THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack County Probate Court
No. 2000-592
In re GUARDIANSHIP OF BRITTANY S.
Argued: November 14, 2001
Decided: March 11, 2002
Disabilities Rights Center, Inc., of Concord (Christina Deslauriers Ghio and Ronald K. Lospennato on the brief,
and Ms. Ghio orally), for the petitioner.
Philip T. McLaughlin, attorney general (Mary E. Schwarzer, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally),
for the State, as amicus curiae.
BRODERICK, J. The petitioner, Tammy G., appeals from the decision of the Merrimack County Probate Court
(O’Neill, J.) denying her request for appointment of counsel in her petition to terminate a guardianship over her
daughter, Brittany S., and an associated motion for contempt or to compel. We affirm.
The parties agree to the following facts. Pursuant to a guardianship order of the probate court, Brittany S. was
placed in the custody of Richard and Susan S. in November 1997. Thereafter, Tammy G. sought treatment for
her bi-polar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In April 2000,
Tammy G. petitioned to terminate the guardianship. Upon motion of the guardians, the probate court ordered
Tammy G. to produce records concerning Aid to the Permanently and Totally Disabled (APTD), Social Security
Income (SSI) and health care. In June, because Tammy G. had not yet complied with the court’s order, the
guardians filed a motion for contempt or, alternatively, to compel production. Tammy G., in turn, filed a motion
for appointment of counsel, which the probate court denied following a hearing in July.
On appeal, Tammy G. argues that the probate court’s order denying her counsel was erroneous because it: (1)
violated her due process rights under the United States and New Hampshire Constitutions; (2) failed to consider
the proper factors of the due process analysis, as enumerated in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319 (1976); and
(3) failed to address her request under the probate court’s discretionary authority.
At the outset, we note the State’s contention that we should dismiss the present appeal for lack of jurisdiction.
Specifically, the State argues that the probate court’s denial of the petitioner’s motion for appointed counsel is
not a final judgment on the merits, and, therefore, is not ripe for review. The State also contends that any
claimed due process right to appointed counsel is so enmeshed with the factual and legal issues of the underlying
cause of action that it cannot be viewed as a separate issue and is, therefore, not immediately appealable under
the collateral order doctrine. We need not address the collateral order doctrine here as our jurisdiction to decide
the due process issue on interlocutory appeal is clear. We waive the procedural requirements of Supreme Court
Rule 8 and consider the appeal as having been properly filed. See Sup. Ct. R. 1.
The petitioner grounds her due process claim to appointed counsel on the Fourteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution and Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution. We first address her claim under the
State Constitution. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983).
The right to raise and care for one’s children is a fundamental liberty interest protected by Part I, Article 2 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. Because the State Constitution is at least as protective of individual liberties as the
Federal Constitution, we need not conduct a separate federal inquiry. See Petition of Kerry D., 144 N.H. 146,
149 (1999). Accordingly, we rely upon our State Constitution and cite federal opinions for guidance only. Ball,
124 N.H. at 232-33; see In re Baby K., 143 N.H. 201, 203-04 (1998).
This court is the final arbiter of the due process requirements of the State Constitution. In re Baby K., 143 N.H.
at 204. To determine whether the State Constitution mandates the appointment of counsel in this case, we
employ a three-prong balancing test. We consider: (1) the private interest affected by the official action; (2) the
risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of
additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and (3) the government's interest, considering the function
involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that additional or substitute procedural requirements would
entail. See id. at 205; see also Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. at 335.
The petitioner argues that the right to the care, custody and control of her child is a fundamental liberty interest
protected by the State Constitution. We agree. See Petition of Kerry D., 144 N.H. at 149. In recognition of this
interest, an indigent parent faced with a termination of parental rights proceeding is entitled to court-appointed
counsel by statute. See RSA 170-C:10 (1994). Likewise, the right to court-appointed counsel is also recognized
for abuse and neglect proceedings. See RSA 169-C:10, II(a) (Supp. 2001) (providing for court-appointed
counsel to represent an indigent parent alleged to have neglected or abused that parent’s child).
The fundamental nature of a parent’s liberty interest, which has been long recognized in termination of parental
rights and abuse and neglect proceedings, is less substantial in a proceeding to terminate a guardianship. Here,
Tammy G.’s parental rights to the care, custody and control of her daughter were already curtailed during the
initial guardianship proceeding. A subsequent proceeding to terminate a previously ordered guardianship
imposes no increased risk of further deprivation of parental rights. See RSA 463:15 (Supp. 2001) (termination of
guardianship). Accordingly, the private interest at stake is less than that at issue in an initial guardianship
proceeding. The private interest associated with the possible return of parental rights is not a mirror image of the
private interest involved with the initial loss of those rights.
The guardianship before us has a finite life and is subject to periodic review by the probate court. See id. Unlike
the termination of parental rights, a guardianship may be ended or modified and the parental ties are not
permanently severed. See In re Jessie E., 137 N.H. 336, 339-40 (1993). Pursuant to RSA 463:15, IV, "[a]ny
minor under guardianship . . . who is 14 years of age or older, or any person interested in the welfare of the
minor, may petition for the termination of the guardianship." RSA 463:16 (Supp. 2001) provides that the probate
court may "from time to time, upon application of any person interested in the welfare of the minor . . . revise or
alter any prior orders or make [a] new [guardianship] order." Where the department of health and human
services provides services to a minor under guardianship, the probate court must review the guardianship at least
annually. See RSA 463:17 (Supp. 2001).
The petitioner asserts that appointed counsel is mandated to protect her interest in keeping her medical records
confidential. She argues that the disclosure of her therapy records could negatively affect the therapeutic
relationship between her and her counselor and that without the assistance of counsel, she "is in the untenable
position of disclosing all of her [medical] records or abandoning her request to have her daughter returned to her
custody." We disagree. The petitioner may renew her request for the probate court to conduct an in camera
review of any or all records which the petitioner has not released. Moreover, any interest Tammy G. has in
keeping her medical records confidential is completely eclipsed by the State’s interest in determining if
"substitution or supplementation of parental care and supervision is no longer necessary to provide for the
essential physical and safety needs of [Brittany S.] and termination of the guardianship will not adversely affect
[her] psychological well-being." RSA 463:15, V. On balance, Tammy G.’s interest in keeping her medical
records confidential does not mandate the appointment of counsel.
We next examine the risk of an erroneous deprivation of Tammy G.’s interest in the potential return of parental
rights as a result of the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural
safeguards. The petitioner contends that the risk of an "erroneous deprivation of the parent-child relationship and
the right to private and confidential medical records is tremendous." She argues that the proceedings in both the
termination of guardianship and the motion relating to the production of her medical records will be particularly
complex, involving the scope of doctor-patient privilege, in camera review and redaction, testimony and cross-
examination of expert witnesses, rules of discovery and substantive due process rights. Further, she argues that
the lack of court-appointed counsel will make it "impossible for the court to reach a fair and accurate
determination."
We disagree that there is an appreciable risk of an erroneous deprivation of the parent-child relationship at stake.
As noted, Tammy G. has already been deprived of this relationship as a consequence of the initial guardianship
proceeding. The private interest at issue here is the possible return of Tammy G.’s parental rights. The risk that
Tammy G. may not prevail in the proceedings is tempered by the fact that, in any hearing regarding the
guardianship of minors, the probate court is not bound by the technical rules of evidence and may admit
evidence which it considers relevant and material. RSA 463:8, I (Supp. 2001). Further, proceedings are held
before the probate judge without a jury and in a closed court. See RSA 463:9, I (Supp. 2001); 10 C. DeGrandpre,
New Hampshire Practice, Probate Law and Procedure § 11-2, at 104 (3d ed. 2001).
Finally, we examine the government's interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative
burdens that the provision of court-appointed counsel would entail. The State, in its role as parens patriae, has a
significant interest in protecting the best interest of Brittany S. See In re Baby K., 143 N.H. at 206. The
petitioner argues that the fiscal and administrative burden associated with court-appointed counsel is "minimal"
because "it entails only the appointment of an attorney from a contract attorney appointment system already in
place." While it may be true that the appointment of counsel in a single case would entail a relatively minor
fiscal and administrative burden, it would be decidedly shortsighted to limit our review to this case only. Given
that RSA 463:15, IV provides that "any person interested in the welfare of the minor, may petition for the
termination of the guardianship of the person," we are mindful that the volume of demand for representation by
indigent parents, and the costs associated with that representation could be significant. Thus, based upon our
analysis of the three-prong balancing test, we hold that the State Constitution does not require that counsel be
appointed to represent Tammy G.
The petitioner further contends that the probate court abused its discretion by failing to consider the three-prong
balancing test of Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. at 335. Because of our own consideration of the Mathews v.
Eldridge balancing test and consequent conclusion that the State Constitution does not require that counsel be
appointed to represent Tammy G. in this termination of a guardianship and contempt proceeding, we need not
decide this issue. See In re Baby K., 143 N.H. at 204 (review of the State Constitution’s due process
requirements is de novo). We note, however, that the probate court both cited Mathews v. Eldridge and correctly
recited the elements of the balancing test. The probate court also compared the private interest at issue in
Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18 (1981), relied upon by the petitioner in her motion to
appoint counsel, with the petitioner’s private interest at issue here. While the probate court did not elaborate
upon its balancing test analysis, it obviously applied the proper test and we cannot say that its conclusions reflect
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. ___, ___ , 787 A.2d 175, 177 (2001).
Finally, the petitioner argues that the probate court failed to consider her request for appointed counsel under the
court’s discretionary authority. We disagree. Under our "unsustainable exercise of discretion" standard, the
petitioner must demonstrate that the probate court’s ruling was "clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of [her] case." Id. The petitioner relied upon Duval v. Duval, 114 N.H. 422 (1974), and Sheedy v.
Merrimack County Superior Court, 128 N.H. 51 (1986), to support her argument that due process may require
counsel in civil contempt proceedings dependent upon the complexity of the issues involved. The record reveals
that the probate judge specifically queried the petitioner’s counsel about both cases before deliberating on the
matter. Cf. DeButts v. LaRoche, 142 N.H. 845, 847 (1998) (record failed to indicate that court exercised its
discretion). The fact that the court did not exercise its discretion in favor of the petitioner does not compel a
finding that the court failed to exercise its discretion. We find that the petitioner has failed to meet her burden
regarding an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Affirmed.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.