THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2000-468
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ALBERT GORDON
Argued: January 15, 2002
Opinion Issued: April 15, 2002
Philip T. McLaughlin, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the
State.
Sakellarios & Associates, of Manchester (Mary A. Barker on the brief, and Jean-Claude Sakellarios, orally) for
the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Albert Gordon, appeals his conviction for aggravated driving of an off-highway
recreational vehicle while intoxicated (OHRV-DWI). RSA 215-A:11, II(a)(1) (2000). He contends that the Trial
Court (Murphy, J.) erred in: (1) concluding that aggravated OHRV-DWI is a lesser-included offense of negligent
homicide; (2) amending the jury instructions to include the lesser-included offense of aggravated OHRV-DWI
after the close of the evidence, prior to final arguments; (3) denying his motion for a directed verdict on his
negligent homicide indictment; (4) denying his motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict; (5) denying
his motion in limine seeking to exclude evidence of his intoxication; and (6) ruling that evidence of his blood
alcohol level at the time of the accident was admissible. We affirm.
The defendant was charged with negligent homicide, RSA 630:3, II (1996), by an indictment alleging that he
caused the death of Raymond Baker while operating a Jeep under the influence of intoxicating liquor. Prior to
trial, the defendant moved in limine to exclude certain evidence regarding his blood alcohol level, claiming
collateral estoppel because a previous administrative license suspension (ALS) hearing determined that there
was insufficient evidence of his intoxication at the time of the incident. The trial court denied the motion.
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved for a directed verdict of acquittal on the ground that there
was insufficient evidence presented to establish that the defendant’s intoxication caused the accident. The court
denied the motion.
The jury acquitted the defendant of the charge of negligent homicide, but convicted him of aggravated OHRV-
DWI. The defendant moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the ground that the evidence presented
at trial was insufficient to establish that his intoxication caused the accident. The trial court denied the motion.
The first issue raised by the defendant is whether the trial court erred by instructing the jury that aggravated
OHRV-DWI is a lesser-included offense of negligent homicide. It is well-established that a contemporaneous
objection is required to preserve an issue for appeal, particularly where the alleged error involves a jury
instruction. See State v. McCabe, 145 N.H. 686, 690 (2001). Our review of the transcript shows that during an
exchange with defense counsel about instructing the jury on aggravated OHRV-DWI, the trial judge said, "But
it’s—it’s still a lesser included— [offense]." At that point, defense counsel responded "Yeah, but you—." The
prosecution argues that this comment constituted a concession that aggravated OHRV-DWI is a lesser-included
offense of negligent homicide. We need not decide whether the defendant conceded this issue, but merely
whether he objected to the aggravated OHRV-DWI jury instruction on the ground that aggravated OHRV-DWI is
not a lesser-included offense of negligent homicide. A fair reading of the transcript indicates that he did not.
Therefore, we need not decide whether OHRV-DWI is a lesser-included offense of negligent homicide because
the issue was not properly preserved for appellate review. See State v. Goodman, 145 N.H. 526, 531 (2000).
In discussing this issue in his brief, the defendant also suggests that the jury instructions misstated the elements
of aggravated OHRV-DWI because the court should have limited the instruction on serious bodily injury to Mr.
Baker’s injury. Our review of the transcript indicates that the defense also failed to raise this point at trial.
Therefore, we will not address this argument. See id.
The second issue raised by the defendant concerns the timing of the State’s request for a jury instruction on the
lesser-included offense of aggravated OHRV-DWI. The defendant argues he was prejudiced by the trial court’s
decision to amend the jury instructions after the close of the evidence, before final arguments. The trial court’s
decision to instruct a jury on a lesser-included offense depends upon two prerequisites being met. See State v.
Bruce, 147 N.H.__, __, 780 A.2d 1270, 1274 (2001). First, the trial court must determine whether the lesser-
included offense is statutorily included within the greater offense, and then whether the evidence introduced at
trial supports a rational basis for finding guilt on that lesser-included offense. Id. Because the second step in the
analysis requires an examination of the evidence presented at trial, whether the jury should be instructed on such
an offense often can only be determined at the close of the evidence. See id. Thus, the initial request for jury
instructions on a lesser-included offense typically cannot occur until that time and the defendant’s argument that
the timing of the jury instructions was improper is unfounded.
The defendant’s third argument is that the trial court erred by denying his motion for a directed verdict on the
negligent homicide indictment. We generally will refuse to review a question that no longer presents a justiciable
controversy because issues involved have become "academic or dead." Petition of Brooks, 140 N.H. 813, 816
(1996). We will not address whether the trial court’s decision to deny the defendant’s motion was in error
because he was not convicted on that charge. See State v. Burke, 122 N.H. 565, 569 (1982). The issue is thus
moot.
The fourth issue raised by the defendant is whether the trial court erred by failing to grant his motion for a
judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the charge of aggravated OHRV-DWI. On a motion for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict, a trial court should uphold the jury’s verdict "unless no rational trier of fact could
find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, considering all the evidence and all reasonable inferences therefrom in the
light most favorable to the State." State v. O’Neill, 134 N.H. 182, 185 (1991). Although the defense alleges that
insufficient evidence was presented to establish that the defendant’s alcohol-related impairment caused the
collision, such a finding is not a required element of aggravated OHRV-DWI. The offense includes only three
elements: (1) that the person drove, operated or attempted to operate an OHRV; (2) that he did so while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor; and (3) at the time alleged, that he caused an OHRV collision resulting in
serious bodily injury to the person or another. RSA 215-A:11, II(a)(1). The defendant does not contest the
sufficiency of the evidence as to these elements.
The defendant’s fifth argument is that the State is estopped from relitigating factual issues resolved in his favor
by an administrative review proceeding and that the superior court erred in denying his motion in limine. The
doctrine of collateral estoppel provides that once an issue of ultimate fact is determined by a valid final
judgment, that issue cannot be litigated between the same parties in any future lawsuit. See State v. Fielders, 124
N.H. 310, 312 (1983). We have previously declined to apply the doctrine of collateral estoppel, however, to a
criminal proceeding following a civil ALS hearing. Were we to hold "the doctrine of collateral estoppel
applicable to later criminal proceedings, the State would be forced to litigate thoroughly every fact at issue in an
administrative license suspension proceeding. This would undermine the goal of providing informal and prompt
review of a decision to suspend a driver’s license." State v. Cassady, 140 N.H. 46, 49 (1995). Therefore, the trial
court properly denied the defendant’s motion in limine.
Finally, the defendant argues that the expert evidence presented by the State on the issue of his intoxication was
unreliable, inadmissible and highly prejudicial. Specifically, he challenges the admissibility of the State’s
evidence of his blood alcohol level at the time of the accident and his likely impairment at that level. We
reiterate the requirement of a contemporaneous objection to preserve an issue for appellate review. See State v.
Sullivan, 142 N.H. 399, 403 (1997). Although the defendant objected to the first hypothetical posed to Dr.
Novak by the State, he never challenged the line of questioning that followed, which required Dr. Novak to
determine what the defendant’s blood alcohol content was at 8:30 p.m. Therefore, the defendant has failed to
preserve this issue for appeal.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, J., sat for oral argument but did not take part in the final vote; BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU and
DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.