AMENDED 3/13/02
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2000-422
PRO CON CONSTRUCTION, INC.
d/b/a PRO CON CONSTRUCTION COMPANY
v.
ACADIA INSURANCE COMPANY
March 5, 2002
Law Offices of John B. Schulte, of Manchester (Caroline K. Delaney on the brief and orally), and Stebbins,
Lazos & Van Der Beken, P.A., of Manchester (Henry B. Stebbins orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and James R. Fox on the brief, and Mr.
Dunn orally), for the defendant.
Duggan, J. The defendant, Acadia Insurance Company (Acadia), appeals a Superior Court (Manias, J.) order
granting summary judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Pro Con Construction, Inc. (Pro Con). We reverse and
remand.
In 1993, Oracle Corporation hired Pro Con to manage the construction of its facility in Nashua. Pro Con hired
several subcontractors for the project, including Decorative Concepts, an interior painting contractor. During the
project, Decorative Concepts carried a commercial general liability policy issued by Acadia that contained an
additional insured endorsement. This endorsement provides:
WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include as an insured any person or organization
for whom you are performing operations if you and such person or organization have
agreed in a contract or agreement that such person or organization be added as an
additional insured on your policy. Such person or organization is an additional insured
only with respect to liability arising out of your ongoing operations performed for that
insured.
(Emphasis added.)
In February 1997, a Decorative Concepts employee was allegedly injured when he slipped and fell on an icy
sidewalk while on his way from his work area to a coffee truck parked on the site’s lot. The employee and his
wife thereafter brought suit against Pro Con, claiming that Pro Con negligently failed to keep the sidewalk clear
of snow and ice. Pro Con requested indemnification under the policy issued by Acadia. Acadia denied Pro Con’s
request for coverage, asserting that the circumstances giving rise to the employee’s claim do not trigger coverage
under the additional insured endorsement. Pro Con then filed this petition for declaratory judgment in superior
court seeking a determination of coverage. See RSA 491:22 (1997).
Acadia and Pro Con filed cross-motions for summary judgment. After a hearing, the superior court ruled that the
language providing coverage for liability arising out of Decorative Concepts’ "‘ongoing operations’ reasonably
informed Pro Con that the policy would cover a Decorative Concepts employee injured during an on-site break
from his assigned task." Therefore, the superior court granted Pro Con’s motion for summary judgment and
denied Acadia’s motion for summary judgment. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Acadia argues the superior court erred in ruling that the policy provided coverage to Pro Con as an
additional insured in this case. Because the parties do not dispute any material facts, we need only determine
whether Pro Con was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. N.E. Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of Rochester, 144 N.H.
118, 120 (1999). We review the superior court’s application of law to the facts de novo. Id.
Our analysis begins with an examination of the insurance policy language. The interpretation of insurance policy
language, like any contract language, is an issue of law for the court to decide. Allstate Ins. Co. v. Armstrong,
144 N.H. 170, 172 (1999). We look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in context, Concord
Gen. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Mitchell, 138 N.H. 229, 231 (1994), "and we construe the terms of the policy as would a
reasonable person in the position of the insured based on more than a casual reading of the policy as a whole,"
Deyette v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 560, 561 (1997) (quotation omitted).
The policy language at issue here is the portion of the additional insured endorsement that provides coverage to
"an additional insured only with respect to liability arising out of your ongoing operations performed for that
insured." The phrase "arising out of" has been interpreted as meaning "originating from or growing out of or
flowing from." Allstate Ins. Co. v. Crouch, 140 N.H. 329, 332 (1995) (quotation omitted). Thus, to warrant
coverage arising out of Decorative Concepts’ ongoing operations performed for Pro Con, the ongoing operations
need not have been the proximate cause of the injuries but the causal connection between the two must be more
than tenuous. See Cannon v. Maine Bonding & Cas. Co., 138 N.H. 365, 366 (1994). This means some causal
nexus must link Decorative Concepts’ ongoing operations and the injuries before coverage under the additional
insured endorsement is triggered. While the causal connection need not be "proximate" as that term is used in
the more demanding evidentiary area of tort law, the causal connection must still exist. See Akerley v. Hartford
Ins. Group, 136 N.H. 433, 439-40 (1992). Acadia contends that in this case the only connection between the
injuries and Decorative Concepts’ ongoing operations is the fact that the injured person was a Decorative
Concepts employee. This connection, Acadia asserts, is too tenuous to warrant coverage.
Decorative Concepts’ ongoing operations consisted of interior painting. The injuries did not occur while the
employee was engaged in any task related to Decorative Concepts’ painting operations, cf. Merchants Ins. Co. of
New Hampshire, Inc. v. USF&G, 143 F.3d 5, 9 (1st Cir. 1998) (concluding coverage warranted when
subcontractor's employee injured while performing task assigned to subcontractor), or near Decorative
Concepts’ painting operations. Therefore, no nexus exists between the painting operations and the injuries, and
thus the required causal connection between the injuries and Decorative Concepts’ painting operations does not
exist.
Pro Con contends that the policy language can be reasonably interpreted to include all claims that would not
have arisen "but for" the employee’s presence on the general contractor’s premises. See, e.g., Shell Oil Co. v. AC
& S, Inc., 649 N.E.2d 946, 951-52 (Ill. App. Ct. 1995) (concluding injuries "arose out of" subcontractor’s work
when employee injured while walking from work-site to work-trailer because "[t]he injuries would not have
occurred ‘but for’ [the plaintiff’s] employment by [the subcontractor] and [the subcontractor’s] presence on the
[general contractor’s] premises"). This interpretation, however, is inconsistent with our longstanding
interpretation of the phrase "arising out of." See, e.g., Union Mut. Fire Ins. Co. v. King, 113 N.H. 39, 41 (1973)
(interpreting "arising out of" to require less than proximate cause, but more than a tenuous causal connection);
Akerley, 136 N.H. at 439 (same). Thus, a reasonable person in Pro Con’s position would not expect coverage for
all claims that would not have arisen "but for" a subcontractor’s employee’s presence on the general contractor’s
premises.
Because no causal connection between the injuries in this case and Decorative Concepts’ painting operations
exists, we reverse the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Pro Con.
Reversed and remanded.
BROCK, C.J., and BRODERICK, J., sat for oral argument but did not take part in the final vote; DALIANIS, J.,
concurred; NADEAU, J., dissented.
NADEAU, J., dissenting. I agree with the majority that to find coverage in this case, Decorative Concepts’
"ongoing operations need not have been the proximate cause of the injuries but the causal connection between
the two must be more than tenuous." I conclude, however, that the facts before us satisfy that test.
Although the majority states that the test requires only "some causal nexus" between the injuries and Decorative
Concepts’ operations, in purporting to apply the test, it actually requires a much stronger causal connection. The
majority states that "[t]he injuries did not occur while the employee was engaged in any task related to
Decorative Concepts’ painting operations, or near Decorative Concepts’ painting operations," and therefore
concludes that the "required causal connection between the injuries and Decorative Concepts’ painting
operations does not exist." (Citation omitted.) Applying existing case law to the facts here, however, leads me to
the opposite conclusion.
Citing similar cases from a number of jurisdictions, the court in Admiral Insurance Co. v. Trident NGL, Inc., 988
S.W.2d 451, 454 (Tex. App. 1999), summarized:
The majority view of these cases is that for liability to "arise out of operations" of a
named insured it is not necessary for the named insured’s acts to have "caused" the
accident; rather, it is sufficient that the named insured’s employee was injured while
present at the scene in connection with performing the named insured’s business, even
if the cause of the injury was the negligence of the additional insured.
Thus, the Admiral court found a sufficient causal connection where "the accident occurred while [the named
insured] was performing its operations, i.e., [the named insured’s] employee was present for the purpose of
maintaining and repairing [the additional insured’s] facilities." Id.
Coverage has been found where, as here, the named insured’s employee becomes injured due to a dangerous
condition on the premises. Thus, the court in Saavedra v. Murphy Oil U.S.A., Inc., 930 F.2d 1104, 1110, 1106
(5th Cir. 1991), found coverage with respect to "operations performed by or for the named insured," where an
employee of the named insured, while performing work on the additional insured’s premises, "allegedly slipped
on algae that had formed around a leaking fire hydrant and seriously injured himself."
Furthermore, covered injuries have not been restricted to those sustained in the actual performance of the
employee’s work as distinguished from preparatory or subsequent activities. For instance, in McCarthy Brothers
Co. v. Continental Lloyds Insurance Co., 7 S.W. 3d 725 (Tex. App. 1999), the employee fell on a "muddy,
slippery" fifty-five to sixty foot incline that the employees "were required to traverse . . . to retrieve electrical
equipment necessary for their work." Id. at 727 (quotations omitted). Similarly, in Highland Park Shopping
Village v. Trinity Universal Insurance Co., 36 S.W.3d 916, 917, 917 n.2 (Tex. App. 2001), an employee sued for
injuries sustained on an allegedly unsafe "Man Lift," a conveyor belt-like device used to move parking garage
employees between floors. The injured employee was sent by his employer, the named insured, to do plumbing
work on the premises of the additional insured, Highland Park Shopping Center. Id. at 917. The employee
"borrowed a ladder from Highland Park to use in his work. After completing the job [the employee] returned the
ladder to the Highland Park garage basement and used the Man Lift to reach his car, parked outside the garage."
Id. The court found that the employee’s injuries arose out of the named insured’s work and that Highland Park
was therefore covered as an additional insured. Id. at 918.
In the context of workers’ compensation, and in interpreting a related exclusion from a general liability policy,
we have held that an injury arises in the course of employment if "it occurred in the performance of an activity
related to employment, which may include a personal activity if reasonably expected and not forbidden."
Gagnon v. N.H. Ins. Co., 133 N.H. 70, 75-76 (1990) (quotation omitted). In the instant case, the injured
employee alleged in his suit against Pro Con that he was on Oracle’s "premises while in the course of his
employment." The trial court found it was undisputed that the employee "slipped and fell on a sidewalk at the
Oracle facility while on his way to a coffee truck located in the parking lot." I have little difficulty concluding
from the evidence that taking a coffee break on the work premises is an activity reasonably expected and not
forbidden. Thus, the injury-producing activity was within the scope of employment.
By logical extension, the injury-producing activity was also related to the employer’s operations. In short, the
employee here "was injured while present at the scene in connection with performing the named insured’s
business." Admiral, 988 S.W.2d at 454. I would conclude, therefore, that Pro Con was covered as an additional
insured under Decorative Concepts’ policy. For that reason, respectfully, I dissent.