THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2000-222
APPEAL OF THE TOWN OF LITCHFIELD
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
February 8, 2002
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Robert R. Lucic on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Craig, Wenners, Craig & Capuchino, P.A., of Manchester (Vincent A. Wenners, Jr. and Stephanie Stergiou Ferro
on the brief, and Mr. Wenners orally), for the respondent.
Duggan, J. The petitioner Town of Litchfield (town), appeals a decision of the public employee labor relations
board (board) certifying a bargaining unit for certain employees of the town. The town argues that the board
erred by including in the bargaining unit twenty-seven part-time firefighters and the deputy town clerk. The
town further argues that if these employees are excluded from the bargaining unit, there will be an insufficient
number of employees for certification of the bargaining unit pursuant to RSA 273-A:8, I (d) (1999). We affirm
in part and reverse in part.
In September 1999, the respondent, AFSCME Council 93 (union), filed a petition to certify a bargaining unit of
town employees in eleven job classifications. The town objected on the basis that: (1) the twenty-seven part-time
firefighters must be excluded because they are on-call and, therefore, are not "public employees" within the
meaning of RSA 273-A:1, IX (d) (1999); (2) the deputy town clerk is appointed and, therefore, excluded
pursuant to RSA 273-A:1, IX (b), and additionally, because the removal of the deputy town clerk cannot be the
subject of collective bargaining, no purpose is served by including the position in the bargaining unit; and (3) the
remaining employees are fewer than the ten required for certification as a bargaining unit pursuant to RSA 273-
A:8, I (d). The hearing officer disagreed with the town’s objections and certified the bargaining unit. The board
affirmed that decision and denied the town’s motion for rehearing.
"To succeed on appeal, the town must show that the [board’s] decision is unlawful or clearly unreasonable."
Appeal of Town of Newport, 140 N.H. 343, 345 (1995). If a party appeals a decision of the board to this court,
we presume the board’s findings of fact to be "lawful and reasonable." RSA 541:13 (1997). The ultimate issue of
statutory eligibility to be a member of a bargaining unit, however, is an issue of law which is not subject to
deferential review. Appeal of State of N.H., 138 N.H. 716, 720 (1994).
On appeal, the town first argues that the part-time firefighters are not "public employees." RSA 273-A:8
authorizes the board to certify an appropriate bargaining unit when ten or more public employees file a petition.
A "public employee" is defined as "any person employed by a public employer except . . . [p]ersons in a
probationary or temporary status, or employed seasonally, irregularly or on call." RSA 273-A:1, IX (d).
Because RSA chapter 273-A (1999 & Supp. 2001) does not define "on call," we look to the plain meaning of the
term. See State v. Beckert, 144 N.H. 315, 317 (1999). Recently, we explained that "on call" means "ready to
respond to a summons or command." Appeal of Town of Stratham, 144 N.H. 429, 431 (1999). In Town of
Stratham, we determined that the part-time police officers were on call employees because,
although the part-time officers work substantial hours and indeed may be essential to the
functioning of the police department, the fact remains they work only when a shift opens because a
full-time officer is unavailable and no other full-time officer chooses to work it. As the sergeant
testified, "There is no set day for part-timers to work, it’s usually an at will situation . . . in any
given month, there can be as many as two openings, or . . . twenty openings."
Id. at 431 (brackets omitted). Thus, although the part-time police officers shared much in common with the full-
time police officers, we determined that the board erred in including them in the bargaining unit because they
were on call employees who worked on an irregular basis.
Here, the board determined that the part-time firefighters are not on call employees because each part-time
firefighter "generally works several hours each week responding to calls, training, covering for the two full time
fire-fighters and attending meetings." The board also noted that "[b]oth full-time and part-time employees are
necessary to the day to day functioning of the Department."
On appeal, the town contends that, like the police officers in Town of Stratham, the part-time firefighters are also
on call employees in that they respond to a variable number of emergencies each week and, because most have
other employment, they are not expected to respond to every emergency. In response, the union contends that
this case differs from Town of Stratham because the part-time firefighters are required to attend regular training
sessions and to respond to calls if they are available. The union’s argument is unavailing, however, because the
part-time officers in Town of Stratham also attended training sessions. See id. at 430-31. Also, nothing in the
statute suggests that the term "on call" turns on whether an employee is required to respond to a call. See RSA
273-A:1, IX (d). Simply because there is an expectation that the firefighters will respond to calls with greater
regularity than the police officers in Town of Stratham does not change the outcome of our analysis. As such, we
hold that the board erred in concluding that the part-time firefighters were not on call and in not excluding them
from the definition of public employee.
The town next argues that the board erred by including the deputy town clerk/tax collector in the bargaining unit.
RSA 273-A:1, IX (b) excludes from the definition of public employee "[p]ersons appointed to office by the chief
executive . . . ." The town asserts that because the deputy town clerk is appointed by the town clerk, see RSA
41:18 (2001), the deputy town clerk is excluded from the bargaining unit.
We must first determine whether the deputy town clerk is appointed by the "chief executive . . . of the public
employer." The term "chief executive" is not defined in RSA chapter 273-A and again, we look to the plain
meaning of the term. See State v. Beckert, 144 N.H. at 317. In Appeal of Westwick, 130 N.H. 618, 621 (1988),
when deciding whether the plaintiff was the chief executive officer of an administrative agency, we noted that
"chief" means "being accorded highest rank, office or rating . . . or one who is put above the rest." (Quotations
and brackets omitted.) Furthermore, we have interpreted this term to include high level positions such as city
manager, university president, and mayor. See American Federation of State &c. Employees v. Keene, 108 N.H.
68, 70 (1967) (city manager); State Employees' Ass'n v. Mills, 115 N.H. 473, 475 (1975) (university president);
Kearns v. Nute, 94 N.H. 217, 220 (1946) (mayor).
In appointing a deputy town clerk, the town clerk is not performing this function as the "chief executive." No
statute or case law designates the town clerk as "chief executive." See, e.g., RSA 45:7 (1991) (the mayor "shall
be the chief executive officer of the city"). In addition, a town clerk lacks the level of responsibility of a mayor
or other chief executive. Pursuant to RSA 45:8 (1991), the mayor "shall cause the laws and regulations of the
city to be executed, and shall exercise a general supervision over the conduct of all subordinate officers." In
comparison, the town clerk has a wide variety of administrative responsibilities. See RSA 41:19-:24 (1991 &
Supp. 2001). These duties do not approximate those of a mayor or other chief executive. We therefore conclude
that a town clerk is not a "chief executive" within RSA 273-A:1, IX (b).
The town additionally argues that because the deputy town clerk’s job tenure is not subject to collective
bargaining under RSA 273-A:1, XI, "there cannot be any purpose served by the position being contained in the
bargaining unit." Pursuant to RSA 273-A:1, XI, the "[t]erms and conditions of employment" are defined to
exclude "conditions of employment . . . confided exclusively to the public employer by statute." RSA 41:45-c, I
(1991) permits the removal of the deputy town clerk at the pleasure of the town clerk. Even assuming the deputy
town clerk’s tenure is "confided exclusively to the employer by statute" and cannot be the subject of collective
bargaining, the deputy town clerk is not thereby excluded from the collective bargaining unit. Although the
union may not represent the deputy town clerk regarding the termination of employment, the union may still
represent the deputy town clerk regarding other terms and conditions of employment, such as wages and hours.
Thus, the statutory definition of "terms and conditions of employment" does not control whether an employee
may be included in the bargaining unit.
The final issue is whether the bargaining unit meets the statutory minimum requirement of ten or more
employees pursuant to RSA 273-A:8, I. The town contends that the original request for a bargaining unit was for
thirty-seven employees and that if the twenty-seven part-time firefighters and the deputy town clerk are
excluded, the resulting unit is only nine employees, one short of the statutory minimum. Because we determine
that the deputy town clerk should be included, we need not address this argument.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part.
BROCK, C.J., and BRODERICK, NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.