THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2000-191
APPEAL OF INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF POLICE OFFICERS
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: November 7, 2001
Opinion Issued: August 12, 2002
Morris & Phillips, of Hampton (Peter C. Phillips on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Sumner F. Kalman, Attorney at Law, P.C., of Plaistow, (Sumner F. Kalman on the brief and orally), for the
respondent, the Town of Atkinson.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, staff attorney, by brief, for NEA-New Hampshire, as amicus curiae.
Kerry P. Steckowych & a., of Goffstown, by brief, for the New Hampshire Association of Chiefs of Police, Inc.,
as amicus curiae.
Kevin P. Chisholm, of Concord, staff attorney, by brief, for the New Hampshire Municipal Association, as
amicus curiae.
BROCK, C.J. The petitioner, the International Brotherhood of Police Officers (IBPO), appeals a decision of the
public employee labor relations board (PELRB) which dismissed an unfair labor practice charge after
concluding that "probationary employees" are not entitled to protection under the Public Employee Labor
Relations Act. See RSA chapter 273-A (1999 & Supp. 2001). We reverse and remand.
On October 5, 1999, the IBPO filed an unfair labor practice charge against the Town of Atkinson (town),
alleging, among other things, that it had wrongfully terminated Michael Rivera’s employment because of his
union activity in violation of RSA 273-A:5, I(a), (b), (c) & (g) (1999). After conducting a hearing, the PELRB
found that because Rivera had not completed twelve months of employment, he was a "probationary employee."
See RSA 273-A:1, IX. Consequently, the PELRB dismissed the charge, finding that because he was still a
probationary employee, Rivera was not covered by the provisions of the Public Employee Labor Relations Act.
This appeal followed.
The original complaint filed by the IBPO alleged violations of several provisions of RSA 273-A:5. On appeal,
however, the IBPO limits its argument to the provision of RSA 273-A:5, I(c), which prohibits discrimination in
hiring and tenure for the purpose of encouraging or discouraging membership in any employee organization.
The applicable standard of review in this case is provided by RSA 541:13 (1997), which authorizes our review
of agency decisions for errors of law. See Appeal of House Legislative Facilities Subcom., 141 N.H. 443, 445
(1996). We presume the PELRB’s findings of fact to be "lawful and reasonable." RSA 541:13. We act as the
final arbiter of the meaning of the statute, however, and will set aside erroneous rulings of law. See Appeal of
Inter-Lakes Sch. Bd., 147 N.H. 28, 31 (2001).
RSA 273-A:5, I(c) prohibits public employers from "discriminat[ing] in the hiring or tenure, or the terms and
conditions of employment of its employees for the purpose of encouraging or discouraging membership in any
employee organization." RSA chapter 273-A contains no definition of "employee"; RSA 273-A:1, IX (Supp.
2001), however, defines "public employee" and excludes "[p]ersons in a probationary or temporary status" from
the definition.
The town contends that because the Public Employee Labor Relations Act specifically excludes probationary
employees from the definition of public employees, RSA 273-A:5 provides no protection in their hiring or
tenure. The town asserts that the word "employee" is merely an abbreviated form of "public employee" and thus,
by definition, does not include probationary employees. We disagree.
In Appeal of Town of Conway, 121 N.H. 372 (1981), we considered the process used by the PELRB in
certifying a bargaining unit under RSA 273-A:8, I, which referred to "employees" rather than "public
employees." Reviewing the entire statutory scheme, we concluded that the definition of "public employee" was
applicable to the word "employee" used in RSA 273-A:8, I, stating: "Words used with plain meaning in one part
of a statute are to be given the same meaning in other parts of the statute unless a contrary intention is clearly
shown." Id. at 373 (ellipses and brackets omitted).
We conclude that a "contrary intention" is clearly shown by the language of RSA 273-A:5, I(c). That section
prohibits public employers from discriminating in, among other things, the hiring of employees for the purpose
of discouraging membership in any union. The definition of "hire" is "to engage the personal services of for a
fixed sum: employ for wages . . . ." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1072 (unabridged ed. 1961);
see RSA 21:2 (2000) (words used in statutes are to be construed according to common and approved usage of
language). Usually, a person applying to be hired by a public employer will not already be a "public employee."
Therefore, we conclude that the legislature intended to prohibit a public employer from refusing to hire an
applicant on account of the applicant's union views or activities, despite the fact that an applicant is not a "public
employee." Cf. Appeal of City of Nashua Bd. of Educ., 141 N.H. 768, 771 (1997) (indicating that discriminatory
hiring policy would raise serious issues of unfair labor practices). Thus, the prohibition in RSA 273-A:5, I(c)
extends beyond discrimination by a public employer against "public employees." We hold that subsection I(c)
prohibits discrimination against probationary employees as well.
Our reading of the statute is consistent with the purpose of the Public Employee Labor Relations Act. The Act
was established in 1975 "to foster harmonious and cooperative relations between public employers and their
employees . . . ." Laws 1975, 490:1. In establishing the PELRB, the legislature recognized the "right of public
employees to organize and to be represented for the purpose of bargaining collectively with the state or any
political subdivision thereof . . . ." Laws 1975, 490:1, I. Allowing a public employer to discriminate in the hiring
or tenure, or the terms and conditions of employment of probationary employees for the purpose of discouraging
union membership would undermine the Act's goal of fostering harmonious cooperative relations between
public employers and their employees. The dissent would construe the statute narrowly to exclude probationary
employees from its protection. We believe such a construction, allowing such discrimination against
probationary employees, might well deter public employees from exercising their right to organize and be
represented for the purpose of bargaining collectively.
We are cognizant that our task is to construe the statute in accordance with legislative intent. If the legislature
believes that unintended consequences have beset its statutory language, we would respectfully urge it to clarify
the statute to remove any uncertainty. See Lord v. Lovett, 146 N.H. 232, 242 (2001) (Broderick, J., concurring).
Because we conclude that RSA 273-A:5, I(c) prohibits a public employer from discriminating in the hiring or
tenure, or the terms and conditions of employment of its probationary employees for the purpose of encouraging
or discouraging membership in any employee organization, we reverse the dismissal of the unfair labor practice
charges brought by the petitioner as they refer to Rivera. We remand for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred; NADEAU, J., with whom DALIANIS, J., joined, dissented.
NADEAU, J., dissenting. The language of RSA 273-A:1, IX is plain and unambiguous. It defines "public
employee" and "expressly excludes ‘persons in a probationary or temporary status’ from the definition." Appeal
of Town of Conway, 121 N.H. 372, 373 (1981).
I agree with the town that because the Public Employee Labor Relations Act specifically excludes probationary
employees from the definition of public employees, RSA 273-A:5 provides no protection in their hiring or
tenure. The word "employee" is merely an abbreviated form of "public employee" and thus, by definition, does
not include probationary employees.
The PELRB was established in 1975 "to foster harmonious and cooperative relations between public employers
and their employees." Laws 1975, 490:1. In establishing the PELRB, the legislature recognized the "right of
public employees to organize and to be represented for the purpose of bargaining collectively with the state or
any political subdivision thereof . . . ." Laws 1975, 490:1, I.
I disagree with the IBPO’s contention that the use of "employee" in certain provisions of RSA 273-A:5, I, and
"public employee" in others indicates a legislative intention to address issues concerning two separate classes of
employees. The Public Employee Labor Relations Act’s statement of purpose, as well as other provisions within
the act, uses the terms "employee" and "public employee" interchangeably. See, e.g., RSA 273-A:1, VIII, :8, :10,
:11. The PELRB’s title, however, coupled with the definition of "public employee" set forth in RSA 273-A:1,
IX, is indicative of the legislature’s intent to limit the jurisdiction of the PELRB, excluding from it, among other
things, probationary employees.
The IBPO’s argument that the language of RSA 273-A:5, I(c) must apply to probationary employees because it
addresses "hiring" and "tenure" does not change this conclusion. The definition of "public employee" provides
that no employee with an individual contract shall be determined to be probationary, "nor shall any employee be
determined to be in a temporary status solely by reason of the source of funding of [his or her] position . . . ."
RSA 273-A:1, IX(d). Given the various types of positions which may fall within the PELRB’s jurisdiction and
the potential for public employees to move within them or between various public employers at both the local
and State level, I do not believe the use of the term "hiring" in RSA 273-A:5, I(c) implies a legislative intent to
expand the jurisdiction of the PELRB.
The conclusion that probationary employees are not covered by the Public Employee Labor Relations Act is
supported by our earlier decision in Appeal of Town of Conway, 121 N.H. 372. That case addressed the process
used by the PELRB in certifying a bargaining unit under RSA 273-A:8, I, which referred to "employees" rather
than "public employees." Reviewing the entire statutory scheme, we concluded that the definition of "public
employee" applied to the word "employee" used in RSA 273-A:8, I, stating that "[w]ords used with plain
meaning in one part of a statute are to be given the same meaning in other parts of the statute, unless a contrary
intention is clearly shown." Id. at 373 (ellipses and brackets omitted). We therefore held that probationary
employees could not be included when determining whether a bargaining unit could be certified. Id.
Although the legislature amended RSA 273-A:8, I, two years later, "the legislative modifications do not indicate
any intent to disturb the earlier statutory interpretations . . . ." Petition of Correia, 128 N.H. 717, 720 (1986). The
amendment neither defined nor changed the reference to "employees." See Laws 1983, 270:2. It also conveyed
no rights to probationary employees. See id. Instead, it clarified that while the positions of probationary
employees could be counted for purposes of certifying a bargaining unit, probationary employees could not vote
in any certification election. See id. The legislature is presumed to have known of the narrow construction we
had previously given the term "employee." See Petition of CIGNA Healthcare, 146 N.H. 683, 690 (2001). Had it
disagreed with our construction, the legislature could have amended the chapter to reflect that disagreement. I
would not usurp that prerogative now by expanding the definition we have previously given to the word
"employee" when used in the Public Employee Labor Relations Act.
For these reasons, respectfully, I dissent.
DALIANIS, J., joins in the dissent.