THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2001-325
LAWYERS TITLE INSURANCE CORP.
v.
DAVID M. GROFF, ESQ.
Submitted: March 6, 2002
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2002
Cook, Little, Rosenblatt & Manson, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Arnold Rosenblatt and Michael S. Owen on the
brief), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Peter G. Beeson and David P. Eby on the brief), for the
defendant.
Brock, C.J. The defendant, David M. Groff, Esq., appeals from a judgment in favor of the plaintiff, Lawyers
Title Insurance Corp., on its claims for breach of contract and negligence. Following a bench trial, the Superior
Court (Conboy, J.) ruled that the defendant was vicariously liable for a title search conducted by a third party.
We reverse.
The relevant undisputed facts follow. In 1991, the parties entered into an agreement which made the defendant
the plaintiff’s agent for the purpose of issuing title insurance policies. Under the agreement, the defendant was to
"[r]eceive and process applications for title insurance in a timely, prudent, and ethical manner with due regard to
recognized title insurance underwriting practices and in accordance with the . . . instructions of [the plaintiff]."
None of the duties specified in the agreement were delegable without the other party’s prior written consent.
The agreement prohibited the defendant from committing the plaintiff "to a risk which [the plaintiff] has
determined to be an extra-hazardous risk or which [the defendant] knows to be based upon a disputed title"
without the plaintiff’s written approval. It also prohibited him from issuing a commitment, policy or
endorsement unless it was "based on reports or certificates of title made by either attorneys at law approved by
[the plaintiff], . . . or on reports or certificates of staff employees of [the defendant], or on reports of others
approved in advance by [the plaintiff] at [the defendant]’s request." The agreement required these reports and
certificates to "be supplemented by abstracts of title whenever required by [the plaintiff]." Whenever a report or
certificate was based upon an abstract of title, the defendant could not issue a commitment or policy thereon
unless the plaintiff approved "the person, firm or corporation which prepared such abstract."
The agreement made the defendant liable to the plaintiff for all "losses resulting from acts or omissions of [the
defendant]," including his failure to exercise "due care and diligence" in committing the plaintiff to risks by
issuance of policies or to comply with either the terms of the agreement or the plaintiff’s instructions.
In November 1998, the defendant was the settlement agent and attorney for a lender in a real estate transaction
involving property in Londonderry. Prior to closing, he retained a title abstractor as an independent contractor to
conduct a title search and prepare an abstractor’s report. The title abstractor negligently failed to find and
disclose a construction mortgage on the property. The defendant thus issued title insurance policies to both the
lender and the buyers without excepting the mortgage. As a result, at closing, the construction mortgage was not
discharged, and the defendant disbursed more than $128,000 directly to the seller.
The mortgagee later asserted its rights and threatened to foreclose on the property. The plaintiff paid the
mortgagee over $152,000 to obtain an assignment of the mortgage and then discharged it. After obtaining a
partial recovery from the seller, the plaintiff sued the defendant to recover $72,340.81, the difference between
what the plaintiff paid the mortgagee and what it received from the seller, plus attorney’s fees and costs.
The plaintiff asserted four claims against the defendant: negligence arising from duties the defendant owed it;
negligence arising from duties the defendant owed to the lender, to which the plaintiff was subrogated; breach of
contract; and breach of fiduciary duty. The trial court ruled in the plaintiff’s favor on the breach of contract and
negligence claims.
With respect to both negligence claims, the court found that the defendant did not breach a duty of care owed
either to the plaintiff or to the mortgagee. Specifically, the trial court found that the defendant was not negligent
in his decision to use an independent abstractor, his selection of the independent abstractor, or his review of the
abstractor’s work.
The court found the defendant vicariously liable, however, for the negligence of the title abstractor, whom the
court ruled was an independent contractor. The defendant was liable for the abstractor’s negligence, the court
ruled, because his duty to perform an adequate title search was nondelegable both pursuant to the agency
agreement and because this duty was essential to his representation of the lender.
With respect to the breach of contract claim, the court rejected the plaintiff’s argument that the defendant
breached the agency agreement by using an "unapproved" abstractor, a ruling that has not been appealed. The
trial court ruled, however, that the defendant breached the agreement by issuing an insurance policy that did not
except a prior recorded mortgage, and, therefore, "was contrary to recognized title underwriting standards and
was not prudent."
We will affirm the trial court's factual findings unless they are unsupported by the evidence and will affirm the
trial court's legal rulings unless they are erroneous as a matter of law. Morgenstern v. Town of Rye, 147 N.H.
558, 561 (2002).
I. Negligence Claims
Ordinarily, an employer is not liable for the negligence of an independent contractor. See Valenti v. NET
Properties Management, 142 N.H. 633, 635 (1998); 8 R. McNamara, New Hampshire Practice, Personal Injury –
Tort and Insurance Practice § 169, at 238 (1996). There are three exceptions to this general rule: (1) negligence
of the employer in selecting, instructing or supervising the contractor; (2) employment for work that is
inherently dangerous; and (3) instances in which the employer is under a nondelegable duty. See McNamara,
supra § 170, at 241-43.
This case involves the third exception to this general rule – the exception for nondelegable duties. The trial court
ruled that the defendant’s duty to examine and clear title was nondelegable because of the agency agreement’s
nondelegation provision and because the duty was essential to the defendant’s representation of the lender. We
disagree. Under the agency agreement, the defendant had no duty to examine and clear title. Moreover, assuming
arguendo that the defendant’s representation of the lender included the duty to examine and clear title, we hold
that this duty was not so essential to the representation as to render it nondelegable. A contrary ruling might
require attorneys to guarantee the results obtained by any number of specialists hired as independent contractors,
even when the attorneys did not agree to assume this responsibility.
A. Contractual Duty
"Because the proper interpretation of a contract is ultimately a question of law for this court, we review the trial
court's interpretation of the contract de novo." Royal Oak Realty Trust v. Mordita Realty Trust, 146 N.H. 578,
581 (2001) (quotations, brackets and citations omitted). "When interpreting a written agreement, we give the
language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the context in which the
agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole." Id. (quotation omitted). "Absent ambiguity,
however, the parties’ intent will be determined from the plain meaning of the language used in the contract." Id.
(quotation omitted).
Paragraph 10 of the agreement between the parties stated that "[n]either [the] Agreement nor any right, interest,
or duty arising under it is . . . delegable by either party hereto without the prior written consent of the other." The
trial court reasoned that because the defendant’s contractual duties included "a careful title search," the
defendant was prohibited from delegating this duty.
To the contrary, the contract explicitly contemplated that the defendant would delegate this task. Paragraph 1(h)
of the agreement required the defendant to base any insurance policy "on reports or certificates of staff
employees of [the defendant], or on reports of others approved in advance by [the plaintiff] at [the defendant]’s
request." Paragraph 1(h) further provided that if the report or certificate of title was based on a title abstract, the
defendant could not issue a policy or commitment unless the plaintiff approved of "the person, firm or
corporation which prepared such abstract."
Indeed, the defendant’s only contractual duties with respect to examining title was to exercise "due care and
diligence" when obtaining reports or certificates prepared by others. He had no contractual duty to examine title
himself, or to ensure that those completing reports, certificates of title, or title abstracts, did so carefully. Had the
parties intended the defendant to perform these duties, they could have included a provision in the agreement to
that effect.
Moreover, the agreement expressly limited the defendant’s liability to damages caused by his own acts and
omissions. Paragraph 4 of the agreement provided that he was liable "for all attorney’s fees, court costs,
expenses, liability, damages, and loss or aggregate of losses resulting from acts or omissions of [the] Agent."
(Emphasis added.) Paragraph 5 of the agreement similarly stated:
As between Principal and Agent, Principal shall be liable for all losses, damages,
expenses and costs arising out of claims covered by and based upon any title insurance
commitments, policies or endorsements issued under the terms of this Agreement,
excepting only those losses, damages, expenses, and costs caused by actions or
omissions for which the Agent is in this Agreement made responsible.
Had the parties intended the defendant to be liable for the acts and omissions of others, the agreement could
have easily so stated.
B. Duty Essential to Legal Representation
The trial court ruled that the lender had a valid malpractice claim against the defendant and permitted the
plaintiff to assert it pursuant to the title insurance policy’s subrogation clause. The court ruled that the defendant
was not negligent in his selection of the title abstractor or his review of the abstractor’s work. Nonetheless, the
court found the defendant vicariously liable for the abstractor’s negligence because examining title was
"essential" to his representation of the lender and, therefore, a nondelegable task.
New Hampshire law recognizes that certain duties are nondelegable. For instance, employers have a
nondelegable duty to maintain a safe workplace, see Rounds v. Standex International, 131 N.H. 71, 76 (1988).
Similarly, in Valenti, 142 N.H. at 636, the court held that a possessor of business premises has a nondelegable
duty to maintain the premises and is thus liable for the negligence of an independent contractor hired to perform
this duty on the possessor’s behalf.
Whether lawyers owe any nondelegable duties to their clients is an issue of first impression for this court. "There
are no clearly defined criteria for identifying duties that are nondelegable." Kleeman v. Rheingold, 614 N.E.2d
712, 715 (N.Y. 1993). Ultimately, the decision to categorize a duty as nondelegable rests upon policy
considerations. Id.
Only a handful of courts have addressed this issue. For instance, in Kleeman, the New York Court of Appeals
ruled that the duty of an attorney retained to commence an action to "exercise care in the service of process" was
nondelegable. Id. at 716. The court observed that timely and accurate service of process is an "integral part" of
commencing an action and is "a particularly critical component of a lawyer’s over-all responsibility for
commencing a client’s lawsuit, since a mistake or oversight in this area can deprive the client of his or her day in
court." Id.
The Supreme Court of New Jersey has ruled that an attorney’s fiduciary responsibility for client trust funds is
nondelegable. Matter of Stransky, 612 A.2d 373, 376 (N.J. 1992). And, courts in Louisiana have ruled that a
signing attorney’s duty, imposed by the Louisiana Code of Civil Procedure, to satisfy himself that the pleading is
factually and legally responsible is nondelegable. See Cooks v. Rodenbeck, 711 So. 2d 444, 449 (La. Ct. App.
1998).
We decline to hold that an attorney may not delegate to an independent contractor the duty to examine title in a
real estate transaction. See Smith v. Boyd, 639 A.2d 413, 415 (N.J. Super. 1993) (attorney who properly relied
on title report prepared by independent contractor not liable for contractor’s negligence).
As the trial court found, "it is common and accepted practice for New Hampshire attorneys to commission
independent contractors to search titles" and to rely upon reports prepared by these independent title abstractors
in preparing title opinions and issuing title insurance policies. As the trial court also found, "[t]itle abstracting
does not require a Juris Doctor; does not involve the practice of law; and does not require the exercise of
professional judgment or the rendering of legal opinions on marketability and insurability [of title]." And, as the
defendant observes in his brief, the widespread use of independent title abstractors is client-driven, "a response
to the demand of sophisticated consumers of legal services (such as lenders and title companies) for most cost-
effective title work."
Were we to classify the duty to examine title as nondelegable, we would "open[ ] up an unrealistic and undue
liability channel not only with respect to the relationship of attorneys to [title abstractors] but, by analogous
extension, also to many other relationships in which attorneys retain specialists and experts in the discharge of
their professional obligations to clients." Kleeman, 614 N.E.2d at 718 (Bellacosa, J., concurring).
Contrary to the plaintiff’s assertions, an attorney does not "escape liability" by hiring an independent contractor
to examine title. The attorney remains subject to liability for negligently hiring, supervising or retaining the
abstractor, negligently reviewing the abstractor’s report, or negligently rendering an opinion based upon the
abstractor’s report. See North Bay Council, Inc. v. Bruckner, 131 N.H. 538 (1989) (attorney negligently failed to
advise client that language creating first refusal right constituted cloud on title). Moreover, the parties are free to
agree that the duty to examine title is nondelegable.
C. Liability Under Agency Law
The plaintiff relies upon general agency law principles to argue that the defendant is liable for the negligence of
the independent title abstractor whom the plaintiff mischaracterizes as the defendant’s "subagent." See
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 406 (1958) ("[u]nless otherwise agreed, an agent is responsible to the
principal for the conduct of a subservant or other subagent with reference to the principal’s affairs entrusted to
the subagent"). "A subagent is a person appointed by an agent empowered to do so, to perform functions
undertaken by the agent for the principal, but for whose conduct the agent agrees with the principal to be
primarily responsible." Id. § 5. In the agency agreement, the defendant agreed to be responsible only for his own
acts and omissions, not for the acts and omissions of others. Thus, the title abstractor was not the defendant’s
"subagent," and section 406 of the Restatement (Second) of Agency does not apply.
II. Breach of Contract Claim
The court ruled that the defendant breached paragraph 2(a) of the agency agreement by issuing a title insurance
policy that failed to except a prior recorded mortgage. Paragraph 2(a) provided:
2. Duties of Agent. Agent shall: (a) Receive and process applications for title insurance
in a timely, prudent and ethical manner with due regard to recognized title insurance
underwriting practices and in accordance with the rules, regulations, bulletins, manuals
and instructions of [the plaintiff] and its subsidiaries.
This provision, however, merely required the defendant to give "due regard" to "recognized title insurance
underwriting practices" and to process applications prudently, ethically and "in a timely . . . manner." There was
no evidence that the defendant failed to give "due regard" to "recognized title insurance underwriting practices,"
or that he behaved imprudently, unethically or in an untimely manner. Nor was there evidence that he failed to
"exercise due care and diligence" in committing the plaintiff to insurance risks, as set forth in paragraph 4(a) of
the agreement. Moreover, while the agreement prohibited the defendant from committing the plaintiff to
insurance risks which he knew were based upon disputed title, it was silent as to risks of which he was
reasonably unaware. In short, there was no evidence that the defendant breached the parties’ agreement.
In light of our ruling, we need not address the parties’ arguments regarding whether the agency agreement
entitled the plaintiff to attorney’s fees.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.