THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2001-354
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRIAN K. PATTEN
Argued: October 16, 2002
Opinion Issued: December 16, 2002
Philip T. McLaughlin, attorney general (Simon R. Brown, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief and
orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, and David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of
Concord (Mr. Johnson and Mr. Rothstein on the brief, and Mr. Johnson orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Brian K. Patten, appeals his conviction on two first degree murder charges. See
RSA 630:1-a (1996). He asserts that the Superior Court (Sullivan, J.) erroneously instructed the jury on the
elements of premeditation and deliberation and that there was insufficient evidence to support a finding of
premeditation and deliberation. We affirm.
The relevant facts follow. On Saturday, June 3, 2000, the defendant called 9-1-1 from his residence, and stated
that he had committed two "necessary killings." The defendant said that he felt "so bad" but "could not bear what
– what they were doing." He stated that he "took a lot of medication, and [] just had to do it." Following the call,
two police officers went to the defendant’s house and requested that he come outside. The defendant did not
cooperate. Eventually, the officers entered the house and, after a struggle, subdued and handcuffed the
defendant. While he was in handcuffs, the defendant continued to express sorrow over what he had done. When
an EMT approached him to check his bandages, the defendant stated, "they wanted a third of my paycheck to
live here."
Inside the officers discovered the bodies of the defendant’s mother and stepfather. His mother had suffered skull
fractures and contusions on her brain from at least six blows to the left side of her head. His stepfather had
suffered significant brain injury and extensive skull fracturing in the area of his forehead, having sustained at
least eight blows to his head, three to his back and three to his hands.
Pursuant to a warrant, the police searched the residence. A wooden mallet and mallet end cap were found
separately in the first floor bedroom. Blood consistent with the defendant’s stepfather’s blood was later detected
on the mallet, while blood consistent with the defendant’s mother’s blood was later detected on the mallet end
cap. The police also found a spiral notebook opened to a page with blood on it. Another page, dated June 3,
2000, contained the text, "I, Brian Keith Patten, died for my daughters and son would live better . . . to save
them all . . . I’m truly sorry. Love, Brian." On the next page were the words, "I have had serial killing intentions
for awhile, so I thought before I killed, to end it."
At trial, the defendant acknowledged that he had murdered his mother and stepfather but argued that a charge of
first degree murder was inappropriate because he acted without premeditation or deliberation. At the close of the
State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss the charges of first degree murder because the State failed to prove
the element of premeditation and deliberation. The trial court denied the motion. The defendant then requested
that the trial court instruct the jury that premeditation and deliberation only exist when the defendant had
"weighed the pros and cons and thought about the moral consequences of killing someone." The trial court
declined to do so. The defendant was convicted on both charges of first degree murder. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court did not properly define the elements of premeditation and
deliberation in its jury charge. "We have long recognized the rule that a claim of an erroneous jury charge must
be evaluated by reading the alleged offending portion in the context of the trial court’s whole charge." State v.
Parker, 142 N.H. 319, 324 (1997) (quotations omitted). "Reversal is not warranted unless the charge, as a whole,
does not fairly cover the issues of law of the case." State v. Marti, 143 N.H. 608, 617 (1999) (quotations
omitted). The elements of premeditation and deliberation require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of "some
reflection and consideration upon the choice to kill or not to kill, and the formation of a definite purpose to kill."
State v. Elbert, 125 N.H. 1, 11-12 (1984) (quotation and ellipses omitted).
The defendant argues that the trial court’s jury charge impermissibly "require[d] merely a finding that the
defendant thought about any aspect of the killing, such as the choice of weapon or manner of killing," rather
than requiring some reflection on the choice to kill as the law requires. We disagree. The trial court instructed
the jury by offering several questions it might ask when considering the issue of premeditation and deliberation.
The trial court then concluded by providing nearly the exact definition of premeditation and deliberation that we
set forth in State v. Greenleaf, 71 N.H. 606, 613-14 (1902):
There must be not only an intention to kill, but there must also be a deliberate and
premeditated design to kill. Such design must precede the killing by some appreciable
space of time. But the time need not be long. It must be sufficient for some reflection
and consideration upon the matter, for choice to kill or not to kill, and for the formation
of a definite purpose to kill. And when the time is sufficient for this, it matters not how
brief it is. Whether a deliberate and premeditated design to kill was formed must be
determined from all the circumstances of the case.
By instructing the jury with the definition from Greenleaf, as well as with questions that the jury could consider
in determining whether the State had met its burden, the trial court properly defined premeditation and
deliberation. See Elbert, 125 N.H. at 11-12. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in refusing to give the
defendant’s requested instruction.
The defendant next argues that there was insufficient evidence to support a finding of premeditation and
deliberation. To prevail on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant must demonstrate that no
rational trier of fact, evaluating all of the evidence and its reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the
State, could conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that he had committed the charged crime. State v. Hammell,
147 N.H. 313, 319 (2001). In determining whether sufficient evidence existed to convince a rational juror that a
defendant acted with premeditation and deliberation, we rely upon specific factors including: "[t]he character of
the weapon employed, the force and number of blows inflicted, the location and severity of the wounds, the
place of the crime, previous remarks and conduct indicating preparation, subsequent acts and statements . . . ."
State v. Sullivan, 131 N.H. 209, 216 (1988) (quotation omitted).
The record establishes that there was sufficient evidence to convince a rational juror that the defendant acted
with premeditation and deliberation. The defendant used a heavy wooden mallet, a weapon capable of producing
death, to carry out the attack. He inflicted several severe wounds on each victim. He struck his mother at least
six times, and his stepfather at least thirteen times. The locations of the wounds also support the jury’s finding.
His mother’s wounds were concentrated around her head, a vital area of her body. His stepfather was struck not
only in the head, but also in the hands and back, which indicated that the defendant persisted in the attack even
while the victim attempted to defend himself. Moreover, the defendant’s diary entry that he "had serial killing
intentions for awhile" was evidence that he had thought about committing murder prior to the attacks. Finally,
there was evidence of the defendant’s motive in murdering his mother and stepfather. During the 9-1-1 call after
the murders, he stated that he "could not bear [] what they were doing," and he told an EMT that "they wanted a
third of my paycheck to live here."
In sum, considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude a reasonable jury could
have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted with premeditation and deliberation.
Affirmed.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, J., concurred.