THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2001-087
JANE A. KELLY & a.
v.
PRUDENTIAL PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: March 13, 2002
Opinion Issued: April 19, 2002
Burns, Bryant, Hinchey, Cox & Rockefeller, P.A., of Dover (Matthew B. Cox on the brief and orally), for the
plaintiffs.
McDonough & O'Shaughnessy, P.A., of Manchester (Robert G. Whaland on the brief and orally), for the
defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Prudential Property and Casualty Insurance Company (Prudential), appeals a
Superior Court (Fauver, J.) order declaring that Prudential may not reduce uninsured motorist benefit payments
to the plaintiffs, Jane and Patrick Kelly, by the amount recoverable from the uninsured tortfeasor. We affirm.
Plaintiff Jane Kelly was injured in an automobile accident. At the time of the accident, she and her husband,
Patrick Kelly, carried uninsured motorist insurance issued by Prudential, with a recovery limit of $100,000. The
plaintiffs settled with the tortfeasor for the liability limit of her policy, $50,000. Following that settlement, an
uninsured motorist arbitration panel assessed the plaintiffs’ total damages at $225,000. Prudential then offset the
plaintiffs’ uninsured motorist coverage recovery by taking the value of the uninsured motorist benefits,
$100,000, and reducing it by the $50,000 settlement, thereby making $50,000 available to the plaintiffs from the
uninsured motorist benefits.
The plaintiffs brought a declaratory judgment action in superior court, see RSA 491:22 (1997), alleging that
Prudential was not entitled to offset their award by the tortfeasor’s settlement. The superior court concluded that
the policy language did not entitle Prudential to offset the tortfeasor’s settlement. Prudential appeals.
Prudential argues that the insurance policy’s language is unambiguous and that the trust agreement provision of
the general policy (Trust Agreement), which provides for a reduction of plaintiff benefits by any amounts
recoverable from a tortfeasor, applies to the entire policy including uninsured motorist coverage.
The interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law for this court to determine. Lebroke v. U.S. Fid. &
Guar. Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 249, 250 (2001). In construing the terms of a policy "we take the plain and ordinary
meaning of the policy’s words in context, and we construe the terms of the policy as would a reasonable person
in the position of the insured based on more than a casual reading of the policy as a whole." Id. at 250 (quotation
omitted). When an ambiguity arises from conflicting provisions of a policy, we resolve the inconsistency in
favor of the insured. See Trombly v. Blue Cross/Blue Shield, 120 N.H. 764, 770 (1980); cf. Transcontinental Ins.
v. WPUDUS, 760 P.2d 337, 343 (Wash. 1988) ("[I]f there is an ambiguity arising because of the difference of
language used in the endorsement and the body of the policy, or between two endorsements, the language of the
contract is construed most strongly against the insurer."); Israel v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 789 A.2d 974,
976 (Conn. 2002) (umbrella policy found to be ambiguous because it contained conflicting provisions).
The Trust Agreement provision of the general policy reads:
Trust Agreement – When we pay for a loss under this policy, we are entitled to the
amount we paid from the proceeds of any settlement or judgment you recover from the
responsible party. When allowed by law, we are also entitled to related collection
expenses for any settlement or judgment.
At our request, you must take any necessary action to recover the payments we have
made. We will select the attorney and pay all related costs and fees.
Prudential argues that the Trust Agreement provision is unambiguous and as one of the general provisions of the
insurance policy, it is intended to apply to the entire policy. See Deyette v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 560,
561 (1997). We agree that this provision, standing alone, clearly and unambiguously permits Prudential to offset
the plaintiffs’ recovery from the tortfeasor. The provision cannot be read alone, however; the entire policy must
be construed as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured, based on more than a casual reading of
the policy. Brouillard v. Prudential Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 710, 712 (1997).
The policy contains another provision addressing the possibility of reducing Prudential’s payment by recovery
from a tortfeasor. The Payments Reduced provision, located in the Uninsured Motorists booklet of the insurance
policy, states:
Payments will be reduced by any amount payable by persons responsible for the
accident and by any amount payable under this policy or by other sources so that the
total amount due does not exceed the amount of the damage. Payments under this part
will also reduce any amount payable under other parts of this policy. In no event will an
insured receive deplicate [sic] payments for the same element of loss.
Under a reasonable reading of the Payments Reduced provision, Prudential may reduce its payment to a plaintiff
only when a plaintiff’s recovery exceeds the amount of the plaintiff’s damages. Under the Trust Agreement
provision, Prudential is always entitled to offset a plaintiff’s recovery by any amounts recoverable from a
tortfeasor. Both offset provisions cannot apply to this case. A reasonable insured conducting a more than casual
reading of the policy could conclude that the Payments Reduced provision of the Uninsured Motorist booklet
supersedes the general Trust Agreement provision. Cf. Deyette, 142 N.H. at 561-62 (insurer entitled to offset
plaintiffs’ recovery by amount recovered from tortfeasor only where policy language "clearly and
unambiguously allow[ed] the defendant to limit its liability").
Construing Prudential’s policy in favor of the insureds, we conclude that Prudential may reduce the plaintiffs’
uninsured motorist benefits only when there would otherwise be a recovery in excess of the plaintiff’s damages.
Here, the plaintiffs’ total damages are $225,000. They have been able to recover $50,000 from the tortfeasor.
Their policy provides $100,000 in uninsured motorist coverage. Thus, because the plaintiffs may recover a total
of $150,000, which is less than the amount of their total damages, the Payments Reduced provision does not
permit offset here. Accordingly, we hold that Prudential is not entitled to offset the plaintiffs’ uninsured motorist
benefits by the amount paid by the tortfeasor.
Affirmed.
NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.