THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2001-452
ALFRED H. TROMBLEY
v.
LIBERTY MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: October 17, 2002
Opinion Issued: December 23, 2002
Moquin & Daley, P.A., of Manchester (Richard C. Moquin and Joni N. Esperian on the brief, and Mr. Moquin
orally), for the petitioner.
Law Offices of John B. Schulte, of Manchester (John B. Schulte on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
NADEAU, J. The respondent, Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, appeals a Superior Court (Barry, J.) order
granting declaratory judgment in favor of the petitioner, Alfred H. Trombley, Jr., and requiring the respondent to
provide the petitioner with uninsured motorist coverage for his workplace injuries. We reverse.
The trial court found, or the parties stipulated to, the following facts. The petitioner was injured on October 27,
1998, in the course of his employment with R.S. Audley, Inc., a construction company primarily engaged in
building and maintaining roads, bridges and highways. That day, the petitioner and a co-worker were working at
the R.S. Audley storage facility on Route 3-A in Bow. The Bow facility consists of an office building, several
shop buildings and a fenced back lot where materials are stored. A winding dirt road serves as a driveway
connecting the back lot to Route 3-A for deliveries and pickups. The trial court found, and neither party disputes,
that the driveway connecting the back lot to Route 3-A is private, and therefore not a public road for the
purposes of this case.
The petitioner was injured while he and his co-worker were loading forty-foot I-beams from the back lot onto a
flatbed truck parked in the driveway. The petitioner was standing on the bed of the truck to guide the direction of
the I-beams as his co-worker loaded them onto the truck from a Caterpillar "Integrated Toolcarrier" (IT). The IT
is a multi-functional piece of heavy-duty construction equipment most often used for digging, loading, lifting,
logging, snow plowing or sweeping, depending upon its attached tool implement. The attached implement being
used to load I-beams was a two-prong forklift tool.
The petitioner’s co-worker loaded one I-beam from the IT onto the truck and began to drive away, but the IT
tool attachment knocked the I-beam from its resting place on the truck bed. The I-beam, in turn, knocked the
petitioner off the truck and onto the ground. The I-beam then fell from the truck, landing on top of the petitioner,
crushing his legs.
The petitioner filed a claim for uninsured motorist coverage with the respondent under an automobile liability
policy the respondent had issued to R.S. Audley for the flatbed truck. The petitioner claimed that his injuries
were caused by his co-worker’s negligent operation of a motor vehicle, the IT, and that his co-worker was
effectively an uninsured motorist under New Hampshire law. See Gorman v. Nat’l Grange Mut. Ins. Co., 144
N.H. 157, 159 (1999), overruled by Matarese v. N.H. Mun. Assoc. Prop.-Liab. Ins. Trust, 147 N.H. 396, 405
(2002). Therefore, the petitioner claimed he was entitled to uninsured motorist coverage under his employer’s
automobile liability policy. Cf. Hull v. Town of Plymouth, 143 N.H. 381, 384-85 (1999). The respondent denied
the petitioner’s request for coverage, finding that it was excluded by a policy provision precluding coverage for
uninsured motorists driving vehicles "designed for use mainly off public roads while not on public roads."
The petitioner subsequently filed this declaratory judgment action in the superior court. After an evidentiary
hearing, the trial court found the respondent failed to sustain its burden of proving a lack of coverage because
the IT was designed for uses both on and off public roads and the exclusionary language in the insurance policy
was repugnant to the New Hampshire Financial Responsibility Act. See RSA 264:14, :15 (1993). The trial court,
therefore, granted the petition for declaratory judgment and found coverage in favor of the petitioner. This
appeal followed.
The respondent’s appeal challenges each of the above findings and rulings. The respondent also challenges the
trial court’s ruling that the petitioner was "legally entitled to recover" uninsured motorist benefits based upon the
Gorman case, in light of our recent decision overruling it. See Matarese, 147 N.H. at 405. We conclude that
coverage for the petitioner's injury was excluded under the express terms of the respondent’s insurance policy,
which is not repugnant to our Financial Responsibility Act. Therefore, we do not address the other issues raised
by this appeal.
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for this court to decide. See Ross v. Home
Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 468, 471 (2001). We construe insurance policy language as would a reasonable person in the
position of the insured based upon more than a casual reading of the policy as a whole. See id. Absent a statutory
provision or public policy to the contrary, an insurance company is free to limit its liability through an exclusion
written in clear and unambiguous policy language. See Wegner v. Prudential Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 148 N.H.
107, 109 (2002). For exclusionary language to be considered clear and unambiguous, two parties cannot
reasonably disagree about its meaning. See M. Mooney Corp. v. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., 136 N.H. 463,
470 (1992).
The disputed exclusionary language in this case excludes uninsured motorist coverage for vehicles that are "
[d]esigned for use mainly off public roads while not on public roads." The trial court found that the IT was not
being used on a public road in this case, but it was designed to be used both on and off public roads. The trial
court therefore ruled that the respondent did not meet its burden of proving that coverage was excluded under its
policy language.
We will disturb the trial court’s factual findings only if they are contrary to the weight of the evidence or
erroneous as a matter of law. See Raudonis v. Ins. Co. of North America, 137 N.H. 57, 59 (1993). The record
reflects that the IT is equipped to be used on public roads, it is registered for use on public roads, and it has been
used on public roads for at least three limited purposes: (1) to plow or sweep streets if a snow plow or street
sweeping tool implement is attached; (2) to move to a construction site within a limited radius; or (3) to be used
at a construction site for building or reconstructing a public road. The manifest weight of the evidence, however,
shows the IT was "designed for use mainly off public roads."
The IT is a large, yellow construction vehicle, manufactured by Caterpillar to run on a heavy-duty, off-road
diesel engine. The IT operation manual classifies the IT as a machine conforming to environmental standards for
non-road engines. The IT weighs 35,500 pounds without tool attachments, and operates at a maximum speed of
22.3 miles per hour. The IT can carry rated loads of up to 9,000 to 10,000 pounds when its tool implements are
attached. However, its maximum speed decreases with additional weight and the operator is advised to travel in
reverse when carrying bulky loads or when traveling down hills to maximize the IT’s traction and visibility.
The IT operator’s manual lists as typical examples for its use bulldozing, dumping, excavating, bucket loading,
bucket scraping, logging, pallet loading and material handling. The operator’s manual provides instructions for
shipping, towing or "roading" the machine. Towing the IT is not recommended. "Roading" the IT is
recommended only after consulting a tire dealer for maximum loads and speeds for tires, and the IT should never
be on any roadway for more than twenty-five miles without an extended break. "Roading" the IT also should
only occur if the machine is properly licensed and registered for the roads on which it will travel.
The IT is registered as construction equipment in the State of New Hampshire and bears construction equipment
license plates allowing it to travel on public roadways. See RSA 261:64 (Supp. 2002). The IT also was properly
equipped for travel on New Hampshire roadways, having head and tail lights, hazard lights, directional signals,
windshield wipers, a defroster and a horn. See RSA 266:1 et. seq. All witnesses at the trial court agreed,
however, that an IT would only be on a public roadway if involved in a construction project or being transported
to or from a construction site. All of the witnesses also agreed that the IT was designed for use primarily for
construction purposes.
Based upon this undisputed evidence and the statutory definition of highway building equipment in effect at that
time, which was,
all bulldozers, rollers, scrapers, graders . . . excavators . . . bucket loaders, snow loaders
. . . and such other items of equipment which in the opinion of the director [of motor
vehicles] have no usefulness upon the highways except for the building, repair or
maintenance of highways . . . or while being transported or moved over the highways . .
. .
RSA 259:42 (1993) (emphasis added), we find that the IT was "designed for use mainly off public roads."
Because the IT was not on a public road when the petitioner was injured, we conclude that it is excluded from
uninsured motorist coverage under the policy language in this case.
We also do not find this exclusionary language to contravene the requirements of the Financial Responsibility
Act. See RSA ch. 264. The respondent must provide uninsured motorist coverage only to the extent that either
the financial responsibility statute or public policy require. See Wegner, 148 N.H. at 109.
The statute requires that a policy providing general liability coverage to an insured also provide uninsured
motorist coverage to that insured with the same monetary limits, although not necessarily with the same scope.
See, e.g., Turner v. St. Paul Prop. & Liab. Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 27, 29 (1996). "It is intended to allow policy
holders to protect themselves against injury from an uninsured motorist to the extent they protect themselves
against liability." Id. Its purpose "is to protect policy holders against losses caused by irresponsible automobile
drivers with insufficient insurance coverage to pay for the insured’s injuries." Wyatt v. Maryland Cas. Co., 144
N.H. 234, 239 (1999) (quotation omitted). Any further coverage, however, is not required.
In the present case, the policy holder is the petitioner’s employer, while both the victim and the tortfeasor are the
policy holder’s employees who were working in the course of their employment. An employer, as policy holder,
protects itself from liability when its employee injures a third party in an accident involving the employer’s
covered vehicle. Thus, under our decision in Hull v. Town of Plymouth, the employer’s insurance carrier would
be statutorily required to provide uninsured motorist coverage under its automobile liability policy to the same
extent, to an uncompensated employee injured in an accident with a third-party uninsured motorist while using
the employer’s vehicle in the scope of employment. See Hull, 143 N.H. at 384-85.
In contrast, however, when the employer is the policy holder and both the victim and the tortfeasor are its
employees, the employer’s liability policy does not provide liability coverage for an employee injuring another
employee in the course of their employment. Nor is the policy statutorily required to do so, because the injured
employee would be fully compensated for his or her injuries under the Workers’ Compensation Act. See id. at
384; see also RSA 259:61 (1993).
Our Financial Responsibility Act requires that:
No policy shall be issued under the provisions of RSA 264:14, with respect to a vehicle
registered or principally garaged in this state unless coverage is provided therein or
supplemental thereto . . . for the protection of persons insured thereunder who are
legally entitled to recover damages from owners or drivers of uninsured motor vehicles
. . . .
RSA 264:15, I (Supp. 2002). A policy issued under the provisions of RSA 264:14 must provide
indemnity for or protection to the insured and any person responsible to him for the
operation of the insured’s motor vehicle, . . . against loss by reason of the liability to
pay damages to others for . . . bodily injuries . . . accidentally sustained . . . by any
person other than the insured, or employees of the insured actually operating the motor
vehicle or such other person . . . entitled to payments or benefits under the provisions of
any workers’ compensation act . . . .
RSA 259:61 (1993).
Because these statutes neither expressly prohibit the exclusionary language in this case nor require liability or
uninsured motorist coverage, the insurer was free to limit its liability through this exclusionary policy language.
See, e.g., West American Ins. Co. v. Pirro, 808 P.2d 322, 323 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1990); Chase v. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins., 641 P.2d 1305, 1309 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1982); Shumaker v. Farm Bureau Mut. Ins. Co., 785 P.2d 180,
181-82 (Kan. Ct. App. 1990).
Reversed.
BROCK, C.J., and BRODERICK, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.