THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2001-629
LOUISE REED
v.
COUNTY OF HILLSBOROUGH
Argued: October 9, 2002
Opinion Issued: December 2, 2002
Mark H. Campbell, of Manchester, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Getman, Stacey, Tamposi, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (John A. Curran on the brief and orally), for the
defendant.
Dalianis, J. The plaintiff, Louise Reed, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Brennan, J.) dismissing her
personal injury action against the defendant, County of Hillsborough. We reverse in part and remand.
The plaintiff, a seventy-three-year-old woman, tripped on a sidewalk and fell while entering the Hillsborough
County Superior Courthouse in Manchester on April 14, 1997. She filed a writ of summons in April 2000,
alleging that the County negligently failed to maintain the sidewalk in a safe condition by allowing the existence
of a "lip" between the sections of concrete, thereby creating an uneven surface. She alleged that as a result, she
suffered "severe and permanent injuries, including head and nose injuries, knee injuries, medical expenses, and
pain and suffering[.]"
Prior to trial, the plaintiff indicated that she did not intend to introduce any expert testimony. The County moved
to dismiss, arguing that she could not prove causation and damages without expert testimony. The trial court
dismissed the plaintiff’s suit, stating:
The plaintiff in this case alleges that she suffered severe and permanent injuries,
including head and nose injuries, medical expenses, and pain and suffering. The alleged
injuries involve substantially more than the immediate cost of first aid following her
fall. A medical expert is necessary for the jury to make a reasonable decision
concerning causation. For instance, the plaintiff may describe what she sincerely
believes are the injuries or the symptoms of the injuries, but neither she nor the jury
have the technical or medical education and experience necessary to reach a reasonable
conclusion as to whether the injury or condition she describes was actually caused by
the fall.
The trial court denied the plaintiff’s motion for reconsideration. This appeal followed.
The plaintiff argues on appeal that the trial court erred in ruling, without a hearing, that she was barred from
presenting her case to a jury absent expert medical testimony. She contends that under the facts of this case,
expert testimony is not required because the issue of causation and damages is within the common experience of
the jury. Specifically, she argues that medical bills, X rays and hospital records, as well as her statements to
physicians under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 803(4), are sufficient to prove causation and damages.
We have held that where scientific issues are beyond the capacity of people of common experience and
knowledge to form a valid judgment by themselves, expert evidence is required to assist a jury in its decision.
Lemay v. Burnett, 139 N.H. 633, 634 (1995). We have specifically recognized that expert testimony is frequently
required to prove medical causation in cases involving claims of physical injuries. Id. at 635; see also Appeal of
Briggs, 138 N.H. 623, 629 (1994) (workers’ compensation). In medical malpractice cases, for example, the
general rule is that the proximate cause between the negligence and the injury must be established through
expert testimony. Thorpe v. State, 133 N.H. 299, 304 (1990); see also RSA 507-E:2 (1997). This rule applies if
"any inference of the requisite causal link must depend on observation and analysis outside the common
experience of jurors . . . ." Thorpe, 133 N.H. at 299 (quotations omitted); see Bentley v. Adams, 100 N.H. 377,
379 (1956) (medical testimony not necessary when circumstances fall within realm of common knowledge).
"Lay testimony is probative on the issue of physical injury and the cause of that injury only if the cause and
effect are so immediate, direct and natural to common experience as to obviate any need for an expert medical
opinion." Weaver v. W.C.A.B. (Pa. Power Co.), 487 A.2d 116, 118 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1985).
The plaintiff alleges that she sustained severe and permanent injuries as a result of her fall, including head and
nose injuries, knee injuries, medical expenses, and pain and suffering. In addition, while not expressed clearly in
her writ, the plaintiff alleged in other pleadings that she also sustained abrasions to her head, neck, back and leg
as a result of the fall. The cause and effect of such injuries as the latter may be so immediate, direct and natural
to common experience that no expert testimony would be necessary. Based upon common experience, jurors
may determine, without the aid of expert testimony, that her fall could cause such injuries. We therefore reverse
the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s negligence case to the extent she claims damages relating to such
obvious injuries and remand for further proceedings.
Given the ambiguity of her writ of summons, and the scant record before us, we cannot discern the precise
nature and character of the remainder of the plaintiff’s claimed injuries. As a result, the plaintiff is entitled to
seek damages without expert testimony for those abrasions discussed above. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to
seek damages for any other non-permanent injuries is left for determination by the trial court. We do not address
any arguments regarding the plaintiff’s alleged failure to comply with discovery deadlines since those issues
were not raised before the trial court as a ground for dismissal. See Daboul v. Town of Hampton, 124 N.H. 307,
309 (1983).
Reversed in part and remanded.
BROCK, C.J., and BRODERICK, NADEAU and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.