THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Milford District Court
No. 2001-138
ROBERT L. METCALF
v.
SHIRLEY LAWSON
Argued: May 14, 2002
Opinion Issued: June 25, 2002
Robert L. Metcalf, by brief and orally, pro se.
Griffin & Owen, P.C., of Amherst (John F. Griffin, Jr. on the brief and orally) and Cazden Law Office, of
Manchester (Elizabeth Cazden on the brief), for the defendant.
Dalianis, J. The defendant, Shirley Lawson, appeals an order of the Milford District Court (Ryan, J.) denying her
motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. We reverse.
This case arises out of a breach of contract action involving an Internet transaction. The defendant, a New Jersey
resident, advertised a "John Deere 30 mini excavator" on an Internet auction site known as "eBay." The
defendant has never been physically present in New Hampshire.
Prior to bidding on the excavator, the plaintiff, Robert Metcalf, a New Hampshire resident, contacted the
defendant through electronic mail (e-mail) to inquire about the product’s quality. After receiving an e-mail
message from the defendant assuring him that the product was in good condition, he bid on the excavator and
won the auction.
Following the auction, the parties exchanged further e-mail messages and at some point the plaintiff informed
the defendant that he was a New Hampshire resident. The plaintiff then traveled to New Jersey and purchased
the excavator. After the transaction was concluded, the plaintiff experienced problems with the excavator and
tried to contact the defendant, hoping to receive a partial refund. The defendant did not respond.
The plaintiff filed a small claims complaint. The defendant moved for dismissal, arguing that she was not subject
to personal jurisdiction in New Hampshire. The court denied the motion, stating, in part:
By advertising her John Deere excavator on "E-bay" for sale, the defendant knew or
should hav[e] know[n] that the offer would be extended to possible buyers in all 50
states. The Court finds that by doing business on the Internet, the defendant has the
requisite minimum contact with the State of New Hampshire.
This appeal followed.
"The plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating facts sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over the
defendant." Phelps v. Kingston, 130 N.H. 166, 170 (1987). The plaintiff must offer affirmative proof to
substantiate facts that relate to personal jurisdiction. See Brother Records v. HarperCollins Publishers, 141 N.H.
322, 324 (1996), cert. denied, 520 U.S. 1103 (1997).
The plaintiff, however, need make only a prima facie showing of jurisdictional facts to defeat a defendant’s
motion to dismiss. See id. at 325.
In determining whether a defendant is subject to personal jurisdiction, we generally engage in a two-part inquiry.
Staffing Network, Inc. v. Pietropaolo, 145 N.H. 456, 457 (2000). "First, the State's long-arm statute must
authorize such jurisdiction. Second, the requirements of the [F]ederal Due Process Clause must be satisfied." Id.
(citation omitted). Because we construe the State’s long-arm statute as permitting the exercise of jurisdiction to
the extent permissible under the Federal Due Process Clause, see Alacron v. Swanson, 145 N.H. 625, 628
(2000), our primary analysis relates to due process. See Dagesse v. Plant Hotel N.V., 113 F. Supp. 2d 211, 215
(D.N.H. 2000).
Pursuant to the Federal Due Process Clause, a court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident
defendant if the defendant has certain minimum contacts with the forum, "such that the maintenance of the suit
does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice." Alacron, 145 N.H. at 628. "Where, as
here, specific rather than continuous contacts with the forum are the basis for personal jurisdiction, whether
these contacts are sufficient to confer jurisdiction over a foreign defendant depends upon the relationship
between the defendant, the forum, and the litigation." Id.
In determining if the exercise of specific personal jurisdiction comports with due process, we examine whether:
(1) the contacts relate to the cause of action; (2) the defendant has purposefully availed herself of the protections
of New Hampshire law; and (3) it would be fair and reasonable to require the defendant to defend the suit in
New Hampshire. Skillsoft Corp. v. Harcourt General, 146 N.H. 305, 308 (2001). All three factors must be
satisfied in order for the exercise of jurisdiction to be constitutionally proper, Dagesse, 113 F. Supp. 2d at 216,
and each factor must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Phelps, 130 N.H. at 171. Because there appears to be
no dispute in this case as to the first factor, we begin by considering if the defendant purposefully availed herself
of the protections of New Hampshire’s laws.
"The constitutional touchstone of the determination whether an exercise of personal jurisdiction comports with
due process remains whether the defendant purposefully established minimum contacts in the forum State."
Asahi Metal Industry Co. v. Superior Court, 480 U.S. 102, 108-09 (1987) (quotations and brackets omitted).
Minimum contacts
must have a basis in some act by which the defendant purposefully avails [himself] of
the privilege of conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking the benefits
and protections of its laws . . . . Jurisdiction is proper where the contacts proximately
result from actions by the defendant himself that create a substantial connection with
the forum State.
Id. at 109 (quotations and ellipsis omitted). "The focus of this inquiry, therefore, is not merely whether . . . the
defendant[’s] contacts might have caused injury in New Hampshire, but whether these contacts should have
given [the] defendant notice that . . . she should reasonably have anticipated being haled into court in this State."
Alacron, 145 N.H. at 628. The purposeful availment requirement ensures that a defendant will not be subjected
to a forum State’s jurisdiction based upon random, fortuitous or attenuated contacts. Dagesse, 113 F. Supp. 2d at
215.
It can be difficult to apply long-standing jurisdictional principles in cases involving Internet contacts. See
Edberg v. Neogen Corp., 17 F. Supp. 2d 104, 113 (D. Conn. 1998). Nevertheless, while
[t]he internet . . . undoubtedly challenges the territorial-based concepts that courts have
traditionally applied to problems of personal jurisdiction[,] . . . it is equally true that
traditional constitutional requirements of foreseeability, minimum contacts, purposeful
availment, and fundamental fairness must continue to be satisfied before any activity –
including internet activity – can support an exercise of personal jurisdiction.
Dagesse, 113 F. Supp. 2d at 220-21 (citations and quotations omitted). In analyzing the significance of Internet
contacts, therefore, most courts hold that the constitutionality of a State’s exercise of jurisdiction is proportionate
to the nature and quality of the commercial activity the defendant conducts over the Internet. See, e.g., Sports
Authority Michigan, Inc. v. Justballs, Inc., 97 F. Supp. 2d 806, 812-13 (E.D. Mich. 2000); Zippo Mfg. Co. v.
Zippo Dot Com, Inc., 952 F. Supp. 1119, 1124 (W.D. Pa. 1997). A common analytical framework applied in
these cases incorporates a sliding scale approach, which provides that:
At one end of the spectrum are situations where a defendant clearly does business over
the Internet. If the defendant enters into contracts with residents of a foreign
jurisdiction that involve the knowing and repeated transmission of computer files over
the Internet, personal jurisdiction is proper. At the opposite end are situations where a
defendant has simply posted information on an Internet Web site which is accessible to
users in foreign jurisdictions. A passive Web site that does little more than make
information available to those who are interested in it is not grounds for the exercise of
personal jurisdiction. The middle ground is occupied by interactive Web sites where a
user can exchange information with the host computer. In these cases, the exercise of
jurisdiction is determined by examining the level of interactivity and commercial nature
of the exchange of information that occurs on the Web site.
Zippo Mfg. Co., 952 F. Supp. at 1124 (citations omitted).
The Zippo test is not particularly helpful in this case, however, because the majority of cases using it are based
upon a defendant’s conduct over its own website. See, e.g., Dagesse, 113 F. Supp. 2d at 219-24; Sports Authority
Michigan, Inc., 97 F. Supp. 2d at 812-14; Zippo Mfg. Co., 952 F. Supp. at 1125-28. Unlike those cases, the
transaction in this case was conducted through an Internet auction site. In analyzing this issue, we find Winfield
Collection, Ltd. v. McCauley, 105 F. Supp. 2d 746 (E.D. Mich. 2000), instructive.
In Winfield Collection, Ltd., the court held that two sales made to Michigan residents through eBay, standing
alone, were insufficient to find that the defendant purposefully availed herself of the privileges and protections
of the State of Michigan. Id. at 749. The court took judicial notice that the function of an auction is to permit the
highest bidder to purchase the property offered for sale, and that the choice of the bidder is beyond the seller’s
control. Id. Thus, it reasoned that the defendant’s sales in the forum were the result of random and attenuated
contacts, insufficient for finding that the defendant purposefully availed herself of the privilege of doing
business in Michigan. Id.
In this case, the defendant did not purposefully avail herself of the privilege of doing business in New
Hampshire by selling her excavator through eBay. Like the defendant in Winfield Collection, Ltd., she had no
control over who would ultimately be the winning bidder on the excavator, nor could she exclude bidders from
particular jurisdictions. While it is arguable that the defendant may have foreseen the possibility that a New
Hampshire resident might bid on the excavator, foreseeability alone is insufficient to support the exercise of
personal jurisdiction under the Federal Due Process Clause. World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444
U.S. 286, 295 (1980). "It is the conduct of the defendant[], rather than the medium utilized by [her], to which the
parameters of specific jurisdiction apply." Millennium Enterprises v. Millennium Music, LP, 33 F. Supp. 2d 907,
921 (D. Or. 1999).
Nor do the e-mail communications between the parties create sufficient minimum contacts. First, the e-mail sent
by the plaintiff prior to winning the auction cannot be a ground to support jurisdiction because that contact was
the result of his unilateral activity. Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253 (1958). Second, there is insufficient
evidence to establish whether any subsequent e-mails were initiated by the defendant and when she was made
aware that the plaintiff was a New Hampshire resident.
Nothing indicates, therefore, that the defendant intentionally directed her activities at New Hampshire or was
aware she was contracting with a New Hampshire resident until after the transaction was completed. See
Compuserve, Inc. v. Patterson, 89 F.3d 1257, 1264-66 (6th Cir. 1996) (defendant knowingly contracted with
Ohio company, directed activities at forum and engaged in ongoing commercial relationship through use of
Internet). Consequently, even if we apply the Zippo test as encouraged by the plaintiff, we conclude that the
defendant’s contacts through the Internet are insufficient to warrant the exercise of jurisdiction.
Finally, what appears to be the isolated nature of this transaction and the absence of any evidence that the
defendant was a commercial seller militate against a finding of jurisdiction. We reject the plaintiff’s contention
that jurisdiction exists because the defendant did not plead that she is a non-commercial seller or that she
engaged in only one transaction on eBay. The plaintiff had the burden of offering some affirmative proof to
substantiate facts that relate to personal jurisdiction. Brother Records, 141 N.H. at 324. To the extent the plaintiff
attempts to introduce evidence on appeal to support his claim for jurisdiction, he is barred from doing so because
it was not presented first to the district court. State v. Natalcolon, 140 N.H. 689, 691-92 (1996).
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant did not engage in sufficient activity in this State to make it fair and
reasonable for purposes of due process to require her to defend this claim here.
Reversed.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.