THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2001-396
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LUIS A. HALL
Argued: October 16, 2002
Opinion Issued: December 17, 2002
Philip T. McLaughlin, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, attorney, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Twomey & Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
BROCK, C.J. The defendant, Luis A. Hall a/k/a Luis J. Wilner a/k/a Joseph Wilner, appeals his convictions for
multiple counts of felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:3, II (1996), and providing alcohol to minors, see
RSA 179:5 (2002). On appeal, the defendant argues that the Superior Court (Hampsey, J.) erred when it denied
his motion to suppress, and the Superior Court (Groff, J.) erred when it denied his motion to dismiss, and
allowed testimony that the defendant asked the victim and another girl to kiss. We affirm.
The defendant first argues that the Superior Court (Hampsey, J.) erroneously denied his motion to suppress his
June 27, 2000 statement to police. He asserts that the statement was not voluntary and that the trial court erred
by failing to consider an earlier non-incriminating statement. See U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV; N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 15. We address the defendant’s State constitutional claim first, citing federal law only to aid in our
analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). "We need not conduct a separate federal constitutional
analysis because our State Constitution affords the defendant greater protection than does the Federal
Constitution in this area." State v. Aubuchont, 147 N.H. 142, 146 (2001).
"Whether a confession is voluntary is initially a question of fact for the trial court, whose decision will not be
overturned unless it is contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, as viewed in the light most favorable to
the State." Id. (quotation omitted). The State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s
statements were made voluntarily. Id.
To be considered voluntary, a confession must be the product of an essentially free and
unconstrained choice and not extracted by threats, violence, direct or implied promises
of any sort, or by the exertion of any improper influence. In determining the
voluntariness of the confession, the trial court must examine the totality of the
surrounding circumstances. Both the characteristics of the accused and the details of the
interrogation are considered. The court should look at the factual circumstances
surrounding the confession, the psychological impact on the defendant, and the legal
significance of how the defendant reacted, in order to determine whether the police
exerted such an influence on the defendant that his will was overborne.
Id. (quotation omitted).
On June 27, 2000, the defendant drove to the Nashua Police Department to speak with an officer about
allegations that he had provided alcohol to minors and had a sexual relationship with a thirteen-year-old girl.
One officer initially questioned the defendant. At the beginning of the interview, the officer administered a
Miranda rights form. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The defendant stated he understood each
right, and he signed his initials next to each right on the form. He also read and signed a waiver form, and stated
that he would voluntarily speak to the officers. After about an hour of questioning, a second officer joined them.
The first officer testified that he "upped the ante" of the questioning by using his interrogation skills and having
another officer present. Approximately one hour later, a third officer joined them for under five minutes. The
third officer told the defendant that if he did not cooperate, "the case would turn in the direction of forensic
evidence." After he left, the remaining two officers questioned the defendant for about twenty-five more
minutes. One officer asked the defendant if he would be surprised if the victim had kept her underwear and that
it could be tested for semen; the officers did not, however, have the victim’s underwear. One of the officers also
asked the defendant if the victim would likely contract any sexually transmitted diseases. The defendant
subsequently confessed to having had sexual contact with the victim, and he agreed to have his statement
videotaped.
The defendant argues that his statement was not voluntary because the conditions surrounding his statement
indicate that his will was overborne. He points to several factors to support his argument: three officers
interrogated him in a confrontational and accusatory manner, they lied about having forensic evidence and
referred to concerns about sexually transmitted diseases.
We are not persuaded that being questioned by three officers rendered the defendant’s statement involuntary. As
evidence that the questioning was coercive, the defendant points to testimony that one officer "confronted" the
defendant with a handwritten note allegedly given to the victim by the defendant, that the officer had received
interrogation training and that he controlled the pace and direction of the questions. There is no evidence,
however, that the officer’s questions were coercive in tone, style or content. During his videotaped confession,
the defendant acknowledged that he had been treated well by the officers. Although the officers may have misled
the defendant into believing they had incriminating evidence, their comments were not so deceptive as to render
the confession involuntary. See United States v. Palmer, 203 F.3d 55, 62 (1st Cir. 2000). We are also not
persuaded that raising concerns about sexually transmitted diseases amounted to police coercion. There was no
evidence of threats, violence, promises or improper influence. Considering the totality of the circumstances, we
conclude that the trial court’s ruling was not contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence.
The defendant also argues that in evaluating the voluntariness of his June 2000 confession, the trial court did not
evaluate the totality of the circumstances because it did not consider a January 2000 statement to police. Without
deciding whether a statement made to police six months prior to an allegedly involuntary confession ought to be
considered as part of a totality of the circumstances analysis of the voluntariness of the confession, we conclude
that the defendant’s argument is unsupported by the record. The trial court stated in its order that it had
considered all relevant pleadings and testimony. The order states that the defendant was interviewed on January
30, 2000, and that he denied any criminal activity at that time. The testimony at the suppression hearing included
references to, and details about, the January statement. The record supports the conclusion that the trial court
appropriately considered the totality of the circumstances, including the defendant’s earlier statement, when it
made its ruling.
The defendant next argues that the superior court erroneously denied his motion for a mistrial. Because the trial
court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial nature of the conduct at issue, it has broad discretion to
decide whether a mistrial is appropriate. State v. Kerwin, 144 N.H. 357, 359 (1999). We will not overturn the
trial court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Pandolfi, 145 N.H. 508, 512 (2000);
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). "To
justify a mistrial, the conduct must be more than merely inadmissible; it must constitute an irreparable injustice
that cannot be cured by jury instructions." Kerwin, 144 N.H. at 358-59 (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that the trial court abused its discretion by permitting the trial to continue after a police
witness twice referred to the suppression hearing. He argues that the trial court did not properly exercise its
discretion, in violation of State v. Gould, 144 N.H. 415 (1999), because it did not sufficiently reflect on the
matter or consider lesser remedies. Gould does not apply to this case because it involved a defendant’s double
jeopardy challenge to a retrial after the trial court declared a mistrial. Gould, 144 N.H. at 416. The defendant
also suggests that by leaving the curative instruction to him, the trial court "handed off" its exercise of discretion.
We fail to see how offering the defendant the opportunity to craft his own curative instruction demonstrated the
trial court’s failure to exercise its discretion.
"Where the testimony is ambiguous, a defendant is not so substantially prejudiced that a mistrial is required."
State v. Ellison, 135 N.H. 1, 6 (1991). The officer made vague and ambiguous references to the suppression
hearing. He did not reveal information about what transpired at the hearing, what it was about, or its outcome.
We cannot conclude that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the
defendant’s case. The trial court therefore did not engage in an unsustainable exercise of discretion in failing to
declare a mistrial.
The defendant finally argues that the trial court erroneously allowed the victim to testify that the defendant asked
her and her female cousin to kiss one another. Defense counsel asked for a mistrial and then argued that the
evidence should be excluded under New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 401 and 403. The court ruled that the
evidence was not a prior bad act, but was
part and parcel of the same episode, and it certainly shows what his intention is in terms
of having sexual relations with this girl. And I think it is relevant, and while it is
prejudicial, I think its probative value, at least in terms of his intent and his plan, is not
substantially outweighed by its prejudice, so I’ll allow it.
(Emphasis added.)
The defendant argues that because the trial court used the words "intent" and "plan" in its analysis, it must have
been applying Rule 404(b). We disagree. The language of the court’s ruling demonstrates that it applied Rules
401 and 403, not Rule 404(b).
The defendant also argues that because the prejudice from the testimony outweighed its probative value, the
court erred by admitting it. We disagree.
Evidence is relevant if it has "any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." N.H. R. Ev.
401. Evidence that is relevant "may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger
of unfair prejudice." N.H. R. Ev. 403. We will not overturn the trial court’s rulings on the admissibility of
evidence pursuant to Rules 401 and 403 absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Pelkey, 145
N.H. 133, 135-36 (2000); Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
At trial, the defendant claimed that he had engaged in only one act of sexual contact with the victim, that the
victim had initiated that contact while he was asleep, and that he was not really aware of what he was doing. The
State argues that the evidence that the defendant requested the two girls to kiss was relevant to undermine his
credibility and to show his intent to have sexual relations with the victim. We agree that the testimony was
relevant because the jury could have interpreted it as evidence that the defendant was an active participant in
sexualized contact with the victim rather than a passive recipient of the victim’s advances.
The defendant argues that evidence of his request for the girls to kiss one another was an invitation to the jury to
make the inferential leap proscribed in State v. Woodard, 146 N.H. 221 (2001). Woodard is easily
distinguishable. In Woodard, the defendant was convicted of felonious sexual assault against a same-sex victim.
Woodard, 146 N.H. at 222. We concluded that evidence that the defendant had engaged in a homosexual
relationship with the victim’s parent two years after the assaults on the victim had limited probative value that
was substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Id. at 224-25. We stated that the potential for
juror bias against homosexual conduct created the danger of prejudice. Id. at 225.
In this case, the evidence was relevant as explained above. The testimony did not relate to the defendant’s
homosexual conduct, and the defendant was not charged with homosexual assaults; thus there was less potential
prejudice than in Woodard. It was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion for the trial court to conclude that
the probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.