THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2001-418
IN THE MATTER OF DOROTHY C. LOCKABY AND WILLIAM E. SMITH
Submitted: July 19, 2002
Opinion Issued: October 25, 2002
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief), for the petitioner.
Perkins & Puckhaber, P.A., of Concord (Diane M. Puckhaber on the brief), for the respondent.
NADEAU, J. The petitioner, Dorothy C. Lockaby, appeals an order of the Salem Family Division (Reardon, J.)
denying her motion to modify the visitation rights of the respondent, William E. Smith, by permitting her to
relocate to the Commonwealth of Virginia with their two minor children. On appeal, the petitioner contends the
trial court’s order is an unsustainable exercise of discretion and an improper modification of custody. We
reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The parties divorced in September 2000, after a long-term marriage that
produced three sons. At that time, the parties’ sons were thirteen, sixteen and nineteen years old. Their oldest
son was a full-time student at the University of Virginia, while their younger sons were in the eighth and
eleventh grades in the Salem School District. In their uncontested divorce, the parties entered into a stipulation
regarding their two minor sons’ custody, education, support and visitation, which the trial court incorporated into
its permanent decree. The parties’ stipulation gave them joint legal custody and the petitioner primary physical
custody of the boys. It also provided the respondent with liberal visitation rights subject to the children’s
schedules, including, but not limited to, every other weekend, alternating holidays, and any additional times the
boys independently arranged with their father. The parties later agreed to give the respondent one night per week
as additional visitation time with the boys.
Since the divorce, the petitioner and her sons have remained in the marital home in Salem, while the respondent
has remarried and moved to Bow. The two boys have always attended school in the Salem School District, and
both boys are honor roll students with plans to attend college. During their parents’ divorce and their visits with
the respondent, the boys initially experienced difficulties and discord in their relationships with him. However,
all of the parties sought to improve their relationships with one another and began seeing a counselor to sort out
their differences. The children and the respondent soon established a good relationship with regular visits during
the week and every other weekend.
In January 2001, three months after the parties’ divorce, the petitioner received an employment offer from James
Madison University in Harrisonburg, Virginia. The petitioner immediately contacted the respondent by letter to
tell him about her job opportunity and to discuss a proposed relocation to Virginia. The same month, the
petitioner filed a motion asking the trial court to modify the respondent’s visitation schedule to eight weeks of
extended visitation throughout the year, which would allow the boys to relocate with the petitioner to Virginia.
The petitioner proposed that the respondent have six weeks of visitation in the summer, one week at Christmas,
and one week in the spring to spend with his sons. The respondent objected to this proposal and to his sons being
moved to Virginia, although he did not oppose the petitioner’s individual relocation. He filed a cross-motion to
modify custody in the event of the petitioner’s relocation, asking the court either to maintain the status quo for
custody and visitation, or to grant him physical custody of the two boys.
In May 2001, the trial court held an evidentiary hearing on the parties’ motions, receiving offers of proof from
the parties and a post-trial letter from the children’s counselor. The evidence showed that each of the teenage
boys wished to remain with the petitioner, and that the petitioner would give up her job opportunity before she
would give up physical custody. While at least one of the boys preferred to stay in Salem with the petitioner,
both boys wanted to move to Virginia with her and did not want to live with the respondent and his new wife.
The record reflected that the older boy wanted to move to Virginia because it has more appealing educational
opportunities and offers him a fresh start, with new people in a new environment. Finally, the boys’ counselor
opined that the boys would not be harmed by the move and, in fact, such a move would put the boys closer to
their brother who is attending school there.
The trial court denied the petitioner’s motion and subsequent motion for reconsideration, finding the move was
not in the minor children’s best interests because it would: (1) remove the boys from their present school system;
(2) terminate their current counseling relationship; and (3) significantly interfere with their father’s visitation and
parental relationship with them. Because the trial court denied the petitioner’s motion, thereby maintaining the
status quo, it declined to address the respondent’s cross-motion to modify custody. This appeal followed.
The petitioner first asks us to apply the analytical framework for custodial relocations set forth in Ireland v.
Ireland, 717 A.2d 676 (Conn. 1998). Cf. Tomasko v. DuBuc, 145 N.H. 169, 171 (2000). While the respondent
does not object to an application of the Ireland framework to this appeal, neither party below suggested, nor did
the trial court apply, this framework. The trial court’s decision is based solely upon the best interests of the
minor children. Therefore, we decline to apply the Ireland standard to this case. Cf. RSA 458:23-a (Supp. 2002)
(effective date July 7, 2002) (adopting standard for application after statute’s effective date).
We review the trial court’s finding that the petitioner’s proposed relocation to Virginia is not in the children’s
best interests for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172; see also State v. Lambert,
147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). This means that we review
only "whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made."
Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296; see also Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172. The trial court’s discretion is not unlimited.
Chasan v. Mintz, 119 N.H. 865, 867 (1979). If the trial court’s decision could not reasonably be made upon the
record below, it will be overturned. See id.; see also Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172.
"In visitation matters, the court has continuing jurisdiction to modify arrangements in the best interests of the
child." Chandler v. Bishop, 142 N.H. 404, 411 (1997). While parents do possess constitutional rights to custody
and visitation with their children, the trial court’s overriding concern in structuring custody and visitation is the
best interests of the child, which may require the court to "circumscrib[e] one or both parents’ rights to promote
the child’s welfare." Id. at 412. Although visitation by the non-custodial parent is an important right, it is "one
that must yield to the greatest good of the child." Houde v. Beckmeyer, 116 N.H. 719, 721 (1976). The trial
court’s decision must be based upon the best interests of the children, and it "may not be sustained as a means of
enforcing the visitation rights of the noncustodial parent." Webb v. Knudson, 133 N.H. 665, 672-73 (1990).
The trial court gave three reasons why the petitioner’s move was not in the best interests of the children: (1) the
relocation would take the boys from a school system and friendships they enjoyed their entire lives; (2) the move
would terminate the boys’ relationship with their counselor; and (3) the move would substantially interfere with
the boys’ relationship with the respondent. The first two findings have no support in the record below, and the
third finding is an unsustainable basis for denying the motion because it seeks only to enforce the visitation
rights of the respondent, who is the non-custodial parent. Cf. Knudson, 133 N.H. at 673.
First, absent from the trial court’s order is any deference to the expressed preferences of the two teenage boys.
See Butterick v. Butterick, 127 N.H. 731, 734-35 (1986). The parties agreed that both boys were intelligent,
mature teenagers who could properly articulate their preferences to an independent person. Additionally, both
parties and the court agreed that a recommendation from the boys’ counselor relating to their best interests and
preferences would be helpful to the court’s decision on this motion. The trial court, however, issued its order
without waiting for the counselor’s recommendation and without receiving any input, other than the parties’
arguments, on the boys’ preferences. Upon receiving the counselor’s report with the petitioner’s motion for
reconsideration, the trial court still gave it no deference, even though it expressed a clear opinion as to the
children’s best interests and a clear articulation of each boy’s preferences.
The counselor reported, consistent with the petitioner’s offer of proof at the hearing, that David, the youngest
boy, initially opposed a move to Virginia because he enjoyed his friends and school in New Hampshire.
However, he since has accepted the move because he wants to continue living with his mother. The report also
disclosed that Paul, the older boy entering his senior year of high school, was excited about the move because he
has experienced difficulties with people in the Salem school system, the move would offer him a new beginning,
and the move would give him more appealing education options. Finally, the counselor’s report states:
Both boys are clear that they wish to reside with their mother. Both boys acknowledge
they could regularly visit their father if they lived in VA. They could also see him for
longer period[s] of time in the summer months. . . .[T]he boys have always lived with
their mother and do not wish to alter that arrangement. In my opinion, the boys would
not be harmed by the move, but there would need to be some protection of the father-
son involvement.
Regular visits and extended visits may allow father and sons to approximate what they
have now.
. . . .
Both boys wish to continue their relationship with both parents. A move to Virginia
does not change this feeling. Their wish to continue living with their mother, coupled
with the opportunities they expect to have in Virginia, along with being closer to their
older brother Michael, who attends the University of Virginia, is a powerful draw. The
possibility of living with their father and his [wife] and attending a school where their
father resides does not offer the same emotional attraction. They are more comfortable
visiting with their father and living with their mother. It remains important for both
boys that their parents are able to come to some solution regarding these issues.
This report is consistent with the petitioner’s offers of proof at the hearing. Moreover, it reflects the boys’
preferences as expressed to an independent counselor, which each party agreed at the hearing should be given
deference. See Butterick, 127 N.H. at 735.
Second, the trial court’s finding that the boys would be taken out of a school system that they enjoy is not
consistent with the weight of the evidence and does not explain how the petitioner’s proposed relocation is not in
the children’s best interest. The record reflects that at the time of the hearing, Paul was about to enter his senior
year at Salem High School, but he wanted to move to Virginia and go to a new school with different
opportunities. The record also shows that David was about to enter his freshman year at Salem High School,
which itself would be a new school environment for him. While David initially did not want to move away from
his friends in Salem, he accepted the idea because he wanted to remain with his mother and he looked forward to
being near his older brother. The record, however, contains no evidence to support the trial court’s finding that
attending a new school in Virginia is not in the boys’ best interests.
Third, there is no evidence in the record that terminating the boys’ counseling relationship by moving to Virginia
would not be in their best interests. The record reflects that the boys began seeing their counselor to help them
through their parents’ divorce and to reconcile their relationships with the respondent. The record shows that the
counselor accomplished this goal because, by the time of the hearing, the boys shared a good relationship with
the respondent and enjoyed regular visits with him. There is no evidence in the record that the counselor planned
to continue his relationship with the boys after providing his opinion to the trial court. Furthermore, the
counselor’s opinion on the boys’ relocation does not recommend continued counseling. We conclude that the
trial court’s second finding is not supported by the record.
Finally, that moving the children to Virginia would interfere with their relationship with their father is self-
evident. See, e.g., Houde, 116 N.H. at 720-21. However, this fact alone does not explain how this interference is
not in the best interests of the children. Cf. Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 173. As we recognized in Tomasko:
There are undoubtedly circumstances in which the loss of midweek or every weekend
visits necessitated by a distant move may be devastating to the relationship between the
noncustodial parent and the child. However, there are undoubtedly also many cases
where less frequent but more extended visits over summers and school vacations would
be equally conducive, . . . to the maintenance of a close parent-child relationship, since
such extended visits give the parties the opportunity to interact in a normalized
domestic setting.
Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 173 (quotation omitted).
In this case, unlike in Tomasko, the trial court made no specific findings to explain why the proposed eight
weeks of extended visits would not be equally as conducive to the boys’ relationship with the respondent as the
present visitation schedule. In fact, the counselor’s report seems to indicate the extended visits could maintain
the parent-child relationships in this case.
After review of the record, we conclude that the trial court’s decision cannot be sustained. There is no objective
reason, based upon this record, to uphold the trial court’s findings other than to enforce the non-custodial
parent’s visitation rights. Reliance upon that reason alone, however, constitutes an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, which requires this decision to be reversed. See Knudson, 133 N.H. at 673. In light of our disposition
on this issue, we decline to address the petitioner’s remaining arguments.
Reversed and remanded.
BROCK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.