THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Strafford
No. 2002-457
MARK GRENIER d/b/a ROYALTY AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES
v.
BARCLAY SQUARE COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUM OWNERS’
ASSOCIATION & a.
Argued: June 11, 2003
Opinion Issued: October 10, 2003
Robert E. Ducharme, of Stratham, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Sanford Roberts, PA, of Portsmouth (Sanford Roberts on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, J. The defendants, Barclay Square Condominium Owners’ Association and New Hampshire Real
Estate Management and Brokerage, Incorporated, appeal an order of the Superior Court (Houran, J.) finding that they
were not authorized to: (1) promulgate a rule to regulate the use of parking spaces; and (2) tow vehicles that are in
violation of that rule. The defendants also argue that the court erred by failing to award them attorney’s fees. The plaintiff,
Mark Grenier d/b/a Royalty Automotive Services, cross-appeals, arguing that the trial court erred by failing to award
him attorney’s fees and costs, and by ordering him to pay storage costs associated with the towing of his vehicles. We
affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part and remand.
The trial court found the following relevant facts. The plaintiff owns two units in the Barclay Square condominium
complex (Barclay Square) located in Somersworth. Barclay Square is a twenty-four-unit business and commercial
complex established in 1987 and is a registered condominium association. It is governed by a board of directors (board)
and managed by defendant New Hampshire Real Estate Management and Brokerage, Inc. (New Hampshire Real
Estate).
From his two units, the plaintiff operates Royalty Automotive Services, an automobile repair and sales business. In
connection with his business, the plaintiff needs parking spaces for a number of vehicles, both during the day and
overnight. The plaintiff regularly uses a portion of the common area to the rear of the units for parking.
At the annual meeting of the Barclay Square Condominium Association (association) in September 1998, the association
adopted a temporary amendment requiring all business owners in Barclay Square wishing to use parking spaces in the
rear of the units to request permission from the board. This amendment was effective until the next annual meeting in
September 1999. At the September 1999 meeting, twenty-two unit owners voted sixteen to six to discontinue the
temporary amendment. The association, however, voted twenty to two to direct the board to promulgate, within sixty
days, "a new parking/general usage policy for the rear land" and to bring the proposal to a vote.
In 1999, the board developed a proposed ordinance (parking rule) regarding overnight parking in the rear common area.
The owners of twenty-one of twenty-four units voted to approve the ordinance, which provides as follows:
Effective November 1, 1999 all unit owners and lessees wanting to use the rear common land
to park registered and inspected (excluding dealer plates) motor vehicles or trailers overnight
must first request permission in writing from the BSCCA Board of Directors. Under no
circumstances shall the Board grant an individual business owner permission to park more
than four (4) vehicles overnight at one time. Permission granted will be on a "space available"
basis and will be for a specified area of land in the rear. . . . Non-compliance with the terms
and conditions of said parking permission will be grounds for immediate revocation of this
permission.
By letter dated December 14, 1999, the plaintiff requested permission to park "the maximum amount of vehicles allowed
overnight" in the rear common area. On March 26, 2001, G. Brandt Atkins, president of New Hampshire Real Estate,
wrote to the plaintiff, informing him that he had been and continued to be in violation of the parking rule and asking that
he conform by 5:00 p.m. on April 3, 2001. Atkins included a copy of the parking rule with the letter and stated that
"non-compliance will be grounds for the Board of Directors to immediately revoke the permission you requested in your
December 14, 1999 letter to the Board."
Atkins notified all unit owners and tenants on April 5, 2001, that he intended to tow any vehicle in violation of the
overnight parking rule that same evening. Atkins had received approval from the board to tow offending vehicles prior to
issuing notices to unit owners and tenants. On the evening of April 5, 2001, Atkins discovered seven vehicles belonging
to the plaintiff’s business parked in the rear common area. He had three vehicles that were unregistered and/or
uninspected towed.
The plaintiff did not pay the $300 necessary to recover his vehicles from the towing company and the vehicles were
subsequently moved into storage at Superior Towing Company, Inc. By court order incorporating the parties’ stipulation,
two parties originally named in this case, Superior Towing Company, Inc. and Automation Towing/Recovery, were
dismissed, the plaintiff paid $4,350 to Superior Towing Company, and Superior Towing was ordered to hold the vehicles
without additional charge pending the court’s decision on the merits. The court stated that "[t]he ultimate responsibility for
the towing and storage charges of $4,350 will be determined by the court in its final decision."
Following a non-jury trial, the trial court found that the board did not have the authority to amend its rules to limit
overnight parking in the rear common area to four vehicles per business owner. Further, it found that the board was not
authorized to tow vehicles in violation of the parking rule because the rule itself limits the sanction available, at least as to
the first violation, to revocation of parking permission. Moreover, the court found that the plaintiff did not receive
sufficient notice of the association’s intent to tow vehicles parked in violation of the parking rule.
The court stated, however, that the plaintiff was responsible for any storage costs in excess of $300 because he failed to
reclaim his vehicles on April 6, 2001, and, therefore, did not mitigate his damages. The court also denied the plaintiff’s
request for attorney’s fees and costs. The plaintiff filed a motion to reconsider, which was also denied. This appeal
followed.
In their brief, the defendants concede that they did not have the authority to limit the available parking per business
owner as found by the trial court. They argue alternatively, however, that they had the authority to tow offending vehicles
from the property because the parking rule also prohibits keeping uninspected and/or unregistered vehicles overnight in
the rear common land. We need not decide this issue because even if we assume that the defendants could penalize the
plaintiff for parking unregistered and/or uninspected vehicles in the rear common area, they were not authorized to tow
his vehicles. The parking rule, in pertinent part, provides that "[n]on-compliance with the terms and conditions of said
parking permission will be grounds for immediate revocation of this permission." In finding that the defendants did not
have the authority to implement the towing rule, the trial court stated that the penalty provision could reasonably be
interpreted as limiting the sanction to be imposed in the event of a parking violation. We agree. While a condominium
association may be permitted to promulgate reasonable rules to address day-to-day concerns, the rule cannot
contravene or otherwise conflict with the express language of the condominium documents. Here, the parking rule
provides expressly that the unit owner will lose permission to use parking spaces if he or she fails to comply with the
parking rule. Moreover, at the time of the events in question, the condominium by-laws provided that the board shall
have the power to levy fines, which were not to exceed $10 for one violation, against a unit owner for violations of the
provisions of the declaration, by-laws or condominium rules. We conclude, therefore, that the defendants’
implementation of the towing penalty was not authorized in light of these other penalty provisions.
The defendants next argue that the trial court erred by failing to award it attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 356-B:15, II
(Supp. 2002). "We will not overturn the trial court’s decision concerning attorney’s fees absent an [unsustainable
exercise] of discretion." Business Publications v. Stephen, 140 N.H. 145, 147 (1995) (quotation omitted); see also State
v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). In evaluating the trial
court’s ruling on this issue, we must first keep in mind the tremendous deference given to a trial court’s decision on
attorney’s fees. Daigle v. City of Portsmouth, 137 N.H. 572, 574 (1993).
Our analysis begins with the statutory language itself; when that language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond the statute for further indications of legislative intent. Johnson v. City of Laconia, 141 N.H. 379, 380 (1996). We
ascribe to statutory words and phrases their usual and common meaning, unless the statute itself suggests otherwise. Id.
Nevertheless, we do not assume that the legislature would enact statutory language that would lead to an absurd result.
Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 398 (1997).
RSA 356-B:15 provides:
I. The declarant, every unit owner, and all those entitled to occupy a unit shall comply with all
lawful provisions of this chapter and all provisions of the condominium instruments. Any lack
of such compliance shall be grounds for an action or suit to recover sums due, for damages or
injunctive relief, or for any other remedy available at law or in equity, maintainable by the unit
owners’ association, or by its board of directors or any managing agent on behalf of such
association, or, in any proper case, by one or more aggrieved unit owners on their own behalf
or as a class action.
II. The unit owners’ association shall be entitled to all costs and attorneys’ fees incurred in any
proceeding under RSA 356-B:15, I.
The defendants argue that they are entitled to attorney’s fees under the plain language of RSA 356-B:15, II. Contrary to
the defendants’ argument, it is not the question of who initiates the underlying action that controls the award of attorney’s
fees, but rather whether the party claiming those fees was successful. To construe RSA 356-B:15, II as allowing the
defendants to recover attorney’s fees in this case would discourage condominium unit owners such as the plaintiff from
bringing claims to protect their rights since they would be responsible for the association’s attorney’s fees regardless of
whether they win or lose. Such an absurd result could not have been intended by the legislature. Rather, we interpret
RSA 356-B:15, II as providing for an award of attorney’s fees to a condominium unit association for litigation in which it
prevails.
The legislative history of RSA 356-B:15, II supports this interpretation. RSA 356-B:15, II was proposed along with
RSA 356-B:46-a (Supp. 2002) in Senate Bill 105, entitled, "An act relative to rent collection upon delinquency in
payment of common expenses by condominium unit owners." The description of this bill provides that it:
I. Allows a condominium unit owners’ association to collect rents from the tenant of a unit to
offset common expenses assessed to the unit in the event that the unit owner fails to pay the
common expenses assessed to the unit.
II. Holds harmless any tenant who pays rent or a portion of rent to the unit owners’
association, rather than to the unit owner, in compliance with the provisions of the bill.
III. Provides for the association’s recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in enforcing
RSA 356-B:15, I.
N.H.H.R. Jour. 766 (1997) (emphasis added). As is evident from this history, the purpose of RSA 356-B:15, II is to
allow the recovery of attorney’s fees and costs associated with actions in which the association successfully enforces the
lawful provisions of RSA chapter 356-B and all provisions of the condominium instruments. Thus, we hold that the
defendants are not entitled to attorney’s fees and costs in this case under RSA 356-B:15, II.
On cross-appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred by failing to grant him costs and attorney’s fees. "A
prevailing party may be awarded attorney’s fees when that recovery is authorized by statute, an agreement between the
parties, or an established judicial exception to the general rule that precludes recovery of such fees." Town of
Nottingham v. Newman, 147 N.H. 131, 137 (2001) (quotation omitted). Although parties generally are responsible for
their own attorney’s fees,
we have recognized exceptions where an individual is forced to seek judicial assistance to
secure a clearly defined and established right if bad faith can be established; where litigation is
instituted or unnecessarily prolonged through a party’s oppressive, vexatious, arbitrary,
capricious or bad faith conduct; as compensation for those who are forced to litigate in order
to enjoy what a court has already decreed; and for those who are forced to litigate against an
opponent whose position is patently unreasonable.
Business Publications, 140 N.H. at 147 (quotations omitted). The plaintiff argues that he is deserving of attorney’s fees
because the association, in enacting the parking rule and towing sanction, acted in bad faith and maintained a position
that was patently unreasonable. As explained above, the trial court has authority to award fees as compensation for
those who "are forced to litigate against an opponent whose position is patently unreasonable." Daigle, 137 N.H. at 574.
The focus in such cases is on a litigant’s unjustifiable belligerence or obstinacy where an action is commenced,
prolonged, required or defended without any reasonable basis in the facts provable by evidence. Id.
After reviewing the record, we find that the trial court’s discretion in denying the plaintiff attorney’s fees is sustainable.
We find no support in the record that the defendants either acted in bad faith by implementing the new parking rule and
towing sanction or that its position in this case was patently unreasonable. While the defendants’ actions may have been
wrong, the record reflects that the actions were taken to remedy a legitimate parking concern. The issue was the subject
at two annual meetings, with the owners of twenty-one of twenty-four units eventually voting to approve the final rule in
1999. Moreover, all unit owners, including the plaintiff, were notified on April 5, 2001, that vehicles in violation of the
overnight parking rule would be towed that evening. Atkins also received approval from the board to tow offending
vehicles prior to issuing notices to unit owners and tenants. While the trial court found that the plaintiff did not receive
sufficient notice of the impending towing, this does not mean that the defendants’ overall position is patently
unreasonable. The fact that its position was unsuccessful does not alone warrant an award of fees. Id. at 575.
The plaintiff next argues that even if the defendants did not act in bad faith, he is entitled to attorney’s fees based upon
equitable principles. Essentially, he contends that it is fundamentally unfair to allow an association to recover attorney’s
fees under RSA 356-B:15, II if it prevails, but deny the same benefit to the unit owner who successfully litigates his or
her claim. We find this argument unpersuasive. First, while RSA 356-B:15, II may not be evenhanded in its award of
attorney’s fees, it is for the legislature, not this court, to determine whether such legislation should be amended, since we
will not add words to a statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. See Appeal of Pritchard, 137 N.H. 291, 293
(1993). Second, because we conclude that the defendants did not act with bad faith or maintain a position that was
patently unreasonable, the plaintiff is not entitled to attorney’s fees.
The plaintiff may, however, be entitled to costs. As a general rule, costs are "allowable only when authorized by statute
or court rule." Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Costs and Attorney’s Fees), 144 N.H. 590, 593 (1999) (quotation
omitted). Superior Court Rule 87, entitled "Taxation of Costs in Civil Proceedings," provides that "[c]osts shall be
allowed as of course to the prevailing party as provided by these rules, unless the Court otherwise directs." Super. Ct. R.
87(a). Superior Court Rule 87(b) delineates the procedures for claiming costs and objecting to claimed costs. Superior
Court Rule 87(c) details which costs shall be allowed to the prevailing party and which costs may be allowed within the
discretion of the trial court. From the record before us, it is unclear if the parties or the trial court followed the
procedures of Rule 87, or if the trial court made its finding regarding plaintiff’s request for costs pursuant to Rule 87.
Consequently, we vacate the trial court’s denial of the plaintiff’s request for costs. On remand, the plaintiff’s request for
costs shall be considered within the framework of Superior Court Rule 87. See Gammans v. FHP Constructors, 146
N.H. 702, 704-05 (2001).
Finally, the plaintiff asserts that the trial court erred by ordering him to pay $4,350 in storage costs associated with the
wrongful towing of his vehicles. The trial court reasoned that the plaintiff was responsible for these storage costs
because, by failing to recover his vehicles the day after they were towed, he failed to mitigate his damages. This
reasoning is flawed.
It is well established that a party seeking damages occasioned by the fault of another must take all reasonable steps to
lessen his or her resultant loss. See Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 575 (1994). The defendants bear the
burden of proving that the plaintiff failed to mitigate damages. Id. at 575-76. For the mitigation doctrine to apply,
however, the party against whom the doctrine is asserted must be seeking damages. In this case, the plaintiff did not
claim storage costs as damages. In addition to seeking recovery of towing fees, the plaintiff’s lawsuit asked for the costs
associated with the litigation, his attorney’s fees, and the release of his cars "without the payment of any costs or fees." In
other words, he merely sought the return of his wrongfully towed and stored vehicles. At no time did the plaintiff request,
or present any evidence of, consequential damages associated with the wrongful towing and storage of his vehicles. Had
he done so, we would find the trial court’s mitigation analysis persuasive.
Because the vehicles were illegally towed and stored, the plaintiff had no express or implied contractual obligation to pay
Superior Towing to store his wrongfully towed vehicles – that obligation belonged to the defendants. To rule, as the trial
court implicitly did, that the plaintiff should have mitigated the defendants’ obligation to pay Superior Towing turns the
mitigation doctrine on its head. The defendants cannot use mitigation as a sword to protect themselves from obligations
they incurred to Superior Towing through their unlawful conduct. The plaintiff did not seek the storage costs as damages
when he initially filed his petition for declaratory judgment. Accordingly, the defendants cannot assert a failure to mitigate
against damages the plaintiff did not originally claim and for which he is not legally liable.
That the parties stipulated, at the urging of the court, that the plaintiff would pay the storage costs pending the court’s
ultimate resolution of liability does not mandate a different result. Having found that the defendants acted illegally in taking
the plaintiff’s vehicles, the trial court should have ruled that they, not the plaintiff, were responsible for the $4,350 in
storage costs. The plaintiff could not be held responsible to mitigate damages he was not legally obligated to pay.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; vacated in part; remanded.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, J., concurred; DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred in part and dissented in part.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurring in part and dissenting in part. While we agree with the majority opinion in
most respects, we respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion that the plaintiff had no duty to mitigate damages in
this case. "As a general rule, plaintiffs may not recover damages for harm that could have been avoided through
reasonable efforts or expenditures." Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 575 (1994). "An exception may be
allowed when the party causing harm acted intentionally or with reckless disregard for the plaintiff’s interests." Id. "Even
in that circumstance, however, the plaintiff cannot intentionally or heedlessly fail to protect his or her own interests." Id.
The majority reasons that the doctrine does not apply to the plaintiff because: (1) he did not seek storage fees as
damages; and (2) the defendants, not he, were contractually liable for the fees. We believe that both of these premises
are mistaken.
As a factual matter, we believe that the plaintiff sought the storage fees as damages. While he did not claim them in his
initial petition for declaratory judgment, temporary and permanent injunction and damages, the record shows that he
sought reimbursement of these fees later in the litigation. Although the majority may conclude that the plaintiff sought
reimbursement of the fees later in the litigation because the trial court ordered him to pay them, this is pure speculation.
Indeed, the plaintiff himself, at trial and on appeal, implicitly conceded that the storage fees were his to mitigate. In both
forums, he argued only that requiring him to mitigate damages by removing his vehicles the day after they were towed
was unreasonable.
No matter how it is framed, the issue before us is which party owes money to the towing company, an innocent third
party, for storing the plaintiff’s vehicles. From the towing company’s perspective, it is logical that the plaintiff should pay
the charges because the vehicles are his and, presumably, he is the only one who can reclaim them from storage. Thus,
the towing and storage costs are technically the plaintiff’s damages resulting from the defendants’ illegal act, thereby
obligating him to mitigate those damages, if possible. While it may seem unfair that the plaintiff should have to do anything
as he was the one who suffered the wrong, this is no different from other tort or contract claims to which the mitigation
doctrine applies. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 918 (1979); Lane v. Camire, 126 N.H. 344, 344-45 (1984)
(affirming directed verdict for defendant on plaintiff’s claim of damages totaling $80,000 from loss of or damage to
stored property where plaintiff made no attempt to mitigate damages by retrieving property from storage, four days after
its removal).
We believe that the trial court correctly found that the plaintiff failed to mitigate his damages by paying the $300 towing
fee to retrieve his vehicles the day after they were towed. We agree with the trial court that requiring the plaintiff to pay
the $300 towing fee to secure his vehicles was reasonable. See Flanagan, 138 N.H. at 575.
We disagree with the trial court that the plaintiff’s failure to pay the $300 towing fee precluded him from recovering any
portion of the storage fees, however. The record shows that had the plaintiff paid the $300 towing fee, he would have
had to either park his retrieved vehicles in the common area of the complex or find an alternative place to store them.
Either option would have required him to incur additional damages. As the evidence demonstrates, had he parked his
retrieved vehicles in the common area of the complex, they would likely have been towed again. The notice the plaintiff
received on April 5, 2001, from the board indicated that it intended to enforce the overnight parking ordinance "strictly"
and would have any vehicle that did not comply with the ordinance towed.
The evidence further shows that had the plaintiff found an alternative place to store his vehicles, he would have had to
pay storage costs. For instance, from May to December 2001, the plaintiff paid Rescue Leasing $200 per month to
store vehicles to avoid having more than four vehicles in the common area overnight. Therefore, we would hold that the
trial court erroneously ruled that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover any portion of the costs for storing his wrongfully
towed vehicles, and we would remand to the trial court to determine the portion of these costs he was entitled to
recover.