THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. 2002-0243
SENATOR CLIFTON BELOW & a.
v.
WILLIAM M. GARDNER, SECRETARY OF STATE
Argued: June 11, 2002
Opinion Issued: June 24, 2002
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (John P. Kacavas on the memorandum and orally), Shaheen & Gordon,
P.A., of Concord (Steven M. Gordon on the memorandum), and Nixon Peabody, L.L.P., of Manchester (W. Scott
O’Connell on the memorandum), for the petitioners.
Barry J. Glennon, staff attorney, of Concord, filed no memorandum, for the Secretary of State.
Richard J. Lehmann, senate legal counsel, by memorandum and orally, for the intervenor, the New Hampshire
Senate.
Charles G. Douglas, III, of Concord, by memorandum and orally, for the intervenor, the President of the New
Hampshire Senate.
Per Curiam. "No right is more precious in a free country than that of having a voice in the election of those who
make the laws under which, as good citizens, we must live. Other rights, even the most basic, are illusory if the
right to vote is undermined." Wesberry v. Sanders, 376 U.S. 1, 17 (1964). Part I, Article 11 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution guarantee to the people of New Hampshire the equal right to vote. To assure that right, the supreme
court has been called upon to establish a new district plan for the New Hampshire Senate.
This task has fallen to the court because the New Hampshire Legislature failed to enact a new district plan for
the New Hampshire Senate following the 2000 census. See N.H. CONST., pt. II, art. 26. Part II, Article 26 of the
State Constitution requires the legislature to redistrict the senate at the regular session following every federal
decennial census. The New Hampshire Legislature prepared a senate redistricting plan that was passed by both
houses, but was vetoed by the Governor. The legislature did not override the Governor’s veto and recessed
without enacting a valid senate redistricting plan into law.
Under Part II, Article 26, the existing senate districts are not constitutionally apportioned and, thus, violate the
equal voting rights of New Hampshire citizens. See U.S. CONST., amend. XIV; N.H. CONST., pt. I, art. 11.
Accordingly, the court must redraw the senate districts to preserve the equal protection and equal voting rights of
the citizens. See Wilson v. Eu, 823 P.2d 545, 547 (Cal. 1992).
I. Background and Procedural History
The New Hampshire Senate is comprised of twenty-four single-member district seats. See N.H. CONST., pt. II,
arts. 25, 26. The State Constitution requires the legislature to redraw each senate seat into a single member
district "as nearly equal as may be in population" every ten years, based upon the federal decennial census. N.H.
CONST., pt. II, arts. 11, 26. The senate began the process of redistricting in February 2001.
The legislature received the 2000 census data in March 2001. According to the census, New Hampshire
experienced a 10% growth in population between 1990 and 2000, increasing from 1,109,252 citizens in 1990 to
1,235,786 citizens in 2000. This growth was unevenly distributed between the northern and southern portions of
the State, however, with the largest population growth occurring in the south. As a result, it is undisputed that
following the 2000 census, the existing senate districts, established in 1992 pursuant to the 1990 census, violate
both the State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST., pt. I, art. 11; N.H. CONST., pt. II, art. 26; U.S.
CONST., amend. XIV; RSA 662:3 (1996).
Using the 2000 decennial census, the ideal population for each senatorial district is 51,491. The current
senatorial districts vary in population from a high of 60,334 (+17.17% deviation from the ideal district
population) to a low of 44,229 (-14.10% deviation from the ideal district population). Adding the largest positive
deviation and the largest negative deviation, without regard to algebraic sign (absolute value), yields the overall
range of deviation. See Abrams v. Johnson, 521 U.S. 74, 98 (1997). The overall range of deviation from the
ideal population is 31.27%. This is considerably higher than the range permissible under the Federal
Constitution for a legislatively drawn district plan. See Brown v. Thomson, 462 U.S. 835, 842-43 (1983) (overall
range of deviation from ideal district population that is lower than 10% is insufficient to establish a prima facie
case of discrimination under Equal Protection Clause of Federal Constitution); Mahan v. Howell, 410 U.S. 315,
329 (1973) (overall range of deviation of 16.4% "may well approach tolerable limits").
In January 2002, after a series of public hearings on a number of proposed redistricting plans, the Republican
leadership introduced senate bill (SB) 1, which set forth a proposed new district plan for the senate based upon
the 2000 census. SB 1 was passed by both the senate and the house along party lines. The Governor vetoed the
bill, however, on March 29, 2002. The senate considered the Governor’s veto on May 22, 2002, the last day of
its regular session, but was unable to override it. As a result, SB 1 did not become law. See N.H. CONST., pt. II,
art. 44 (requiring that "every bill" passed by both houses of the legislature be signed by the Governor before
becoming law, unless two-thirds of both houses override the Governor’s veto).
The jurisdiction of the court was invoked in April 2002, when eleven senate Democrats filed a petition for
original jurisdiction requesting the court to declare the existing State senate districts unconstitutional and to
impose a deadline for the legislature to enact a valid senate redistricting plan. Given the need to establish a
redistricting plan consistent with constitutional requisites before the 2002 senate election, we accepted
jurisdiction. See Monier v. Gallen, 122 N.H. 474, 476 (1982).
On May 22, 2002, the senate and the house recessed without enacting a valid senate redistricting plan. On May
23, 2002, the court determined, that since it had no assurance that a redistricting plan would be validly enacted
in time for the upcoming election, it must establish a constitutional senate redistricting plan. See Reynolds v.
Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 585 (1964); Connor v. Finch, 431 U.S. 407, 415 (1977).
The court endeavored to accomplish the task of redistricting the New Hampshire Senate as fairly, efficiently and
quickly as possible, given the imminence of the scheduled September primary. It ordered the parties to submit
constitutional redistricting proposals by June 6, 2002; new plans submitted after that date were not considered.
The court further required that any proposal submitted be based upon the 2000 census data and comply with the
constitutional principle of one person/one vote. Oral argument was scheduled and held on June 11, 2002. This
decision follows thirteen days after oral argument.
Because this case is an "extraordinary [one] where the introduction of outside skills and expertise, not possessed
by the judge, will hasten the just adjudication of a dispute without dislodging the delicate balance of the juristic
role," Reilly v. United States, 863 F.2d 149, 156 (1st Cir. 1988), the court informed the parties of its intent to
appoint Bobby Bowers, Director of the South Carolina Budget and Control Board Office of Research and
Statistics, as its technical advisor. After reviewing and dismissing the single objection it received regarding
Bowers’ appointment, the court appointed him as its technical advisor pursuant to its inherent authority. See id.
See generally State v. Coon, 974 P.2d 386, 395-96 (Alaska 1999) (discussing authority of courts to appoint
expert technical advisors). Bowers was appointed to aid the court in understanding the relevant terminology and
technology associated with redistricting, to help the court understand the redistricting plans submitted by the
parties, and, where necessary, to assist the court in the technical aspects of the redistricting plan.
The court received four senate district plans for consideration. The court has reviewed each plan in detail and
has also considered the written and oral submissions of all parties.
II. Governing Principles
"Reapportionment is primarily a matter of legislative consideration and determination." Monier, 122 N.H. at 476
(quotation omitted); see Reynolds, 377 U.S. at 586. "[A] state legislature is the institution that is by far the best
situated to identify and then reconcile traditional state policies within the constitutionally mandated framework
of substantial population equality." Connor, 431 U.S. at 414-15. Thus, we undertake the "unwelcome obligation
of performing in the legislature’s stead" gingerly, mindful that, as a court, we "possess no distinctive mandate to
compromise sometimes conflicting state apportionment policies in the people’s name." Id. at 415. Had the
legislature complied with its obligation to reapportion "according to . . . constitutional requisites in a timely
fashion," our intervention would have been unnecessary. Monier, 122 N.H. at 476; see Reynolds, 377 U.S. at
586.
A. One Person/One Vote
1. History of Part II, Article 26
We begin with a discussion of the one person/one vote standard under our own constitution. The New
Hampshire Constitution guarantees that each citizen’s vote will have equal weight. N.H. CONST., pt. I, art. 11.
To ensure this right, Part II, Article 26 of the State Constitution, as amended in 1964, requires that the State be
divided into "single-member [senate] districts, as nearly equal as may be in population." N.H CONST., pt. II, art.
26. This is our first opportunity to interpret the phrase "as nearly equal as may be in population."
This phrase was added to Part II, Article 26 as a result of the Constitutional Convention in 1964. See Journal of
Constitutional Convention 305, 317 (1964). Prior to the 1964 amendment, senate districts were apportioned on
the basis of taxes, not population. See Levitt v. Maynard, 104 N.H. 243, 245 (1962). "New Hampshire [was] the
only state which . . . carried the principle of no taxation without representation to its ultimate conclusion. Its
Senate districts [were] determined by the proportion of direct taxes paid by the said districts." Id. (quotations
omitted). Prior to 1964, Part II, Article 26 read as follows:
And that the state may be equally represented in the senate, the legislature shall, from
time to time divide the state into twenty-four districts, as nearly equal as may be
without dividing towns and unincorporated places; and in making this division, they
shall govern themselves by the proportion of direct taxes paid by the said districts, and
timely make known to the inhabitants of the state the limits of each district.
Id. (quotation omitted).
Even though the constitution required redistricting, before the 1964 amendment the legislature rarely redistricted
the senate. Indeed, senate districts drawn in 1915 were not redrawn until 1961. See id.
In 1964, a resolution was introduced at the Constitutional Convention seeking to change the basis for senate
apportionment from taxes to population. The matter came to the convention "[a]s a result of recent decisions by
the United States Supreme Court" and the concern that "[i]t [was] only a matter of time before our system of
apportioning State Senate Districts according to taxable property" was declared unconstitutional. Journal of
Constitutional Convention, supra at 48.
Approximately one week after the convention began, the United States District Court for the District of New
Hampshire issued its opinion in Levitt v. Stark, 233 F. Supp. 566 (D.N.H. 1964). In Levitt, the federal court
stated that it "entertain[ed] serious doubt of the federal constitutional validity of the New Hampshire method for
selecting the members of the legislature." Levitt, 233 F. Supp. at 569. The court noted, however, that the United
States Supreme Court had not yet held that both houses of a bicameral state legislature had to be apportioned on
the basis of population, and intimated that if only one of the houses of the New Hampshire Legislature were
apportioned on the basis of population, the other house might survive federal court scrutiny. Id.
The convention, at first, wrestled with making changes to the method of apportioning the house of
representatives. When this proved too difficult, the convention turned its attention to senate apportionment.
Journal of Constitutional Convention, supra at 272. As one of the delegates noted:
I have stood before groups repeatedly and told them that it was not necessary to adjust
the House situation as long as we adjusted the Senate situation. . . . [Y]esterday we did
not adjust the House situation so as to make it consonant with what the Supreme Court
wants. . . . But what is important right now is that we put the Senate on a population
basis because of the fact that we have left the House as we left it yesterday. . . . Now if
we make our Senate consonant with the principle of equality in representation, then
what we did yesterday is fine. If we don’t here today make it consonant, we have left
ourselves open to question.
Id. at 272-73.
The convention thus resolved to amend Part II, Article 26 to make clear that senate districts would be
apportioned based upon population equality and would be redrawn every ten years, following the decennial
census. Id. at 280. As a result of the convention’s resolution, in November 1964, voters were asked, "Are you in
favor of amending the constitution to apportion the senate districts on the basis of population as equally as
possible without dividing any town, ward or place?" Id. at 305. Consequently, Part II, Article 26 was amended to
state:
And that the state may be equally represented in the senate, the legislature shall divide
the state into single-member districts, as nearly equal as may be in population, each
consisting of contiguous towns, city wards and unincorporated places, without dividing
any town, city ward or unincorporated place. The legislature shall form the single-
member districts at its next session after approval of this article by the voters of the
state and thereafter at the regular session following each decennial federal census.
N.H. CONST., pt. II, art. 26.
In light of the history of the 1964 amendment to Part II, Article 26, we hold that the phrase "as nearly equal as
may be in population" is at least as protective of the citizens’ voting rights as the federal constitutional standard
of one person/one vote. Accordingly, we need not undertake a separate federal analysis and we base this decision
upon Part II, Article 26. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 233 (1983). We rely upon federal cases interpreting the
Federal Constitution only to aid in our analysis. See id.
2. Substantive Requirement of One Person/One Vote
Under the State Constitution, "there can be room for but a single constitutional rule – one voter, one vote." Gray
v. Sanders, 372 U.S. 368, 382 (1963) (Stewart, J., concurring). Our constitution requires therefore that the State
Legislature be apportioned so that each person’s vote carries as near equal weight as possible. See Reynolds, 377
U.S. at 588 (Clark, J., concurring). "[T]he overriding objective [of redistricting] must be substantial equality of
population among the various [legislative] districts, so that the vote of any citizen is approximately equal in
weight to that of any other citizen in the State." Id. at 579. However, a State need not achieve "absolute
population equality" with respect to state legislative districts. Karcher v. Daggett, 462 U.S. 725, 732-33 (1983).
The degree to which a state legislative district plan may vary from absolute population equality depends, in part,
upon whether it is implemented by the legislature or by a court. State legislatures have more leeway than courts
to devise redistricting plans that vary from absolute population equality. See Chapman v. Meier, 420 U.S. 1, 26-
27 (1975).
With respect to "a court plan, any deviation from approximate population equality must be supported by
enunciation of historically significant state policy or unique features." Id. at 26 (emphasis added). Absent
persuasive justifications, a court-ordered redistricting plan of a state legislature "must ordinarily achieve the goal
of population equality with little more than de minimis variation." Id. at 26-27. The latitude in court-ordered
plans to depart from population equality thus "is considerably narrower than that accorded apportionments
devised by state legislatures, and . . . the burden of articulating special reasons for following . . . a [state] policy
in the face of substantial population inequalities is correspondingly higher." Connor, 431 U.S. at 419-20.
However, "[n]either courts nor legislatures are furnished any specialized calipers that enable them to extract
from the general language of the . . . [constitution] the mathematical formula that establishes what range of
percentage deviations is permissible, and what is not." Mahan, 410 U.S. at 329.
The senate and senate president argue that because we are a state court, we should use the standard applied to
state legislatures rather than the standard applied to federal district courts. We disagree.
All courts called upon to make redistricting decisions are governed by the same measure of restraint. Unlike
legislatures, courts engaged in redistricting primarily view the task through the lens of the one person/one vote
principle and all other considerations are given less weight. See Connor, 431 U.S. at 415. "The framers in their
wisdom entrusted this decennial exercise to the legislative branch because the give-and-take of the legislative
process, involving as it does representatives elected by the people to make precisely these sorts of political and
policy decisions, is preferable to any other." Jensen v. Wisconsin Elections Bd., 639 N.W.2d 537, 540 (Wis.
2002). We believe, therefore, that we too must accomplish our task "circumspectly, and in a manner free from
any taint of arbitrariness or discrimination," Connor, 431 U.S. at 415 (quotation omitted), and that the high
standard that governs a federal court-enacted redistricting plan applies to any plan we adopt.
B. Other State Constitutional Principles
In addition to requiring that senate districts be "as equal as may be in population," the New Hampshire
Constitution mandates that: (1) senate districts be comprised of "contiguous" towns, city wards and
unincorporated places; (2) no town, city ward or unincorporated place may be divided unless the town, city ward
or unincorporated place requests division by referendum; and (3) each senate district must elect only one senator.
N.H. CONST., pt. II, arts. 26, 26-a. These additional requirements, however, are secondary to the overriding
constitutional principle of one person/one vote. See In re Legislative Districting, 475 A.2d 428, 439 (Md. 1984);
In re Senate Bill 177, 318 A.2d 157, 160 (Vt. 1974); Rice v. English, No. 1010968, 2002 WL 1052048 at *2
(Ala. 2002).
Contiguity may be a valid consideration in districting a state legislative body. See Reynolds, 377 U.S. at 578-79.
"A State may legitimately desire to maintain the integrity of various political subdivisions, insofar as possible,
and provide for compact districts of contiguous territory in designing a legislative apportionment scheme." Id. at
578. Courts generally agree that contiguous territory is territory that touches, adjoins or is connected, as
distinguished from territory that is separated by other territory. See In re Legislative Districting, 475 A.2d at
436; Hickel, 846 P.2d at 45; In re Sherill, 81 N.E. 124, 131 (N.Y. 1907).
Other States considering similar constitutional provisions have held that the contiguity requirement is intended
to prevent partisan gerrymandering. See In re Legislative Districting, 475 A.2d at 436; see also Reynolds, 377
U.S. at 578-79. Political gerrymandering is "[t]he practice of dividing a geographical area into electoral districts,
often of highly irregular shape, to give one political party an unfair advantage by diluting the opposition’s voting
strength." Black’s Law Dictionary 696 (7th ed. 1999); see also Hickel v. Southeast Conference, 846 P.2d 38, 45
(Alaska 1992).
The State Constitution also requires that each of the twenty-four senate districts be single-member districts,
which means that each district elects only one senator.
III. Plans Submitted by the Parties
We have reviewed each submitted plan against the neutral constitutional principles set forth above.
A. Petitioners’ Plan
The petitioners assert their plan is a "least change" approach, in which they endeavored to maintain
"constituency consistency" to the "greatest extent practicable." They aver that the overall range of deviation
from the ideal senate district population in their plan is 4%.
The petitioners’ plan is flawed because it does not rest entirely upon the federal census data, as required by law.
"Our State Constitution establishes only one yardstick as a legislative guide in making an apportionment. That
yardstick is the last general census of the inhabitants of the state taken by authority of the United States or of this
state." McGovern v. Secretary of State, 138 N.H. 128, 131 (1993) (quotation omitted).
While data from the federal census (referred to as PL 94-171 census data) reflects ward populations based upon
the ward lines in effect as of April 1, 2000, some of the data used by the petitioners reflect ward populations
based upon the ward lines changed after April 1, 2000. Some of the ward populations used by the petitioners are
not the same as the ward populations contained in the PL 94-171 census data. For example, the petitioners use an
adjusted population of 9,088 for Manchester ward 6, while the population for Manchester ward 6 is 10,678 in the
PL 94-171 census data. Thus, there are some discrepancies between the petitioners’ ward populations and the PL
94-171 census data ward populations.
The petitioners used the PL 94-171 census data for all city wards except those in the cities of Claremont,
Rochester, Manchester, Keene, Nashua and Dover. When the PL 94-171 data is substituted for those cities, the
overall range of population deviation is actually 7.92%. In addition, the petitioners’ plan changes the senate
districts for 32.89% of the State’s population (406,493 citizens) and district 7 is no longer comprised of
contiguous territory.
The senate president argues that the petitioners’ plan artificially divides the cities of Concord, Laconia and
Dover for partisan political advantage. The senate president also argues that some of the districts in the
petitioners’ plan are oddly shaped and are not comprised of contiguous territory for the sole purpose of
protecting Democrat incumbents and targeting Republican incumbents. For instance, one district contains both a
ward of the city of Manchester and a ward of the city of Nashua, even though these wards do not touch by land,
but instead border a common waterway.
Even if the senate president’s criticisms are accurate, we note that while these types of political considerations
may be permissible in legislatively-implemented redistricting plans, they have no place in a court-ordered
remedial plan. See Wilson, 823 P.2d at 576-77; see also Wyche v. Madison Parish Police Jury, 769 F.2d 265, 268
(5th Cir. 1985) (per curiam).
B. Senate President’s Plans
The senate president has proposed two alternative plans for the court’s consideration. The first plan is a
"compromise plan," which the senate president asserts "is the next closest plan to the legislature’s intent."
According to the senate president, the "compromise plan" represents the results of weeks of negotiation between
the senate Republicans and Democrats. It is said to combine elements of SB 1, the plan supported by the
Republicans, and of the plan supported by the Democrats and submitted by the petitioners, and is alleged to have
an overall range of population deviation of 9.83%. The second plan is a "deviation plan," which the senate
president asserts has an overall range of deviation of less than 4% from the ideal district population.
Both plans are flawed for the same reasons as are the petitioners’ plans. Like the petitioners, the senate president
did not rely solely upon federal census data, but instead relied upon ward population data that differed from the
data reported in the federal census.
The senate president’s "compromise plan" used the PL 94-171 census data base for all city wards except for
those in Manchester and Nashua. When the PL 94-171 data is substituted for those cities, the overall range of
population deviation is actually 9.2%, and the plan changes the senate districts for 24.10% of the State’s
population (297,846 citizens).
The senate president’s "deviation plan" used the PL 94-171 census data base for all city wards except those in
Manchester, Nashua and Concord. When the PL 94-171 data is substituted for those cities, the overall range of
population deviation is actually 5.4%, and the plan changes the senate districts for 34.74% of the State’s
population (429,310 citizens).
As with the petitioners’ plan, the plans submitted by the senate president embody political considerations.
Although the senate president claims the "compromise plan" is a product of weeks of negotiation between senate
Republicans and Democrats, it was not adopted. The "deviation plan" is similarly laden with political
considerations. Although SB 1 was modified to achieve a lower overall range of deviation, the plan is in many
respects similar to the plan supported by senate Republicans and rejected by senate Democrats.
C. Senate Plan
The senate has submitted the plan contained in SB 1, with some minor modifications. We do not adopt the
senate’s proposed plan for the same reasons that we do not adopt the other submitted plans. The senate’s
proposed plan does not rest entirely upon federal census data. When the PL 94-171 data is substituted, the senate
plan's overall range of population deviation is actually 9.66%.
Like the other submitted plans, the senate’s plan changes the senate districts of a significant portion of the State’s
population. It changes the districts for 31.10% of the State’s population (384,391 citizens). Also, like the other
submitted plans, the senate’s plan seeks partisan advantage. It is most similar to SB 1, the plan supported by
senate Republicans and opposed by senate Democrats.
D. SB 1
The senate and senate president argue that we must either order elections to take place pursuant to SB 1 or use it
as our starting point in devising a redistricting plan of our own. We decline both options for the reasons set forth
below.
We do not adopt SB 1 as the court’s plan because, like the other plans submitted by the parties, it fails to comply
with the neutral constitutional criteria required of court-ordered remedial plans. Like the plans submitted by the
parties, SB 1 does not rely exclusively upon PL 94-171 census data. SB 1 relies upon ward population data that
differs from the data reported to the federal census. Additionally, like the plans submitted by the parties, SB 1
represents "the culmination of very specific political and, in some cases, individual agendas." Colleton County
Council v. McConnell, Nos. CIV.A. 01-3581-10, CIV.A. 3:01-3609-10, CIV.A. 3:01-3892-10, 2002 WL
1065576 at *28 (D.S.C. 2002).
For these same reasons, we also decline to use SB 1 as our template, although as with the plans submitted by the
parties, we examined it for evidence of State redistricting policy. Even though SB 1 was passed by the
legislature, it did not become law, and, thus, while it is some evidence of State redistricting policy, it is not
entitled to the judicial deference accorded fully enacted redistricting plans. See Prosser v. Elections Bd., 793 F.
Supp. 859, 867 (W.D. Wis. 1992). Only fully enacted plans "have the virtue of political legitimacy." Id.
For all of the above reasons, we conclude that none of the submitted plans is appropriate for adoption by the
court. As explained above, each plan relies upon different data. Each plan has "calculated partisan political
consequences (the details of which are unknown). We have no principled way to choose [among] the plans,
especially knowing that we would be endorsing an unknown but intended political consequence by the choice
we make." Wilson, 823 P.2d at 576-77. Accordingly, the court has devised a redistricting plan consistent with
neutral State and federal constitutional principles.
IV. Court Plan
The goal of the court’s plan is to remedy the constitutional deficiencies in the existing senate districts. In
devising the plan, we are guided primarily by the State and federal constitutional principles of one person/one
vote. Also, we use as our benchmark the existing senate districts because the senate districting plan enacted in
1992 is the last validly enacted plan and is the "clearest expression of the legislature’s intent." Colleton County
Council, 2002 WL 1065576 at *24. We consider the 1992 senate plan to be the best evidence of State
redistricting policy. In addition, by using the existing senate districts, we are able to ensure, to the greatest extent
practicable, that each senatorial district contains roughly the same constituents as the last validly enacted plan.
And, we adhere to the New Hampshire constitutional requirements that each senate district be a single-member
district comprised of contiguous towns, city wards and unincorporated places and that each town, city ward and
unincorporated place not be divided. N.H. CONST., pt. II, art. 26.
With these principles in mind, we have determined that to remedy the population deviations in existing districts,
it is preferable that the core of those districts be maintained, while contiguous populations are added or
subtracted as necessary to correct the population deviations.
The court’s plan has an overall range of deviation of only 4.96%, and, thus, satisfies the one person/one vote
standard.
As referred to above, the court was informed that, in certain cities, ward lines may have been changed since the
2000 census was conducted, and that it was not known whether such changes were made using the PL 94-171
census data. For example, we have been advised that Manchester and Nashua have adjusted ward lines since the
2000 census data was released, making these ward lines inconsistent with the PL 94-171 data as reported for
those wards. We have also been advised that Rochester has added a ward since the 2000 census data was
released, making its wards similarly inconsistent with the PL 94-171 data.
However, because no party provided us with all of the necessary data, the court’s plan relies exclusively upon
the PL 94-171 census data, which was provided by the Bureau of the Census for redistricting purposes.
Wherever such changes have been made, it will be the responsibility of the appropriate officials to conform the
ward lines to the PL 94-171 data or to make internal election process accommodations.
Further, unlike the plans submitted by the parties, the court’s plan imposes the least change for New Hampshire
citizens in that it changes the senate districts for only 18.82% of the State’s population (232,565 citizens).
Moreover, all of the court’s senate districts are single-member districts and they are each comprised of
contiguous towns, city wards and unincorporated places. N.H. CONST., pt. II, art. 26. Consistent with the New
Hampshire Constitution, the court’s plan does not divide any town, city ward or unincorporated place throughout
the entire State. The plan also splits only two cities, Manchester and Nashua, which were also split in the
redistricting plan enacted in 1992. The plan is drawn without any consideration of partisan politics.
Because the legislature failed to meet the mandate of Part II, Article 26 of the New Hampshire Constitution, the
court has been called upon to assure that that requirement is met. It is in fulfillment of that requirement that the
court has adopted the plan for formation of senate districts attached to this opinion. This plan is effective
immediately and the injunction against the senate filing period is dissolved as of 12:01 a.m. June 26, 2002.
Unless otherwise ordered by the court, the filing of any motion to reconsider shall not stay the effective date of
the plan.
So ordered.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
INDEX TO APPENDICES
Senate District Plan (State Map) Appendix A
Senate District Plan (City of Manchester Map) Appendix B
Senate District Plan (City of Nashua Map) Appendix C
Senate District Population Report Appendix D
Full Geography Report with Population Totals Appendix E