THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2002-695
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID EASTMAN
(APPEAL OF DAVID H. BOWNES)
Argued: July 10, 2003
Opinion Issued: October 8, 2003
Brennan, Caron, Lenehan & Iacopino, of Manchester (Michael J. Iacopino on the brief and orally), for the appellant.
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, attorney, on the brief and orally), for the State.
NADEAU, J. The appellant, David H. Bownes, attorney for David Eastman, appeals a decision of the Superior Court
(Smukler, J.) denying a motion to exceed maximum counsel fees under Supreme Court Rule 47 (Rule 47). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On March 22, 2002, the superior court appointed Bownes as counsel to
Eastman, who had been represented at various times by at least three other attorneys. Eastman was charged with felony
counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault and one misdemeanor count of sexual assault. Bownes represented
Eastman through the completion of trial, which terminated July 12, 2002.
On August 2, 2002, Bownes filed a motion to exceed maximum fees pursuant to Rule 47. Bownes completed an
attorney’s statement of fees, which totaled $9,376.55 for 133.7 hours of work by counsel and 34.3 hours of work by his
paralegal. The superior court issued an order denying the motion without any explanation. Bownes filed a motion to
reconsider in which he requested a hearing and reconsideration of the matter, or, alternatively, articulation of the court’s
reasoning. The superior court denied Bownes’ motion without articulating its reasoning.
On appeal, Bownes argues that the superior court’s failure to exercise its discretion under Rule 47 is unsustainable, in
part, because the trial judge summarily denied Bownes’ motion without any express findings or a hearing and failed to
explain his reasoning. In the alternative, Bownes contends that if the court did, in fact, exercise its discretion under Rule
47, that exercise of discretion is not sustainable because good cause and exceptional circumstances warrant the payment
of fees exceeding the maximum amount allowed under this rule.
The version of Rule 47 in effect at the time Bownes filed his motion to exceed maximum fees provided, in pertinent part:
(2) Fees. Maximum compensation is limited as follows:
(a) Time properly chargeable to case: $60 per hour. The paralegal hourly rate
shall not exceed $35.00 and shall be included with fees of counsel for the
purposes of determining the maximum fee on any case. Travel time is not a
compensable event unless expressly authorized by the court in advance for
exceptional circumstances.
(b) Maximum fee per day (for all cases): $400.
(c) Maximum fee for misdemeanors: $1,000.
(d) Maximum fee for felonies: $3,000.
. . . .
Only upon an express, written finding of good cause and exceptional
circumstances by the court will the maximum fees be exceeded or will additional
fees be authorized. All petitions to exceed the maximum fee guidelines must be
approved prior to the guidelines being exceeded.
Sup. Ct. R. 47(2) (amended 2002).
In contrast, the current version of Rule 47 permits the trial court to "waive the requirement for prior approval when
justice so requires." Sup. Ct. R. 47(2) (effective Oct. 11, 2002). Inasmuch as the old version of Rule 47 controls the
outcome of this case, the trial judge was justified in refusing to consider Bownes’ motion because it was untimely. See
Sup. Ct. R. 47; cf. In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768, 770 (2002).
Because trial judges may have occasion in the future to exercise their discretion to approve additional fees upon an
express written finding of good cause and exceptional circumstances, we will address that issue. In determining the
reasonableness of the fee charged, judges should consider, among other criteria, the following:
1) responsibilities involved measured by the magnitude and importance of the
case;
2) manner in which duties were performed;
3) knowledge, skill, efficiency, professionalism, and judgment required of and
used by counsel;
4) nature of counsel’s practice and injury thereto;
5) any extraordinary pressure of time or other factors under which services were
rendered; and
6) any other circumstances relevant and material to a determination of a fair and
reasonable fee.
United States v. Johnson, 214 F. Supp. 2d 488, 491 (E.D. Pa. 2002) (quotation omitted). In Johnson, the court
adopted these criteria after an analysis of the Criminal Justice Act, which sets forth standards for payment of appointed
counsel. See id.; 18 U.S.C. § 3006A(d)(3) (2000). The policy behind this act is to furnish competent counsel to those
who could not afford one and to ensure that those attorneys who accept appointments do not suffer economic hardship.
See United States v. Carnevale, 624 F. Supp. 381, 383-84 (D.R.I. 1985). To balance these interests, the Criminal
Justice Act provides that maximum fee compensation may be exceeded in cases of "extended or complex
representation" when the trial judge or magistrate certifies that excess payment is necessary to provide fair compensation
and the payment is approved by the chief judge of the circuit. 18 U.S.C. § 3006A(d)(3) (2000).
The determination of fair compensation is a fact-specific inquiry based upon the circumstances of the attorney and
defendant involved, and the situation surrounding both the appointment and the retention of counsel. United States v.
James, 301 F. Supp. 107, 117 (W.D. Tex. 1969). Judicial experience must guide this determination. United States v.
Diaz, 802 F. Supp. 304, 308 (C.D. Cal. 1992).
A fee for the defense of an indigent defendant need not be equal to that which an attorney would expect to receive from
a private client, but should strike a balance between conflicting interests, which include the ethical obligation of a lawyer
to make legal representation available and the increasing burden on the legal profession to provide counsel to indigents.
State v. Robinson, 123 N.H. 665, 668 (1983).
We set forth these criteria today to guide trial judges in their determination of fair compensation once good cause and
exceptional circumstances have been found to exist. Here, however, because the old version of Rule 47 controls the
outcome of this case, the trial judge was justified in denying Bownes’ motion as untimely without further explanation.
Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.