THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2002-762
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WILLIAM CARBO
Argued: October 20, 2004
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2004
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally),
for the State.
Michael J. Sheehan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
Duggan, J. The defendant, William Carbo, was convicted after a jury trial in Superior Court (McHugh, J.) on one
count of aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, III (1996), two counts of felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:3, II (1996), and one count of violating a protective order, see RSA 173-B:9 (2002)
(amended 2002, 2003). The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress
evidence obtained by a consent search of his car. He also argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion
for a mistrial. We affirm.
In 1997, the victim’s parents rented an apartment from the defendant in Manchester-by-the-Sea, Massachusetts.
The defendant occupied an apartment in the same building. By 1998, the parents noticed that the defendant was
spending considerable time with their thirteen-year-old son and giving their son gifts such as money and
clothing. The parents became increasingly concerned by this and asked the defendant to stop. Although they
spoke with the defendant about this matter on at least two occasions, he did not comply with their wishes. In
May 1999, the parents moved to New Hampshire, primarily because the defendant refused to curtail his contact
with the victim.
After the parents moved to New Hampshire, they continued to find items in their son’s room, which suggested
that the defendant was still having contact with him and giving him gifts. When confronted, their son admitted
that the items were from the defendant and that they had been spending time together. Subsequently, the parents
obtained a restraining order against the defendant.
On March 29, 2000, the parents saw the defendant drive past them in the direction of their house. They followed
the defendant’s car and arrived home to find it in their driveway and the defendant exiting the house carrying
something in his arms. The parents parked behind the defendant’s car and called the police. When the police
arrived, they arrested the defendant for violating the restraining order.
At the police station, Sergeant Coope asked the defendant to sign a consent to search form for his car, but told
him he was under no obligation to consent. Cf. State v. Hight, 146 N.H. 746, 751 (2001) (recognizing that "we
have previously admonished that it is good policy for police officers to advise persons that they have a right to
refuse to consent to a warrantless search"). The defendant signed the consent form. Sergeant Coope searched the
defendant’s car and retrieved the following items, which were introduced at trial: a book entitled "How Sex
Works," a Playboy magazine, several sports magazines and a backpack containing condoms, lubricant, one half
of a wooden ruler, towels, napkins and three pairs of boxer shorts.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) denying his motion to suppress evidence
obtained in the consent search of his car; and (2) denying his motion for a mistrial. We address each argument in
turn.
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept the trial court’s factual findings unless
they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. See id. at 748. Our review of the trial court’s legal
conclusions, however, is de novo. See id.
The defendant concedes that he voluntarily gave consent. However, the defendant argues that we should adopt
the holding in State v. Carty, 790 A.2d 903, 912 (N.J.), modified, 806 A.2d 798 (N.J. 2002). In Carty, the New
Jersey Supreme Court held that law enforcement personnel must have a reasonable and articulable suspicion of
further criminal wrongdoing prior to asking for consent to search a motor vehicle during a routine traffic stop.
Id. The defendant argues that requiring reasonable and articulable suspicion would prevent the police from
obtaining consent for random searches that are merely "fishing expedition[s] trying to prove a crime that [the
officer] had a hunch had been committed."
The State argues that concerns about police expanding the scope of routine traffic stops are adequately addressed
in State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. 19 (2004). Moreover, the State argues that the defendant’s reliance on
Carty is misplaced. We agree.
In McKinnon-Andrews, we dealt with the issue of expanding the scope of a police stop by adopting a three-part
test to evaluate the validity of the police conduct. Id. at 25. This test is designed to regulate police conduct by
not allowing police to "fundamentally alter[] the nature of the stop by converting it into a general inquisition
about past, present and future wrongdoing, absent an independent basis for reasonable suspicion or probable
cause." Id. This is the same concern that the New Jersey Supreme Court in Carty identified as its rationale for
requiring police to have reasonable suspicion before asking for consent to search during a routine traffic stop.
Carty, 790 A.2d at 905. The focus of both McKinnon-Andrews and Carty is whether the police have exceeded
the scope of the initial traffic stop without reasonable suspicion of further illegal activity, thus resulting in an
illegal detention. It is, thus, the illegality of the seizure that renders the consent unconstitutional.
Here, the defendant was not subject to a motor vehicle stop or other Terry stop. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20
(1968). Rather, the defendant was arrested for violating a restraining order. Later, while the defendant was at the
station, the police asked for consent to search his car. Because the defendant was subject to a valid arrest, there is
no similar concern that the police may prolong the seizure of the defendant or otherwise violate his right to be
free from an unreasonable seizure. Under these circumstances, the inquiry is limited to whether the consent was
free, knowing and voluntary, which the defendant conceded. See State v. Prevost, 141 N.H. 647, 650 (1997).
Accordingly, the trial court did not err in denying his motion to suppress.
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying the defendant’s motion for a mistrial. Specifically,
the defendant argues that the victim’s father testified about inadmissible uncharged sexual misconduct. See N.H.
R. Ev. 404 (b).
At trial, the victim’s father testified as follows:
[State]: How was this . . . situation, it was you, your wife and [your son] and the
defendant in [the defendant’s] home. How was the situation affecting the family in
terms of your relationship with your wife and your son?
[Father]: Initially, like I said, for the first six months to a year everything seemed to be
pretty normal; but as we suspected things were going on, my wife more so, she would
have a tendency to get in arguments with me thinking that other things more severe
may have been going on.
Defense counsel objected. The trial judge instructed the jury: "The importance of these questions is to determine
the state of mind and the relationship between this witness and his wife. You’re not to speculate as to what he
was – what his concerns were, whether they were valid or invalid."
The prosecution then asked:
[State]: So, it’s fair to say that tensions were getting a little high at some point?
[Father]: Yeah, because my wife and I had disagreed on certain things. I said you can’t,
you know, believe this man is guilty of something without proof . . . .
Defense counsel again objected and moved for a mistrial, arguing that a mistrial was warranted because "the
witness mentioned his suspicion that the defendant was guilty of things happening in Manchester by the Sea[,]
Massachusetts," which the court previously had ruled was inadmissible under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
404(b). Defense counsel asserted that this testimony left the jury with the impression that "things [were]
happening in Massachusetts," which was "totally improper" under Rule 404(b). The trial judge denied the
motion for a mistrial, and gave a lengthy, curative instruction to the jury, stating in part: "As a result of the last
series of questions, it may cause you to speculate as to whether or not anything of a bad nature took place in
Massachusetts while the family lived down there. I am telling you, you cannot speculate about any such
behavior."
The defendant argues that the victim’s father’s testimony constituted an erroneous admission of evidence under
Rule 404(b). He argues that the evidence prejudiced the jury to such an extent that the error could not be cured
by the trial judge’s instruction. Consequently, the defendant argues that the trial court’s denial of his motion for a
mistrial was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion for a mistrial, we recognize that the trial court is in the best
position to gauge the prejudicial nature of the conduct at issue and has broad discretion to decide whether a
mistrial is appropriate. State v. Kerwin, 144 N.H. 357, 359 (1999). We will not overturn the trial court’s decision
on whether a mistrial or other remedial action is necessary absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State
v. Pandolfi, 145 N.H. 508, 512 (2000); see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard).
To justify a mistrial, the conduct in question must be more than merely inadmissible; it must constitute an
irreparable injustice that cannot be cured by jury instructions. Kerwin, 144 N.H. at 359. The proper inquiry in
this case, for determining whether the defendant was so substantially prejudiced that the remedy of mistrial was
required, is whether the fact that the alleged prior acts were criminal in nature was unambiguously revealed to
the jury. State v. Ellison, 135 N.H. 1, 6 (1991).
Here, the testimony did not unambiguously reveal evidence of specific bad acts. Rather, the victim’s father
testified, "we suspected things were going on," "that other things more severe may have been going on" and
"you can’t . . . believe this man is guilty of something without proof." The first two statements were vague
references to other conduct, while the third expressed some skepticism about whether the defendant had engaged
in unlawful conduct. These references are significantly more ambiguous than testimony about uncharged
criminal conduct in other cases where we have held that a mistrial was warranted. Compare State v. LaBranche,
118 N.H. 176, 177 (1978) (holding that repeated testimony about a second incident of attempted sexual assault
that was the basis of a properly severed indictment was inadmissible and sufficiently prejudicial to require a new
trial), with Ellison, 135 N.H. at 6 (holding that a mistrial was not required in an assault case where inadmissible
testimony that the defendant fractured the victim's nose on a prior occasion could be viewed as an accident and
thus was ambiguous). Moreover, the trial court gave a curative instruction immediately after ruling on the
defendant’s objections and motion for a mistrial. We thus hold that the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s
motion was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 671, 675 (2002).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.