THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Manchester District Court
No. 2002-758
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ANTHONY VAN DYCK
Argued: May 7, 2003
Opinion Issued: June 27, 2003
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stein, Volinsky & Callaghan, P.A., of Concord (Robert A. Stein and Scott F. Johnson on the brief, and Mr. Stein orally),
for the defendant.
BROCK, C.J. The defendant, Anthony Van Dyck, appeals the order of the Manchester District Court (Lyons, J.)
disqualifying his counsel, Attorney Robert Stein, from representing him in pending criminal proceedings. See Sup. Ct. R.
8. We reverse and remand.
The relevant facts follow. On or about December 27, 2001, the defendant’s long-term relationship with Taffney Clark
ended and she told him to vacate her residence. Because of events related to the termination of the relationship, the
police arrested and charged the defendant with simple assault, criminal mischief and resisting arrest (the December 2001
charges). Trial was set for March 12, 2002. On January 25, 2002, Clark obtained a protective order against the
defendant, and, in February 2002, she moved to enforce it, alleging that on three occasions, the defendant had violated
it. A warrant for the defendant’s arrest was issued, but not served, on February 25, 2002 (the February 2002 charges).
On March 12, 2002, a prosecutor for the Manchester City Solicitor’s Office, Michele Battaglia, and defense counsel
engaged in plea negotiations with respect to the December 2001 charges. Following these negotiations, the defendant
pleaded guilty to the resisting arrest charge and the State nol prossed the simple assault and criminal mischief charges. As
the defendant was leaving the courtroom, the police arrested him on the February 2002 charges. The charges were for
simple assault, stalking and three counts of violating a restraining order. Attorney Battaglia is not prosecuting the
February 2002 charges.
The defendant moved to dismiss the February 2002 charges, arguing, in part, that Attorney Battaglia had engaged in
prosecutorial misconduct during the March plea negotiations because she knew of, but failed to disclose, the February
2002 charges and the outstanding arrest warrant. The defendant contended that this deprived him of due process. He
alleged that he pleaded guilty to the December 2001 charges "to put all matters concerning . . . Clark behind him." The
State objected and filed a "Motion to Determine Status of Counsel," asserting that the allegations in the motion to dismiss
appeared to require Attorney Stein to testify as a witness, in violation of New Hampshire Rule of Professional Conduct
3.7(a).
The court initially gave the parties an opportunity to render the motion moot by entering into a stipulation of facts.
Because the parties were unable to arrive at a stipulation, the court ordered them to submit memoranda on the issue of
the status of counsel and provide sworn affidavits of the anticipated testimony of Attorneys Battaglia and Stein. The court
disqualified Attorney Stein from all further proceedings in the case after finding that he was likely to be a witness at the
motion to dismiss hearing and that his dual roles of advocate and witness were "so incompatible" that they created an
appearance of impropriety. See N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 3.7(a).
New Hampshire Rule of Professional Conduct 3.7(a) states that a lawyer
shall not act as advocate at a trial in which the lawyer is likely to be a necessary witness
except where: (1) the testimony relates to an uncontested issue; (2) the testimony relates to
the nature and value of legal services rendered in the case; and (3) disqualification of the
lawyer would work unreasonable hardship on the client.
We review a trial court’s ruling that Rule 3.7(a) requires an attorney’s disqualification under our unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. See McElroy v. Gaffney, 129 N.H. 382, 390 (1987); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
It is not necessary for us to decide whether Rule 3.7(a) applies to the evidentiary hearing on the pre-trial motion to
dismiss, see ABA Comm. on Ethics and Prof’l Responsibility, Informal Op. 89-1529 (1989); DiMartino v. Eighth
Judicial Dist. Ct., No. 40923, 2003 WL 1889220, at *2 (Nev. April 16, 2003); cf. Main Events Productions, LLC v.
Lacy, 220 F. Supp. 2d 353, 357 (D.N.J. 2002), because we hold that it would not require Attorney Stein’s
disqualification because he was not a "necessary" witness.
A lawyer is a "necessary" witness "if his or her testimony is relevant, material and unobtainable elsewhere." World Youth
Day, Inc. v. Famous Artists, 866 F. Supp. 1297, 1302 (D. Colo. 1994). "[I]f the evidence sought to be elicited from the
attorney-witness can be produced in some other effective way, it may be that the attorney is not necessary as a witness."
Humphrey on behalf of State v. McLaren, 402 N.W.2d 535, 541 (Minn. 1987). "If the lawyer’s testimony is merely
cumulative, or quite peripheral . . . ordinarily the lawyer is not a necessary witness." Id. "Simply to assert that the
attorney will be called as a witness, a too-frequent trial tactic, is not enough." Id.
Attorney Stein’s testimony would be merely cumulative of Attorney Battaglia’s testimony, and, thus, was not necessary.
In her affidavit, Attorney Battaglia stated that when she negotiated the plea with Attorney Stein, she knew about the
outstanding warrant and that there was a police officer in the back of the courtroom waiting to arrest the defendant. She
further stated that she never informed Attorney Stein about the outstanding warrant and new charges because she was
concerned that the defendant would flee once the charges were made known to him. Attorney Stein’s testimony would
not add to these statements.
The State contends that Attorney Stein was a "necessary" witness because only he could testify about whether he knew
about the new charges and warrant before the defendant pleaded guilty to the December 2001 charges. Whether
Attorney Stein knew of the new charges and warrant is peripheral to the central allegations in the defendant’s motion to
dismiss. The defendant’s motion to dismiss was based upon the allegation that had he known of the outstanding warrant
and charges, he would not have agreed to plead guilty to the December 2001 charges. Attorney Stein is not the best
witness as to the defendant’s state of mind. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court’s determination that Attorney Stein
was a "necessary" witness constituted an unsustainable exercise of its discretion and that the court erroneously barred
him from representing the defendant in this case.
The State asserts that Attorney Stein’s disqualification is necessary for the pre-trial hearing to advance the policies
underlying Rule 3.7. We disagree.
Rule 3.7 is intended to eliminate the possibility that the attorney will not be a fully objective witness, reduce the risk that
the trier of fact will confuse the roles of advocate and witness, and ensure that the administration of justice not only is fair,
but appears fair. See McElroy, 129 N.H. at 389. "Most of these considerations have little weight" when defense counsel
is to testify at a pre-trial motion hearing. United States v. Morris, 714 F.2d 669, 672 (7th Cir. 1983). Unlike a jury, a
judge is unlikely to confuse the roles of advocate and witness or to deem an attorney credible simply because he is an
attorney. See id. Further, the risk that the hearing will appear unfair is minimal when the testifying attorney represents the
defendant, rather than the government. See id. Ironically, the State argues that disqualification is necessary because the
court might view Attorney Stein’s testimony with skepticism. We find this argument unpersuasive. See id. We admonish
trial courts to review motions to disqualify defense counsel in criminal cases cautiously to minimize the potential for abuse
of the advocate-witness rule and the risk that a criminal defendant will be deprived unnecessarily of his chosen counsel.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.