THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2002-098
IN RE JUVENILE 2002-098
Argued: October 17, 2002
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2002
John D. MacIntosh, P.C., of Concord (John D. MacIntosh on the brief and orally, for the petitioners, Paul and
Karen VanDenBerg.
Moir and Brodich, P.A., of Concord (Nicholas Brodich on the brief and orally), for the respondent, Stefan K.
Katherine B. Stearns, of New London, by brief and orally, for the respondent, Aranka D.
Abramson, Bailinson & O’Leary, P.C., of Manchester (Ronald L. Abramson on the brief and orally), for the
juvenile.
Philip T. McLaughlin, attorney general (Ann F. Larney, associate attorney general, on the brief) for the State.
David N. Sandberg, of Manchester, by memorandum, for Court Appointed Special Advocates of New
Hampshire, Inc., guardian ad litem for the juvenile.
Darryl L. Hamm, of Oakland, California, by brief, for the National Center For Youth Law & a., as amici curiae.
NADEAU, J. This case comes before us on an interlocutory transfer without ruling from the Superior Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) for a determination of whether the district court had jurisdiction over an abuse and neglect case
involving a juvenile nonresident foreign national, and whether the court’s jurisdiction could be invoked to obtain
special immigration juvenile status under federal law. See Sup. Ct. R. 9. We hold that the court had jurisdiction
and that it could be used in furtherance of obtaining special immigration juvenile status.
The following facts are stated in the interlocutory transfer statement, see id., or appear in the record. Petitioner
Paul VanDenBerg first met the juvenile while working in Brasov, Romania with a foundation assisting homeless
children. The juvenile is a Romanian citizen, as are her parents, respondents Stefan K. and Aranka D. Neither
Stefan K. nor Aranka D. has ever been in the United States.
In February 1999, VanDenBerg helped the juvenile, with her parents’ permission, obtain a visitor’s visa to the
United States. The juvenile stayed with VanDenBerg and his wife, petitioner Karen VanDenBerg, in Newbury,
New Hampshire, for the six-month duration of her visa. The juvenile returned to Romania at the end of that
period.
The juvenile, with VanDenBerg’s assistance, obtained another visitor’s visa in May 2000 and again stayed with
the VanDenBergs. She did not, however, return to Romania at the expiration of her visa on or about November 1,
2000. Rather, the VanDenBergs and the juvenile discovered in the summer and fall of 2000 that a provision of
the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Act (INA) might permit the juvenile to remain in the United States
by obtaining "special immigration juvenile status." Specifically, 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(27) (2000) defines the term
"special immigrant" to include:
(J) an immigrant who is present in the United States –
(i) who has been declared dependent on a juvenile court located in the United States or
whom such a court has legally committed to, or placed under the custody of, an agency
or department of a State and who has been deemed eligible by that court for long-term
foster care due to abuse, neglect, or abandonment;
(ii) for whom it has been determined in administrative or judicial proceedings that it
would not be in the alien’s best interest to be returned to the alien’s or parent’s previous
country of nationality or country of last habitual residence; and
(iii) in whose case the Attorney General expressly consents to the dependency order
serving as a precondition to the grant of special immigrant juvenile status; except that –
(I) no juvenile court has jurisdiction to determine the custody
status or placement of an alien in the actual or constructive
custody of the Attorney General unless the Attorney General
specifically consents to such jurisdiction; and
(II) no natural parent or prior adoptive parent of any alien
provided special immigrant status under this subparagraph
shall thereafter, by virtue of such parentage, be accorded any
right, privilege, or status under this chapter . . . .
On November 20, 2000, the VanDenBergs filed, in the New London District Court, an abuse and neglect petition
under the Child Protection Act, RSA chapter 169-C. The petition, as amended, alleged that the juvenile was both
abused and neglected within the meaning of the Child Protection Act, as she had been, among other things,
beaten by both of her parents and abandoned by them, forcing her, at times, to live on the streets of Brasov or in
its sewers.
After a preliminary hearing, the District Court (McSwiney, J.) ruled that it had jurisdiction to hear the petition
and that there was reasonable cause to believe that the juvenile had been abused and neglected. The court also
appointed counsel for the juvenile, Stefan K. and Aranka D. respectively. Following an adjudicatory hearing, the
court again held that it had jurisdiction and that the juvenile had been both abused and neglected within the
meaning of the Child Protection Act. The court further found the juvenile to be dependent upon the court within
the meaning of 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(27)(J). In a later dispositional order, the court found that "[a]lthough a final
decision must await the outcome of the PACE evaluation and the actions of [the juvenile’s] parents, [she] is
eligible for long-term foster care." The court also found that "[a]t the present time it is not in [the juvenile’s] best
interest to be returned to Romania."
The case was appealed to the superior court. See RSA 169-C:28 (2002). The parents moved to dismiss the
matter for lack of jurisdiction, raising the question, as stated by the trial court:
Whether a New Hampshire Court, pursuant to New Hampshire’s Child Protection Act
(R.S.A. 169-C), has jurisdiction over a juvenile who is a nonresident foreign national
but now physically present in the State of New Hampshire, and the respondents are
nonresident foreign nationals who have never been present in the United States, and the
alleged abuse and neglect occurred outside of New Hampshire and these United States
prior to the juvenile’s entry into the United States.
The trial court transferred the question to this court as an interlocutory transfer without ruling pursuant to
Supreme Court Rule 9. The court later transferred an additional question: "Can the petitioners and the juvenile
invoke the jurisdiction of the district court under RSA Ch. 169-C in order to secure protection from deportation
under specific provisions of federal law (8 U.S.C. § 1101 (a) (27) (J)[)] granting to her a ‘special immigration
juvenile status’ visa?"
Notwithstanding the trial court’s reference in the first question to "jurisdiction over [the] juvenile," we
understand the question to ask whether the district court had subject matter jurisdiction over the case, not
personal jurisdiction over either the juvenile or her parents. Accordingly, we address only that narrow question.
RSA 169-C:4, I (2002) provides that "[t]he [district] court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction over all
proceedings alleging the abuse or neglect of a child." See also RSA 169-C:3, IX (2002). Under a prior statute
dealing with neglected and delinquent children, we held that "[t]he jurisdiction of the juvenile court is not
limited to those who reside or have their domicile in this state but applies to any neglected or delinquent child
found within the state." In re Poulin, 100 N.H. 458, 461 (1957) (citing RSA 169:2). We similarly now hold that
RSA 169-C:4, I, confers jurisdiction to the district court over any case involving a child found within the State
who is alleged to have been abused or neglected, no matter where the abuse or neglect is alleged to have
occurred. Cf. In re Noah W., 131 N.H. 53, 56 (1988).
While Stefan K. correctly points out that RSA 169-C:5, I (2002), providing that "[p]roceedings under this
chapter may be originated in the judicial district in which the child is found or resides," deals with venue rather
than jurisdiction, we do not base our holding upon that provision. Rather, we rely upon the broad language of
RSA 169-C:4, I, and the traditional parens patriae power of the State.
We have long recognized the State’s parens patriae interest in the welfare of children within its jurisdiction. See,
e.g., Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36, 40 (1990). Thus, regarding the power to adjudicate the custody of a child,
we have stated:
The jurisdiction of a State to regulate the custody of infants found within its territory
does not depend upon the domicile of the parents. It has its origin in the protection that
is due to the incompetent or helpless. For this, the residence of the child suffices though
the domicile be elsewhere. Furthermore, since the welfare of the child is the controlling
consideration and since it is not chargeable with its parent’s misconduct, this
jurisdiction will be exercised even though the child was brought to this state by its
parent fraudulently, and for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction over the question of
custody, provided, however, that the child is, as in this case, too young to decide what is
best for its own welfare.
Sheehy v. Sheehy, 88 N.H. 223, 225 (1936) (quotation, citation and ellipsis omitted).
We are also not persuaded by Stefan K.’s contention that a finding of jurisdiction in this case would undermine
the purposes of the Child Protection Act, including those of keeping families together and providing assistance
to parents. See RSA 169-C:2 (2002). We acknowledge the difficulties occasioned by the residence of the parents
in a foreign country and the language and cultural barriers involved in this case. Nevertheless, "the welfare of an
allegedly abused or neglected child is of paramount importance under RSA chapter 169-C." In re Bill F., 145
N.H. 267, 274 (2000). Accordingly, we conclude that the obstacles to reunification present in this case do not
divest the district court of the power to protect a child found within the State through the exercise of jurisdiction
conferred by RSA 169-C:4, I. We answer the first transferred question, therefore, in the affirmative.
The second transferred question deals with the relationship between the district court’s jurisdiction under RSA
chapter 169-C and special immigration juvenile status under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(27)(J). We find nothing in 8
U.S.C. § 1101(a)(27)(J) to bar or preempt jurisdiction in this case.
As a general matter, "the INA specifically delegates determinations of dependency, eligibility for long-term
foster care, and the best interest of the child to state juvenile courts." Gao v. Jenifer, 185 F.3d 548, 555 (6th Cir.
1999). Thus, "[t]he INA generally relies on state courts, acting in their usual course." Id. The only challenge to
the district court’s jurisdiction based upon the INA that has been raised before us is Stefan K.’s assertion that the
juvenile was in the constructive custody of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) once her visa
expired, and that therefore the Attorney General’s consent to jurisdiction was required under 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)
(27)(J)(iii)(I). Stefan K. cites no precedent in support of this assertion, however.
The record reveals that the INS was contacted by DCYF regarding the juvenile and "determined not to
commence Removal proceedings at th[at] time, but to await the outcome of [the district] court proceedings."
Moreover, the record discloses that the juvenile has already been granted permanent resident status by the INS.
Thus, we find nothing before us to indicate that the juvenile was ever in the actual or constructive custody of the
INS. Accordingly, we answer the second transferred question in the affirmative.
Remanded.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.