THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. 2003-607
PETITION OF TERRY M. BENNETT
(New Hampshire Insurance Department)
Argued: May 5, 2004
Opinion Issued: June 21, 2004
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III and Benjamin T. King on the brief, and
Mr. Douglas orally), for the plaintiff.
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally),
for the New Hampshire Insurance Department.
Broderick, C.J. The plaintiff, Terry Bennett, appeals the order of an insurance department hearing officer
dismissing, without prejudice, a notice of hearing issued by the insurance commissioner. We reverse and
remand.
The record supports the following facts. On June 16, 1993, the plaintiff contracted with United Risk
Management (URM) for an ITT Hartford Group, Inc. homeowner’s insurance policy in the face amount of one
million dollars, to be written by Twin City Fire Insurance Company. On August 2, 1993, a fire destroyed the
plaintiff’s home. ITT Hartford Group, Inc. subsequently paid the one million dollar face amount of the policy.
For discussion of the facts surrounding the plaintiff’s earlier appeal to this court, see Bennett v. ITT Hartford
Group, Inc., 150 N.H. ___, 846 A.2d 560 (2004). The plaintiff claims that he also contracted with URM for
replacement cost coverage that would have entitled him to additional coverage in excess of one million dollars.
He claims that ITT Hartford Group, Inc. and Twin City Fire Insurance Company (collectively, Hartford) deleted
this coverage from his policy without the supreme court in accordance with the provisions of RSA
541." In this case, the insurance commissioner never issued such an order or decision. Accordingly, the plaintiff
has no statutory right of appeal under RSA chapter 541.
This holding, however, does not preclude us from recasting the current appeal as a petition for writ of certiorari,
because our long-standing practice permits us to consider an appeal mistakenly taken under RSA chapter 541 as
a petition for writ of certiorari. See id. "Certiorari is an extraordinary remedy, which is not granted as a matter of
right but rather only when the court deems that the substantial ends of justice require such relief." Appeal of
Tamm, 124 N.H. 107, 110 (1983) (quotation omitted). In this case, the plaintiff’s appeal will be treated as a
petition for writ of certiorari. The scope of review on a petition for writ of certiorari is confined to a
determination of whether the hearing officer acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction, authority or observance
of the law, thereby arriving at a conclusion which could not be legally or reasonably made or acted arbitrarily,
capriciously or with an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Appeal of McDonough, 149 N.H. 105, 110
(2003).
The plaintiff argues that the hearing officer unlawfully, unjustly, and unreasonably dismissed the notice of
hearing. We agree. The hearing officer dismissed the notice of hearing because it recited only that the insurance
department had reason to believe that Hartford’s actions may have constituted an unfair trade practice, and not
that the commissioner had reason to believe that Hartford’s actions did, in fact, constitute an unfair trade
practice.
RSA 417:6 requires the insurance commissioner to issue a notice of hearing "[w]henever the commissioner shall
have reason to believe that any [person engaged in the business of insurance in this State] has been engaged or is
engaging in any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice defined in RSA 417:4,
and that a proceeding by the commissioner in respect thereto would be to the public interest." We have
consistently stated that under this provision, the insurance commissioner need only suspect a violation of RSA
417:4 in order to properly issue a notice of hearing. See Bell v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 190, 193 (2001);
Appeal of Metropolitan Prop. & Liabil. Ins. Co., 120 N.H. 733, 737 (1980). A fair reading of the notice of
hearing in this case demonstrates that the insurance commissioner suspected that Hartford committed a violation
of RSA 417:4. The phrase "may have" preceding "constituted" merely reflects the fact that a violation of RSA
417:4 had yet to be conclusively established. Indeed, the purpose of the subsequent hearing would be to
determine whether a violation actually occurred. See RSA 417:10. The statement in the notice of hearing that
"there is reason to believe that [Hartford’s] actions may have constituted unfair claims or settlement practices"
was not "on its face insufficient to meet the requirements of [RSA 417:6]."
The hearing officer also dismissed the notice of hearing because it did "not propose any regulatory sanction, thus
raising a question as to the basis for the determination that a hearing on this matter would be in the public
interest." The hearing officer acknowledged, however, that RSA 417:6 "does not mandate a regulatory sanction."
RSA 417:6 simply requires that the insurance commissioner have reason to believe that a proceeding regarding
the violation "would be to the public interest." Since the insurance commissioner found that it was "in the public
interest to convene a hearing," the hearing officer further erred in dismissing the notice of hearing for failing to
propose a regulatory sanction. Accordingly, we order that the notice of hearing be reinstated. Nothing in this
opinion, however, impedes the insurance commissioner from exercising whatever discretion he may have to act
upon the notice of hearing upon remand.
The insurance department contends that "[t]he Commissioner’s subsequent failure to [issue a new notice of
hearing] for a period of 120 days after the dismissal without prejudice is the equivalent of failing to take action
on a complaint for 120 days, which triggers the application of RSA 417:19, II." Therefore, it reasons that
because the plaintiff failed to file an appeal under RSA 417:19, II, this appeal is moot. In light of our order that
the notice of hearing be reinstated, we need not address this argument.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the hearing officer’s order deprived him of his constitutionally protected right to
a remedy for injuries inflicted upon him, as guaranteed by Part I, Article 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
In light of our order above, we need not address this argument.
Reversed and remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.