THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2003-687
JOHN R. HARRINGTON & a.
v.
TOWN OF WARNER
Argued: December 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2005
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Margaret H. Nelson on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.A., of Concord (Donald E. Gartrell on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. Peter Wyman obtained a variance from the Town of Warner
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) to expand his current manufactured
housing park, Pleasant Lake Estates, to include twenty-five additional sites.
The abutting landowners, petitioners John R. and Fernanda Harrington
(abutters), appeal from an order of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) affirming
the ZBA’s decision. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are evident from the
record. Pleasant Lake Estates is located on a forty-six-acre parcel of land in
Warner that is zoned as a medium density residential district (R-2). The park
currently utilizes twenty-six acres of the property and consists of thirty-three
manufactured homes and fifty-four campground sites. Wyman sought to
expand Pleasant Lake Estates by adding twenty-six additional manufactured
homes on the remaining twenty acres of the property. Article XIII, section E of
Warner’s zoning ordinance pertains to manufactured housing parks and
provides:
Where Allowed: Manufactured housing parks shall be allowed in all
but the commercial district (C1) and Business district (B1) and
consist of a minimum of 10 acres and at least two (2) sites. The
maximum number of sites shall not exceed 25. Housing sites shall
not include wetlands, water bodies, roads, severe slopes or open
space on individual sites.
Warner, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art. XIII, § E(1) (2002). Wyman sought a
variance for the expansion because the respondent Town of Warner (Town) was
uncertain whether his proposal was permitted under the zoning ordinance.
Following two public meetings and a site walk, the ZBA voted to grant
the variance but limited the expansion to twenty-five additional sites to be
added at the rate of five lots per year. The abutters appealed the ZBA’s
decision. Following a hearing, the trial court ruled that the ZBA acted
reasonably and lawfully in concluding that Wyman met his burden of
establishing the criteria necessary for a variance. This appeal followed.
I. Variance Criteria
The abutters argue that the trial court erred in affirming the ZBA’s
decision to grant the variance because Wyman failed to satisfy the criteria for a
variance. Specifically, the abutters argue that Wyman: (1) failed to show
unnecessary hardship; (2) created any financial hardship he suffered because
the zoning restrictions preceded his purchase of the property; (3) failed to show
that the variance was consistent with the spirit of the ordinance; (4) failed to
show that the variance did not derogate from the intent or purpose of the
ordinance; and (5) failed to show that substantial justice would be done in
granting the variance.
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Hill v. Town of Chester, 146 N.H.
291, 292 (2001). The factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful
and reasonable, and will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors of law,
unless the court is persuaded, based upon a balance of probabilities, on the
evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable. Duffy v. City of
Dover, 149 N.H. 178, 180 (2003). The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s
decision bears the burden of proof on appeal to the trial court. Id. We will
2
uphold the trial court’s decision on appeal unless it is not supported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
Our cases interpreting RSA 674:33, I(b) (1996) have long recognized a
five-part test for the granting of variances. See, e.g., Ryan v. City of
Manchester Zoning Board, 123 N.H. 170, 173 (1983). To obtain a variance, a
landowner bears the burden of showing that: (1) the variance will not be
contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions exist such that literal
enforcement of the ordinance results in unnecessary hardship; (3) the variance
is consistent with the spirit of the ordinance; (4) substantial justice is done;
and (5) granting the variance will not diminish the value of surrounding
properties. Shopland v. Town of Enfield, 151 N.H. 219, 222 (2004); see RSA
674:33, I(b).
A. Unnecessary hardship
We first address the abutters’ argument that the trial court erred in
ruling that the ZBA acted lawfully and reasonably in finding that Wyman met
his burden of showing unnecessary hardship. Our recent decisions have
attempted to clarify the unnecessary hardship standard.
In Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 85, 91-92 (2004), we
distinguished between use and area variances when determining whether an
applicant established unnecessary hardship. We held that, when an applicant
seeks an area variance, the following factors should be considered in the
hardship calculation: (1) whether an area variance is needed to enable the
applicant’s proposed use of the property given the special conditions of the
property; and (2) whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some other method reasonably feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance. Id. at 92.
When, however, an applicant seeks a use variance, the standard set forth
in Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington, 145 N.H. 727, 728 (2001),
applies. See Boccia, 151 N.H. at 92. In Simplex, the applicant sought a use
variance to operate commercial businesses in an industrial zone. Simplex
Technologies, 145 N.H. at 728. To establish unnecessary hardship for a use
variance, an applicant must show that: (1) the zoning restriction as applied
interferes with the applicant’s reasonable use of the property, considering the
unique setting of the property in its environment; (2) no fair and substantial
relationship exists between the general purposes of the zoning ordinance and
the specific restriction on the property; and (3) the variance would not injure
the public or private rights of others. Id. at 731-32. Thus, as a threshold
matter, we must determine whether the variance sought by Wyman was an
area or use variance. See Boccia, 151 N.H. at 91-92.
3
A use variance allows the landowner to engage in a use of the land that
the zoning ordinance prohibits. Id. at 90. Use variances pose a greater threat
to the integrity of a zoning scheme because the fundamental premise of zoning
laws is the segregation of land according to uses. Bacon v. Town of Enfield,
150 N.H. 468, 477 (2004) (Duggan and Dalianis, JJ., concurring specially).
An area variance is generally made necessary by the physical
characteristics of the lot. Boccia, 151 N.H. at 90. In contrast to a use
variance, an area variance involves a use permitted by the zoning ordinance
but grants the landowner an exception from strict compliance with physical
standards such as setbacks, frontage requirements, height limitations and lot
size restrictions. Id. As such, an area variance does not alter the character of
the surrounding area as much as a use not permitted by the ordinance.
Bacon, 150 N.H. at 477 (Duggan and Dalianis, JJ., concurring specially).
The critical distinction between area and use variances is whether the
purpose of the particular zoning restriction is to preserve the character of the
surrounding area and is thus a use restriction. See 3 A. H. Rathkopf & D. A.
Rathkopf, Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning and Planning § 58:4, at 58-17 (2004).
If the purpose of the restriction is to place incidental physical limitations on an
otherwise permitted use, it is an area restriction. See Boccia, 151 N.H. at 90.
Whether the variance sought is an area or use variance requires a case-by-case
determination based upon the language and purpose of the particular zoning
restriction at issue. Accordingly, to resolve this question, we must interpret
the Town’s zoning ordinance to determine the purpose of the zoning restriction.
The interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Duffy, 149 N.H. at 181. Because the traditional rules of
statutory construction generally govern our review, the words and phrases of
an ordinance should be construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language. Id. When the language of an ordinance is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance itself for further
indications of legislative intent. Id. Moreover, we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words that they did not
see fit to include. Id.
As set forth above, article XIII, section E of the Town’s zoning ordinance
provides that manufactured housing parks “shall be allowed in all but the
commercial district (C1) and Business district (B1) and consist of a minimum
of 10 acres and at least two (2) sites. The maximum number of sites shall not
exceed 25.” Warner, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art. XIII, § E(1).
The plain language of the ordinance appears to fix the maximum number
of manufactured housing sites in a park at twenty-five for any parcel of land
ten acres in size or larger. This interpretation is supported by another section
4
of the zoning ordinance, which regulates manufactured housing subdivisions
with essentially identical language. See Warner, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art.
XIII, § F. Under that section, a subdivision must consist of a minimum of
twelve acres, and “[t]he maximum number of lots in any manufactured housing
subdivision shall not exceed 25.” Id. at § F(0), (2) (emphasis added). By the
express terms of this ordinance, the size of a manufactured housing
subdivision is limited to twenty-five, regardless of the underlying acreage.
Considering the language of these similar provisions, we hold that the
ordinance is unambiguous. See Duffy, 149 N.H. at 181. Similar to the
subdivision provision, the manufactured housing park provision expressly
limits the number of sites allowed to twenty-five. This limitation applies
regardless of the number of acres within the park. Thus, unlike an area
restriction, the limitation on the number of manufactured housing sites is not
related to the acreage or other physical attributes of the property. Rather, the
restriction limits the intensity of the use in order to preserve the character of
the area.
Moreover, Warner’s overall zoning scheme segregates land by intensity of
use. Warner, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art. II. For instance, there are three
residential districts: village, medium density and low density. Id. Within these
districts, a two-family dwelling is a permitted use in the village and medium
density residential districts. Id. tbl. 1. A two-family dwelling, however, is only
allowed in the low density district by special exception. Id. The zoning
ordinance is more restrictive with regard to two-family dwellings in the low
density district, thereby preserving the character of the neighborhood by
restricting a more intensive use of land. Thus, the overall zoning scheme
reveals an intent to segregate land by both the types of uses and the intensity
of the use. Accordingly, given the language and purpose of the zoning
ordinance, we conclude that the provision limiting the number of sites to
twenty-five is a use restriction.
Having concluded that the variance at issue is a use variance, we now
turn to the appropriate standard for unnecessary hardship. Generally, a use
variance requires a greater showing of hardship than an area variance because
of the potential impact on the overall zoning scheme. Bacon, 150 N.H. at 477
(Duggan and Dalianis, JJ., concurring). Accordingly, when the unnecessary
hardship prong of the variance test is applied to use variances, we apply the
three-prong standard set forth in Simplex. See Boccia, 151 N.H. at 94. As our
cases since Simplex have emphasized, the first prong of the Simplex standard
is the critical inquiry for determining whether unnecessary hardship has been
established. See, e.g., Rancourt v. City of Manchester, 149 N.H. 51, 53-54
(2003). A number of nondispositive factors are encompassed within this prong.
See, e.g., Hill, 146 N.H. at 293.
5
First, Simplex requires a determination of whether the zoning restriction
as applied interferes with a landowner’s reasonable use of the property.
Simplex, 145 N.H. at 731. This factor includes consideration of the
landowner’s ability to receive a reasonable return on his or her investment.
Matthew v. Smith, 707 S.W.2d 411, 416 (Mo. 1986) (en banc). Although
“[r]easonable return is not maximum return,” id. at 417 (quotation omitted),
this factor requires more than a “mere inconvenience,” Boccia, 151 N.H. at 93.
This factor, however, does not require the landowner to show that he or she
has been deprived of all beneficial use of the land. See Simplex, 145 N.H. at
731-32. Rather, this factor should be applied consistent with our sound policy,
enunciated in Simplex, of being “more considerate of the constitutional right to
enjoy property.” Id. at 731. Nevertheless, “mere conclusory and lay opinion
concerning the lack of . . . reasonable return is not sufficient; there must be
actual proof, often in the form of dollars and cents evidence.” Matthew, 707
S.W.2d at 417; see, e.g., Carter v. Derry, 113 N.H. 1, 4 (1973) (considering
evidence of original cost, current market value and decline in value).
Next, Simplex requires a determination of whether the hardship is a
result of the unique setting of the property. Simplex, 145 N.H. at 731. This
factor requires that the property be burdened by the zoning restriction in a
manner that is distinct from other similarly situated property. Bacon, 150
N.H. at 478 (Duggan and Dalianis, JJ., concurring specially). It does not,
however, require that the property be the only such burdened property.
Rather, the burden cannot arise as a result of the zoning ordinance’s equal
burden on all property in the district. See Rathkopf, supra § 58:5, at 58-18
(“This degree of hardship is implicit in zoning; the restrictions on each parcel of
property are compensated for by similar restrictions on neighboring property.”).
In addition, the burden must arise from the property and not from the
individual plight of the landowner. Olszak v. Town of New Hampton, 139 N.H.
723, 726 (1995). Thus, the landowner must show that the hardship is a result
of specific conditions of the property and not the area in general. Simplex, 145
N.H. at 731.
Finally, Simplex requires consideration of the surrounding environment.
Id. This includes evaluating whether the landowner’s proposed use would alter
the essential character of the neighborhood. Matthew, 707 S.W.2d at 417.
Indeed, because the fundamental premise of zoning laws is the segregation of
land according to uses, the impact on the character of the neighborhood is
central to the analysis of a use variance. See Bacon, 150 N.H. at 477 (Duggan
and Dalianis, JJ., concurring specially).
In this case, the following evidence was introduced before the ZBA
regarding unnecessary hardship. In his variance application, Wyman stated
that the variance to expand the mobile home park was necessary for two
reasons: (1) the twenty acres would be “totally unusable” without the variance;
6
and (2) expanding the park would allow for additional income so that he could
provide affordable housing and keep the community clean.
The minutes of two public hearings reflect the following evidence of
hardship. Wyman reiterated that the variance was necessary for the two
reasons stated in his application. In addition, Wyman stated that he was
unable to subdivide the property because there was inadequate road frontage
and building a road was “almost impossible” due to the location of the
campground, the current mobile home park area and swamp land. Wyman
also stated that he would be improving the private road that currently serves
the park and that these improvements would “meet some of the town specs.”
Nonetheless, because the private road would not be a town road, Wyman would
still not have enough road frontage to subdivide the property. In response to a
question regarding the impact on the area, Wyman stated that the variance
would provide more affordable housing and make the park more attractive so
that it would be a place where people want to live. Negative impacts that were
brought to the ZBA’s attention included additional children in the schools and
increased traffic in an already congested area. Prior to the conclusion of the
second public meeting, Wyman was asked to answer specifically how he met
each of the five requirements for a variance. With regard to unnecessary
hardship, Wyman stated that, “Without [the variance], there is a good chance
that I would have to let [the manufactured housing park] go back to the
previous owner.”
In applying the Simplex standard to these facts, we are mindful that we
do not act as a super zoning board. Britton v. Town of Chester, 134 N.H. 434,
441 (1991). Our inquiry is not whether we would find as the trial court found,
but rather whether the evidence before the court reasonably supports its
findings. See Bacon, 150 N.H. at 471.
Here, sufficient evidence supports the trial court’s determination that the
ZBA acted reasonably in finding that Wyman met his burden of proving
unnecessary hardship. Although Wyman’s unsupported conclusion that,
without the variance, he might have to let the property “go back to the previous
owner” does not warrant the granting of a use variance, see Boccia, 151 N.H. at
93 (requiring more than mere inconvenience); see also Rathkopf, supra § 58:5,
at 58-27 to 58-28 (recognizing that zoning boards and courts will not grant a
variance merely to avoid a negative financial impact on the landowner), other
evidence in the record supports the trial court’s decision.
We first look to the evidence supporting the conclusion that the zoning
restriction interferes with Wyman’s reasonable use of the property. Most
significant to our analysis is that manufactured housing parks are a permitted
use in the R-2 zone. This fact is entitled to considerable weight when
evaluating the reasonable use of the property. In addition, if Wyman had
7
adequate road frontage to subdivide his property, he would have sufficient
acreage for a manufactured housing park on the new lot.
Next, the evidence supporting the conclusion that the hardship is a
result of unique conditions of his property includes: (1) Wyman is unable to
subdivide because he has insufficient road frontage; (2) constructing a road
that would provide adequate frontage is “almost impossible” because of the
current location of the campground, the existing mobile home park and the
presence of swamp lands; and (3) the improvements to the private road that
services the park would not remedy the inadequacy in road frontage.
Finally, the ZBA considered the impact such a large expansion would
have on the character of the area, including the impact on the schools,
increased traffic, the availability of affordable housing, and the potential of
reviving an undesirable area of town. The ZBA also conducted a site walk. In
granting the variance, the ZBA implicitly found that the expansion of the park
would not adversely affect the character of the area. Notably, the ZBA limited
the expansion to five new lots per year in order to lessen the impact on the
schools. Moreover, no evidence to the contrary was introduced. Accordingly,
the trial court did not err in concluding that the ZBA acted reasonably in
finding that Wyman met his burden of proving unnecessary hardship.
B. Self-created hardship
Next, the abutters argue that because the zoning restrictions preceded
Wyman’s purchase of the property, he is not entitled to a variance absent
special circumstances. We disagree.
In Hill v. Town of Chester, we addressed the effect a purchase with
knowledge of zoning restrictions has on an applicant’s ability to demonstrate
unnecessary hardship. Hill, 146 N.H. at 293. We recognized that “landowners
are deemed to have constructive notice of the zoning restrictions applicable to
their property” and that “[a] person who purchases land with knowledge, actual
or constructive, of the zoning restrictions which are in effect at the time of such
purchase, is said to have created for himself whatever hardship such
restrictions entail.” Id. at 294 (quotation omitted). Nonetheless, we held that a
self-created hardship does not preclude the landowner from obtaining a
variance. Id. Rather, “purchase with knowledge” is a nondispositive factor to
be considered under the first prong of the hardship test set forth in Simplex.
Id. at 293.
To counter the fact that the hardship was self-created because the
landowner had actual or constructive knowledge of the zoning restrictions, the
landowner can introduce evidence of good faith. See Rathkopf, supra § 58:21
at 58-135.
8
Good faith can be established in several ways: showing that the
owner has complied with the rules and procedures of the
ordinance; showing that the owner has attempted to use other
alternatives to relieve his hardship prior to requesting a variance;
showing that the owner had relied on the representations of zoning
authorities or builders; or showing that the owner had no actual or
constructive knowledge of a requirement, violation, or limitation on
land that he purchased.
Id.; see also Badish v. O’Regan, 212 N.Y.S.2d 632, 634-35 (Sup. Ct. 1961).
Here, Wyman was advised by a letter from the town selectmen prior to
purchasing the property that the mobile home park could be expanded, subject
to compliance with building ordinances and planning board approval. In
addition, Wyman raised the issue of the provision limiting mobile home parks
to a maximum of twenty-five sites with the ZBA. The ZBA was uncertain
whether the provision allowed twenty-five sites per ten acres of land or whether
the provision was an absolute maximum and thus advised Wyman to seek a
variance for the proposed expansion.
The record unequivocally establishes that Wyman acted in good faith in
following the zoning ordinance and in seeking a variance. Wyman did not
create the hardship because of his “failure to plan properly.” Hill, 146 N.H. at
293. Accordingly, any heightened scrutiny that is warranted by Wyman’s
actual or constructive knowledge of the zoning restriction under the first prong
of Simplex is satisfied by the evidence of his good faith.
C. Other variance criteria
Next, the abutters argue that the trial court erred in ruling that the ZBA
acted lawfully and reasonably in finding that Wyman met his burden of
showing that the variance was consistent with the spirit of the ordinance, did
not detract from the intent or purpose of the ordinance and that substantial
justice would be done in granting the variance. We disagree.
Based upon the record of the ZBA hearings, we conclude that sufficient
evidence supports these rulings. At the hearings, Wyman showed that the
variance was not contrary to the spirit of the ordinance and did not detract
from the intent or purpose of the ordinance because mobile home parks are a
permitted use under the ordinance, the mobile home park already exists in the
area, the variance would not change the use of the area and, were he able to
subdivide, he would have sufficient minimum acreage for the proposed
expansion.
9
In addition, Wyman showed that substantial justice would be done in
granting the variance because it would improve a dilapidated area of town and
provide affordable housing in the area. Specifically, Wyman explained that all
of the lots will meet the minimum size and setback requirements, will be
surrounded by a tree buffer, will only allow the use of newer mobile homes and
will have upgraded septic systems. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in
concluding that the ZBA acted lawfully and reasonably in finding that Wyman
met his burden of proving that the variance was consistent with the spirit of
the ordinance, did not detract from the intent or purpose of the ordinance and
that substantial justice would be done in granting the variance.
II. Adequate Record
Next, the abutters argue that the trial court failed to provide an adequate
basis for appellate review of its decision. Specifically, the abutters argue that,
under RSA 491:15 (1997), the trial court’s order was inadequate because the
court failed to rule on the proposed findings and rulings and failed to address
critical legal and factual issues in its narrative order. We disagree.
RSA 491:15 provides: “The court . . . shall, if either party requests it,
give his decision in writing, stating the facts found and his rulings of law,
which shall be filed and recorded.” In interpreting RSA 491:15, we have held
that
although a superior court justice sitting without a jury is generally
under no obligation to make findings and rulings in support of a
decree unless a party asks for them, when either party does
request them, RSA 491:15 requires a statement of facts and legal
rulings in jury-waived and non-jury cases. The trial judge in such
a case need not respond expressly to every specific request filed by
a party, but the court is obligated to make findings of the basic or
essential facts that are sufficient to support the ultimate decision.
This may be done in the narrative form, and the essential rulings
of law may be likewise explained.
Magrauth v. Magrauth, 136 N.H. 757, 760 (1993) (quotation, brackets and
ellipses omitted).
Here, the trial court made a narrative order setting forth the relevant
facts, the standard of review and the applicable law for granting variances. The
order reviewed the minutes of the ZBA’s meetings and discussed the evidence
presented on each of the requirements for a variance. The court then
concluded that because the record supports the findings on all the pertinent
factors, the ZBA’s decision was both reasonable and lawful.
10
The trial court’s order sets forth both sufficient findings of fact and
essential rulings of law to support the ultimate decision. See id. Although the
trial court did not rule on the abutters’ proposed findings and rulings, “the trial
judge . . . need not respond expressly to every specific request filed by a party.”
Id. Accordingly, the trial court did not fail to provide an adequate basis for
appellate review of its decision.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
11