THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
State Board of Education
No. 2003-667
APPEAL OF HOPKINTON SCHOOL DISTRICT
(New Hampshire State Board of Education)
Argued: September 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: November 18, 2004
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Russell F. Hilliard and Lauren S. Irwin on the brief, and Mr. Hilliard
orally), for the petitioner.
Wiggin & Nourie, PA, of Manchester (Stephanie Bray on the brief), and Greenberg Traurig, LLP, of Boston,
Massachusetts (Courtney B. Pillsbury on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
Duggan, J. This case concerns the non-renewal of the contract of the respondent, Mary Beth Stevens, as
principal of the Maple Street School in Hopkinton. The petitioner, Hopkinton School District (district), seeks
review of the State Board of Education’s (board) decision finding that there was "bias and/or the appearance of
bias" in the Hopkinton School Board’s (HSB) decision affirming the superintendent’s recommendation for non-
renewal of Stevens’ contract. We vacate and remand.
The record supports the following facts. In 1996, Stevens began serving as the principal of the Maple Street
School. During the 1998-1999 school year, problems arose involving Stevens’ administration of the school.
Although Stevens’ evaluation that school year was basically favorable, Superintendent Richard Ayers noted the
need for an action plan at the Maple Street School to address his concerns, which included Stevens’
communication skills and the lack of a fully developed curriculum.
At the same time, Ayers received evaluations from the HSB that noted concern with the Maple Street School
leadership. The HSB directed Ayers to identify the problems and propose solutions for the school, including an
HSB-approved action plan.
During the 2000-2001 school year, Ayers prepared an action plan for Stevens. In February 2001, Stevens
received an unfavorable evaluation that again noted problems in the areas of communication and curriculum
development, among others. On April 4, 2001, Ayers advised Stevens that soon she would be presented with an
action plan designed to give her concrete goals that she must meet in order to rectify the problems at Maple
Street School.
On April 13, 2001, Stevens attended a meeting with Ayers, Peggy McAllister, executive director of the New
Hampshire Association of School Principals, and Edward Kaplan, chairman of the HSB. At the meeting, Ayers
presented the action plan to Stevens. Ayers indicated to Stevens that full implementation of the action plan
would be necessary for her to succeed as principal of Maple Street School.
Over the next school year, Ayers was concerned with Stevens’ failure to meet the goals set forth in the action
plan. On March 30, 2002, Ayers formally advised Stevens that her contract would not be renewed for the
following year. One of the primary reasons he cited for not renewing her contract was her non-completion of the
action plan.
Pursuant to RSA 189:14-a (Supp. 2004), Stevens requested a letter of reasons and a hearing from the HSB in the
matter of her non-renewal. On May 16, 2002, after a public hearing, the HSB affirmed Ayers’ recommendation
for non-renewal.
Stevens appealed to the board, claiming that the HSB was biased against her and she therefore was deprived of a
fair hearing. Specifically, Stevens claimed that the HSB’s alleged involvement in formulating and administering
the action plan, as well as certain alleged incidents suggesting that the HSB was pressuring Ayers to "get rid of
[her]," demonstrated that the HSB was biased.
The board appointed a hearing officer to determine the standard of bias to be applied and make a
recommendation on whether there was bias. At the conclusion of a full evidentiary hearing, the hearing officer’s
recommendation stated, in part:
In this case, the evidence demonstrates that sufficient pre-hearing circumstances existed
which raised the spectre of unfairness. Of considerable concern is the involvement of
the HSB chair in a meeting between Superintendent Ayers and [Stevens]; even
assuming minimal participation [of] Mr. Kaplan and the altruistic purpose to which he
attributed his presence. . . .
The totality of circumstances in this case created sufficient risk of unfairness and
prejudgment which could not likely be cured, even acknowledging the HSB’s attempts
to appear impartial and to afford [Stevens] with a full and fair hearing.
The board sustained the findings and conclusions of the hearing officer, holding that
there was "bias and/or appearance of bias" by the HSB in hearing Stevens’ appeal,
entitling her to a new hearing before an impartial tribunal. This appeal followed.
We will not overturn the board’s decision absent an error of law unless we are satisfied,
by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Morrill, 145 N.H. 692, 695 (2001); see RSA 541:13 (1997).
The party seeking to set aside the board’s order bears the burden of demonstrating that
it is clearly unreasonable or unlawful. Morrill, 145 N.H. at 695. The board’s findings of
fact are considered to be prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id.
On appeal, the district argues that the board erred as a matter of law by applying the
wrong standard for determining bias in a non-renewal hearing. Specifically, the district
contends that a showing of actual bias is required. We agree.
We previously have addressed the bias standard applied to a school board conducting a
non-renewal hearing under RSA 189:14-a. Farrelly v. Timberlane Regional School
Dist., 114 N.H. 560, 563-64 (1974). In Farrelly, we declined to apply the juror standard
for bias because "no school board would be qualified to act as decision-maker under
RSA 189:14-a if the [juror standards] were applied and the decision would thus be
surrendered to a body less familiar with relevant considerations and not responsible
under state and local law for making these decisions." Id. at 564 (quotation omitted).
Although we did not squarely address the bias standard that should apply to local
school boards in non-renewal hearings, we concluded that the alleged denial of due
process that resulted from the school board’s prior involvement was "unsupported by
any showing of actual bias or prejudice." Id. at 565.
Other courts that have addressed this issue require a showing of actual bias. See
O’Connell v. School Dist. of Springfield, 830 S.W.2d 410, 418 (Mo. 1992) (en banc)
(recognizing that "[t]he law is well-settled that the school board for the district that
initiates charges against the teacher may also conduct the hearing, absent actual bias or
prejudice"). In Spradlin v. Board of Trustees Pascagoula School District, for example,
the entire school board had participated in a pre-hearing investigation of a teacher.
Spradlin v. Bd. of Tr. Pascagoula Sch. D., 515 So. 2d 893, 896-97 (Miss. 1987).
Nonetheless, the Mississippi Supreme Court affirmed the teacher’s dismissal, noting
that "absent a showing of either personal animosity, personal stake or financial stake in
the decision," the board’s involvement in the events preceding the termination was not
enough to "overcome the presumption of honesty and integrity of board members in
conducting the hearing and rendering the decision." Id. at 898.
We have acknowledged, as have other courts, the practical reality of the role of local
school boards. See, e.g., Hortonville Dist. v. Hortonville Ed. Assn., 426 U.S. 482, 495-
96 (1976); Petrowski v. Norwich Free Academy, 506 A.2d 139, 145 (Conn. 1986),
appeal dismissed, 479 U.S. 802 (1986); Farrelly, 114 N.H. at 564-65. "Local
governments and school boards would be seriously handicapped if any conceivable
interest, no matter how remote and speculative, would require the disqualification of a
public official." Petrowski, 506 A.2d at 145 (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we hold
that a school board may conduct a non-renewal hearing, absent a showing of actual bias
or prejudice. To hold otherwise would disregard the intent of the legislature in
providing a statutory framework for non-renewal proceedings complete with hearings
at both local and State levels, including the local school board. See Farrelly, 114 N.H.
at 564.
Here, the hearing officer concluded that there was a "risk of unfairness and
prejudgment" in the HSB’s non-renewal hearing. The board agreed that there was "bias
and/or [an] appearance of bias." In light of our adoption of the actual bias standard, we
vacate the board’s ruling and remand for application of the standard set forth today. Cf.
Verizon New England v. City of Rochester, 151 N.H. ___, ___, 855 A.2d 497, 304
(2004) (remanding for application of test by the trial court in the first instance).
To assist the board in applying the actual bias standard on remand, we provide the
following guidance to the board. The board should apply the presumption that the HSB,
serving in an adjudicatory capacity, is "presumed to be of conscience and capable of
reaching a just and fair result." Petition of Grimm, 138 N.H. 42, 52 (1993). In addition,
the board must find that there was more than prior involvement of Kaplan or the HSB
to bar the HSB from conducting the hearing on actual bias grounds. See Farrelly, 114
N.H. at 565. Compare Crane v. Mitchell County U.S.D. No. 273, 652 P.2d 205, 214
(Kan. 1982) (superseded by statute on other grounds) ("[T]he mere fact a school board
may make a prior decision to dismiss a teacher does not render it incapable of providing
the teacher with a subsequent hearing fully complying with due process.") with Riter v.
Woonsocket School Dist. No. 55-4, 504 N.W.2d 572, 575-76 (S.D. 1993) (finding
actual bias where, among other considerations, a position from which the coach was
being terminated had been offered to another person prior to the hearing).
The board may examine the entire written record in this case and accept, reject or
modify the hearing officer’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. See Appeal of
Dell, 140 N.H. 484, 493 (1995). When an administrative agency rejects a hearing
officer’s advisory decision, it must adequately explain the grounds for its decision and
fully set out the agency’s decision based upon an independent examination of the
record. Id. In general, the board may resolve evidentiary conflicts by using its own
expertise and technical judgment in evaluating opinion evidence contained in the
record. Id. at 496. This procedure is not proper, however, "where the board elects to
make factual determinations as a hearing panel and disposition turns on the credibility
of the witnesses’ testimony." Id. at 495 (quotation and ellipsis omitted); see also
Grimm, 138 N.H. at 42. When the resolution of disputed facts depends upon the fact
finder’s assessment of witnesses’ credibility, as shown by their demeanor or conduct at
a hearing, all members of the hearing panel acting as fact finders must be present for
the testimony. Dell, 140 N.H. at 496.
The board’s discussion focused primarily on McAllister’s testimony before the hearing
officer. This testimony included a description of a telephone conversation between
McAllister and Ayers in the spring of 2001 wherein Ayers allegedly stated that the HSB
said that the renewal of his own contract depended upon him "get[ting] rid of" Stevens.
Ayers, however, did not recall that specific exchange and Kaplan testified that he had
not made such a representation to Ayers. The hearing officer discussed the inconsistent
testimony but declined to make any factual findings regarding the statements or their
credibility, nor did her recommendation to the board rely upon the testimony. In
applying the standard set forth above, the board may consider these statements as part
of the written record but may not make factual determinations that depend upon the
credibility of the witnesses’ statements. See Dell, 140 N.H. at 495-96.
We vacate and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.