THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord District Court
No. 2003-152
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID RENO
Argued: November 12, 2003
Opinion Issued: January 26, 2004
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the
State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant, David Reno, appeals his conviction for operating after suspension. See RSA
263:64 (1993) (amended 2002).
He challenges an order of the Concord District Court (Sullivan, J.) denying his motion to suppress evidence
obtained from the stop of his vehicle on February 14, 2002. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On the evening of February 14, 2002, a Concord police dispatcher
relayed a report of a possible driving while intoxicated offense. The dispatcher stated that the vehicle, with New
Hampshire license plate 1406184, had just left Wal-Mart and that the subject apparently smelled of alcohol. The
dispatcher stated that the given license number "comes back on an ’88 Mercury Cougar, color (unintelligible)."
After relaying the direction the subject had reportedly taken out of Wal-Mart, the dispatcher stated: "New
Hampshire 1406184, and it should be operated by a David Reno. I just checked; he is under suspension." After
hearing the dispatch, Concord Police Officer Miguel Cebollero saw the defendant’s vehicle pass him and later
stopped the defendant for operating after suspension.
Before the trial court, the defendant moved to suppress evidence obtained from the stop of his vehicle, arguing
that the stop was made without reasonable suspicion that he had committed a crime. See, e.g., State v. Hight, 146
N.H. 746, 748 (2001) (officer making investigatory stop must have reasonable suspicion that the "person
stopped has been, is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal activity" (quotation omitted)). The trial court denied
the motion, finding State v. Richter, 145 N.H. 640 (2000), controlling. On appeal, the defendant argues that "
[b]ecause Richter is inapplicable, and the anonymous tip Cebollero relied upon to effect the stop was legally
insufficient, the stop violated Reno’s [State and federal] constitutional right[s] to be free from unreasonable
searches and seizures." We first address the defendant’s claims under our State Constitution, and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231, 233 (1983).
In Richter, we held that when an officer observes a vehicle that is determined to be registered to an owner with a
suspended license, the officer, having observed nothing to indicate the driver is not the owner, may reasonably
infer that the driver is the owner. Richter, 145 N.H. at 641-42. We further held that because "[s]uch an inference
[gives] rise to a reasonable suspicion that the driver [is] committing a violation of RSA 263:64," the officer may
"initiate[] a traffic stop to investigate whether the [driver is] driving his vehicle in violation of the law." Id. at
642.
The defendant argues that this case differs from Richter because the officer did not know that the registered
owner of the car was under suspension. Rather, the defendant argues, the officer knew that a person named
David Reno had a suspended license, but did not know whether Reno was the registered owner of the car. The
trial court, however, found that Cebollero "learned that the registered owner was under suspension." "We defer
to the factual findings of the trial court on the events leading up to the stop, unless those findings are clearly
erroneous . . . ." Id. at 641 (quotation omitted). The validity of such stops, however, is a matter of de novo
review. See id.
The dispatcher immediately preceded the disclosure of Reno’s name with a recitation of the vehicle’s plate
number. The trial court could have reasonably inferred that the dispatcher had run the plate number and
discovered that the car was registered to David Reno. Based upon the dispatcher’s statement, "I just checked;
[Reno] is under suspension," the court could also have reasonably inferred that the dispatcher then ran a check
on Reno and determined that he had a suspended license. Thus, the court’s conclusion that Cebollero knew the
registered owner was under suspension is not clearly erroneous, and, under Richter, Cebollero had sufficient
information to support a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was committing a crime. See id. at 641-42.
We need not address the merits of the defendant’s arguments regarding the sufficiency of the anonymous tip,
because we disagree with the defendant’s assertion that "[s]ince the information Cebollero had before stopping
Reno’s car was based solely on an anonymous tip from an informant, the law governing anonymous tips
applies." As noted above, the trial court could reasonably have found that the information regarding the
registered owner of the car and his suspension came not from the informant but from the dispatcher’s check of
the vehicle’s plate number. We recognized in Richter the authority of police to run computer checks of passing
vehicle licenses, without suspicion of criminal conduct. Id. at 640-41. Such checks are not searches under either
the Fourth Amendment to the Federal Constitution or Part I, Article 19 of our State Constitution. Id. at 641.
Thus, the officer lawfully obtained all the information needed to make a valid stop without relying on the
informant. Because the Federal Constitution affords no greater protection to the defendant under these
circumstances than does our State Constitution, see Richter, 145 N.H. at 641; Olabisiomotosho v. City of
Houston, 185 F.3d 521, 529 (5th Cir. 1999) (no privacy interest in license plate number), we reach the same
result under the Federal Constitution as under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred; BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned
under RSA 490:3, concurred.