THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2003-432
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
FRANCIS KEPPLE
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: January 24, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karen A. Gorham, attorney, on the brief
and orally), for the State.
Duncan J. MacCallum, of Portsmouth, by brief and orally, for the
defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a jury trial, the defendant, Francis Kepple, was
convicted of two counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault, RSA 632-A:2,
I(i), (j) (1996) (amended 2003), one count of criminal solicitation, RSA 629:2
(Supp. 2004), and one count of endangering the welfare of a child, RSA 639:3
(1996) (amended 2002, 2003). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court
(Hollman, J.) erroneously denied his motion to suppress a tape recording of a
conversation between him and the victim. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In July 2001, the
defendant invited the fifteen-year-old victim to earn some money by helping
him clean a house in Raymond where he was doing maintenance work. Shortly
after they arrived at the house, the defendant supplied the victim with vodka
and Pepsi. After drinking some of the vodka and eating a sandwich, the victim
began to feel “really sick.” The defendant suggested that she should lie down
on a bed. When she did so, he sat down next to her and started rubbing her
stomach. The defendant then removed the victim’s clothing and performed oral
sex on her. Afterward, the defendant began masturbating and asked the victim
if she wanted to perform oral sex on him. At that point, the victim “realized
what was going on,” put on her clothes and left.
Eventually, the victim disclosed these events to the Raymond police. The
victim and her parents consented to, and the attorney general’s office
authorized, the recording of a conversation between the victim and the
defendant as a one-party intercept under RSA 570-A:2, II(d) (2001) to
investigate the crime of aggravated felonious sexual assault. During the
conversation, the defendant made statements acknowledging his responsibility
for the assault.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to suppress the tape recording of his
conversation with the victim, arguing that the New Hampshire Wiretapping and
Eavesdropping statute, RSA ch. 570-A (2001 & Supp. 2004), is
unconstitutional on its face and as applied to the facts of this case because it
purports to authorize electronic surveillance for offenses that are not
specifically enumerated in the federal wiretapping statute, Title III of the
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (Title III). See 18 U.S.C. §
2516(2) (2000). Additionally, the defendant argued that the State failed to
obtain judicial authorization under RSA 570-A:8 to use the recording to
support the charges brought subsequent to the intercept that were not
enumerated in the one-party intercept memorandum.
The trial court found that the offenses enumerated in RSA chapter 570-A
fell within the general category of “other crime[s] dangerous to life, limb, or
property” authorized in Title III and thus the State statute is not
unconstitutional on its face. Furthermore, the trial court found that the
alleged sexual assault in this case involved danger to the victim’s life and thus
the intercept was authorized under Title III. Finally, the trial court found that
the State did not violate RSA 570-A:8 because the evidence to support the
criminal solicitation and endangering the welfare of a child indictments came
from sources other than the one-party intercept. The tape recording was
played for the jury and admitted as evidence at trial.
The defendant raises three issues on appeal. First, he argues that the
State wiretapping statute, RSA chapter 570-A, violates the Supremacy Clause
of the Federal Constitution because it authorizes electronic surveillance for
offenses that are not specifically enumerated in Title III. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 2516(2). Second, he argues that the one-party intercept in this case was
2
unlawful under Title III because the alleged aggravated felonious sexual assault
charge did not involve any danger to the victim’s life, limb or property. See id.
Third, he argues that the trial court should have suppressed the tape recording
because the State gathered evidence for offenses not designated by the
authorization and failed to apply for judicial approval to use the recording
during the trial as is required under RSA 570-A:8.
The State argues that because Title III specifically excludes electronic
surveillance when one party consents to the recording, the federal limitations
regarding enumerated offenses are inapplicable here. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 2511(2)(c) (2000). The State further contends that post-interception approval
to use the recording was not required because the information obtained was
limited to the aggravated felonious sexual assault offense enumerated in the
authorization. We agree with the State.
First, the defendant argues that the State statute violates the Supremacy
Clause of the Federal Constitution because it authorizes wiretapping in
circumstances that are not permitted under federal law. Under the Supremacy
Clause, state law is preempted when: “(1) Congress expresses an intent to
displace state law; (2) Congress implicitly supplants state law by granting
exclusive regulatory power in a particular field to the federal government; or (3)
state and federal law actually conflict.” Koor Communication v. City of
Lebanon, 148 N.H. 618, 620 (2002) (quotation omitted). The defendant
contends that the State statute conflicts with federal law because it authorizes
wiretapping to investigate crimes that are not enumerated in the federal
statute. Compare 18 U.S.C. § 2516(2) with RSA 570-A:7. Because the
constitutionality of a statute involves a question of law, we review the trial
court’s determination de novo. State v. Bortner, 150 N.H. 504, 510 (2004).
Title III permits interception of wire, oral or electronic communications
by law enforcement officers when it may provide evidence of certain
enumerated offenses or other crimes “dangerous to life, limb, or property” and
punishable by imprisonment for more than one year. 18 U.S.C. § 2516(2). The
federal statutory scheme provides an exception, however, for one-party
intercepts:
It shall not be unlawful under this chapter for a person acting
under color of law to intercept a wire, oral, or electronic
communication, where such person is a party to the
communication or one of the parties to the communication has
given prior consent to such interception.
18 U.S.C. § 2511(2)(c). Thus, communications in which one party consents to
have the conversation recorded are not protected from interception under Title
III. Griggs-Ryan v. Smith, 904 F.2d 112, 116 (1st Cir. 1990).
3
“It is well accepted that Congress’ wiretapping statute was not an
attempt to occupy the field, but merely an attempt to establish minimum
standards.” Whitaker v. Garcetti, 291 F. Supp. 2d 1132, 1142 (C.D. Cal.
2003). We have recognized that RSA chapter 570-A is more stringent than its
federal counterpart, providing more protection for the individual’s right to
privacy. State v. Ayers, 118 N.H. 90, 91 (1978) (superseded by statute on other
grounds). Under RSA 570-A:2, a law enforcement officer may intercept oral
communications when one of the parties has given prior consent to the
interception, provided that the attorney general’s office determines that there is
reasonable suspicion that evidence of criminal conduct will be derived from the
interception. RSA 570-A:2, II(d); see, e.g., State v. Conant, 139 N.H. 728, 729-
30 (1995). Thus, the State statute does not conflict with federal law, but rather
provides greater protection of individual rights because it requires
authorization from the attorney general prior to conducting the one-party
intercept.
Next, the defendant argues that the intercept violated federal law
because aggravated felonious sexual assault is not one of the enumerated
offenses under Title III and, in this case, did not involve danger to the victim’s
life, limb or property. See 18 U.S.C. § 2516(2). This argument assumes the
applicability of Title III to one-party consent interceptions. Because Title III
explicitly exempts one-party interceptions from the statutory scheme, we hold
that the federal law does not apply to the interception in this case. See 18
U.S.C. § 2511(2)(c). When the State seeks to introduce evidence obtained by a
one-party consent interception, our statutory inquiry is limited to whether
there has been compliance with RSA chapter 570-A.
Finally, the defendant argues that the State failed to comply with
statutory procedure for using and disclosing the contents of the one-party
intercept. See RSA 570-A:8, V. The police sought and obtained the
authorization for the one-party intercept from the attorney general’s office to
investigate the charge of aggravated felonious sexual assault. See RSA 570-
A:7. The defendant argues that the State also used the contents of the
intercept to indict and convict the defendant on the other offenses charged;
namely, criminal solicitation and endangering the welfare of a child. Under
RSA 570-A:8, when the police intercept communications relating to offenses
other than those specified in the order of authorization, the police must submit
a subsequent application to a judge for approval before disclosing the contents
of the communication at trial. RSA 570-A:8, V.
Even assuming that the authorization requirement under RSA 570-A:8
applies to one-party intercepts, the interception here did not gather any
evidence of either criminal solicitation or endangering the welfare of a child.
During the taped conversation, the defendant acknowledged that he was
4
attracted to the victim and took advantage of her. These statements related to
the aggravated felonious sexual assault charge, for which the interception was
authorized. There were no references during the conversation to the victim’s
consumption of alcohol or the defendant’s solicitation of oral sex, which were
the bases for the other indictments. We thus reject the defendant’s argument
that the authorization violated RSA 570-A:8, V.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s motion to suppress the tape recording.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5