THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2003-485
GGP STEEPLEGATE, INC.
v.
CITY OF CONCORD
Argued: February 11, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 25, 2004
Murphy & Michaels, LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Anthony M. Ambriano on brief and orally), for the
petitioner.
Paul F. Cavanaugh, city solicitor, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the respondent.
Nadeau, J. The petitioner, GGP Steeplegate, Inc. (Steeplegate), appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) granting the motion of the respondent, City of Concord (city), to dismiss Steeplegate’s petition
for real estate tax abatement for lack of jurisdiction. See RSA 76:17 (2003). We reverse and remand.
On April 1, 2001, Steeplegate owned a shopping mall located in Concord. Using the cost approach to valuation,
the city appraised Steeplegate’s real property and accordingly assessed taxes. On February 21, 2002, Steeplegate
timely filed a petition for tax abatement with the city’s board of assessors (assessors). In filing its application,
Steeplegate utilized the form provided by the board of tax and land appeals (BTLA) pursuant to RSA 76:16, III
(2003). Section E of the application instructs the applicant to explain the reasons why it should be entitled to an
abatement:
An abatement may be granted for "good cause shown." Generally, this means a
disproportionate assessment or an assessment based on an error. It can also include other
reasons. This form is based on a disproportionate or erroneous assessment. If your request is
based on other reasons, please state them with specificity. If the application is based on a
disproportionate assessment, the taxpayer has the burden to prove disproportionality.
Therefore, state with specificity all of the reasons supporting your application. Statements
such as "taxes too high," "disproportionately assessed" or "assessment exceeds market value"
are insufficient.
Generally, specificity requires the taxpayer to present material on the following (all may not
apply):
1) physical data -- incorrect description or measurement of property;
2) market data -- the property’s value on the April 1 assessment date, supported
by comparable sales, income analysis or a professional opinion of value; and/or
3) assessment data -- the property’s assessment exceeds the general level of
assessment shown by comparing the property’s assessment with assessments on
other properties in the municipality.
When completing section E of the form, Steeplegate wrote, "Income Approach Analysis does not support
current assessment."
On March 14, 2002, the director of real estate assessment for the city informed Steeplegate that he would
recommend to the assessors that they default Steeplegate’s application because it "lack[ed] sufficient specificity
to establish the assertion that the assessment is excessive." The director provided Steeplegate with the
information necessary to cure the default and explained that once a default is issued, a taxpayer has twenty days
to cure it. Steeplegate submitted no further documentation, and on May 1, 2002, the assessors denied the
abatement application.
Pursuant to RSA 76:17, Steeplegate petitioned the superior court for tax abatement. The city filed a motion to
dismiss, which the court granted. In its order, the court upheld the assessors’ findings that Steeplegate’s
explanation was not specific, and that it did not avail itself of the opportunity to cure the application’s
deficiency. Because the assessors did not "neglect or refuse so to abate" – the statutory precursor to judicial
review – the court ruled that it lacked jurisdiction to consider the petition. RSA 76:17. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Steeplegate argues that because use of the BTLA abatement form is permissive, failing to complete it
to the satisfaction of the assessors should not preclude tax relief or subsequent review by the superior court. The
city argues that Steeplegate failed to establish "good cause" in its application. Because no good cause was
shown, the city argues that the application was not valid, and thus the assessors properly denied it. The city
contends that the superior court properly dismissed the petition for lack of jurisdiction because there was no
denial of an application to appeal. We disagree.
Because resolution of this issue requires statutory interpretation, which is a matter of law, we review the trial
court’s decision de novo. Magoon v. Thoroughgood, 148 N.H. 139, 142 (2002). In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. In the Matter of Watterworth & Watterworth, 149 N.H. 442, 445 (2003). We first examine the language
of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. Furthermore, we interpret
statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id. "Our goal is to apply statutes in
light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme." Fichtner v. Pittsley, 146 N.H. 512, 514 (2001) (quotation and citation omitted).
RSA 76:16, I (2003) permits any person aggrieved by the assessment of a tax to apply in writing to the
selectmen or assessors for abatement of the tax. Selectmen or assessors may abate any tax assessed by them for
good cause shown. RSA 76:16, I. The BTLA prescribes the abatement application form. RSA 76:16, III. RSA
76:16, IV (2003) explicitly provides, however, that "[f]ailure to use the [prescribed] form . . . shall not affect the
right to seek tax relief." (Emphasis added.) The tax abatement scheme is written to make the proceedings free
from technical and formal obstructions. Arlington Mills v. Salem, 83 N.H. 148, 154 (1927). "It should be
construed liberally, in advancement of the rule of remedial justice which it lays down." Id. (quotation omitted).
To ensure that tax abatement proceedings remain free from technical and formal obstructions, we conclude that
the threshold for properly completing an abatement application is minimal. Therefore, a taxpayer who provides a
brief explanation of the reason or reasons the taxpayer seeks an abatement remains entitled to seek tax relief.
The language of RSA 76:16, IV and our well-established rule that tax abatement proceedings remain free from
technical impediments support our conclusion that the selectmen or assessors may not deny an abatement
application solely because a taxpayer failed to provide in the application a detailed explanation why the taxpayer
is entitled to tax relief.
Here, in completing the section of the BTLA form entitled "Reasons for Abatement Application," Steeplegate
explained that under an income approach analysis, the current assessment was not supported. Steeplegate’s
application notified the assessors of its grievance and further informed them that it sought an abatement because
the income approach (rather than the cost approach utilized by the assessors) was the more appropriate method
to calculate the value of the shopping center. We find that Steeplegate’s application was valid. Therefore, the
denial of Steeplegate’s abatement application was effectively a denial of its request for an abatement.
The city next argues that the superior court lacked jurisdiction because Steeplegate’s application was dismissed
as insufficient and, thus, there was no denial of an application to appeal. The city contends the court has
jurisdiction only if the assessors neglect or refuse to abate the taxes, which did not occur here because the
application was invalid. Because we hold that the action of the assessors was a denial of the requested
abatement, the superior court has jurisdiction to review the petition. See RSA 76:17. Thus, it improperly granted
the city’s motion to dismiss. Accordingly, we reverse and remand.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.