THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2003-821
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KENDALL M. WATSON
Argued: September 14, 2004
Opinion Issued: December 10, 2004
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Craig S. Donais, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the
State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a bench trial in Superior Court (Mangones, J.), the defendant, Kendall M. Watson, was
convicted of possession of marijuana with intent to sell. See RSA 318-B:2 (2004). The sole issue on appeal is
whether the trial court erred in ruling that the defendant knowingly and voluntarily consented to the search of his
hotel room. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. At approximately 2:00 a.m. on July 28, 2001, Manchester Police Officer
Garth Hamelin observed a red Ford Focus drive into the parking lot of the Econo Lodge hotel. The car was
traveling at a high rate of speed toward the rear of the lot and narrowly missed striking a wall. Officer Hamelin
followed the car to initiate a stop for reckless operation. Manchester Police Officer Kevin Covey, who was also
in the parking lot, pulled in to assist. Officers Hamelin and Covey parked their police vehicles behind the car,
making it impossible for the car to be moved.
When Officer Hamelin arrived in the rear parking lot, the driver of the car, the defendant, had already gotten out
of the car and was walking toward the rear entrance of the hotel. Officer Hamelin ordered the defendant to stop
and he complied. Officer Hamelin asked him for his license and registration. Officer Hamelin noticed that the
defendant was "extremely nervous" and "smelled of an alcoholic beverage"; the defendant’s eyes were bloodshot
and his speech slurred. The defendant said he had consumed "four to six beers" and that he was driving his
friend, Eric Sperry, home in the car Sperry rented because Sperry was too intoxicated. Suspecting that the
defendant was intoxicated based on his demeanor, conduct and statements, Officer Hamelin administered two
field sobriety tests. The defendant performed adequately, leading Officer Hamelin to believe he was under the
influence of a narcotic or drugs, instead of alcohol. The defendant denied using drugs and orally consented to a
search of his person.
At some point during the conversation, Officer Hamelin asked the defendant why he was at the hotel. The
defendant said that he originally had planned to spend the night with his girlfriend at the hotel but she had
cancelled. The defendant said that he decided to stay at the hotel despite the cancellation because he already had
paid for the room. Officer Hamelin asked the defendant why he was staying at the hotel when, according to his
license, he lived "down the street." The defendant did not reply.
Meanwhile, Officer Covey ordered Sperry out of the car, retrieved a bag of marijuana from Sperry’s pants
pocket and placed him under arrest for possession of marijuana. After determining that Sperry had rented the car,
Officer Covey obtained Sperry’s consent to search it. In the trunk, the police found a large triple-beam scale,
three boxes of Ziploc baggies, scissors and a box of latex disposable gloves with marijuana residue on the scale
and gloves.
Officer Hamelin became concerned that there might be other individuals in the defendant’s hotel room. The
defendant was increasingly nervous, "vague with his answers," sweating, pale and shaking. Officer Hamelin
asked the defendant whether there was anyone in the room, to which the defendant replied, "No." Officer
Hamelin then asked the defendant if he would "mind if we go up and check." Officer Hamelin testified that the
defendant replied, "No. I don’t mind."
As they walked to the rear door of the building, the defendant said that he did not have a key to open the door.
Officer Hamelin reminded the defendant that he had seen a key card in the defendant’s wallet during the search
minutes before. The defendant then took his wallet out, removed the key and used it to open the door.
They walked down the hallway and got into the elevator. Officer Hamelin asked the defendant what floor his
room was on. At first, the defendant did not answer, but then said he did not know the floor. Officer Hamelin
asked again and the defendant eventually told him.
When they got to the floor, Officer Hamelin asked the defendant for his room number. The defendant did not
answer and just "stood there." According to Officer Hamelin, "He wasn’t answering my questions any more. He
wasn’t talking. He was pale white." Officer Hamelin asked, "Is someone in the room?" The defendant did not
answer. Eventually, the defendant led Officer Hamelin to the door of one of the rooms. Officer Hamelin could
hear noise coming from inside the room. The noise, which turned out to be the television, elevated Officer
Hamelin’s concerns that there were other people in the room. Officer Hamelin walked back down the hallway,
called for a back-up unit and handcuffed the defendant.
Another officer arrived to stay with Sperry in the parking lot while Officer Covey went upstairs to assist
Hamelin. Officer Hamelin, Officer Covey and the defendant went back to the door. They could still hear the
television inside, prompting Officer Hamelin to ask the defendant: "Listen. Tell me right now. Is there somebody
in that room that is going to jump out?" The defendant did not respond, but as Officer Hamelin started to open
the door, the defendant said, "You are not going to like what you see."
Officer Hamelin opened the door and entered the room. On a counter he saw three lines of a white powdery
substance and a rolled-up dollar bill. He also found a suitcase with "chunks of marijuana" and, under a
comforter, large vacuum-sealed bags containing approximately thirty-two pounds of marijuana.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in ruling that he validly consented to the search of his
hotel room. We disagree.
A voluntary consent free of duress and coercion is a recognized exception to the need for both a warrant and
probable cause. State v. Johnston, 150 N.H. 448, 453 (2004). The burden is on the State to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the consent was free, knowing and voluntary. Id. Voluntariness is a question
of fact, based on the totality of the circumstances. State v. Hastings, 137 N.H. 601, 606 (1993). We will disturb
the trial court’s finding of consent only if it is not supported by the record. State v. Hammell, 147 N.H. 313, 318
(2001).
The defendant points to five factors to argue that his consent was not voluntary: (1) the heightened scrutiny
accorded to one’s dwelling; (2) the heightened scrutiny accorded to consent given by one in police custody; (3)
the failure of the police to advise the defendant of his right to refuse consent; (4) the failure of the police to use a
written consent to search form; and (5) the defendant’s lack of cooperation with the police after consenting to the
search.
We agree with the defendant that the privacy interest in a hotel room is comparable to that of the home, see State
v. Diaz, 134 N.H. 662, 666 (1991); see also Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 96, 99 (1990) (holding that
"whether it be a hotel room, or the home of a friend," defendant’s "status as an overnight guest is alone enough"
to create a reasonable expectation of privacy), and that "the sanctity of the home is jealously guarded by a long
line of cases," Johnston, 150 N.H. at 455. We also agree that, in some situations, the fact that the defendant is in
custody may weigh heavily against a finding of valid consent, see United States v. Barnett, 989 F.2d 546, 555
(1st Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 850 (1993), and that the use of a written consent form may be an important
factor when evaluating the totality of the circumstances, see Johnston, 150 N.H. at 454. Likewise, we
acknowledge that the failure of the police to advise the defendant of his right to refuse consent may be
considered in determining the validity of his consent. State v. Hight, 146 N.H. 746, 751 (2001). Indeed, we have
previously admonished that it is good policy for police officers to advise persons that they have a right to refuse
to consent to a warrantless search. Id.
Nonetheless, our review of the record in this case reveals that these factors, either alone or in combination, do
not demonstrate that the trial judge’s finding of consent in this case is unsupported by the record. The record
shows that while they were in the parking lot, the defendant was generally cooperative with the police. He
consented to a search of his person. He submitted to field sobriety tests and, up to a point, responded to all
questions asked by the police.
The record also shows that, although the defendant was not free to leave, he had not been placed under formal
arrest. This is not a case in which consent was obtained in a post-arrest station house setting where the defendant
may have been subject to coercive influences. Cf. Barnett, 989 F.2d at 555 (recognizing that "sensitivity to the
heightened possibility of coercion is appropriate when a defendant’s consent is obtained during custody"). Nor is
this a case where the procedure used by the police to obtain consent had a "potential for abuse." See Johnston,
150 N.H. at 455 (noting potential for abuse in the knock and talk procedure). Although advising a defendant of
the right to refuse consent can be an important factor in finding that the State met its burden, see, e.g., United
States v. Marshall, 348 F.3d 281, 286 (1st Cir. 2003), the failure to so warn the defendant in the circumstances
here is not dispositive.
Here, the police made a straightforward request of the defendant to go upstairs and "check" his room. Officer
Hamelin testified that the defendant replied, "No. I don’t mind." The defendant does not argue that the request
was preceded by an illegal search or deceptive activity and there is no evidence in the record that the police
threatened the defendant.
Although the defendant argues that his lack of cooperation after he gave consent vitiated his consent, we agree
with the trial judge that "[w]hile perhaps done unenthusiastically, the consent took place [and the] defendant did
not revoke his consent to the search of the hotel room." See, e.g., United States v. Cadieux, 324 F. Supp. 2d 168,
170 (D. Me. 2004) (recognizing that although consent may be revoked, the law generally requires an
unequivocal act or statement of withdrawal).
Based upon our analysis of the totality of the circumstances, we hold that the trial court did not err when it ruled
that the State met its burden of proving, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant freely,
knowingly and voluntarily consented to the search of his hotel room.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J., concurred specially; NADEAU, J., concurred
specially.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurring specially. I concur with the majority’s holding that, based upon an analysis of
the totality of the circumstances in this case, the trial court did not err in ruling that the State had met its burden
of proving that the defendant freely, knowingly and voluntarily consented to the search of his hotel room. I write
separately, however, because I disagree with the majority when it states in dicta: "We agree with the defendant
that the privacy interest in a hotel room is comparable to that of a home . . . ."
Because our standard of review in this case involves the totality of circumstances concerning the defendant’s
consent, the precise nature of his privacy interest in his hotel room is not at issue here. Indeed, I fully agree that
a "review of the record in this case reveals that these factors [including the defendant’s privacy interest in his
hotel room], either alone or in combination, do not demonstrate that the trial judge’s finding of consent in this
case is unsupported by the record." Whether the privacy interest in a hotel room is comparable to that of the
home, or diminished from it—and if so, to what extent—remains an undecided issue in this State. This case
neither requires nor lends itself to its resolution. In light of the majority’s dicta, however, I write to express my
opinion that there is a diminished expectation of privacy in a hotel or motel room from that of the home.
I fully agree that a guest in a hotel room is entitled to constitutional protection against unreasonable searches and
seizures under both the Fourth Amendment to the Federal Constitution and Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution. See, e.g., Stoner v. California, 376 U.S. 483, 490 (1964); Hoffa v. United States, 385 U.S. 293, 301
(1966). That, however, is not the end of the analysis. Instead, we must turn to Katz v. United States, 389 U.S.
347, 353 (1967), which established the "expectation of privacy" rationale as the touchstone governing the scope
of Fourth Amendment protection. See United States v. Mankani, 738 F.2d 538, 542 (2d Cir. 1984).
In State v. Goss, 150 N.H. 46 (2003), we acknowledged the reasonable expectation of privacy analysis under the
Fourth Amendment to the Federal Constitution and explicitly adopted the same under Part I, Article 19 of our
State Constitution. We stated:
Our State Constitution protects all people, their papers, their possessions and their
homes from unreasonable searches and seizures. It particularly protects people from
unreasonable police entries into their private homes, because of the heightened
expectation of privacy given to one’s dwelling. . . .
. . . .
. . . We believe the most cogent articulation of that analysis was supplied by Justice
Harlan in his concurrence in Katz . . . : "My understanding of the rule that has emerged
from prior decisions is that there is a twofold requirement, first that a person have
exhibited an actual (subjective) expectation of privacy and, second, that the expectation
be one that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable." We therefore adopt Justice
Harlan’s two-part test under Part I, Article 19.
State v. Goss, 150 N.H. 46, 48-49 (2003) (emphasis added; citations and quotations omitted).
Consequently, the majority’s dicta presumes that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable that the
expectation of privacy in a hotel or motel room is the same as that in a person’s private home. I do not share that
presumption.
[I]t is not the common hallway, entryway or passage alone that diminishes one’s
reasonable expectation of privacy in a hotel or motel room. Instead, it is the fact that
hotels, as opposed to residences, are truly transitory places. Unlike an apartment or a
room in a boarding house, hotels and motels are not ordinarily considered places where
one lives and keeps personal effects. In addition, service personnel in hotels and motels
have keys to enter and make-up the rooms, remove dishes, check air-conditioning,
heating and the like. Former occupants may even have retained a key to a hotel room. . .
.
In short, it is the transitory nature of such places, commonly understood as such, that
diminishes a person’s justifiable expectation of privacy in them. Since a hotel room is
exposed to others, it is unlike a "house," i.e., a place where one lives. Therefore, there is
an accepted loss of privacy when one occupies a public place. . . .
United States v. Mankani, 738 F.2d at 544 (citations omitted).
As understandable as the desire for privacy in an individual’s hotel or motel room may be, "it is not conclusive
of society’s willingness to recognize . . . as reasonable" that the expectation of privacy is the same as that in
one’s own home. Goss, 150 N.H. at 51 (Broderick, J., dissenting) (quotation omitted). Although most people
would probably prefer that their reasonable expectation of privacy were the same in these two places, that
expectation is not consistent with everyday life experience. See id.
Nadeau, J., concurring specially. The majority concludes that the defendant, while seized, was not in custody. In
dicta, the majority notes that "the fact that the defendant is in custody may weigh heavily against a finding of
valid consent and that the use of a written consent form may be an important factor when evaluating the totality
of the circumstances." (Citations omitted.)
I concur with the majority that the record supports the trial court’s finding of consent. Given the absence of
custody, however, I believe the majority’s dicta does not foreclose the court from holding, in a future case, that
unless the police advise a person in custody of the right to refuse consent to search, the consent is per se
involuntary.