THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2003-727
BOSTON AND MAINE CORPORATION
v.
SPRAGUE ENERGY CORPORATION
Argued: June 10, 2004
Opinion Issued: December 3, 2004
Ransmeier & Spellman Professional Corporation, of Concord (R. Matthew Cairns and John T. Alexander on the
brief, and Mr. Alexander orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie P.A., of Manchester (Thomas J. Pappas and William J. Edwards on the brief, and Mr. Pappas
orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Boston and Maine Corporation (B&M), appeals and the defendant, Sprague
Energy Corporation (Sprague), cross-appeals an order of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) concerning B&M’s
termination of licenses permitting Sprague to utilize pipes crossing over and under B&M’s railroad track. B&M
argues on appeal that the trial court erred: (1) when it ruled that Sprague’s commercial petroleum pipes may
constitute "suitable crossings or other facilities" within the meaning of RSA 373:1 (1995); (2) when it implicitly
ruled that RSA 373:1 requires a railroad to provide crossings or other facilities to benefit a private business that
purchased property on both sides of a railroad line after the line was established; (3) by ruling that RSA 373:1
may create sufficient legal authority for the taking of railroad property; and (4) by failing to rule that any taking
of B&M’s property by Sprague requires the payment of just compensation. For its part, Sprague argues on cross-
appeal that the trial court erred: (1) in denying its motion for summary judgment and ruling that B&M’s claims
regarding the removal of its railroad track by Sprague were governed by the twenty-year statute of limitations
for the recovery of real estate under RSA 508:2 (1997); and (2) in ruling that Sprague’s underground pipelines
constitute an unreasonable use, and exceeded the scope, of Sprague’s express easement granted in 1873 for a
grade crossing. We affirm.
I
The record supports the following facts. B&M is a railroad company that owns a strip of real estate, known as
the Newington Branch, which extends approximately 3.5 miles from Portsmouth to Newington and consists of
railroad track, track bed and associated properties and structures. Sprague markets energy products, including
gasoline, natural gas and oil. It owns property and related facilities along the Newington Branch, including
petroleum holding tanks and pipelines at the Gosling Road Terminal, the Avery Lane Terminal and the River
Road Terminal.
Between approximately 1950 and 2000, Sprague and its predecessors entered into several license agreements
with B&M for the use of B&M’s property for vehicle crossings, underground water and fuel pipes, fuel pipes
over pipe bridges and a railroad side track. The agreements provided that they could be terminated at will by
either party. Sprague’s Avery Lane Terminal is a commercial fuel and petroleum facility with docks located on
the Piscataqua River where Sprague receives gasoline, among other products, that is shipped by barge. The
gasoline is unloaded and piped across Sprague’s property to loading racks where it is loaded into trucks and
delivered to service stations. Sprague’s pipes run from the docks to the loading racks and pass beneath B&M’s
Newington Branch. Sprague owns the property on both sides of the Newington Branch at its Avery Lane
Terminal. The Newington Branch separates Sprague’s docks and storage tanks from the Spaulding Turnpike.
In January 2001, an internal review of B&M properties suggested to B&M management that Sprague had
modified, installed, relocated or overburdened certain appurtenances on the Newington Branch in violation of
the applicable license agreements. B&M proceeded to terminate the agreements and offered to negotiate new
arrangements with Sprague for any licenses it wanted to continue. When no new agreements were negotiated,
B&M filed suit seeking an injunction to prevent Sprague from any unlicensed and unauthorized occupation and
use of B&M’s property, to require Sprague to remove certain appurtenances, and to require Sprague to replace
and restore railroad track it had allegedly removed in violation of a 1973 deed.
Sprague counterclaimed, seeking a declaration that RSA 373:1 imposed a duty upon B&M to provide suitable
crossings over and under its track for the accommodation of Sprague’s pipelines and other facilities at the Avery
Lane Terminal and a declaration that Sprague’s easement for a vehicular grade crossing at Avery Lane also
covered Sprague’s seven underground pipes.
Following a four-day bench trial the court ruled, among other things, that the statutory purpose of RSA 373:1 is
to aid landowners with land divided by a railroad and that the term "facilities" may include underground pipes
such as those at Avery Lane. The court also ruled that Sprague’s seven underground pipes were not authorized
by the grade crossing easement granted in 1873. The court agreed with B&M that Sprague’s removal of the
railroad track was in violation of the 1973 deed and ordered Sprague to restore the track or compensate B&M for
doing so.
II
The first issue we address is whether the trial court erred when it held that Sprague’s commercial petroleum
pipes may constitute "suitable facilities" within the meaning of RSA 373:1. This statute provides that "[i]t shall
be the duty of every railroad to provide . . . suitable gates, crossings, cattle passes and other facilities for the
accommodation of persons whose lands are divided, or are separated from a highway, by a railroad." RSA 371:1.
B&M argues that the statute delineates three specific "facilities" that a railroad must provide to persons whose
lands are separated from a highway by a rail line – gates, crossings and cattle passes – and that Sprague’s
underground pipes do not fit within any of those categories. Sprague argues that limiting RSA 373:1 as B&M
suggests would render the words "other facilities" meaningless and that the term is "a catchall phrase that is
intended to include various types of crossings, such as those that go over or under railroad tracks, which
provides the statute with flexibility to change with changing circumstances and times."
"In matters of statutory interpretation, this court is the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent." Nilsson v.
Bierman, 150 N.H. 393, 395 (2003). "We begin by examining the language of the statute and ascribing the plain
and ordinary meanings to the words the legislature used." Id.
"[I]t is settled that a landowner whose land is cut off from a highway by a railroad has the right to a suitable
crossing where a reasonable necessity therefor is demonstrated." Patterson v. Boston & Maine R.R., 102 N.H.
387, 389 (1960) (quotation and citation omitted). "[A] suitable crossing is one reasonably safe and convenient
for the purpose at a location to be determined according to the use made of the land, its physical characteristics,
and the practicability and comparative expense of the different modes of crossing, whether by a bridge over the
road, a crossing at grade, or a pass under it." Id. (quotations omitted). "The standard to be applied in determining
the duty of a railroad under RSA 371:1 is that of the reasonable necessity for a crossing. . . ." Appeal of
Meserve, 120 N.H. 461, 463 (1980).
The trial court noted that the word "pipe" or "pipeline" is not technically included in the wording of RSA 373:1.
Nevertheless, it interpreted "the broad terms ‘suitable . . . crossings . . . and other facilities’ to include pipelines
that came into existence after 1852," when the statute was enacted. The trial court reasoned that "RSA 371:1’s
spirit and intent is to allow a landowner access to their [sic] own property and the . . . conclusion that the seven
underground pipes may constitute a form of ‘suitable crossings’ and/or ‘other facilities’ is consistent with this
intent." In reaching this conclusion, the trial court looked to uncontroverted testimony from a representative of
the New Hampshire Department of Transportation, Bureau of Rail Transit, that the term "facilities" includes
underground pipes. The court also relied upon evidence that for the past fifty years, B&M has consistently
referred to pipes as "facilities" in its license agreements.
We hold that the general term "other facilities" as used in the statute encompasses underground pipes. See
Faulkner v. Keene, 85 N.H. 147, 158 (1931) (legislative enactments apply alike to persons, subjects and business
within their general purview and scope existent at the time of the enactments and to those coming into existence
subsequent to their passage). The language of RSA 373:1 is straightforward and its intent is plain: to
accommodate landowners whose property is divided or separated from a highway by a railroad. Here, Sprague’s
property is separated from the Spaulding Turnpike by B&M’s railroad, and its underground pipes constitute a
suitable crossing that is reasonably necessary for the conduct of its business. We reject B&M’s argument that the
provisions of RSA 373:1 do not apply because Sprague bought the property at issue after the railroad was
already established. We fail to see a difference whether the property is separated from a highway by a railroad
before or after its purchase. In either case, the statute’s requirements apply.
III
B&M argues that the trial court erred by "failing to find" that RSA 373:1 "does not create sufficient legal
authority for the taking of railroad property" and "by failing to rule" that "any taking of B&M’s property requires
the payment of just compensation, which should be based on fair market value." Accordingly, B&M argues that
RSA 373:1 as applied by the trial court amounts to an unconstitutional taking for which B&M is entitled to just
compensation. We hold that this issue was not properly preserved for appeal.
B&M’s complaint before the trial court sought: an injunction to prevent Sprague from any unlicensed and
unauthorized occupation and use of B&M’s property; an order requiring Sprague to remove certain
appurtenances; an order requiring Sprague to replace and restore railroad track it had allegedly removed in
violation of a 1973 deed; and damages for trespass, unjust enrichment and breach of contract. The complaint did
not raise the issue of a taking of private property without just compensation or the constitutionality of RSA
373:1. During the four-day bench trial there was no argument presented concerning the constitutionality of the
statute or any evidence submitted as to specific damages regarding valuation or fair market value. In addition,
there is nothing in the record to indicate that this issue was raised in a motion for reconsideration following the
trial court’s order on the merits.
B&M made general reference to taking issues in four of its fifty-six requests for rulings of law. The court’s order
on the merits carefully and thoroughly addressed issues concerning termination of the license agreements,
interpretation of the 1873 easement, application of RSA 373:1, operation of the 1973 deed, and damages. At the
end of the order, the court stated that "[b]oth parties here have submitted requests for findings of fact and rulings
of law. The Court’s findings and rulings are embodied in its narrative discussion above. Therefore, each party’s
requests are GRANTED to the extent that they are consistent with this order; otherwise, they are DENIED."
Although B&M’s requests for rulings of law make broad passing reference to the prohibition against taking
private property without just compensation, the record before us reveals that B&M made no specific arguments
to the trial court on this issue. Passing reference, otherwise ignored, does not preserve an issue on appeal. See In
re Estate of Leonard, 128 N.H. 407, 409 (1986); N.H. Dep’t of Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H. 676, 679 (2002)
(we will not review constitutional issues on appeal that were not presented below).
IV
Sprague argues that the trial court erred by ruling that its pipes were not a reasonable use of an express easement
it was granted in 1873. The relevant portion of the so-called 1873 Rollins deed states that "said Railroad
Company are [sic] to build and maintain a grade crossing near my house." The trial court concluded that
Sprague’s seven underground pipes at the Avery Lane grade crossing were not a reasonable use or extension of
Sprague’s express easement for the grade crossing granted pursuant to this deed. Sprague contends that its pipes
underneath the railroad track are "simply a reasonable and foreseeable extension of the scope of the original
easement, in light of the industrial evolution of the surrounding property." We address this issue separately from
the statutory analysis under RSA 373:1 in section II above. Sprague’s statutory rights are independent of its
rights under the easement.
In determining permissible use of an easement, courts are guided by the principle of "reasonable use." Downing
House Realty v. Hampe, 127 N.H. 92, 96 (1985). An enlargement of use is permissible if "the change of a use is
a normal development from conditions existing at the time of the grant, such as an increased volume of traffic."
Id. Reasonable use is a question of fact for the trial court. Id. "We will not overturn the factual findings of the
trial court . . . when they are supported by the evidence." Arcidi v. Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 702 (2004).
The owner of an easement "cannot materially increase the burden of it upon the servient estate, nor impose a
new or additional burden thereon." Crocker v. Canaan College, 110 N.H. 384, 387 (1970). "The test to determine
the right to make a particular alteration is whether the alteration is so substantial as to result in the creation and
substitution of a different servitude from that which previously existed." Id. (quotation omitted); see, e.g.,
Nadeau v. Town of Durham, 129 N.H. 663, 668 (1987) (reasonable use did not support expansion of right-of-
way from serving two single-family dwellings and two small apartments to one serving fourteen housing units);
Delaney v. Gurrieri, 122 N.H. 819, 822 (1982) (reasonable use theory did not permit defendants to cut down two
trees in easement to lake to allow boat to be hauled by vehicle rather than carried); Crocker v. Canaan College,
110 N.H. at 387-88 (expansion of sewage easement to serve 200 college students and staff nine months per year
instead of 35-guest inn two months per year properly enjoined).
In its order, the trial court reasoned that "[w]hen the easement in this case was conveyed and the uses authorized
under it set forth, its use was intended to be incidental to residential or agricultural use." Noting that the area has
been converted over time to commercial and industrial uses, the court nonetheless found that "it was neither
contemplated nor reasonably foreseeable that Rollins’ successor in title would be an energy corporation, which
would attempt to expand the use of the ‘grade crossing’ to include the installation of seven commercial
underground fuel pipes. Such an enlargement of use certainly would work to unreasonably burden B&M’s
property given the safety risks and potential liability."
We uphold the trial court’s decision. The court’s finding that the easement for a grade crossing granted in 1873
would be unreasonably burdened if it were extended to encompass seven underground pipes carrying
commercial gasoline is supported by the evidence. The change of use of the grade crossing by Sprague is not "a
normal development from conditions existing at the time of the grant." Downing House Realty, 127 N.H. at 96.
V
By deed dated December 18, 1973, B&M conveyed a 5.48 acre parcel of land located at the River Road
Terminal to Sprague’s predecessor-in-title. The deed provides in part: "Excepting from this conveyance any and
all tracks and sections of railroad track and railroad track materials located within the limits of the above-
described parcel. Said conveyance is hereby made subject to the reserved right of the grantors, their successors,
assigns and licensees, from time to time and at any and all times to use, operate, maintain, remove or retire in
place all or any part of the railroad trackage and track materials located northwest of the area marked ‘END OF
TRACK’ on plan."
In 1997 Sprague upgraded its River Road Terminal and removed about 375 feet of railroad track. B&M sought
an order requiring Sprague to replace the track or, in the alternative, compensate B&M for the removal. Sprague
filed a motion for summary judgment arguing that B&M’s claim was barred by the three-year statute of
limitations for personal actions under RSA 508:4 because the alleged removal of the track occurred more than
three years before the filing of the lawsuit. B&M argued that Sprague’s removal of the track is an assertion of
ownership rights adverse to B&M’s deeded interest in land and that an action to enforce a right to ownership is
governed by the statute of limitations for recovery of real estate, RSA 508:2.
The Superior Court (Hollman, J.) ruled in favor of B&M. The court’s order states that "B&M has asserted
sufficient facts . . . to support its argument that Sprague’s removal of B&M’s property is an ‘assertion of
ownership rights adverse to B&M’s interest in the land.’ . . . Because an assertion of ownership rights of
property is governed by RSA 508:2 and not RSA 508:4, B&M’s claim regarding removal of the property falls
within the twenty year statute of limitations time frame provided in that statute." On appeal, Sprague argues that
the court’s decision was erroneous because B&M’s claim is a personal action and thereby time-barred.
"When reviewing the denial of a motion for summary judgment, we consider the pleadings and any
accompanying affidavits, and all proper inferences drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party." Porter v. City of Manchester, 151 N.H. 30, 40 (2004). "Summary judgment will be granted
when there is no genuine issue of material fact to be decided, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law." Id.
The 1973 deed clearly exempts from the conveyance all railroad track and track materials. B&M alleged that
removal of the track bed by Sprague "significantly hindered the Railroad’s operations." We agree with the trial
court that Sprague’s removal of B&M’s track was a deliberate exercise of ownership rights adverse to B&M’s
deeded interest in the land. Railroad track installed upon the railroad’s land that is integral to the railroad’s
successful operation becomes a part of the property. Thompson v. Valley Railroad Co., 32 U.S. 68, 74-75 (1889).
B&M’s action is one to enforce a right to ownership in real property, and therefore the twenty-year limitations
period set forth in RSA 508:2 applies. See Hewes v. Bruno, 121 N.H. 32, 34 (1981). Because this evidence
discloses no genuine issue of material fact and B&M is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we affirm the
denial of summary judgment.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.