THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Durham District Court
No. 2003-191
JOSEPH MILLER
v.
SLANIA ENTERPRISES, INC.
Argued: February 5, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 15, 2004
Joanne M. Stella, of Durham, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Lynne C. Christie, of Durham, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Manchester (Elliott Berry on the brief), for The Way Home, as amicus
curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Slania Enterprises, Inc. (landlord), appeals a decision of the Durham District
Court (Larson, J.) awarding damages to the plaintiff, Joseph Miller, as a result of an illegal eviction. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The landlord entered into a lease agreement with the plaintiff and others
(tenants) for an apartment in Durham. The lease ran from June 2001 until May 25, 2002, and called for monthly
rent of $2,000. The tenants failed to pay the total rent due for April 2002 on time. The landlord brought an
eviction action for nonpayment of rent, which resulted in the issuance of a default judgment and writ of
possession on April 19, 2002.
On April 25, 2002, the plaintiff and a fellow tenant met with Tom Christie, the landlord’s representative. They
verbally agreed that the plaintiff would pay the April rent arrearage and the May rent, and in return, the tenants
would be allowed to stay in the apartment until May 25, 2002. The plaintiff gave Christie a check for $3,200 to
pay the April arrearage and the May rent, which Christie accepted and later deposited in the bank. The check
cleared the plaintiff’s bank in Illinois on April 29, 2002.
After the meeting on April 25, the tenants held a party in their apartment. The landlord believed that the party
violated the terms of the prior lease agreement, and thus violated the terms of the verbal agreement reached on
April 25. The landlord instructed the sheriff to execute the writ of possession. On April 29, the sheriff posted a
notice on the tenants’ apartment door advising them that they had forty-eight hours to move. The tenants
completed moving out of the apartment on May 1.
On May 31, the landlord issued a letter to the tenants itemizing a number of charges the landlord was making
against the tenants’ $2,000 security deposit. Because the charges exceeded $2,000, no part of the tenants’
security deposit was returned to them.
The plaintiff sued for breach of the covenant of quiet enjoyment, violation of the Consumer Protection Act,
improper security deposit deductions, and unjust enrichment. The landlord counterclaimed for damages in
excess of the security deposit, or alternatively for all of its damages under contract law. During the trial, the
plaintiff cross-examined Christie, without objection, regarding his knowledge of the provisions of RSA 540:13,
VII (Supp. 2003), which permits a landlord under certain circumstances to accept payment of rental arrearages
without creating a new tenancy. At the conclusion of the trial, plaintiff’s counsel asked the court to review RSA
540:13, VII, arguing:
If they [the landlord] accept payment during the pendency of a possessory action, that
they’re supposed to inform the tenant, in writing, that they’re gonna go forward with
the eviction.
No objection was made at trial to this argument. The court gave the landlord ten days following the end of the
trial in which to file a memorandum of law.
In its post-trial memorandum of law, the landlord noted: "At trial, though not [pled], Plaintiff seemed to argue
that Landlord had created a new tenancy under RSA 540-A:13(VII) [sic] by not giving written notice of
proceeding with the eviction after Joe Miller paid the April rent arrearage and the May rent in advance." The
landlord then set forth its legal arguments on the merits. It again did not object to the court’s consideration of
this issue, nor contend that the timing and manner in which the issue had been raised at trial either deprived it of
the opportunity to present evidence or otherwise prejudiced it in any way.
The trial court ruled that the landlord’s acceptance of the $3,200 tendered by the plaintiff on April 25, absent any
written notice of the landlord’s intention to proceed with the eviction process, created a new tenancy. The court
found that no evidence was introduced by either party as to the terms of the new tenancy, and ruled that it was a
tenancy at will. The court further ruled that the eviction violated RSA 540:13, VII because the writ of possession
that was executed had been issued on the old tenancy, but a new tenancy had thereafter been created. The court
awarded damages in the amount of $1,000 for the unlawful eviction, as well as attorney’s fees of $600.
The court also ruled that improper security deposit deductions were claimed by the landlord, and awarded
$1,353.72 to the plaintiff. Although the court further ruled that the landlord’s May 31, 2002 itemization of
charges had been untimely, the court did not award any damages because of the late