THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2003-614
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DOUGLAS AINSWORTH
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: February 4, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jonathan V. Gallo, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Twomey & Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Douglas Ainsworth, was convicted after a
jury trial in the Superior Court (Perkins, J.) on two counts of attempted
murder, see RSA 629:1 (Supp 2004); RSA ch. 630 (1996); one count of reckless
conduct, see RSA 631:3 (1996); and one count of attempted first-degree
assault, see RSA 629:1 (Supp. 2004); RSA 631:1 (1996). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In September 2002, the
defendant drove to the home of his former wife, Kerrell Betourne, and fired a
shotgun at her through her window. He then drove to his mother’s home,
where he fired at Officers Jeff Buskey and William Wright. He was indicted on
five charges: attempted murder of Officer Buskey; attempted murder of Officer
Wright; attempted murder of Ms. Betourne; attempted first-degree assault of
Ms. Betourne; and reckless conduct against Officer Buskey.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a notice of self-defense in which he
stated “that he may rely on the defense of physical force to defend [him]self
against Officer Jeff Buskey . . . and Officer William Wright.” The court found
the defendant’s notice to be inadequate, but allowed the defendant to
supplement it. The trial judge’s instructions to the jury did not include an
instruction on self-defense. Defense counsel did not object, and in fact
responded affirmatively that the instructions were proper.
Also, prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion for discovery requesting
personnel records of both Officers Buskey and Wright. The defendant
requested that the State “conduct a good faith review of the files and notify the
court of its findings,” and alleged that information contained in them might
have some bearing on his defense of self-defense. The court denied the motion
upon the basis that it “[did] not find that probable cause exist[ed] to produce
the personnel records of the officers involved.”
During the trial, the State was allowed, over the defendant’s objection, to
introduce into evidence the tape of Betourne’s 9-1-1 call from the night of the
shooting.
In her closing argument, defense counsel argued that portions of the
testimony of the defendant’s children amounted to “gratuitous cruelty” to the
defendant. In response, the State argued: “At the outset of this case, the
defense attorney told you that she cares about the defendant . . . I’m asking
you to care about these people who were targets. I’m asking you to care about
three terrified children . . . .” Defense counsel objected and requested a
curative instruction or a mistrial. Both requests were denied.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) failing to
give a jury instruction on self-defense; (2) denying him access to the officers’
personnel files; (3) finding that the tape of the 9-1-1 call was not more
prejudicial than probative; and (4) denying his motion for a mistrial. We
address each argument in turn.
I. Jury Instruction
The defendant first argues that the trial court should have given a jury
instruction on self-defense. The State contends that the defendant failed to
timely object to the court’s jury instructions, and thus has not preserved the
issue for appellate review. We agree.
2
A contemporaneous objection is necessary to preserve a jury instruction
issue for appellate review. Transmedia Restaurant Co. v. Devereaux, 149 N.H.
454, 457 (2003). This requirement affords the trial court an opportunity to
correct an error it may have made and is particularly appropriate where an
alleged error involves a jury instruction. Id. This long-standing requirement is
grounded in common sense and judicial economy, and applies equally to civil
and criminal matters. Id.
Because the defendant did not contemporaneously object to the jury
instructions before the trial court, but rather indicated satisfaction therewith,
the court had neither an opportunity to rule in a timely fashion on the issue
nor a timely opportunity to correct any error; accordingly, the issue is not
preserved for our review. See Transmedia Restaurant Co., 149 N.H. at 457.
II. Personnel Files
Next, the defendant argues that the denial of his discovery motion was
an unsustainable exercise of discretion because it “den[ied] him both the right
to cross-examine and the right to put on all proofs favorable,” citing Part I,
Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution. The State responds that the
defendant failed to make a sufficient showing of probable cause under RSA
105:13-b (2001). We agree.
RSA 105:13-b provides in pertinent part:
No personnel file on a police officer who is serving as a witness . . .
in a criminal case shall be opened for the purposes of that criminal
case, unless the sitting judge makes a specific ruling that probable
cause exists to believe that the file contains evidence relevant to
that criminal case. If the judge rules that probable cause exists,
the judge shall order the police department employing the officer to
deliver the file to the judge. The judge shall examine the file in
camera and make a determination whether it contains evidence
relevant to the criminal case.
We review the trial court’s decisions on the management of discovery and
the admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. State v. Amirault, 149 N.H. 541, 543 (2003). To meet this standard,
the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s rulings were clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
In order to trigger in camera review of the officers’ personnel files, the
defendant must establish a reasonable probability that the files contain
information that is material and relevant to his defense. State v. Gagne, 136
3
N.H. 101, 105 (1992); see Amirault, 149 N.H. at 544. It is the defendant’s
burden to establish that there is a realistic and substantial likelihood that
evidence helpful to his defense would be obtained from the officers’ personnel
files. State v. Gaffney, 147 N.H. 550, 556-57 (2002). To meet this threshold
requirement, the defendant must present a plausible theory of relevance and
materiality sufficient to justify review of otherwise protected documents.
Amirault, 149 N.H. at 544.
Although this standard for in camera review is not unduly high, we
conclude that the defendant’s representation falls short of meeting it. By
representing only that the information contained in the files might have some
bearing on his defense of self-defense, the defendant failed to establish a
reasonable probability that the records contained information that was
material and relevant to his defense. See Gagne, 136 N.H. at 105. Thus, he
did not meet his burden of establishing that there was a realistic and
substantial likelihood that evidence helpful to his defense would be obtained
from the officers’ personnel files, see Gaffney, 147 N.H. at 556-57, and did not
present a plausible theory of relevance and materiality sufficient to justify
review of otherwise protected documents. See Amirault, 149 N.H. at 544.
Thus, the defendant did not demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See id.
We conclude that the trial court’s determination that no probable cause
existed to produce the personnel files of Officers Buskey and Wright is
sustainable. See Amirault, 149 N.H. at 543; see also RSA 105:13-b.
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has failed to demonstrate that he
was denied either the right to cross-examine based upon the inadmissible
records, or to put on all proofs favorable. But cf. State v. Graf, 143 N.H. 294,
296 (1999) (right to produce all favorable proofs gives defendant only the right
to produce witnesses).
III. 9-1-1 Tape
We now consider whether the trial court erred in admitting Ms.
Betourne’s 9-1-1 call into evidence. The defendant contends that the 9-1-1
tape should have been excluded because he admitted that he shot out the
window, arguing that he did so while suffering from the combined effects of
alcohol and Amitriptylene. He contends that “nothing in the tape addresse[d]
the issue of [his] ability to form the intent required by the statute he is accused
of violating.” Thus, the defendant concludes, “playing the tape can only have
served to ‘inflame the passions of the jury’ with sympathy for Ms. Betourne,”
leading jurors to decide the case against him on the basis of “unfairly
prejudicial feelings.”
4
The State responds that although Ms. Betourne was present to testify as
to the incident involving the defendant, the tape “represented a
contemporaneous account of the events as they occurred and therefore the
best evidence of the incident.” Thus, the State argues that the danger of unfair
prejudice, if any, did not substantially outweigh the probative value of this
evidence. See N.H. R. Ev. 403. We agree.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 provides: “Although relevant,
evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by
the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury,
or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of
cumulative evidence.” We accord the trial court considerable deference in
determining whether probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger
of unfair prejudice, and we will not disturb its decision absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Jordan, 148 N.H. 115, 117
(2002). To show that the trial court exercised unsustainable discretion, the
defendant must show that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Id.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to
punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to
base its decision on something other than the established propositions in the
case. Id.
The record supports the trial court’s admission of the 9-1-1 tape. The
trial court found the tape to be relevant, probative, and not substantially more
prejudicial than probative. The 9-1-1 tape is as contemporaneous as possible
an account of the events as they occurred. Moreover, the probative value of the
tape is strengthened given that in order to find the defendant guilty of the
charge of attempted murder of Ms. Betourne, the jury had to find that he
attempted to purposely cause her death. See RSA 629:1. Relative to this
charge, the trial judge gave the following jury instructions, in pertinent part:
In deciding whether a person is guilty of a crime, you as a jury
have to know both what a person’s actions were and what that
person’s intentions were . . . . So for a person to be guilty of a
crime, that person must have done two things. That person must
have mentally intended to do something that’s criminal, and that
person must have physically acted to do something that is
criminal. And unless a person both intends and acts to do
something criminal, that person has not committed a crime.
The defendant testified that he “grabbed [his] rifle, and [he] shot a hole in
the window.” Because the defendant admitted to shooting through the window
5
of Ms. Betourne’s home, the 9-1-1 tape’s probative value regarding the
defendant’s physical actions was minimal. The inquiry as to the tape’s
probative value does not end here, however, because the State was required to
prove that the defendant acted purposely when he fired at Ms. Betourne. The
prosecution, with its burden of establishing guilt beyond a reasonable doubt,
has the right to prove every essential element of the crime by the most
convincing evidence it is able to produce. Jordan, 148 N.H. at 118.
During the 9-1-1 call, Ms. Betourne told the dispatcher: “[W]hen I
walked in the living room, the gunshot went threw [sic] the window.” She also
stated:
I just told him to leave because he kept on harassing me and
calling me . . . the last two days . . . and I hoped he would just
leave me alone. . . . I told him to . . . leave because he’s
supposed to give me 24 hours notice . . . . He showed up this
week and I threw him out and he showed up again. . . . He
walked in on me on Sunday and I was getting dressed and I
told him to leave. . . . And then yesterday he . . . started
calling . . . and showed up and I told him to leave.
This recording supports the jury’s inference that the defendant intended
to kill her.
Having reviewed the contents of the tape, we conclude that the tape’s
probative value is not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice. See State v. Cochran, 132 N.H. 670, 673 (1990) (reasoning that
where contested evidence carries no particular emotional charge, questions of
credibility and reliability fall within jury’s province). Although Ms. Betourne
was upset and afraid during the incident, the tape is not so unduly emotional
as to inflame a jury. See Jordan, 148 N.H. at 118. We conclude, therefore,
that the trial court did not commit an unsustainable exercise of discretion in
admitting the tape at trial. See State v. Morrill, 151 N.H. 331, 333 (2004)
(stating trial court is in best position to gauge prejudicial impact of particular
testimony); see also State v. Wood, 150 N.H. 233, 235 (2003) (stating trial court
is in best position to gauge any prejudicial effect of prosecutor’s closing
remarks on jury).
IV. Motion for a Mistrial
Finally, we address the defendant’s argument that he was entitled to a
mistrial because the State’s closing argument, which referenced “three terrified
children,” was improper. When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion for
a mistrial, we recognize that the trial court is in the best position to gauge the
6
prejudicial nature of the conduct at issue and has broad discretion to decide
whether a mistrial is appropriate. State v. Kerwin, 144 N.H. 357, 359 (1999).
We will not overturn the trial court’s decision on whether a mistrial or other
remedial action is necessary absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
State v. Pandolfi, 145 N.H. 508, 512 (2000); cf. Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
To support his argument, the defendant first cites State v. Ellsworth, in
which we reversed a conviction based upon an improper comment by the
prosecutor as to the defendant’s failure to testify. State v. Ellsworth, 151 N.H.
152, 158 (2004). In Ellsworth, the court found that the prosecutor’s comment
was deliberate, the lingering prejudice could have affected the outcome, and
the ensuing curative instruction was not enough. Id. Next, the defendant cites
Walton v. City of Manchester, 140 N.H. 403 (1995). In Walton, we required a
new trial because we concluded that the argument made by the city’s attorney
was: (1) calculated to encourage the jury to make a decision based upon
personal interest and bias: (2) prejudicial; and (3) not based on evidence. Id. at
408.
Here, the defendant contends that because the State’s comments were
not inadvertent, and because there was no curative jury instruction, a mistrial
should have been granted. The defendant argues further that the “three
terrified children” referenced by the State were not parties to the action, and
that “[f]ollowing the reasoning of Walton, the prosecutor’s overt invitation to the
jury to consider them in their deliberations can be nothing but an appeal to
deliver a verdict based on sympathy and not on the facts of the case.”
We are not persuaded by the defendant’s arguments. Unlike the
comments made by the city’s attorney in Walton, which were unsupported by
evidence and intended to appeal to personal sympathies of the jury, the
prosecutor’s comments here were a permissible response to defense counsel’s
closing argument. See State v. Laurent, 144 N.H. 517, 520 (1999) (holding
State’s comments permissible as rebuttal to inferences created by defendant).
Defense counsel specifically referenced the defendant’s children and parts of
their testimony, which she called “gratuitous cruelty.” The responding
comments by the State were supported by testimony of Ms. Betourne and the
defendant’s children, who testified that they were in fear after the defendant
shot into the house. Moreover, the jury was instructed to arrive at a verdict on
“the facts of this case and . . . without prejudice . . . and without any sympathy
at all.” See State v. Smith, 149 N.H. 693, 697 (2003) (stating juries are
presumed to follow the instructions of the court). We uphold, therefore, the
trial court’s decision that neither an immediate curative instruction nor a
declaration of a mistrial was necessary, and conclude that the trial court’s
7
denial of the defendant’s motion was not an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 671, 675 (2002).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ.,
concurred.
8