THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2003-774
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER ROGAN
Argued: November 30, 2004
Opinion Issued: January 6, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Brian R. Graf, senior assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Christopher Rogan, was convicted after a
jury trial in Superior Court (Hollman, J.) on one count of aggravated felonious
sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2 (1996 & Supp. 2001) (amended 2003). On
appeal, he argues that the trial court erred when it allowed the State to play an
audiotaped interview of the victim. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The defendant was indicted on
four counts of pattern aggravated felonious sexual assault alleging assaults
committed against the victim, who was thirteen at the time.
At trial, Deputy Belknap County Sheriff Denise Miller, an investigator
assigned to the case, testified on direct examination as to how she generally
conducts interviews in this type of case, and specifically testified regarding her
audiotaped and videotaped interview of the victim on November 12, 2002,
which lasted approximately two hours. She described how the victim
responded when discussing certain aspects of the investigation, and explained
that during her interview of the victim, she was able to obtain details about the
events.
On cross-examination of Deputy Miller, defense counsel, using a
transcript of the interview, questioned her regarding her thoroughness and
about whether she coerced the victim’s answers. Following this cross-
examination, the State requested permission to play the audiotape. The State
argued that the entire audiotape needed to be played to the jury to rebut the
inference created during Deputy Miller’s cross-examination that the victim’s
incriminating statements were suggested by Deputy Miller. Defense counsel
argued, on the other hand, that the tape should not be played for the jury,
because she used a transcript and not the tape to impeach Deputy Miller, and
because the focus of her cross-examination was to show that the investigation
was incomplete and flawed. After listening to most of the tape, the court
allowed it to be played, but first issued a jury instruction limiting its
admissibility to “evidence bearing upon the issues of Denise Miller’s credibility
in her testimony at trial and of whether her investigation was fair and
impartial.”
At the close of the State’s case, the trial court dismissed three of the
charges; the jury convicted the defendant on the remaining charge. On appeal,
the defendant contends that defense counsel did not “open the door” by
creating a misleading impression regarding the interview; and even if she did,
the admission of the entire tape was an “unfairly prejudicial remedy.”
“Opening the door” is a conclusory term. State v. Crosman, 125 N.H.
527, 530 (1984). Once associated more strictly with the doctrine of curative
admissibility, it is now more broadly applied to situations in which a
misleading advantage may be countered with previously suppressed or
otherwise inadmissible evidence. See id. at 530-31. The “opening the door”
doctrine applies when one party introduces evidence that provides a
justification beyond mere relevance for an opponent’s introduction of evidence
that may not otherwise be admissible. State v. Morrill, 151 N.H. __, __, 857
A.2d 1250, 1251 (2004). The initial evidence must have reasonably created a
misimpression or misled the fact-finder in some way. Id. This rule allows the
opposing party to place potentially misleading evidence in its proper context.
Id.
2
The admissibility of evidence is generally within the trial court’s sound
discretion. State v. Ellsworth, 151 N.H. 152, 159 (2004). Because the trial
court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial impact of particular
testimony, we will not upset the trial court’s ruling unless it is an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 56
(2001); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). To show that the trial court’s
exercise of discretion is unsustainable, the defendant bears the burden of
establishing that the decision was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. Carlson, 146 N.H. at 57; cf. Lambert 147 N.H. at 296.
Here, during cross-examination, defense counsel placed the integrity of
Deputy Miller’s investigation at issue with several questions and comments,
such as:
Q: So you - - you’ve made up your mind that [the victim] . . . was
lying to Detective Simmons before you ever met her?
. . . .
Q: Were you going to coerce her to say anything? . . . .
Q: And if she didn’t want to say something, what was your
intention?
. . . .
Q: All right. And we know - - at least we think we know now,
because of what you got her to say in that interview, that it started
after the accident . . . .
The State contends that the statements on the audiotape “were relevant
to rebut the inference created by the defense through the cross-examination of
Deputy Miller that her investigation was unfair and that she had coerced the
victim to make incriminating statements.” We agree.
The trial court held a hearing out of the presence of the jury regarding
the State’s request to play the tape, during which defense counsel argued that
the focus of the cross-examination of Deputy Miller was to suggest that her
investigation was incomplete and flawed. The State countered that defense
counsel was “trying to say the nature of the interview put words in the
[victim’s] mouth and essentially prompted the [victim] to give responses.” In
fact, defense counsel ultimately admitted that she had indeed suggested that
coercion had occurred during the interview.
After reviewing the record, we agree with the trial court that defense
counsel’s cross-examination not only raised the issue that the investigation
was flawed and incomplete, but also that “[the victim’s] statements were
unfairly influenced by the investigator,” that the interview was essentially
“unfair,” and that the investigator used a “persuasional technique” to prompt
3
the victim. Accordingly, we conclude that defense counsel – having taken the
risk of creating a misleading advantage, see Crosman, 125 N.H. at 531, or of
misleading the fact-finder in some way, see Morrill, 151 N.H. at __, 857 A.2d at
1251 – “opened the door” to the admission of evidence that would rebut the
misimpression. As such, the State “place[d] [the] potentially misleading
evidence in its proper context.” Id.
We next consider whether the tape was the appropriate evidence for
rebutting any misimpression that might have been created by defense counsel.
The crux of the defendant’s position is that “the tape shed little light on the
adequacy of Miller’s investigation, because she admitted on cross-examination
that she did not do any further investigation based on [the victim’s] vague or
inconsistent responses.” The defendant’s argument is, however, misplaced.
Playing the tape did not serve to “shed light on the adequacy of Miller’s
investigation”; rather, its purpose was to allow the jury to assess whether the
information on the tape rebutted the misimpression created by defense counsel
that the victim’s answers were coerced by Deputy Miller. We agree with the
trial court’s assessment that the tapes were the “best evidence of what
happened in terms of whether the interview [was] fair or not,” and with the
State’s position that it was necessary to play the tape to expose the jury to
important factors such as tone of voice and presentation of questions and
pauses, because such factors could assist the jury in its assessment of whether
there was coercion.
Finally, we consider whether playing the tape in its entirety was “unfairly
prejudicial” in a manner that greatly outweighed its probative value. The
defendant’s position is that because the tape was “so long” and because “its
content so resonated with [the victim’s] testimony . . . the jury was likely to
have considered it for its truth.” The State responds that this issue was not
properly preserved below because defense counsel argued that the transcript,
rather than the tape, should have been admitted, and never specifically argued
that only a portion of the tape should have been heard by the jury. The State
further argues that if the issue was preserved, it was within the trial court’s
discretion to admit the entire audiotape, citing several cases in which we have
allowed lengthy recorded testimony to be admitted. See, e.g., State v. Dewitt,
143 N.H. 24 (1998) (upholding trial court’s decision to admit entire two-hour
videotape). Even if the issue were properly preserved, we would concur with
the trial court’s ruling. See, e.g., Handley v. Town of Hooksett, 147 N.H. 184,
189 (2001).
In State v. Dean, we held that a prosecutrix’s entire statement was
properly admitted to show that the statement as a whole was consistent with
her testimony, and that any inconsistencies were insignificant. State v. Dean,
129 N.H. 744, 750 (1987). Similarly, in State v. Morales, where the defendant
had attempted to impeach the victim’s testimony by referencing portions of the
4
victim’s prior statement, we affirmed the trial court’s decision to allow the
entire statement of the victim. State v. Morales, 136 N.H. 616, 620 (1993).
Significantly, we stated: “In affirming the trial court’s decision, we do not
purport to establish a per se rule mandating the admission of a witness’s entire
prior statement after the witness has been impeached through reference to
portions of the statement. Rather, questions concerning . . . portions of those
statements allowed to rehabilitate an impeached witness, are matters within
the sound discretion of the trial court.” Id.
Here, similar to the situations in both Dean and Morales, defense
counsel impeached Deputy Miller by referencing portions of her interview.
Playing the audiotape directly pertained to that interview and to the purpose
for which the State wanted it introduced – to rehabilitate any misimpression by
defense counsel that the victim was coerced. Moreover, playing the entire tape
was appropriate because defense counsel, in her attempt to create the
impression that the interview was inappropriate, extensively referenced the
transcript of the interview. Thus, we conclude that the entire tape had
significant probative value.
We next consider whether the admission of the entire tape was
prejudicial. We have previously found a defendant’s claim of prejudice
regarding admitted evidence unfounded, especially in light of the trial court’s
limiting instruction. Dean, 129 N.H. at 750. We have also stated that
distinguishing between using evidence for credibility purposes, as opposed to
substantive purposes, requires a careful explanation in the limiting instruction.
State v. Fischer, 143 N.H. 311, 317 (1999).
Here, Fischer’s requirement of a “careful explanation in the limiting
instruction” was met when the judge clearly and unequivocally issued the
following jury instructions:
Ladies and gentlemen, you are going to hear now an audiotape of
Deputy Sheriff Denise Miller’s interview with [the victim] . . . . The
tape, which has been admitted into evidence, is not admitted as
proof of the truth of the statements contained in the tape but as
evidence bearing upon the credibility of certain statements made by
Denise Miller in her testimony at trial and as evidence bearing upon
the issue of whether the investigation conducted by Denise Miller
was fair and impartial.
In other words, this tape has been admitted into evidence for a
limited purpose. You are not to consider the content of this tape
as proof of the truth of the statements contained therein, but only
as evidence bearing upon the issues of Denise Miller’s credibility in
her testimony at trial and of whether her investigation was fair and
impartial.
5
Thus, we conclude that the admission of the entire tape was not unduly
prejudicial. See Dean, 129 N.H. at 750; see also State v. Smith, 149 N.H. 693,
697 (2003) (stating that juries are presumed to follow the instructions of the
court).
We conclude that the defendant has not carried his burden of proving
that the trial court’s ruling was unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See
Carlson, 146 N.H. at 57. We hold, therefore, that the trial court acted within
its discretion by admitting into evidence the contents of the entire tape of
Deputy Miller’s interview with the victim.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6