THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–southern judicial district
No. 2003-779
HOLLY BERRY & a.
v.
WATCHTOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF NEW YORK, INC. & a.
Argued: October 20, 2004
Opinion Issued: July 15, 2005
Gawryl & MacAllister, of Nashua (Jared O’Connor on the brief), and
Marci A. Hamilton, of Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania, orally, for the
plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Donald E. Gardner and
Brian J.S. Cullen on the brief, and Mr. Gardner orally), and Robert C. James,
of Patterson, New York, on the brief, for defendants Watchtower Bible & Tract
Society of New York, Inc. and Wilton Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiffs, Holly Berry and Heather Berry, appeal
orders of the Superior Court (Groff, J.) dismissing their claims. We affirm.
I
The plaintiffs brought an action for damages against the defendants,
Watchtower Bible & Tract Society of New York, Inc. (Watchtower); the Wilton
Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Wilton Congregation); and their father,
Paul Berry, for injuries from sexual and other abuse allegedly committed by
Berry. Although it is unclear from the record whether Berry remains a
defendant, he is not involved in this appeal.
The plaintiffs’ claims against Watchtower and Wilton Congregation are
based upon allegations that their mother, Sara Poisson, informed certain elders
of the Wilton Congregation about the purported abuse, and that they failed to
report it to law enforcement authorities and improperly counseled Poisson
about how she should handle the alleged abuse. Specifically, the plaintiffs
alleged that Watchtower and Wilton Congregation were negligent in failing to
report the suspected abuse (Count I); breached their fiduciary duties by failing
to report it (Count II); breached their common law duties by failing to report the
abuse as required by RSA 169-C:29 (2002) (Count III); and engaged in willful
concealment of the abuse (Count IV).
Watchtower and Wilton Congregation moved for summary judgment on
all claims, asserting, among other things, that: (1) the religious privilege
identified in RSA 516:35 (1997) and New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 505
(Rule 505) precluded them from making disclosure of any confidential
information obtained from the plaintiffs’ parents; (2) they had no common law
or fiduciary duty to protect the plaintiffs from abuse; and (3) the reporting
statute, RSA 169-C:29, did not create a private right of action.
Relying upon Marquay v. Eno, 139 N.H. 708 (1995), the trial court ruled
that RSA 169-C:29 did not create a private right of action and that the elders
did not owe the plaintiffs any fiduciary duty. The trial court, however,
concluded that Watchtower and Wilton Congregation did have a common law
duty to protect the plaintiffs from abuse. Finally, with regard to the reporting
statute, the trial court ruled that it applied to “any other person,” and thus
applied to Watchtower and Wilton Congregation.
Following an evidentiary hearing, the court ruled that the elders were
ordained ministers for purposes of Rule 505 and that the matters discussed
with them by the plaintiffs’ mother were “of such a nature that the discussions
[were] subject to the requirement of confidentiality.” The court concluded that
“[w]ithout the waiver of both Ms. Poisson and Mr. Berry, the Elders [were
obligated to] maintain the privilege and [could not] disclose any information.”
Because Rule 505 requires confidentiality, the court determined that
Watchtower and Wilton Congregation did not have a duty to report or disclose
the alleged abuse, despite the requirements of the reporting statute.
Accordingly, the court ruled that “to the extent the plaintiffs’ claims of
negligence are premised on the duty of the defendants to report the allegations
or admissions of child abuse, [their] action [is] dismissed.”
2
In November 2003, the trial court ruled that all conduct complained of by
the plaintiffs, whether sounding in common law negligence or deceit, fell under
the heading of “clerical malpractice” and that it would be a violation of the
Establishment Clause of the First Amendment for the court to “review and
interpret church law, policies, or practices in the determination of the claims.”
(Quotation omitted.) Accordingly, all remaining claims against Watchtower and
Wilton Congregation were dismissed. This appeal followed.
II
The plaintiffs raise several issues, including: (1) whether the elders in
the Wilton Congregation were required to report the alleged abuse pursuant to
the child abuse reporting statute, RSA 169-C:29; (2) whether Jehovah’s
Witness elders are “clergy” for purposes of the evidentiary religious privilege,
see RSA 516:35; N.H.R. Ev. 505; (3) whether the religious privilege applies
when the communication is a non-private communication made in the
presence of third parties; (4) whether Watchtower and Wilton Congregation owe
a common law duty to the plaintiffs to take remedial action to protect them; (5)
whether the reporting statute supersedes the religious privilege; (6) whether an
inquiry into the conduct of Watchtower and Wilton Congregation to discover
those actions taken in relation to the plaintiffs’ alleged abuse violates the
religious privilege; and (7) whether such an inquiry violates the Establishment
Clause’s rule against judicial intervention in ecclesiastical disputes.
Some of the plaintiffs’ claims were disposed of by summary judgment
and some were dismissed by the trial court. “In reviewing a grant of summary
judgment, we look at the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn therefrom, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.”
Sandford v. Town of Wolfboro, 143 N.H. 481, 484 (1999) (quotation omitted).
“If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and if
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the
grant of summary judgment.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted). In
reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, “our task is to ascertain
whether the allegations pleaded in the plaintiff’s writ are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery.” Rayeski v. Gunstock
Area, 146 N.H. 495, 496 (2001) (quotation omitted). “We assume all facts
pleaded in the plaintiff’s writ are true, and we construe all reasonable
inferences drawn from those facts in the plaintiff’s favor.” Id. “We then engage
in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the complaint against the
applicable law.” Id. (quotation omitted).
III
Sara Poisson and Paul Berry were married in 1980 and moved to
Greenville in 1984. Poisson’s daughter, Holly, was born of a prior marriage in
3
1978. Poisson and Berry’s daughter, Heather, was born in 1982. Both Poisson
and her husband were practicing Jehovah’s Witnesses.
In the Jehovah’s Witness faith, elders are selected by the governing body
of the local congregation to be the congregation’s spiritual leaders. Elders are
lay people who do not have any formal religious training or education. They
hold secular employment and are not compensated for their work as elders. As
elders they are responsible for meeting with individual members of the
congregation when requested to do so and working with them to identify
problems and provide spiritual counsel. In the Wilton Congregation, at any
given time, there were five to ten elders.
The plaintiffs allege that Poisson approached the elders seeking spiritual
advice because she and her husband were having marital problems, which
included verbal, mental and physical abuse. In response to her requests, the
elders provided the couple with spiritual advice and assistance, which included
joint prayers, Bible readings, and discussion of the Scriptures for application to
their identified problems. According to Poisson, she reported to the elders on
ten to twelve separate occasions that her husband was abusing their children.
The plaintiffs further allege that “[i]n accord with directions to publishers,
policies and practices of the organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses, the elders . . .
told the Plaintiffs’ mother she should keep the matter within the organization of
Jehovah’s Witnesses.” In 2000, Berry was convicted of sexually assaulting
Holly when she was a young child. State v. Berry, 148 N.H. 88 (2002).
IV
The plaintiffs argue that the plain language of RSA 169-C:29 required
elders of the Wilton Congregation to report the suspected child abuse to law
enforcement authorities. Watchtower and Wilton Congregation argue that the
plaintiffs presented no evidence that the elders had reason to suspect sexual
abuse or physical injury and further that RSA 169-C:29 does not provide a civil
remedy for their failure to report suspected abuse.
RSA 169-C:29 provides:
Any physician, surgeon, county medical examiner,
psychiatrist, resident, intern, dentist, osteopath, optometrist,
chiropractor, psychologist, therapist, registered nurse, hospital
personnel . . . , Christian Science practitioner, teacher, school
official, school nurse, school counselor, social worker, day care
worker, any other child or foster care worker, law enforcement
official, priest, minister, or rabbi or any other person having reason
to suspect that a child has been abused or neglected shall report
the same in accordance with this chapter.
4
An “abused child” includes children who have been sexually abused, or
physically or psychologically injured. RSA 169-C:3 (2002). The trial court held
that
to the extent the plaintiffs’ claims of negligence are premised on
the duty of the defendants to report the allegations or admissions
of child abuse, the plaintiffs’ action must be dismissed. The Elders
were barred by the Religious Privilege from disclosing any of the
allegations or admissions to anyone and thus no duty to report the
allegations could have arisen.
We concur with the trial court that the child abuse reporting statute does
not give rise to a civil remedy for its violation. Failure to comply with the
statute is a crime and “[a]nyone who knowingly violates any provision . . . [is]
guilty of a misdemeanor.” RSA 169-C:39. The reporting statute does not,
however, support a private right of action for its violation. Marquay, 139 N.H.
at 715. Even assuming, without deciding, that the elders had an obligation to
report suspected child abuse to law enforcement authorities, the plaintiffs have
no cause of action for damages based on the elders’ failure to do so.
Accordingly, we need not decide whether Jehovah’s Witness elders qualify as
“clergy” for purposes of the evidentiary religious privilege.
V
The plaintiffs further contend that Watchtower and Wilton Congregation
had a common law duty to take remedial action to protect the plaintiffs due to
a special relationship, a fiduciary relationship and/or the special
circumstances of this case. While acknowledging that, in general, a person has
no affirmative duty to aid others, the trial court analogized this case to the
limited circumstances in which a person has a duty to prevent foreseeable
harm to a third party and applied a balancing test to determine whether such a
duty should be placed on Watchtower and Wilton Congregation. Under the
facts of this case, the court declared that such a duty placed “little burden”
upon them, requiring “only common sense advice to the church member and a
reporting of the abuse to the authorities.” The trial court concluded that the
social importance of protecting the plaintiffs from sexual abuse outweighed the
importance of immunizing the defendants from extended liability.
Whether a duty exists in a particular setting is a question of law.
Iannelli v. Burger King Corp., 145 N.H. 190, 193 (2000). “Absent a duty, there
is no negligence.” Walls v. Oxford Management Co., 137 N.H. 653, 656 (1993).
Recognizing the “fundamental unfairness of holding private citizens responsible
for the unanticipated criminal acts of third parties,” Remsburg v. Docusearch,
149 N.H. 148, 153-54 (2003), this court has identified three limited exceptions
5
to the general rule that citizens have no such duty at common law: (1) where
there is a special relationship between the parties; (2) where special
circumstances exist including situations where the defendant’s acts create an
“especial temptation and opportunity” for the criminal misconduct; or (3) where
the duty is voluntarily assumed. Id. The plaintiffs argue that the first two of
these exceptions apply here. We disagree.
The plaintiffs argue that a special relationship existed between them and
Watchtower and Wilton Congregation because “[they] and their family were
members of the Wilton Congregation and relied to their detriment on elders of
the congregation for moral, spiritual and practical guidance.” In addition, the
plaintiffs argue that “knowing that [Jehovah’s Witness] adherents were
admonished not to speak to secular authorities upon the pains of disfellowship,
Defendants in this case facilitated ‘an especial temptation and opportunity for
criminal misconduct’ by refusing to report the abuse themselves.”
Under the Restatement (Second) of Torts § 314A (1965), “special
relationships” giving rise to a duty to aid or protect individuals from the
criminal acts of others “are those of common carrier/passenger,
innkeeper/guest, landowner/invitee and one who is required by law to take or
who voluntarily takes custody of another under circumstances such as to
deprive the other of his normal opportunities for protection.” Dupont v. Aavid
Thermal Technologies, 147 N.H. 706, 710 (2002) (quotation, ellipsis, and
brackets omitted). “The relation of the parties determines whether any duty to
use due care is imposed by law upon one party for the benefit of another. If
there is no relationship, there is no duty.” Guitarini v. Company, 98 N.H. 118,
119 (1953) (quotation omitted).
In Marquay, a special relationship between students and certain school
employees giving rise to a duty of care was recognized because of the
compulsory character of school attendance, the expectation of parents and
students for and reliance upon a safe school environment and the general
importance to society of education. Marquay, 139 N.H. at 717. In this case
there are none of the same considerations. Church attendance is not
compulsory. There is no allegation that Berry’s alleged abusive acts took place
on congregation property or during congregation-related activities. There is no
allegation that the plaintiffs were under the custody or control of Watchtower
or Wilton Congregation at any time. See Meyer v. Lindala, 675 N.W.2d 635,
640 (Minn. Ct. App. 2004) (rejecting claim that control premised on faith-based
advice creates a special relationship). In fact, the evidence is that the plaintiffs
were at all times under the custody and protection of their parents.
There are no factors present that establish any special relationship
between the plaintiffs and Watchtower or Wilton Congregation. See Roman
Catholic Bishop v. Superior Ct., 50 Cal. Rptr. 2d 399, 406 (Ct. App. 1996) (no
6
special relationship exists between a church and its parishioners). “The
creation of an amorphous common law duty on the part of a church or other
voluntary organization requiring it to protect its members from each other
would give rise to both unlimited liability and liability out of all proportion to
culpability.” Bryan R. v. Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc., 738 A.2d 839, 847
(Me. 1999) (quotation omitted), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 1189 (2000)
(parishioner’s allegation that he was sexually assaulted by an adult church
member when he was a child did not establish special relationship with church
despite fact that elders knew of the abuse). We decline to hold that the fact of
church membership or adherence to church doctrine by the plaintiffs’ parents
creates a special relationship between the plaintiffs and Watchtower or Wilton
Congregation.
We also disagree with the plaintiffs’ assertion that special circumstances
exist in this case such that an especial temptation and opportunity for Berry’s
criminal misconduct was created by Watchtower and Wilton Congregation.
There is no allegation that the elders created any opportunity for Berry to
abuse his daughters. As noted, there was no allegation that the alleged abuse
took place on congregation property or at congregation-related activities. There
is no allegation that the elders acted in any way other than by providing
spiritual guidance and scriptural advice, at the request of the plaintiffs’
mother. We hold that the plaintiffs have failed to establish either a special
relationship with the defendants or that special circumstances existed in which
Watchtower and Wilton Congregation created an especial temptation for
criminal conduct by Berry. Consequently, there is no common law duty
running from Watchtower and Wilton Congregation to the plaintiffs and the
trial court’s ruling that a duty existed requiring Watchtower and Wilton
Congregation to dispense “common sense advice to the church member and a
reporting of the abuse to the authorities” is erroneous as a matter of law.
The special circumstances exception should never be triggered by the
mere failure of a citizen to report actual or suspected criminal conduct to law
enforcement authorities or by a citizen’s improper advice concerning an
appropriate response to complaints of criminal activity. Otherwise, the general
rule which imposes no duty on citizens to prevent the criminal acts of third
parties will be swallowed up and civil liability unreasonably extended. The
dissent suggests that if the elders had counseled Poisson to report the abuse to
secular authorities they would have satisfied their common law duty to the
plaintiffs, even if Poisson did not follow their advice. Apparently, knowledge by
the elders of alleged criminal conduct and a failure to report it would not be
sufficient to create civil liability but failure to dispense proper advice to the
person disclosing the conduct would be. Poisson, however, had her own
independent and overarching duty to protect her children from abuse
perpetrated by her husband and had a common law obligation to intervene
7
regardless of any advice she received. No special circumstances exist in this
case to justify civil liability against Watchtower or Wilton Congregation.
In both Iannelli and Remsburg, on which the dissent relies, the
defendants were engaged in commercial activity and were held to have a duty
to prevent foreseeable criminal activity directed either to patrons on their
premises or to individuals about whom they were selling otherwise private or
hard-to-gather information. In both cases the defendants exercised control,
either over commercial property or information they sold to third parties. Their
activities and conduct created a condition or enhanced a foreseeable risk of
criminal conduct which they could independently and affirmatively control.
Ianelli, 145 N.H. at 193-95; Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 153-55. The same was true
in Dupont, where workplace supervisors allegedly did not act appropriately in
protecting an employee from a criminal attack on workplace premises.
Dupont, 147 N.H. at 713-14.
In the case before us, the elders were not similarly situated. They, in
their roles as church leaders, learned of alleged criminal activity happening on
property Wilton Congregation did not own or control and occurring solely
between family members. The elders did not create the risk of harm to the
children nor control its cessation or continuation. Although their positions in
the Wilton Congregation invested them with a strong moral obligation to do all
reasonably possible to stop the abuse, it would be inappropriate to transform a
moral obligation into a common law duty.
The common law narrowly defines those responsible civilly for failure to
prevent criminal assaults by third parties. If mere knowledge of alleged
criminal conduct or imprudent advice offered in response to a disclosure or
discovery can create a “special circumstance,” then close friends, neighbors
and extended family will find themselves at risk of civil liability for situations
they did not create and over which they exercise no control. Without sufficient
control that would give rise to a duty, a private citizen should be immune from
civil liability for failure to prevent criminal acts of others.
RSA 169-C:29 requires certain persons to report suspected child abuse
to law enforcement authorities. While we are not called upon here to determine
the extent of that requirement, this is generally a sufficiently effective
mechanism to protect victims and it would be unwise to expand the current
limits of civil liability imposed upon private citizens to effect what the criminal
law already requires.
Finally, the plaintiffs argue, in reliance on Marquay v. Eno, that
Watchtower and Wilton Congregation owed them a fiduciary duty of care when
the elders became aware of the purported abuse by their father. We do not
agree that Marquay identified a fiduciary duty. Rather, we held that the school
8
was liable for the criminal acts of certain of its employees because the school
had breached a common law duty based upon the principle that “schools share
a special relationship with students entrusted to their care.” Marquay, 139
N.H. at 717. Nothing in the record indicates that the plaintiffs here were
entrusted to the care of Watchtower or Wilton Congregation. Rather, the
plaintiffs’ allegations are based upon their parents’ relationship with the elders
and communications between their parents and the elders. “A fiduciary
relationship . . . exists wherever influence has been acquired and abused or
confidence has been reposed and betrayed.” Schneider v. Plymouth State
College, 144 N.H. 458, 462 (1999) (quotation omitted). As the trial court
recognized, the plaintiffs did not allege that the elders acquired influence over
them or that their confidence had been reposed in the elders and that
“[w]ithout these basic facts, there can be no fiduciary relationship.” We agree.
Because we hold that Watchtower and Wilton Congregation have no
common law duty to protect the plaintiffs and that the plaintiffs may not bring
a private cause of action for the alleged failure of the elders to comply with RSA
169-C:29, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiffs’ action, albeit for
different reasons. We need not, therefore, address the remaining arguments.
Affirmed.
NADEAU and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS, J., concurred in part
and dissented in part.
DALIANIS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. While I agree
with the majority that the reporting statute, RSA 169-C:29 (2002), does not
give rise to a civil remedy for its violation, and that there was no fiduciary
relationship between the plaintiffs and the defendants, I disagree with its
conclusion that defendant Wilton Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses (Wilton
Congregation) had no common law duty towards the plaintiffs. I, therefore,
respectfully dissent from that part of the majority opinion.
In Walls v. Oxford Management Co., 137 N.H. 653, 658 (1993), we
elucidated four exceptions to the general rule that individuals are not
responsible for the criminal attacks of others: (1) when there is a special
relationship; (2) where the defendant creates an especial temptation and
opportunity for criminal misconduct, also called the special circumstances
exception, see Remsburg v. Docusearch, 149 N.H. 148, 154 (2003); (3) the
existence of overriding foreseeability; and (4) when one voluntarily assumes the
duty. Walls, 137 N.H. at 658-59. Although we rejected the prospect of liability
based upon the overriding foreseeability exception in that case, id. at 659, we
arguably relied upon it in Iannelli v. Burger King Corp., 145 N.H. 190, 194
(2000), where we found a commercial establishment had a duty to protect a
customer from the criminal conduct of a group of patrons, in this case assault,
9
because the group’s behavior leading up to the assault created a foreseeable
risk of harm.
In Dupont v. Aavid Thermal Technologies, 147 N.H. 706, 709 (2002), we
listed only three exceptions to the general rule that a private citizen has no
duty to protect others from the criminal attacks of third parties, excluding the
overriding foreseeability exception, though we did so while citing the Iannelli
case, which arguably relied upon that exception. Most recently, in Remsburg
v. Docusearch, we again did not specifically address the overriding
foreseeability exception, but explained that the general rule was “grounded in
the fundamental unfairness of holding private citizens responsible for the
unanticipated acts of third parties . . . .” Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 154
(emphasis added).
The decision in Remsburg merges what once was the overriding
foreseeability exception with the special circumstances exception, which
includes situations where there is an especial temptation and opportunity for
criminal misconduct brought about by the defendant. This exception follows
from the rule that a party who realizes or should realize that his conduct has
created a condition which involves an unreasonable risk of harm to another
has a duty to exercise reasonable care to prevent that risk from occurring.
“Where the defendant’s conduct has created an unreasonable risk of criminal
misconduct, a duty is owed to those foreseeably endangered.” Id. (emphasis
added).
The status of the overriding foreseeability exception in our case law is not
clear. I note, however, that the foreseeability of harm has at least been
incorporated into our liability analysis through the special circumstances
exception. See Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 154. Other courts have also used
foreseeability as a factor in a separate analysis to determine the existence of a
duty. See, e.g., Tarasoff v. Regents of University of California, 551 P.2d 334,
342 (Cal. 1976); Juarez v. Boy Scouts of America, Inc., 97 Cal. Rptr. 2d 12, 29
(Ct. App. 2000); Doe v. Franklin, 930 S.W.3d 921, 927 (Tex. App. 1996);
Babula v. Robertson, 536 N.W.2d 834, 837 (Mich. Ct. App. 1995); Solano v.
Goff, 985 P.2d 53, 54 (Colo. Ct. App. 1999); McGlynn v. Newark Parking
Authority, 432 A.2d 99, 104 (N.J. 1981); see also Restatement (Second) of Torts
§ 302 B at 88 (1965). Thus, the rule that duty and foreseeability are
inextricably bound together, Manchenton v. Auto Leasing Corp., 135 N.H. 298,
304 (1992), retains some force even when we are faced with criminal acts
perpetrated by third parties.
We review motions to dismiss to determine if the plaintiff’s allegations are
reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. We then
engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the writ against the
applicable law. In so doing, we assume the truth of all well-pleaded facts
10
alleged by the plaintiff, construing all inferences in the light most favorable to
the plaintiff. Dupont, 147 N.H. at 709.
The plaintiffs allege the following facts. Holly Berry was born on
December 13, 1978; she was physically and sexually abused by Paul Berry
from 1983 until 1989. Heather Berry was born on May 27, 1982; she was
physically and sexually abused by Paul Berry between the ages of three and
six.
The Jehovah’s Witness faith encourages its members to report problems
among members of the congregation to elders within the organization, and not
to secular authorities. During the period when the physical and sexual abuse
was occurring, Sara Poisson made ten to twelve reports to the elders of the
Wilton Congregation that her husband was abusing her daughters, the
plaintiffs. The elders scheduled meetings with Poisson and Paul Berry to
counsel them about the problems they were experiencing in their marriage.
Berry was present at the meetings. There were always two elders at the
meetings. The elders did not report the ongoing abuse the plaintiffs were
suffering, and instructed Poisson not to report it. They told her to “be silent
about the abuse and to be a better wife.”
Based upon these allegations, I believe that defendant Wilton
Congregation had reason to anticipate Berry’s criminal conduct and that it
created a situation facilitating Berry’s conduct. Accordingly, I find a duty
based upon the special circumstances exception. As noted above, this
exception includes when the opportunity for criminal misconduct is brought
about by the actions or inactions of the defendant. Iannelli, 145 N.H. at 194.
The exact occurrence or precise injuries need not have been foreseeable, id.,
though in this case they arguably were. The Wilton Congregation was aware of
the harm being perpetrated on the plaintiffs through repeated reports. Due to
the number of reports over the years, it was also aware that the abuse was
ongoing.
The majority notes: “There is no allegation that the elders acted in any
way other than by providing spiritual guidance and scriptural advice, at the
request of the plaintiffs’ mother.” The majority’s analysis of the special
circumstances exception does not address the plaintiffs’ allegation that the
elders of the Wilton Congregation instructed Poisson not to report the abuse to
secular authorities. I find no meaningful difference, however, between the facts
alleged in this case, and the facts of the special circumstances cases relied
upon by the majority. See Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 154-55 (risk of criminal
misconduct, including stalking and identity theft, sufficiently foreseeable,
therefore special circumstances imposed duty on private investigator to
exercise reasonable care in disclosing third party’s information to client); Walls,
137 N.H. at 659 (duty to protect tenants from criminal attack may arise when
11
landlord has created or is responsible for a known defective condition that
foreseeably enhanced risk of attack). The majority characterizes these cases as
relying upon the element of control. I do not find this retrospective statement
of the law persuasive.
In this case, the elders of defendant Wilton Congregation not only created
an opportunity for Paul Berry to continue abusing the plaintiffs precisely
because of their inaction, but actively facilitated the continuing abuse by their
instruction to Poisson not to act. Further, the elders instructed Poisson not to
report the abuse in the presence of the abuser himself. It is not unreasonable
to infer that Berry continued abusing the plaintiffs, his daughters, safe in the
knowledge that Poisson was not going to report him to secular authorities.
The elders of the Wilton Congregation were aware of Poisson’s
understanding of the policy against seeking outside help. Yet, despite the
numerous reports, made at different times to different elders of the Wilton
Congregation, none of them advised her to seek help from secular authorities,
and at least some of them instructed her not to seek such help, effectively
allowing Paul Berry to continue his pattern of abuse. Because the harm done
to the plaintiffs was foreseeable to the Wilton Congregation, and facilitated both
by its action and inaction, the Wilton Congregation had a duty to protect the
plaintiffs from it.
The majority fears heading down a slippery slope where friends and
relatives will face tort liability for giving bad advice. This is an unusual case,
however, and I would decide it based upon its facts alone. The facts creating
the duty in this case were the elders’ awareness of Poisson’s religious beliefs,
the fact that her husband was the one abusing the children, the elders’
knowledge of the abuse over the years, their continued failure to counsel her to
seek help, their specific instruction to her not to seek help when she relied
upon their guidance and the fact that they did so in Berry’s presence. These
special circumstances created an opportunity for Berry to continue abusing the
plaintiffs.
Children who are victims of physical and sexual abuse are limited in
their ability to protect themselves, especially when their abuser is a parent.
The legislature has recognized this fact, and has attached criminal liability to
any person who fails to report suspected child abuse, no matter what their
connection to the child, if any. See RSA 169-C:29. Recognizing a common law
duty to protect children through counseling a parent to seek help, would
accurately reflect our collective concern for the vulnerable class of child abuse
victims.
The trial court found that, to the extent a common law duty may have
existed, the religious privilege barred the defendants from disclosing the abuse.
12
See N.H. R. Ev. 505. The trial court concluded, therefore, that any allegations
that the defendants breached their duty by failing to report or disclose the
abuse could not stand. The majority does not address whether the defendants
were barred from disclosing the abuse by the religious privilege, and I decline
to address it as well because I find that Wilton Congregation’s duty could have
been satisfied simply by counseling Poisson to report the abuse to secular
authorities.
The plaintiffs also claimed, in the aggregate, that the Wilton
Congregation was negligent in failing to instruct Poisson to seek help and
treatment for the plaintiffs outside the Congregation. The trial court classified
these remaining claims as claims for negligent counseling. The trial court
found that investigation into these claims was barred by the First Amendment
of the Federal Constitution, concluding that such investigation would result in
“excessive government entanglement with religion.”
I disagree with the trial court’s characterization of this inquiry. The First
Amendment states: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment
of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof . . . .” U.S. CONST. amend. I.
It is applicable to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment. Cantwell v.
Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 303 (1940). “[T]he Amendment embraces two
concepts, – freedom to believe and freedom to act. The first is absolute, but in
the nature of things, the second cannot be.” Id. at 303-04. “[T]he prohibition
extends to common law provisions as well as statutory enactments.” Smith v.
O’Connell, 986 F. Supp. 73, 77 ( D.R.I. 1997).
Courts around the country are split on whether civil suits against
religious entities or their officials are permitted under the First Amendment.
These suits have been brought under many theories, including breach of
fiduciary duty, common law negligence, negligent supervision and hiring, and
negligent counseling. See Malicki v. Doe, 814 So. 2d 347, 357-58 (Fla. 2002)
(summarizing litigation from around the country); Roman Catholic Diocese of
Jackson v. Morrison, ___ So. 2d ___, ___, 2005 WL 1039146, at *38-43 (Miss.
May 5, 2005) (listing state and federal court decisions on either side of the
issue).
The defendants make no arguments specific to the State Constitution,
but rely upon the Federal Constitution alone. The United States Supreme
Court’s cases concerning the Free Exercise Clause
establish the general proposition that a law that is neutral and of
general applicability need not be justified by a compelling
governmental interest even if the law has the incidental effect of
burdening a particular religious practice. . . . Neutrality and
general applicability are interrelated . . . . A law failing to satisfy
13
these requirements must be justified by a compelling governmental
interest and must be narrowly tailored to advance that interest.
Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 531-32 (1993)
(citation omitted).
The Supreme Court has never held that “when otherwise prohibitable
conduct is accompanied by religious convictions, not only the convictions but
the conduct itself must be free from governmental regulation.” Employment
Div., Ore. Dept. of Human Res. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 882 (1990). “[I]n order
to launch a free exercise challenge, it is necessary to show the coercive effect of
the enactment as it operates against the individual in the practice of his
religion.” Malicki, 814 So. 2d at 354 (quotation and brackets omitted). “A law
establishing standards of conduct does not implicate the free exercise clause
unless adherence to those standards interferes with some religious activity.”
O’Connell, 986 F. Supp. at 78.
“The Free Exercise Clause is violated only when laws actually conflict
with a religion’s specific doctrines and therefore impose penalties either for
engaging in religiously motivated conduct or for refusing to engage in
religiously prohibited conduct.” Fortin v. Roman Catholic Bishop of Portland,
871 A.2d 1208, 1227 (Me. 2005) (quotation omitted; emphasis added). The
inquiry “asks whether government has placed a substantial burden on the
observation of a central religious belief or practice . . . .” Swaggart Ministries
v. Cal. Bd. of Equalization, 493 U.S. 378, 384-85 (1990) (quotation omitted;
emphasis added). The entity claiming First Amendment protection must
identify “a specific religious doctrine or practice that will be burdened” by
pursuit of the lawsuit. Fortin, 871 A.2d at 1226.
The defendants in this case have not identified a specific religious
doctrine or practice that would be burdened by a recognition of a common law
duty to protect the plaintiffs. The defendants have not alleged that they were
forbidden from counseling Poisson to seek outside help, or even that the
Jehovah’s Witness faith prohibits its members from seeking outside help.
Therefore, I would hold that the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment
does not bar the plaintiffs’ lawsuit, as no central tenet of the faith would be
burdened by a finding of a common law duty.
Further, “[a] law, legislatively or judicially created, that would regulate or
prevent religiously motivated conduct does not violate the First Amendment if
the State’s interests in the law’s enforcement outweighs the burden that the
law imposes on the free exercise of religion.” Alberts v. Devine, 479 N.E.2d
113, 123 (Mass. 1985). Even if the recognition of a duty to counsel Poisson to
seek help from the authorities violated a tenet of the Jehovah’s Witness faith, I
would hold, in recognition of the State’s obvious interest in protecting children
14
from abuse, that the burden on the free exercise of the defendants’ religion is
minimal.
State action does not violate the Establishment Clause if: (1) it has a
secular purpose; (2) “its principal or primary effect [is] one that neither
advances nor inhibits religion”; and (3) it does not “foster an excessive
government entanglement with religion.” Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602,
612-13 (1971). The defendants argue that any inquiry into the counsel given to
Poisson would foster excessive government entanglement with religion, as it
would require the trial court to evaluate religious doctrine and the quality and
substance of religious counseling. They argue that such an inquiry amounts to
a claim for “clergy malpractice,” a cause of action which has not been
recognized by any court. See 47 Am. Jur. Trials 271, 288 (1993 & Supp.
2004).
The defendants do not challenge the plaintiffs’ claim upon either of the
first two parts of the Lemon test. The United States Supreme Court has
recognized, however, that the third part of the test, the entanglement factor, is
significant simply as an aspect of the inquiry into the effect of the government
action, the second part of the test. Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S. 203, 233
(1997). I do not find that the inquiry into the advice given by the elders of the
Wilton Congregation would have as its principal and primary effect either the
advancement or inhibition of religion. Any entanglement created by the
imposition of a duty upon the elders of the Wilton Congregation does not rise to
the level of being excessive. It would merely require that when a duty arose
due to the foreseeability of harm, the elders would be required to, at the very
least, counsel the member who approaches them for advice to seek help.
Nor do I find that it would create a cause of action for clergy malpractice.
The definition of malpractice relies upon adherence to professional standards.
See Black’s Law Dictionary 971 (7th ed. 1999). There is no need to rely upon
any “professional” clerical standard here to discover the Wilton Congregation’s
duty in this case. See Morrison, ___ So. 2d at ___, ___, 2005 WL 1039146, at
*18, *20. As the trial court found in its ruling on an earlier motion for
summary judgment: “The burden involves only common sense advice to the
church member . . . .”
In Malicki, the Florida Supreme Court rejected a First Amendment bar to
tort liability for the negligent conduct of church officials that resulted in harm
to the plaintiffs. In its opinion, the court quoted the reasoning of a lower
Florida court, which had come to a slightly different conclusion, but whose
reasoning I find persuasive: “[J]ust as the State may prevent a church from
offering human sacrifices, it may protect its children against injuries caused by
pedophiles by authorizing civil damages against a church that knowingly
15
(including should know) creates a situation in which such injuries are likely to
occur.” Malicki, 814 So. 2d at 360 (quotation omitted).
Finally, I would uphold the trial court’s decision that though the statute
of limitations, RSA 508:4, I (1997) and RSA 508:8 (1997), had expired by the
time that plaintiff Holly Berry filed suit, the discovery rule allowed her to bring
suit within three years of the time she discovered, “or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have discovered, the injury and its causal
relationship to the act or omission complained of.” RSA 508:4, I. Though the
plaintiff was aware of the sexual abuse, she was not aware of the defendant’s
response to Poisson’s repeated requests for aid until “within a short period of
time prior to filing” the lawsuit. Therefore I would uphold the trial court’s
determination that Holly Berry is not barred by the statute of limitations, and
allow both Holly and Heather Berry to proceed with their claims against
defendant Wilton Congregation for common law negligence. Accordingly, I
respectfully dissent.
16