THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2003-622
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
VINCENT SCHONARTH
Argued: February 17, 2005
Opinion Issued: September 2, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karen E. Huntress, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Vincent Schonarth, appeals his convictions
on seventeen counts of theft by deception. See RSA 637:4 (1996). On appeal,
he contends that the Trial Court (T. Nadeau, J.) erred in: (1) consolidating the
seventeen indictments for trial; (2) denying his motions to dismiss and for
directed verdict; and (3) allowing a trial deposition of the victim prior to trial.
We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The defendant first met the
victim, Denley Emerson, in 1996 when the defendant contacted him to inquire
about renting property that Emerson owned. Emerson advised the defendant
that he did not want to rent the property but wanted to sell it. When the
defendant said that he had no money, Emerson agreed to finance the property
for five years. They signed a contract for sale of the property for $77,000 on
November 12, 1996. In 1999, the defendant advised Emerson that he had
obtained a mortgage. When the purported loan did not close, the defendant
advised Emerson that the mortgage company had been bought by Providian
Bank and that Providian would give him the mortgage. Between 1996 and
2002, neither the defendant nor his wife filed a mortgage application with
Providian.
Despite not having a pending application, the defendant continued to
represent to Emerson that he had filed an application and reported on its
status. In the following years, the defendant asked Emerson to lend him
money to satisfy requirements allegedly imposed by Providian to obtain the
loan. He also requested loans for the purchase price and closing costs for a
piece of property contiguous to the one he was to purchase from Emerson, for
court costs and fines, for repair expenses to the house, to pay debts to avoid
going to jail, to pay a bond premium and employment security, and for utility
and business-related expenses. Each of these loans was in some way allegedly
related to enabling the defendant to secure the mortgage for the purchase of
Emerson’s property.
Although the defendant told Emerson that he would repay him with the
proceeds of the mortgage, he neither sought a mortgage nor repaid the loans.
The defendant also did not use the loan proceeds for purposes related to the
purchase of the property.
In 2002, the defendant advised Emerson that Providian would not be
financing his purchase of the property. He also told Emerson that he had
formed a corporation with his wife to buy radio stations in the Lakes Region.
He then solicited and obtained funds from Emerson for investment in the
corporation and for related purposes. The corporation did not exist.
In 2002, the State charged the defendant with seventeen counts of theft
by deception. See RSA 637:4. In the indictments, the State alleged that,
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, the defendant obtained or
exercised control over varying amounts of funds belonging to Emerson by
deception with a purpose to deprive him of the funds.
In March 2003, the State moved to consolidate the seventeen
indictments, citing our decision in State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118 (2003). The
defendant objected, arguing that each of the allegations was separate and
distinct and that joinder would allow the State to introduce evidence that
would be inadmissible if the charges were tried separately. The trial court
granted the motion, finding that the acts constituted a common plan for
purposes of joinder.
2
1. Consolidation of Charges
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred in
consolidating the seventeen charges for trial. Absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, we will affirm a trial court’s decision to sever or
consolidate charges. State v. McIntyre, 151 N.H. 465, 466 (2004). To establish
that a trial court’s decision was unsustainable, the defendant must
demonstrate that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
A defendant has an absolute right to severance of unrelated offenses.
Ramos, 149 N.H. at 128. Unrelated offenses are those that are not related. Id.
Related offenses are those that are based upon the same conduct, a single
criminal episode or a common plan. Id. In State v. McIntyre, 151 N.H. at 466-
67, we adopted the definition of “plan” under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
404(b) for purposes of the common plan relatedness test for joinder.
The defendant argues that under McIntyre, the trial court erred in joining
the charges. We disagree. Viewed objectively, the defendant’s actions
demonstrated a prior design that included the charged acts as part of its
consummation. See State v. Michaud, 150 N.H. 359, 361 (2003). The charges
all involved the same elderly victim; all were based upon the defendant’s efforts
to defraud the victim of his property through increasingly grandiose schemes
connected to the defendant’s alleged desire to repay his debt to the victim.
Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s ruling.
II. Sufficiency of Evidence of Theft by Deception
The defendant next argues that the State failed to present sufficient
evidence that he committed theft by deception. To prevail in an appeal
challenging the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant bears the burden of
proving that no rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Flynn, 151 N.H. 378, 382 (2004). In reviewing the evidence, we
examine each evidentiary item in the context of all the evidence, not in
isolation. Id.
“A person commits theft if he obtains or exercises control over property of
another by deception and with a purpose to deprive him thereof.” RSA 637:4, I
(1996). The defendant concedes that viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State, the jury could have found that he made false
3
statements, that the victim gave him money and that the victim believed at
least some of his statements. He argues, however, that the State failed to prove
the victim’s transfers of property were the consequence of the defendant’s false
statements and therefore that the defendant exercised control over the property
as a result of deception. In support, he offers that the victim continued to
retain legal ownership of the land that the defendant occupied, that the value
of the land had increased due to improvements made by the defendant and
that the victim “relied at least as much on his knowledge of his legal rights and
of the land’s value, as on [the defendant’s] increasingly implausible false
statements.” We disagree with both the defendant’s interpretation of the
evidence and his legal conclusion.
We note that much of the victim’s testimony cited by the defendant is
taken out of context. Moreover, the jury was free to accept or reject his
testimony in whole or in part. See State v. Giles, 140 N.H. 714, 718 (1996).
The victim testified that he provided money to the defendant “based upon what
he said,” that he “believed him very thoroughly for several years,” and that he
would not have entered notes in his checkbook that he believed to be
inaccurate. In response to the State’s question, “Would you have loaned [the
defendant] all this money . . . if you knew that he had never applied for a
mortgage with the Providian Bank,” the victim replied, “Of course not.” That
the victim retained ownership in land that may have increased in value due at
least in part to improvements made by the defendant does not alter our
conclusion that the evidence supported the jury’s finding that the defendant
obtained substantial monies from the victim by deception.
III. Trial Deposition of Victim
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in permitting the
State to take the trial deposition of the victim. We review the trial court’s
ruling under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v.
Sargent, 148 N.H. 571, 573 (2002).
RSA 517:13, II (1997) provides that the trial court may permit either
party in a criminal case to take the deposition of any witness, other than the
defendant, when the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the
deposition is necessary:
(a) To preserve the testimony of any witness who is unlikely to be
available for trial due to illness, absence from the jurisdiction or
reluctance to cooperate; or
(b) To insure a fair trial, avoid surprise or for other good cause
shown.
4
In granting the State’s request to preserve the victim’s testimony for trial,
the trial court found that although the victim was in good health, he was
eighty-three years old and had exceeded the life expectancy for males. The
court noted the several delays that had occurred in scheduling the case for trial
and found that good cause existed to ensure that the jury could hear the
victim’s testimony. The defendant argues that RSA 517:13, II(a) must be read
separately from RSA 517:13, II(b) and that because the State failed to satisfy
the specific criteria set forth in 517:13, II(a), the trial court erred by considering
the same factors in finding good cause under RSA 517:13, II(b). Even if we
assume that the defendant is correct in arguing that the two subsections of
RSA 517:13, II must be read separately, we find no error in the trial court’s
ruling. While RSA 517:13, II(a) addresses illness, it does not specifically
address death. The factors cited by the trial court satisfied the good cause
standard set forth in RSA 517:13, II(b). Because the court’s findings are
supported by the record, we conclude that the trial court properly exercised its
discretion in granting the State’s request for a trial deposition.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5