THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2003-795
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSEPH SAWTELL
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 9, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Charles J. Keefe, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Gleason Law Offices, P.C., of Haverhill, Massachusetts (Scott F. Gleason
and Thomas J. Gleason on the brief, and Scott F. Gleason orally) for the
defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant, Joseph Sawtell, appeals his conviction in
the Superior Court (Coffey, J.) of first degree murder. See RSA 630:1-a (1996).
We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On September 19, 2002, the
defendant allegedly shot the victim, his nineteen-year-old girlfriend, Crystal
Sheehan, four times with a .357 magnum revolver and then shot himself in the
chest. The defendant and the victim had been involved in a relationship for
about one year prior to her murder, and the victim had given birth to the
defendant’s son approximately two months earlier. Prior to the murder, the
defendant had, on several occasions, expressed unhappiness about the victim’s
pregnancy, thrown her out of their apartment and threatened to harm her.
Thus, the State’s theory was that “the birth of the baby created a conflict
between the defendant and [the victim] and the defendant’s demonstrated
dislike of living with the baby evidences his motive in carrying out [the victim’s]
murder and his failed suicide.”
On appeal, the defendant challenges the introduction of three pieces of
evidence: (1) an inculpatory statement he made to a nurse who was treating
him; (2) testimony of witnesses as to his unhappiness about fatherhood and
removal of the victim and their son from their apartment; and (3) testimony of
witnesses that he had previously threatened the victim with a gun.
We review a trial court’s decision on the admissibility of evidence under
an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Amirault, 149 N.H.
541, 543 (2003). To meet this standard, the defendant must demonstrate that
the trial court’s rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to his
prejudice. Id.
We first consider the challenge to the nurse’s testimony about the
defendant’s statement that he shot himself. The defendant argues that its
introduction violated the physician-patient privilege, see RSA 329:26 (2004);
N.H. R. Ev. 503(a), because his statement was made to the hospital nurse who
was providing care and treatment to the defendant under instructions from a
treating physician, and was necessary for diagnosis and treatment.
RSA 329:26 provides in relevant part:
The confidential relations and communications between a
physician or surgeon licensed under provisions of this chapter and
the patient of such physician or surgeon are placed on the same
basis as those provided by law between attorney and client, and,
except as otherwise provided by law, no such physician or surgeon
shall be required to disclose such privileged communications.
Confidential relations and communications between a patient and
any person working under the supervision of a physician or
surgeon that are customary and necessary for diagnosis and
treatment are privileged to the same extent as though those
relations or communications were with such supervising physician
or surgeon.
Traditionally, we have carefully guarded the confidential relationship
between patients and their medical providers. In re Grand Jury Subpoena
(Medical Records of Payne), 150 N.H. 436, 440 (2004). The physician-patient
privilege is meant to encourage the patient to disclose relevant facts fully so as
2
to receive complete and appropriate treatment. State v. Kupchun, 117 N.H.
412, 415 (1977). The privilege parallels the Hippocratic oath in recognizing
that much of what a physician learns from his patient may be both
embarrassing and of little real consequence to society. In order to insure that
the patient may reveal facts that could be necessary to successful treatment
without fear of humiliation, the legislature has granted the patient a privilege
protecting statements made to a physician for purposes of treatment. Nelson v.
Lewis, 130 N.H. 106, 109 (1987). Thus, when construing the physician-patient
privilege, we do so strictly. See State v. Elwell, 132 N.H. 599, 605 (1989).
A careful review of the record reveals that the statement was not made
for the purpose of obtaining a diagnosis or treatment. Rather, the nurse
testified that the statement was made while she was explaining the defendant’s
injuries to him: “When I described the track the bullet had taken through his
chest, [the defendant] made the statement that, ‘I was aiming for my heart.’”
The record reflects that at the time the defendant made the statement the
nurse was not attempting to elicit any information from him nor was the
defendant responding to any questions posed by her. In addition, there was no
evidence presented at trial that the nurse used the information in any way to
treat or diagnose the defendant. In fact, at the time the statement was made
the defendant had already received treatment and, in any event, the statement
was not necessary for his treatment. Thus, the statement was not “essential in
procuring information necessary for treatment or diagnosis.” Elwell, 132 N.H.
at 605. Accordingly we hold that the statement was not protected under RSA
329:26.
Even if the introduction of the statement were erroneous, the error was
harmless. The statement itself was cumulative of similar statements made by
the defendant at the murder scene, as testified to by three witnesses. We do
not agree with the defendant’s contention that the statement made to the nurse
would appear more credible and thus be more prejudicial than the statements
made immediately after the murder because the statement to the nurse was
made “after he had been treated and stabilized in a hospital and was resting
comfortably” while the statements to the other witnesses were made when he
was “injured and in great pain.”
Next, the defendant argues that the admission of evidence regarding his
unhappiness about being a father and his attempts to evict the victim from the
apartment violated New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403, as the evidence was
substantially more prejudicial than probative.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 provides:
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value
is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
3
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
Whether the probative value of certain evidence is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice is a matter within the trial court’s
discretion, and we will not disturb that determination absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. State v. Plch, 149 N.H. 608, 621 (2003). Evidence is
unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to appeal to a jury’s
sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger
other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to base its decision
on something other than the established propositions in the case. State v.
Pelkey, 145 N.H. 133, 136 (2000). Unfair prejudice is not mere detriment to a
defendant from the tendency of the evidence to prove his guilt. State v.
Cochran, 132 N.H. 670, 672 (1990). Rather, the prejudice required for
reversible error is an undue tendency to induce a decision against the
defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.
Id.
We disagree with the defendant that the evidence concerning his dislike
of being a parent and attempts to evict the victim and his son from the home
was more prejudicial than probative. The evidence was relevant and highly
probative of the defendant’s motive to commit murder. The defendant has
failed to show how this evidence, or its effect, was to appeal to a jury’s
sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or call
upon the jury to make a decision based upon emotion. We hold that the
evidence had sufficient probative value such that the trial court properly
exercised its discretion in concluding that its probative value was not
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.
Finally, the defendant argues that the admission of evidence of his prior
threats to the victim with a gun violate New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
404(b). Specifically, he argues that the prior incidents, which occurred ten
months and five months prior to the murder, lacked temporal proximity to the
crime. We disagree.
We review the trial court’s admission of evidence pursuant to Rule 404(b)
for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Smalley, 151 N.H. 193,
196 (2004). The purpose of Rule 404(b) in a criminal trial is to ensure that the
defendant is tried on the merits of the crime as charged and to prevent a
conviction based on evidence of other crimes or wrongs. State v. Bassett, 139
N.H. 493, 496 (1995). Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
4
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
Evidence of other crimes is not admissible unless: (1) it is relevant for a
purpose other than to show the defendant’s bad character or disposition; (2)
there is clear proof that the defendant committed the other crimes or acts; and
(3) prejudice to the defendant does not substantially outweigh the probative
value of the evidence. Bassett, 139 N.H. at 496.
We have previously held that prior threats and assaults by a defendant
against a victim were relevant to prove the defendant’s intent and therefore
admissible under Rule 404 (b). In State v. Dukette, 145 N.H. 226, 230 (2000),
we concluded that evidence of prior assaults was admissible because the prior
conduct involved the same victim, a similar weapon, and occurred in a like
circumstance. Id. Here, as in Dukette, the prior acts involved the same
parties, a similar, if not identical weapon, and occurred under similar
circumstances.
We disagree with the defendant’s argument that the prior incidents
lacked sufficient proximity to be relevant pursuant to Rule 404 (b). In State v.
Allen, 128 N.H. 390, 397 (1986), an attempted murder case, we held that
evidence of the defendant’s entry into the victim’s house with a loaded revolver,
which occurred three years earlier, was admissible and relevant to prove the
defendant’s intent. Here, one incident occurred approximately five months
before the murder, and the other incident occurred approximately ten months
before the murder.
Thus, under the facts of this case, we find the evidence of the prior
threats was admissible because the threats were relevant to prove the
defendant’s intent and did not lack temporal proximity to the crime.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5