THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2003-209
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JAMES WELLINGTON
Argued: February 5, 2004
Opinion Issued: April 20, 2004
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the
State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, James Wellington, was convicted by a jury of six counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I(l) (1996), II (Supp. 1999), one count of felonious sexual assault, see RSA
632-A:3, III (1996), and one count of indecent exposure and lewdness, see RSA 645:1, II(a) (Supp. 1999). The
defendant argues that the Trial Court (McGuire, J.) erred by: (1) refusing to award him funds to hire an expert on
child witness suggestibility to consult with defense counsel; and (2) refusing to allow him to introduce evidence
tending to demonstrate the victim’s sexual knowledge. We affirm.
The victim, an eight-year-old female at the time, first met the defendant in May 2001 when he helped the
victim’s mother move into a new apartment. The defendant continued to have contact with the victim and her
mother through the church they all attended and in late August 2001, the defendant volunteered to mentor the
victim. The victim’s mother agreed to let the defendant spend time with the victim. Throughout August and early
September the defendant took the victim swimming at Webster Lake and on occasion took her to his house.
During that time the defendant touched the victim’s genital area while they were swimming.
On one occasion, while at the defendant’s house, the victim asked the defendant "where babies come from." The
defendant told the victim that it was too hard to explain and that he would show her. He took off his clothes and
had the victim take off her clothes. He next got on top of the victim on his bed and touched his penis to her
genital area, but said that he could not show her because his penis would not fit into her vagina. He then put his
mouth on her genital area and touched her genital area with his hand. After that he masturbated, ejaculated onto
her and wiped the semen off with a paper towel. Then he placed his penis inside her mouth.
On the evening of September 11, 2001, the victim’s mother went to a meeting and left the defendant to babysit
the victim and her friend. After the friend had gone home, the defendant pulled down the victim’s pants and
underwear and put his mouth on her genital area. Nine days later, on September 20, the victim told her mother
what had happened. The victim’s mother contacted the police.
Sergeant Norman Ashburn of the Franklin Police Department responded and spoke briefly with the victim and
her mother. Ashburn took them to the police station where they met briefly with Officer Nancy Hicks. Neither
Hicks nor Ashburn had significant experience interviewing children. On September 24, Anne Pennock of the
New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families met with Hicks and together they interviewed the
victim. The interview was videotaped and lasted between forty-five minutes and an hour.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion for services other than counsel, pursuant to RSA 604-A:6 (2001),
seeking "funds in the amount of $2,000 for the purpose of consulting with Dr. Phillip Esplin, an expert in the
area of child suggestibility and interviewing techniques." The trial court denied the motion. The defendant
sought reconsideration, which the court denied.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it denied him the funds necessary to consult with Dr.
Esplin for a review of the discovery material and an opinion as to whether false memory implantation may have
occurred. The defendant contends that he made a sufficient showing that the interviewers engaged in improper
or suggestive interviewing techniques, and he claims violations of his rights to due process, a fair trial, and equal
protection. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, VI, XIV.
We first address the defendant’s claims under the New Hampshire Constitution, and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Regardless of whether a defendant has invoked equal protection, fundamental fairness necessary for due process,
or the right to services to enable his counsel to assist him effectively, an indigent defendant's access to experts
has been said to lie within the sound discretion of the court. State v. Campbell, 127 N.H. 112, 115 (1985). To
warrant a favorable exercise of that discretion, it is not enough merely to allege in general or conclusory terms
that expert services would be helpful. Id. Rather, a defendant must demonstrate by reference to the facts and
circumstances of his particular case that the assistance he seeks is necessary to ensure effective preparation of
his defense by his attorneys. Id.
To successfully establish an unsustainable exercise of that discretion, on appeal, the defendant must demonstrate
by clear and convincing evidence that his request to the court included as complete a showing of necessity for
the desired services as could be expected of him, and that the denial of funds substantially prejudiced him at
trial. State v. Stow, 136 N.H. 598, 605 (1993); see also State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001); Campbell,
127 N.H. at 117.
The defendant filed a motion for services other than counsel to explore the possibility that improper techniques
were employed during interviews of the victim because: (1) the initial interviews between the victim and
Ashburn and Hicks were not recorded; (2) "leading questions and anatomical drawings were used"; and (3) "the
child was not asked about her memories of prior instances of abuse." The defendant cited our approval of expert
testimony in this area, see State v. Sargent, 144 N.H. 103, 105 (1999). He also stated that, "if after consulting
with Dr. Esplin, counsel feels that it is necessary to call Dr. Esplin at a trial in this matter, counsel will then
petition this court for additional funds."
In denying the initial motion for funds the trial court ruled:
According to the defendant, the value of Dr. Esplin’s services is to explore the
reliability of [the victim’s] statements and whether, because of improper interviewing
techniques, false memory implantation may have occurred . . . . After reviewing the
videotape and other relevant evidence, the Court finds that the defendant has not shown
that improper interviewing techniques were used, and thus, the probable value of Dr.
Esplin’s testimony is minimal.
The defendant argues that the trial court’s finding constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion because he
pointed to specific examples of improper interview techniques. In State v. Sargent, 144 N.H. at 106, we held that
"the proper protocols and techniques used to interview child victim witnesses" is a subject for expert testimony.
We did not require, however, "that the trial court provide funds for such a witness, nor did [we] mandate that
such expert witnesses be called in all cases involving child victims." Cupe v. State, 560 S.E.2d 700, 706 (Ga. Ct.
App. 2002).
In this case, the defendant has not met his burden of demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence that his
request for authorization to obtain expert services at public expense included as complete a showing of necessity
as could then be expected of him. See Campbell, 127 N.H. at 117. At the time of his request, he merely pointed
out to the trial court, through his motions and during his motion hearings, that a few improper techniques may
have been employed during the interview without demonstrating how those improper techniques would affect
his case.
Specifically, the defendant pointed to several exchanges that took place during the recorded interview. One such
exchange is the following:
Victim: Well he showed me ways on how to make a baby and on how to . . .
Anne: Would it be easier if you pointed to the picture?
Victim: Yes.
Anne: Okay.
Victim: Is there a girl in there? He tried um . . . (circles vagina and draws a line
between female and male figures)
Officer Hicks: What did he try to do with his penis in your vagina?
Victim: He tried to show me how men and women made a baby.
Anne: Yeah?
Victim: Uh huh.
Officer Hicks: But what did he do with his penis in your vagina?
Victim: Well he didn’t really go in but he tried to show me with it. They were really
(unclear) and then he showed me how they could have it but not have a baby by not
using that.
Although both questions asked by Officer Hicks were leading, because at no point had the victim stated, prior to
the questions, that the defendant had put his penis in her vagina, we are not persuaded that such questions had
any impact upon his case. In each instance, the victim did not respond with the answer suggested by Officer
Hicks’ questions; rather, she gave her own independent version of the events. The defendant pointed to only
three other excerpts in his motions and during his motions hearings. After reviewing the videotape and transcript
of the interview, we find those three excerpts to be equally unpersuasive.
The defendant also pointed out that the interviewers used anatomical drawings, but he failed to present to the
court how that use may have affected his case. See Campbell, 127 N.H. 115. Additionally, the defendant pointed
to a game of "hangman" that was played by the interviewers and the victim at the end of the interview. While
under some circumstances the use of a game could be an inappropriate effort to cajole a child into giving
favorable responses, in this case the child spontaneously brought up the notion of playing the game. At no point
did the interviewers indicate that playing the game was contingent upon her answers to the questions, nor did
they ever attempt to use the game to aid in the interview.
The same analysis holds for the defendant’s reference to the fact that several prior interviews were unrecorded
and his claim that the interviewers failed to ask the child about her prior sexual history. In all instances, the
defendant, while citing examples of possible improper interview techniques, failed to point out how, under the
facts and circumstances of his case, those techniques, if improper, affected the victim’s answers so that an expert
was necessary to ensure effective preparation of his case. See id. We find that at the time the defendant requested
authorization to obtain the expert services, he failed to make as complete a showing of necessity as could then
have been expected of him; therefore, the trial court’s decision not to grant the defendant the funds he sought for
an expert was a sustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 117; Stow, 136 N.H. at 605.
The defendant argues that without access to an expert, his counsel was unable to make a showing as to what
effect, if any, these allegedly improper interview techniques may have had upon his case. While we cannot
expect defense counsel to indicate what an expert will find before the expert has had a chance to find it, it is
reasonable to require the defendant to articulate some basis beyond general hope that an expert might be helpful
in trial preparation. Campbell, 127 N.H. at 118. Under the facts and circumstances of this case, including the
specific examples cited to by the defendant, we see no evidence that the victim’s answers were a result of any
suggestibility that could be attributed to leading questions or other allegedly improper techniques. The defendant
must point to some evidence, aside from mere hope for its existence, which would tend to indicate a causative
effect of an improper interview technique, and, in this case, he failed to satisfy that burden.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than does the State Constitution under these
circumstances. See Williams v. Martin, 618 F.2d 1021, 1026 (4th Cir. 1980); Stow, 136 N.H. at 605; Campbell,
127 N.H. at 115. Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
The defendant’s second issue on appeal concerns evidence tending to demonstrate that the victim masturbated on
prior occasions. In order to determine the admissibility of such evidence, the trial court held a Howard hearing.
See State v. Howard, 121 N.H. 53 (1981). Although finding the evidence "probative of her prior sexual
knowledge because she alleged at the time of the disclosure that the defendant made her masturbate in front of
him and put her own finger in her vagina," the trial court denied the defendant the opportunity to make use of or
inquire into the incident because it found that "sufficient trustworthy evidence" had not been presented to it at
that time. The only evidence was a statement from the mother that a babysitter had told her that the victim had
masturbated.
The defendant argues that he presented sufficient trustworthy evidence and that, even if he were not allowed to
introduce such evidence, he should have been allowed to inquire about it on cross-examination because he had a
"good-faith basis to believe the conduct occurred, and an ability to prove the factual predicate underlying the
inquiry."
In Howard, we recognized that the "average juror would perceive the average twelve-year-old girl as a sexual
innocent." Howard, 121 N.H. at 61. In order to counter that perception, we held that "a defendant must be
afforded the opportunity to show, by specific incidents of sexual conduct, that the [victim] has the experience
and ability to contrive a statutory rape charge against him." Id.
A trial court’s determination about the introduction of evidence or the scope of cross-examination is a matter of
discretion for the court and will not be overturned absent an unsustainable exercise of such discretion. State v.
Berrocales, 140 N.H. 647, 649 (1996); State v. Ellsworth, 142 N.H. 710, 720 (1998). To establish an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Berrocales, 140 N.H. at 649.
In both circumstances, to be admissible, the defendant must demonstrate that the specific details of the prior
allegation are probative of the assertion that the victim had independent knowledge of the sexual activity with
which the defendant is charged. Berrocales, 140 N.H. at 649; Ellsworth, 142 N.H. at 720-21. In this case, the
trial court’s determination to disallow the introduction of such evidence did not constitute an unsustainable
exercise of discretion because the fact that the victim may have masturbated on prior occasions was not
probative of independent knowledge of the sexual activity with which the defendant was charged.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.