THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2003-303
CITY OF MANCHESTER SCHOOL DISTRICT & a.
v.
CITY OF MANCHESTER
Argued: January 15, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 15, 2004
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Dean B. Eggert and Jennifer L. Murphy on the brief, and Mr.
Eggert orally), for the plaintiffs.
Thomas I. Arnold, III, deputy city solicitor, of Manchester, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. In this declaratory judgment action, the defendant, City of Manchester (city), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Mangones, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the plaintiffs, Manchester School
District and School Administrative Unit #37 (collectively, the school district). The court ruled that the city acted
without authority when, by charter amendment, it merged the school district with the municipal corporation
thereby making the school district a city department. See RSA ch. 49-B (2003). We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. In December 1999, the school district filed a petition for declaratory
judgment, seeking a determination that it was not a department of city government. The Superior Court (J.
Nadeau, C.J.) ruled that because the school district functions as a "substantially independent governmental
entity," it was not a city department.
The board of mayor and aldermen then proposed an amendment to the city charter. The effect of the amendment
was to merge the school district with the municipal corporation and make it a city department. The amendment
also gave the mayor and aldermen authority to develop procedures for the administration of the school
department budget. On November 6, 2001, Manchester voters approved the charter amendment.
In response, the school district filed a second petition for declaratory judgment, seeking a declaration that the
charter amendment was unlawful. Both parties filed motions for summary judgment. The Trial Court
(Mangones, J.) granted the school district’s motion for summary judgment and concluded that "a specific
legislative act must be in effect for a City to create a school department in derogation of general law on the
issue." This appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all
properly drawn inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Big League Entm’t v. Brox
Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and
if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The sole issue for our review is whether the city had the authority to adopt a charter amendment that merges the
school district with the municipal corporation, thus making the school district a city department. In deciding this
issue, we consider our constitution, the home rule statutes and statutes governing the operation of school
districts.
Under our constitution, the legislature has plenary control over municipalities. See State v. Goffstown, 100 N.H.
131, 133 (1956). Thus, "[municipalities] have only the powers which the State grants to them." Id. (quotation
omitted). The legislature has authorized municipalities to adopt charters, which transfer power from the
legislature and invest it in the governing body of the municipality. See 13 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice,
Local Government Law § 31, at 19 (1995).
In New Hampshire, prior to 1966, municipal charters "could be amended or repealed at the discretion of the
legislature." Id. § 33, at 22. In 1966, Part I, Article 39, the home rule amendment, was added to the New
Hampshire Constitution. Id. § 33, at 23. It provides:
No law changing the charter or form of government of a particular city or town shall be
enacted by the legislature except to become effective upon the approval of the voters of
such city or town upon a referendum to be provided for in said law.
The legislature may by general law authorize cities and towns to adopt or amend their
charters or forms of government in any way which is not in conflict with general law,
provided that such charters or amendments shall become effective only upon the
approval of the voters of each such city or town on a referendum.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 39.
The first paragraph of the amendment "prevents the legislature from altering the form of municipal government,
as provided in any municipal charter without a referendum vote." Loughlin, supra § 33, at 23. "The second
paragraph of Article 39 is not self-executing and did not become operative until the enactment of legislation
setting out the method of exercising such home rule powers." Id. § 63, at 48. The power available to
municipalities under the second paragraph of Article 39 has been described as limited. See id. In stark contrast to
the "unlimited legislative powers that some other states have granted to municipalities," the power available to
cities and towns under New Hampshire’s home rule amendment "is limited to the specified processes by which
their charters or forms of government are adopted or amended." Id.
In 1979, the legislature enacted legislation to implement Part I, Article 39. Id. § 34, at 24. The current versions
of the home rule statutes were adopted in 1991. Id. § 35, at 26. Together, these three statutes, RSA chapters 49-
B, 49-C and 49-D, constitute a detailed, comprehensive scheme for the establishment and operation of local
government. RSA chapter 49-B gives municipalities explicit authority to choose a form of government. Their
choices, however, are limited. RSA 49-B:2, III (2003) limits a city’s choice to the forms of government outlined
in RSA chapter 49-C. See RSA 49-C:8 (2003) (explaining mayor-aldermen and council-manager plans).
Likewise, RSA 49-B:2, II (2003) limits a town’s choice to the forms of government outlined in RSA chapter 49-
D. See RSA 49-D:2, :3 (2003 & Supp. 2003) (explaining town council-town manager plan and optional types of
legislative bodies). Similarly, the structure of the form of government selected is dictated by RSA chapters 49-C
and 49-D.
RSA chapter 49-B is the starting point for the formation of a local government. It "provides the statutory
framework through which cities and towns may amend their actual forms of government, and grants them the
power necessary to carry out such changes." Loughlin, supra § 34, at 24. RSA 49-B:1 (2003) states:
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the home rule powers recognized by
article 39, part first, of the constitution of the state of New Hampshire. To that end, the
general court hereby provides a vehicle whereby a municipality may adopt a form of
government that best addresses local needs. At the same time, however, the general
court recognizes a need to require uniform procedures and practices when there is a
corresponding state interest. Therefore, this chapter is intended only to provide a
procedural framework by which a city or town may amend its actual form of
government. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to create any power in, or confer
any power upon, any city or town beyond that necessary to carry out the amendment of
a charter or form of government as set forth in this chapter. The general laws of this
state shall remain in full force and effect, and they shall be construed to be consistent
with this chapter to the greatest extent possible in the effectuation of this chapter’s
stated purpose. Accordingly, this chapter shall be strictly interpreted to allow towns and
cities to adopt, amend, or revise a municipal charter relative to their form of
government so long as the resulting charter is neither in conflict with nor inconsistent
with the general laws or the constitution of this state.
RSA chapter 49-B then sets forth exceptionally detailed requirements for the adoption, amendment and revision
of charters. To begin the process of adopting a charter, the municipality must establish a charter commission
comprised of nine elected members. RSA 49-B:3, :4 (Supp. 2003). The commission is required to hold a public
meeting within fourteen days of its own organizational meeting. RSA 49-B:4. The commission must issue a
preliminary report within 180 days of its establishment and a final report within 225 days. Id. The statute also
prescribes the procedure by which the charter, charter amendment or revision is submitted to the voters. RSA
49-B:6 (2003).
Here, the municipal charter denominates Manchester as a city. Therefore, the charter must adhere to the
framework set forth in RSA chapter 49-C. See RSA 49-B:2, III. RSA chapter 49-C permits a city to select either
the mayor-board of aldermen plan or the city council-manager plan as a form of government. RSA 49-C:8.
Manchester has opted for the mayor-board of aldermen form of government. RSA chapter 49-C sets forth an
exhaustive blueprint for this form of government.
The statute provides that the mayor, who is "the chief administrative officer and the head of the administrative
branch of the city government," must be selected from the city-at-large. RSA 49-C:8, :16 (2003). The mayor is
required to "devote full time to mayoral duties" and "shall preside" over meetings of the aldermen. RSA 49-
C:11, :12 (2003). Additional powers and duties of the mayor are detailed in RSA 49-C:16.
The statute further states that the municipal charter must provide for the appointment of officers, as well as the
establishment of departments, divisions and bureaus. Specifically, under RSA 49-C:20 (2003):
The charter shall provide for the appointment of a city clerk, a treasurer, one or more
assessors, a fire chief, a police chief, a health officer, a city solicitor, a general
assistance administrator, and such other officers as may be necessary to administer all
departments which the elected body and the charter shall establish.
Moreover, with respect to departments, RSA 49-C:21 (2003) provides:
The city shall have departments, divisions, and bureaus as may be established by the
charter or as the elected body may establish by ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
first chief administrative officer, under the provisions of the charter to draft and submit
to the elected body within 9 months after assuming office, an ordinance consistent with
the charter which provides for the division of the administrative service of the city into
departments, divisions and bureaus and defines the functions and duties of each.
In this case, the city relies primarily upon RSA 49-C:21 to argue that it has "clear authority" to transform the
school district into a city department. We disagree.
We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and, therefore, we will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add words that the legislature did not include. JTR Colebrook v. Town of Colebrook, 149
N.H. 767, 770 (2003). When construing a statute, we first examine the language found in the statute. Id.
"Although we give undefined language its plain and ordinary meaning, we must keep in mind the intent of the
legislation, which is determined by examining the construction of the statute as a whole, and not simply by
examining isolated words and phrases found therein." Id. (quotation omitted). We construe statutory provisions
in a manner that is consistent with the spirit and objectives of the legislation as a whole. Id. at 770-71.
Our task is to construe the scope of RSA 49-C:21. The city argues, and we agree, that we must look at RSA 49-
B:1 to accomplish this task. The overarching purpose of RSA chapter 49-B is to provide "the statutory
framework through which cities and towns may amend their actual forms of government, and grant[ ] them the
power necessary to carry out such changes." Loughlin, supra § 34, at 24. RSA chapters 49-C and 49-D work in
conjunction with RSA chapter 49-B by providing a limited list of forms of government that are available to
municipalities. See RSA 49-C:8; RSA 49-D:2, :3. Thus, RSA 49-B:1 provides a framework for construing not
only RSA chapter 49-B, but also RSA chapters 49-C and 49-D. Therefore, we consider RSA 49-B:1 in
determining the scope of authority granted to municipalities by RSA 49-C:21.
The legislative directive in RSA 49-B:1 provides that "this chapter shall be strictly interpreted to allow towns
and cities to adopt, amend, or revise a municipal charter relative to their form of government so long as the
resulting charter is neither in conflict with nor inconsistent with the general laws or the constitution of this
state." In light of this legislative directive, we have recognized that RSA chapter 49-B "provides the statutory
framework through which cities and towns may amend their actual forms of government, and grants them the
power necessary to carry out such changes." Town of Hooksett v. Baines, 148 N.H. 625, 628 (2002) (quotation
omitted). We have, however, cautioned that "the constitutional authority supporting RSA chapter 49-B in no way
provides or suggests that the towns, cities or other subdivisions of this State should have the right to exercise
supreme legislative authority." Id. (quotation omitted). In other words, when a municipality exceeds the
authority granted by RSA chapter 49-B, it intrudes into the legislative authority of the general court. See id. We
have thus held that "RSA chapter 49-B grants a municipality only the power necessary to amend its form of
government." Id. at 629.
Consistent with these limitations, we have held that RSA chapter 49-B permits a municipality with a city
council-city manager form of government to adopt a process of citizen initiative and referendum. Harriman v.
City of Lebanon, 122 N.H. 477, 482-83 (1982). Nonetheless, we noted that, if adopted, a citizen initiative and
referendum process could not "intrude" into matters reserved for the city council, and could not contravene the
general laws or the constitution. Id. at 483.
On the other hand, we have held that a town does not have the authority to enact a rent control ordinance. Girard
v. Town of Allenstown, 121 N.H. 268, 271-73 (1981) (quotation and brackets omitted). We stated that "towns
only have such powers as are expressly granted to them by the legislature and such as are necessarily implied or
incidental thereto." Id. at 271 (quotation omitted). We also declined to interpret RSA chapter 49-B "broadly and
literally." Id. at 272. Instead, we held that the statute "was intended only to provide a statutory framework by
which the cities and towns may amend their actual form of government and that RSA 49-B:8 . . . grants only the
power necessary to carry out such changes." Id. at 272-73.
More recently, we held that RSA chapter 49-B did not authorize the city of Manchester to alter its retirement
system by amending the city charter. Appeal of Barry, 143 N.H. 161, 165-66 (1998). In Barry, the retirement
board argued that ‘‘Part I, Article 39 of the New Hampshire Constitution and RSA chapter 49-B authorize[d] the
city to amend the retirement system because it is part of the city charter, its form of government." Id. at 164. We
squarely rejected the argument that the city’s retirement system was part of its form of government and stated
that "RSA 49-B:2 clearly limits the forms of government a municipality may choose, rather than grants a
municipality unbridled authority to amend its charter." Id. at 165.
Finally, in Baines, 148 N.H. at 630, we held that RSA chapter 49-B did not authorize a town to amend its charter
to impose term limits on city officials. We specifically rejected the town’s argument that because former RSA
49-B:2, IV authorized municipalities to regulate "terms of office," the town was authorized to amend its charter
to impose term limits. Id. at 629-30. In line with our previous holdings, we said that "RSA chapter 49-B grants a
municipality only the power necessary to amend its form of government." Id. at 629.
In sum, our cases demonstrate that RSA chapter 49-B authorizes municipalities to amend their actual forms of
government. See Harriman, 122 N.H. at 482-83. Our cases also demonstrate that RSA chapter 49-B does not
provide municipalities with the authority to enact rent control ordinances, amend their retirement systems or
impose term limits on elected officials because, in doing so, municipalities impermissibly intrude into the
legislative authority of the general court. See Girard, 121 N.H. at 271-73; Barry, 143 N.H. at 165; Baines, 148
N.H. at 629-30. In the present case, when the city amended its charter to make the school district into a city
department, it did not amend its actual form of government and, therefore, it acted outside of the scope of
authority granted to it by RSA chapter 49-B.
Moreover, there is a comprehensive statutory scheme that evidences a legislative intent not to permit
municipalities to exercise broad control over the establishment, powers and functioning of school districts.
School districts exist as separate entities because the legislature has determined that all school "districts legally
organized shall be corporations, with power to sue and be sued, to hold and dispose of real and personal property
for the use of the schools therein, and to make necessary contracts in relation thereto." RSA 194:2 (1999).
School districts have extensive powers, including the power to raise money, procure land, build schoolhouses,
obtain insurance, purchase vehicles and pay debts. RSA 194:3 (1999). In addition, the legislative scheme
includes a list of superintendent services that must be provided by each school district, as well as a list of
procedures that school districts must follow when adopting a budget. RSA 194-C:4, :9 (1999 & Supp. 2003).
The legislature has also created a state board of education that has the authority to manage, supervise and direct
the public schools in the State. RSA 186:5 (1999). This comprehensive statutory scheme suggests that, at least
with respect to the structure and functioning of school districts, the legislature did not intend to wholly abdicate
its supervisory control to municipalities. Accordingly, it would be inconsistent with this legislative intent to
adopt the city’s argument that the legislature intended to provide municipalities with the authority to merge a
school district with the municipal corporation by simply amending the city charter. Cf. Baines, 148 N.H. at 631
(explaining that it "would be repugnant to the implied intent of the statutory scheme" to allow a municipality to
impose term limits where the "legislature has created a comprehensive statutory scheme governing elections and
has defined the scope of qualifications necessary to obtain elected office").
RSA 49-C:20 provides additional evidence of the legislature’s intent not to permit municipalities to exercise
broad control over school districts. The statute specifically states that a charter "shall provide for" the
appointment of numerous officers, including a city clerk, a treasurer, an assessor, a fire chief and a police chief.
The statute does not give the city the authority to appoint the superintendent of a school district. Rather, the
legislature has expressly given this authority to the local school board. See RSA 194-C:5, II(a) (1999).
The absence of any reference to municipal authority over school districts in RSA chapter 49-C, and the existence
of a comprehensive statutory scheme for school districts in RSA chapter 194, raises considerable doubt that the
legislature intended to cede authority to municipalities to merge school districts with the city government
without explicit legislative approval.
To summarize, our cases have narrowly construed the scope of authority conferred upon municipalities by RSA
chapter 49-B in light of the legislative directive that it be strictly interpreted. To construe the home rule statutes
as broadly as the city suggests would run afoul of our previous decisions holding that RSA chapter 49-B only
provides municipalities with the statutory framework through which they can choose and amend their form of
government. See Baines, 148 N.H. at 628. "RSA chapter 49-B in no way provides or suggests that the towns,
cities or other subdivisions of this State should have the right to exercise supreme legislative authority." Id.
(quotation omitted). We thus conclude that the home rule statutes do not give the city the authority to merge the
school district with the municipal corporation.
Finally, the city points to Nashua, Portsmouth and Rochester as examples of municipalities that have created
school districts that are city departments. As the trial court correctly noted, however, the Nashua, Portsmouth
and Rochester school departments were created by special legislative act. See Laws 1923, ch. 227:2 (Nashua);
Laws 1905, ch. 212 (Portsmouth); Laws 1891, ch. 241:4 (Rochester). If anything, this suggests that when a
municipality seeks to transform the school district into a city department, it must obtain legislative approval. In
light of this history, we conclude that in order to merge the school district with the municipal corporation and
make the school district a city department, the city is required to obtain legislative authority.
Because legislative authority had not been obtained for the city to amend its charter to make the school district a
city department, we hold that the trial court correctly determined that the school district was entitled to judgment
as a matter of law.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.