THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2003-544
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DEBORAH MOORE
Argued: June 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: July 23, 2004
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Laura E. B. Lombardi, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for
the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
Galway, J. The defendant, Deborah Moore, was convicted of felony possession of hydromorphone and
misdemeanor possession of marijuana. See RSA 318-B:2; :26, II(a) (Supp. 2003). She appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) denying her motion to suppress evidence seized as a result of her arrest. We affirm.
I. Facts
The record of the suppression hearing supports the following facts. On December 11, 2002, State Trooper
Matthew Koehler was on patrol in Dalton. At approximately 4:30 p.m., he saw a pickup truck with a defective
headlight, and stopped it. The truck was driven by Linda Tellier, and the defendant was her only passenger.
While questioning Tellier about her license and registration, the trooper noticed an odor of alcohol coming from
the truck. He asked Tellier if she had been drinking, and she acknowledged that she had consumed one beer. He
also asked if there was any beer in the vehicle, and she replied that there was no alcohol, and that her passenger
had not been drinking. He then requested that she get out of the truck and submit to a field sobriety test. She
complied and passed the test.
Because the trooper believed that Tellier was not impaired and that she did not emit an odor of alcohol when she
was away from the truck, he became concerned that the vehicle might contain an open container of alcohol in
violation of the law. See RSA 265:81, III (1993). Accordingly, he asked Tellier if there were any open containers
in the truck, which she denied. She, however, declined Trooper Koehler’s request to search the vehicle for such
containers.
Still lacking an explanation for the odor of alcohol, the trooper asked the defendant to get out of the truck so he
could determine whether she was the source of the odor. When the defendant stepped out of the truck, the
trooper noticed a slightly crumpled beer can between the passenger seat and the passenger door, "dirty liquid" on
the floorboards of the passenger compartment, and what looked like spilled liquid on the front of the defendant’s
pants. He asked the defendant if she had been drinking beer from the can, and she replied that she had been
drinking earlier, but denied drinking in the truck. The trooper then searched the vehicle and picked up the
opened beer can, noting that it was cold and that there were beer suds along the rim of the can.
The defendant was arrested for violating the open container law. See RSA 265:81, III. Following her arrest, the
defendant was found to be in possession of drugs, which gave rise to the charges prosecuted in this case.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion to suppress the drugs found on her person pursuant to Part I, Article
19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States
Constitution. She argued: (1) that Trooper Koehler illegally seized her when he detained her for a period of time
longer than necessary; (2) that his order to exit the truck was a pretext; and (3) that the New Hampshire
Constitution requires an officer to have an articulable basis predicated upon safety considerations before
ordering a passenger to exit, and that the trooper had no such articulable basis. The trial court denied the motion,
ruling that the trooper had a "reasonable, articulable suspicion that there was an open container in the vehicle."
This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the trooper "ordered her out of the truck in which she was a passenger" without any
"articulable, case-specific reason to do so." Because the defendant relies solely upon the State Constitution, we
cite federal authority for guidance only, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 233 (1983). In reviewing the trial court’s
ruling, we accept its factual findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State v.
Wallace, 146 N.H. 146, 148 (2001).
II. Analysis
The validity of the initial stop for a defective headlight is not challenged on appeal. Rather, the sole issue before
us is whether the trooper had reasonable, articulable suspicion to justify his request to the defendant to get out of
the truck. See Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20-21 (1968). We conclude that he did.
During a stop, an officer may ask a detainee a moderate number of questions to determine the detainee’s identity
and to try to obtain information confirming or dispelling the officer’s suspicions. State v. Szczerbiak, 148 N.H.
352, 355 (2002). Absent an independent basis for having a reasonable, articulable suspicion, however, an officer
cannot expand the scope of the initial stop. Cf. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. ___, 846 A.2d 1198, 1203-04
(2004) (recognizing that the purpose of Terry’s scope requirement is to prevent law enforcement officials from
fundamentally altering the nature of the stop by converting it into a general inquisition about past, present and
future wrongdoing, absent an independent basis for reasonable suspicion or probable cause). These parameters
impose a standard of "reasonableness" upon the exercise of discretion by government officials in order to
safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbitrary invasions. Id. at ___, 846 A.2d at 1201.
Here, the defendant argues that Trooper Koehler lacked any "articulable" reason to ask her to exit the truck.
Although she cites the officer’s testimony that "the reason [he] wanted her out of the vehicle [was] to see if the
odor of alcohol was on her," she argues that his "bare open-container suspicion did not give him any legitimate
reason to order her out of the car."
To determine the sufficiency of the officer’s suspicion, we must consider the facts he articulated in light of all of
the surrounding circumstances. See State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 381 (2003). We do not, however, consider
each fact in isolation. Id.
Here, we conclude that the following case-specific, objective facts support a finding that the officer had
reasonable, articulable suspicion that the defendant had been, was, or was about to engage in criminal activity
sufficient to justify asking the defendant to get out of the vehicle. See id. at 380. First, when an officer
determines that a driver is not the source of an odor of alcohol emanating from the vehicle, it is reasonable for
the officer to suspect that the odor might be coming from some other source—such as a passenger or an open
container within the vehicle—and that further investigation is necessary. This is particularly true in light of the
driver’s insistence that there was no alcohol in the vehicle, that there were no open containers in the vehicle, and
that the passenger had not been drinking. Second, an officer also could reasonably conclude that in order to
determine the source of the odor, it would be necessary to remove the passenger from the vehicle. And finally,
an officer could reasonably infer that an opened beer can in the vehicle and liquid on the vehicle’s floor indicates
that the open container law has been violated. The fact that there were other actions that a reasonable officer
might have taken does not automatically render the actions that were taken unreasonable.
We hold that these objective facts were sufficient to create an independent basis for having reasonable,
articulable suspicion that the defendant had been, was, or was about to engage in criminal activity and thus allow
an expansion of the scope of the initial stop. Thus, these facts justified the officer’s request that the defendant
exit the vehicle without violating her State constitutional rights.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.