THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2003-008
MOTION MOTORS, INC.
v.
KENNETH G. BERWICK & a.
Argued: February 4, 2004
Opinion Issued: April 20, 2004
Lester Wm. Firstenberger, PLLC, of Pittsfield, and Allyn C. Bridge, of Concord (Lester Wm. Firstenberger and
Mr. Bridge on the brief, and Mr. Firstenberger orally), for the plaintiff.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, of Manchester (Robert R. Lucic and John-Mark Turner on the brief, and Mr.
Lucic orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The defendants, Kenneth G. and Doris D. Berwick, appeal orders of the Superior Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) that: (1) the Berwicks could not maintain a claim for enhanced damages under RSA 227-J:8
(2000); (2) the Berwicks’ gravel rights did not extend to the entire eastern half of the property owned by the
plaintiff, Motion Motors, Inc. (Motion Motors); and (3) the Berwicks must remove the sawmill upon Motion
Motors’ demand. While the trial court addressed some issues as if both Berwicks had the rights in question, we
note that the reservations of rights in the gravel, timber and sawmill were reserved to Kenneth Berwick
personally. Motion Motors cross-appeals, arguing that the trial court erred by: (1) granting the Berwicks’ petition
to quiet title; (2) not admitting the testimony of certain witnesses; (3) dismissing Motion Motors’ claim for
damages; (4) ruling that Motion Motors had unlawfully terminated the Berwicks’ mineral rights and extending
those rights an additional three years; (5) denying Motion Motors’ request for discovery of the drafting
attorney’s personal notes; and (6) granting the Berwicks’ motion for a directed verdict. We affirm in part and
reverse in part.
The record establishes the following facts. On March 24, 1988, Motion Motors purchased real property from the
Berwicks, which Motion Motors had been renting from the Berwicks. At that time, the Berwicks’ son, Michael
Berwick, and Ralph Langevin each owned fifty percent of Motion Motors. The property is a square plot of land
in Loudon, connected to Ricker Road by a twelve-foot wide "panhandle" that runs approximately 200 feet
adjacent to the Berwicks’ property. The Berwicks’ property borders Ricker Road and, except for the
"panhandle," separates Motion Motors’ property from the road. The property conveyed consists of
approximately 10.4 acres. Additionally, there is a sawmill on the conveyed property, which was used by Kenneth
Berwick before and after the sale.
Motion Motors purchased the property by a quitclaim deed, which contained a metes and bounds description of
the property, set out certain covenants and reservations, including a reservation for future use of the sawmill, and
incorporated by reference an agreement (referenced agreement). The referenced agreement was revised on
March 24, 1993 (revised agreement). Both parties argue that there are conflicts among the grants, covenants, and
reservations in each document, as well as ambiguities within each document. Motion Motors has sought to sell
its interest in the parcel. To date, any proposed sales have been contingent upon Motion Motors securing a
release of Kenneth Berwick’s reservation of the use of the sawmill.
We begin with the Berwicks’ issues on appeal. They first appeal the denial of their counter-claim seeking
enhanced damages for the unauthorized felling of timber.
When the Berwicks sold the property to Motion Motors, they reserved "under Kenneth G. Berwick, personally, .
. . the rights to harvest and remove all standing timber" on the property for fifteen years. The Berwicks allege
that Motion Motors unlawfully invaded that right by cutting down trees on the property.
In matters of statutory interpretation, this court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in
the words of a statute considered as a whole. Estate of Ireland v. Worcester Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 656, 661 (2003).
We look first to the statutory language itself, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
words used. Id. If the language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the statute for further
indications of legislative intent. Id. The trial court's interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Pennelli v. Town of Pelham, 148 N.H. 365, 366 (2002).
RSA 227-J:8 states, in pertinent part:
I. No person shall negligently cut, fell, destroy, injure, or carry away any tree, timber,
log, wood, pole, underwood, or bark which is on the land of another person . . . without
the permission of that person . . . .
II. [A]ny person who violates the provisions in paragraph I shall forfeit to the person
injured no less than 3 and not more than 10 times the market value of every such tree,
timber, log, lumber, wood, pole, underwood, or bark cut, felled, destroyed, injured, or
carried away.
The Berwicks rely upon Smith v. Kennett, in which we recognized that the statute provides damages for the
"benefit of the person injured, that is, for the benefit of the owner of the trees, not the owner of the land," Smith
v. Kennett, 80 N.H. 14, 14 (1921), and argue that, as the owner of the trees, they are entitled to enhanced
damages.
The penalty provided in RSA 227-J:8 is intended to protect trees as a marketable resource. See Peaslee v.
Koenig, 122 N.H. 828, 831 (1982). The statute has two criteria to qualify for damages. First, the timber in
question must have been situated on "the land of another person." RSA 227-J:8, I. Second, the person bringing
the action must have been "the person injured." RSA 227-J:8, II.
In Smith, the plaintiff owned property and the defendant owned certain timber on that property, which he had
purchased from the plaintiff. After the time period had expired for the defendant to cut down his purchased
timber, he entered the plaintiff’s land and over the plaintiff’s objection cut down the timber. The plaintiff
brought an action against the defendant claiming enhanced damages under a statute virtually identical to RSA
227-J:8. See PS 244:1 (1891); Smith, 80 N.H. at 14. We ruled that, although the defendant had committed an
unlawful entry onto the plaintiff’s land, the plaintiff was not entitled to damages under the statute because the
plaintiff was not injured. See Smith, 80 N.H. at 14. Therefore, although the plaintiff met the first criterion, since
the defendant cut down timber situated on the land of another person, the plaintiff failed to meet the second
criterion because the plaintiff was not injured by the defendant’s actions since the defendant owned the timber.
In the present case the roles of the plaintiff and the defendant are reversed. Kenneth Berwick, as owner of the
rights in timber, qualifies as a person injured by the felling of the timber. Thus, the question is whether Motion
Motors felled timber "on the land of another person." The Berwicks argue that timber rights should qualify as an
interest in land sufficient to satisfy this requirement. They further argue that RSA 227-J:8 is a trespass statute
and that chopping down the trees of another is considered trespass to land in other contexts.
In Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001), interpreting an almost identical predecessor statute, see RSA
539:1 (Supp. 1994) (repealed 1995), we held that a tenancy did not qualify as "land of another" for the purposes
of section I of the statute. Similarly, timber rights do not qualify as "land of another" for the purposes of RSA
227-J:8, I. The statute applies to timber felled on the land of another person. The legislature could have, but did
not, provide that it apply when a party fells timber belonging to another person. See RSA 227-J:12, I (2000)
("No person shall knowingly cut out or alter the mark of any mill log or cut into any lumber or log belonging to
another person . . . ." (emphasis added)); see also Clifton Iron Co. v. Curry, 18 So. 554, 556 (Ala. 1895).
Therefore, the Berwicks fail to meet the first criterion because Motion Motors owned the underlying land and,
thus, did not injure timber situated "on the land of another person."
The Berwicks next challenge the trial court’s ruling that, under the quitclaim deed and referenced agreement,
they could remove gravel only from a particular bluff of sand behind the sawmill rather than from the entire
eastern half of the parcel.
The proper interpretation of a contract, such as a deed, is a question of law for this court. Baker v. McCarthy,
122 N.H. 171, 174-75 (1982). When the language of the deed is clear and unambiguous, we will interpret the
intended meaning from the deed itself without resort to extrinsic evidence. Petition of Rattee, 145 N.H. 341, 345
(2000). We review the trial court's interpretation of the contract de novo. Lawyers Title Ins. Co. v. Groff, 148
N.H. 333, 336 (2002).
The language of the quitclaim deed states:
Further reserving unto the grantor Kenneth G. Berwick, personally, the rights to dig and
remove the gravel deposits located on the easterly side of the within premises, and the
rights to harvest and remove all standing timber on the said premises, which rights to
said gravel and timber shall automatically expire fifteen (15) years from date hereof.
The above described and conveyed premises are conveyed subject to those certain
covenants and restrictions on resale, further encumbrance and use of the said premises
as are contained in the [referenced] agreement between the within grantors and the
grantee herein . . . .
(Emphasis added.)
Motion Motors argues that the phrase "within premises" is ambiguous and should be interpreted in accordance
with extrinsic evidence that it argues shows that the Berwicks intended to reserve rights only to the gravel
behind the sawmill. The Berwicks argue that the language is unambiguous and that any extrinsic evidence shows
that they are entitled to deposits throughout the eastern half of the entire property.
We hold that the meaning of "within premises" is unambiguous and we need not look to extrinsic evidence. The
word "premises" appears four times in the deed. The third and fourth uses, in the sentence quoted above, clearly
refer to the entire conveyed property because the "premises" conveyed to Motion Motors was the entire 10.4-
acre parcel, and not the sawmill and bluff of sand behind the sawmill, in which a right of use was reserved to
Kenneth Berwick.
Similarly, the word "premises" as used in the sentence quoted above concerning the reservation of gravel and
timber rights, also refers to the entire parcel. First, the deed employs the term "premises" to refer to the entire
parcel in the subsequent sentence. Second, the only other uses of the word "within" describe the "within
grantors," in which the term "within" is simply used to describe the parties who are the subject of the deed.
Likewise, the term "within premises" simply refers to the premises that is the subject of the deed, and not, as
Motion Motors suggests, premises located "within" the parcel of land.
Throughout the deed the drafter refers to the underlying real estate as a "parcel," "property," or "premises," and it
is clear that each of the three terms refers to the entire deeded property. Thus, considering the deed as a whole,
the only reasonable interpretation of the clause reserving to Kenneth Berwick "the rights to dig and remove the
gravel located on the easterly side of the within premises" is that it refers to the eastern half of the entire parcel.
This interpretation is further supported by the language in the referenced agreement which notes that Kenneth
Berwick had retained and reserved all "the rights to the gravel located on the east side of the . . . property."
The Berwicks’ final issue on appeal concerns the trial court’s order that they remove a sawmill located on
Motion Motors’ property upon Motion Motors’ sale of the property.
The deed between the parties contains a clause reserving "unto the grantor, Kenneth G. Berwick, his heirs,
administrators, successors and assigns the sawmill structure and related improvements appurtenant thereto now
located on the said property."
The referenced agreement contains three clauses relating to the sawmill. Clause three states that "a condition of
the . . . conveyance and transfer is that Kenneth G. Berwick retains all right, title and ownership to the saw mill."
Clause four states that "Motion Motors, Inc., for itself, its successors and assigns, agree [sic] that Kenneth G.
Berwick can maintain the said sawmill on the property . . . and cause the same to be operated for an indefinite
period of time." Clause six states that Motion Motors "agrees that during the first five years following the date of
the aforesaid conveyance and transfer, it will neither sell nor transfer the property," and "[in] the event a sale is
proposed on terms and conditions acceptable to Motion Motors, Inc. and with the written prior agreement of [the
Berwicks], the property may be conveyed subject to the right of [the Berwicks] to remove the sawmill and
equipment belonging to them as may be located on the said property, for which purpose there shall be afforded a
reasonable time within which to accomplish the removal [of the sawmill]."
The 1993 revised agreement also refers to the sawmill, but simply extends the original five-year period for an
additional five years.
Motion Motors argues that the reservation of the use of the sawmill for an indefinite period of time is ambiguous
and that we should turn to extrinsic evidence to determine the length of the contract. It further argues that a
proper reading of clause six of the referenced agreement and revised agreement mandates that the Berwicks
remove, within a reasonable period of time, the sawmill structure upon any proposed sale accepted by Motion
Motors.
We conclude that the contract is not ambiguous and may be interpreted on its face. When the provisions of an
integrated agreement, viewed in the context of the entire agreement, are not ambiguous, we interpret the contract
as a matter of law. West v. Turchioe, 144 N.H. 509, 515 (1999).
The language of the quitclaim deed concerning the sawmill envisions a broad reservation, granting rights to
"Kenneth Berwick, his heirs, administrators and assigns." In contrast, the deed narrowly reserves to "Kenneth
Berwick, personally, the rights to dig and remove the gravel deposits . . . and remove all standing timber . . .
[which] shall automatically expire fifteen years" from the date of the deed.
We also look to the language of the referenced and revised agreements. In interpreting a multiple-document
agreement, we seek to harmonize and give effect to the provisions of the various documents so that none will be
rendered meaningless. Id.
In the referenced and revised agreements "Motion Motors, Inc. for itself, its successors and assigns" gives
Kenneth Berwick the right to use the sawmill "for an indefinite period of time." The parties disagree as to the
meaning of "indefinite." We will interpret a contract according to the common meaning of its words and phrases
and judge the intent of the parties by objective criteria rather than their unmanifested states of mind. Lake, 145
N.H. at 715. The common meaning of "indefinite" is "continuing with no immediate end being fixed." Webster's
Third New International Dictionary 1147 (unabridged ed. 2002). Because Kenneth Berwick’s right to indefinite
use of the sawmill extends to Motion Motors’ successors and assigns, it is clear that the parties agreed that
Kenneth Berwick could continue to use the sawmill after a proposed sale. The clause providing for indefinite use
is consistent with the broad language of the deed.
The trial court found that "prior to entering into a binding agreement for sale of the property, Motion Motors
must first obtain the Berwick’s [sic] approval. Notwithstanding this requirement, the Berwicks would have no
basis to unreasonably withhold their approval, contingent on Motion Motors’ payment of any monies it owed the
Berwicks." Thus, the trial court ordered the Berwicks to remove the sawmill on the basis that Motion Motors
claimed to be ready to make a sale in 2002 that was contingent upon the Berwicks removing the sawmill and
that Motion Motors had sought, but had failed to obtain, the Berwicks’ agreement. We disagree with the trial
court’s ruling.
As discussed above, the language of the deed and clauses three and four of the referenced and revised
agreements gives Kenneth Berwick the right to use the sawmill for an indefinite period of time and contemplates
that his right to continued use of the sawmill extends beyond the sale of the property. It was reasonable for the
Berwicks to withhold their approval because the sale was contingent upon Kenneth Berwick giving up his right
to continued use of the sawmill. Nothing in the contract indicates that Motion Motors could mandate that
Kenneth Berwick surrender his rights to use the sawmill. The only language in the deed and agreements
discussing removal of the sawmill refers to allowing the Berwicks a reasonable period of time to remove the
sawmill after a sale if the Berwicks had already agreed to the sale by prior written agreement. Here the Berwicks
had not signed a prior written agreement approving the sale and had a reasonable objection. Therefore, we hold
that the trial court erred in ordering the Berwicks to remove the sawmill.
Motion Motors has received the benefit of its bargain and has cited no persuasive reason as to why it should not
have to endure the consequences of the deal that it freely struck. Now that the second five-year period has
expired Motion Motors is free to sell the land, subject to Kenneth Berwick’s personal right to use the sawmill,
unless the Berwicks agree by prior written approval to release that right. Meanwhile, as the right to indefinite
use as described in the referenced and revised agreements is personal to Kenneth Berwick, he is free to continue
to use the sawmill until the time of his death.
We now turn to Motion Motors’ issues on cross-appeal. Motion Motors first argues that the trial court erred in
granting the Berwicks’ motion to quiet title as to a twelve-foot right-of-way claimed by Motion Motors in
addition to the twelve-foot "panhandle" granted to Motion Motors in the quitclaim deed. The dispute concerns
the language of the referenced agreement, which states in clause two that "[b]y deed of even date, the real estate
and property described therein located off Ricker Road . . . consisting of 10.4 acres more or less, together with a
12 foot right-of-way for access from Ricker Road, has been conveyed by Kenneth G. and Doris D. Berwick to
Motion Motors, Inc."
In granting the Berwicks’ petition to quiet title, the trial court ruled that when "considered in light of the fact that
there is a reference to the deed conveying the property and the fact that the language ‘has been conveyed’, past
tense, is used, it is clear to the court that this was not an agreement for a right of way above and beyond the
access described in the deed." The trial court noted that "while it is unfortunate that the drafter of this agreement
used the term right of way which usually connotes an interest in the land of another, in this case, it is patently
clear that the reference is to the access driveway already conveyed in fee simple to Motion Motors and not some
additional ‘right of way’."
Motion Motors argues that the language "together with a 12 foot right-of-way" indicates that the referenced
agreement meant to convey a new interest in land in the form of an easement over the Berwicks’ property. We
disagree.
It is clear from the plain language of the referenced agreement that the Berwicks were not attempting to convey
a new interest in land. The clause describing the right-of-way begins by stating, "By deed of even date," which
indicates that what will next be described is simply what the deed has already stated. This is reconfirmed by the
language "has been conveyed," which is in the past tense, indicating that a new conveyance is not now taking
place. The reference to the deed, combined with the language in the past tense, indicates that clause two does not
contemplate granting to Motion Motors a new interest in land not already conveyed by the deed.
Motion Motors’ next issue involves the proposed testimony of Michael Berwick and expert witness Attorney
Robert Howard. Motion Motors argues that because the language concerning the "12 foot right-of-way" and the
removal of the sawmill was ambiguous, the court erred in excluding Michael Berwick’s testimony as to his
subjective intent at the time the deed was executed and Attorney Howard’s interpretation of the deed concerning
those topics. Because we have found that the language at issue is unambiguous, however, we need not address
these issues.
Motion Motors’ next issue concerns its claim for monetary damages from the failure of its 1999 proposed sale of
the property to Gary Colby. Motion Motors contends that it is entitled to monetary damages because, upon its
acceptance of Colby’s offer to purchase the land, it demanded that the Berwicks remove the sawmill and the
Berwicks failed to do so. Based upon our conclusion that Motion Motors had no right to demand that the
Berwicks remove the sawmill, and that Motion Motors neither sought nor received the Berwicks’ prior written
approval as to the removal of the sawmill, we need not address this issue.
The final issue that we will address concerns the court’s order granting a three-year extension of Kenneth
Berwick’s mineral rights due to Motion Motors’ interference with those rights. On July 26, 1999, former counsel
for Motion Motors wrote to counsel for the Berwicks declaring that under no condition was there any permission
or authority to mine any mineral on Motion Motors’ property. The letter further pointed out that the parties were
in litigation regarding the nature and extent of mineral rights. In its order, dated December 2, 2002, the trial court
found that "this denial of permission to exercise clearly defined rights to that area where the court has
determined such right to exist . . . constituted an unjust and illegal termination of [the] Berwicks’ rights under
the agreement."
Motion Motors argues that the letter did not constitute a termination of Kenneth Berwick’s gravel rights because
Motion Motors sought only to inform the Berwicks of Motion Motors’ position regarding the legal status of the
excavation rights. We disagree.
Although Motion Motors made reference to the pending litigation, the attempted termination was not
conditioned in any way upon the litigation nor did it act to merely inform the Berwicks of the status of the
litigation. The Berwicks negotiated for Kenneth Berwick’s right to mine the minerals for fifteen years – from
March 1988 to March 2003 – and Motion Motors’ unconditional notice, on July 26, 1999, clearly and
unequivocally attempted to terminate those rights. See also Dover v. Firefighters Local 1312, 114 N.H. 481, 484
(1974).
Motion Motors next argues that the trial court’s grant of the equitable remedy of a three-year extension of the
mineral rights was improper because the "plain, adequate and complete" remedy of legal damages was available.
However, the trial court gave Motion Motors the option of choosing between legal damages or an equitable
remedy. The trial court ruled:
Because the relations between these parties have disintegrated to the level that it is
going to be difficult, if not impossible, for them to work together, the court is reluctant
to order a continuing relationship between them. The court, therefore, orders that at the
discretion of Motion Motors, Motion Motors shall either reimburse the Berwicks for the
value of the gravel to which they were entitled and were unable to remove or the
mineral rights shall be extended for a period of three years.
Therefore, the trial court did not impose an equitable remedy upon Motion Motors; rather, the court provided it
with an option to choose between an equitable remedy or a legal remedy.
Motion Motors’ final argument centers around a cease and desist order sent, at Motion Motors’ behest, from the
Town of Loudon to the Berwicks on September 9, 2002. The cease and desist order stated that the Berwicks
could not mine "until such applicable local permits and approvals are granted." Motion Motors contends that
because the Berwicks had not obtained the proper permits by September 9, 2002, or any time prior thereto, the
Berwicks were not harmed by the July 26, 1999, notice of termination since they could not have exercised those
rights. We disagree.
The notice of termination attempted to preclude Kenneth Berwick from acting on his mineral rights regardless of
the alleged failure to obtain the "applicable local permits and approvals." The record does not reflect that he was
prohibited from obtaining the proper permits; rather, it reflects that he had simply not yet chosen to take that
step. The trial court was aware of the town’s cease and desist order and properly granted a remedy as to Motion
Motors’ unlawful purported notice of termination.
We need not address Motion Motors’ remaining arguments because they were either not properly raised below
and preserved for appeal, or they lack merit and warrant no further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H.
321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed in part; reversed in part.
NADEAU and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.