THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2003-670
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LUCILLE SANCHEZ
Argued: July 13, 2005
Opinion Issued: September 29, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (David W. Ruoff, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Kenna, Johnston & Sharkey, P.A., of Manchester (Bruce E. Kenna on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
NADEAU, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Lynn, J.), the
defendant, Lucille Sanchez, was convicted of first degree murder, RSA 630:1-a
(1996); RSA 626:8 (1996), and conspiracy to commit murder, RSA 629:3
(1996); RSA 630:1-a. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On July 2, 1989,
Lucienne Lemaire, the defendant’s aunt, was found strangled in her
Manchester home. The police investigation determined that she had been
murdered sometime during the evening of July 1, 1989. During the course of
several interviews by police investigators on July 2, 4 and 11, 1989, the
defendant denied any involvement in her aunt’s murder and initially denied
any knowledge of who might have committed the murder. After several hours
of questioning on July 11, however, the defendant told investigators that her
boyfriend, later identified as Baltazar Salas-Robles, an illegal alien, had
admitted to her on July 1 that he had committed the murder. The defendant
told investigators that she withheld the information because Salas-Robles had
threatened her family and told her that he would implicate her if she told
police. By this time, Salas-Robles had fled.
In 2002, police investigators arrested Salas-Robles in Texas. After
extensive questioning, Salas-Robles admitted murdering the victim and told
investigators that the defendant had solicited him to kill her aunt so she could
claim her inheritance. The defendant was arrested at her home in Texas in
March 2002. Following her return to New Hampshire, she was indicted on
three charges: (1) first degree murder; (2) conspiracy to commit murder; and (3)
solicitation to commit murder. Prior to his trial, Salas-Robles reached a plea
agreement with the State and agreed to testify against the defendant.
Following a jury trial, the defendant was convicted on all three charges.
At sentencing, the trial court granted the defendant’s motion to dismiss the
solicitation charge as a violation of her double jeopardy rights. However, the
trial court denied the defendant’s motion to dismiss the conspiracy charge.
The trial court imposed a sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility
of parole on the first-degree murder charge and a concurrent sentence of fifteen
to thirty years on the conspiracy charge.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court: (1) erred in failing to
give the jury a curative instruction after the State’s closing argument; (2) erred
in failing to instruct the jury on the legal principle of jury nullification; and (3)
violated her double jeopardy rights by sentencing her on convictions for the
separate crimes of first degree murder and conspiracy to commit first degree
murder.
The defendant first contends that the trial court should have given a
curative instruction after the State misstated the evidence. Specifically, during
the State’s closing argument, the prosecutor commented that the night of July
1, 1989, was the perfect opportunity to murder the victim because her upstairs
tenants were not home.
The defendant argues that there was “no evidentiary basis” to support
the State’s argument. Following the jury instructions, the defendant objected
and asked the court to instruct the jury “not to consider any comment by
counsel regarding evidence that may not be consistent with their recollection
what [sic] the evidence was.” The defendant argues that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by denying the requested jury
instruction. We disagree.
2
As the trial court is in the best position to gauge any prejudicial effect the
prosecutor’s closing remarks may have had on the jury, we review its decision
declining to give an instruction under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. State v. DeCosta, 146 N.H. 405, 415 (2001); cf. State v. Lambert,
147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard). To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
The State may not ask the jury to base its decision upon evidence not in
the record. State v. Glodgett, 148 N.H. 577, 582 (2002) (quotation and
brackets omitted). However, “a prosecutor may draw reasonable inferences
from the facts proven and has great latitude in closing argument to both
summarize and discuss the evidence presented to the jury and to urge them to
draw inferences of guilt from the evidence.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted).
Here, the prosecutor’s remark concerning the absence of the victim’s
upstairs tenants on the night of the murder did not constitute an improper
comment. The record reflects that the comment was based upon reasonable
inferences from the facts elicited during the trial. The victim and her upstairs
tenants shared a common entrance into the house. Witnesses testified that
they tried knocking on all of the outside doors and windows in order to find a
way into the home and that the victim’s daily newspaper was still tucked in the
outside door. All of the entrance doors were locked and one of the first officers
to arrive at the crime scene had to climb up a ladder to gain access into the
home. In addition, witnesses testified that they had not seen the upstairs
tenants that morning and police testified they were not home when they were
canvassing the crime scene. Finally, in a July 4, 1989, interview that was
admitted into evidence, the defendant alluded to the fact that the upstairs
tenants were gone for the weekend. Given the evidence presented at trial, the
State drew a reasonable inference that the victim’s upstairs tenants were not
home on the night of the murder. Because the State neither misstated the
evidence nor invited the jury to speculate about facts not in the record, we
agree with the trial court that no curative instruction was required.
The defendant next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion by refusing to instruct the jury on the legal principle of jury
nullification. The defendant bases this argument upon the plea bargain in
which Salas-Robles, the admitted murderer of the victim, was charged with a
lesser offense in exchange for his testimony implicating the defendant. At the
close of the trial, the defendant submitted a request for the following specific
jury instruction: “Even if you find that the State has proven each and every
element of the offense charged beyond a reasonable doubt, you may still find
3
the defendant not guilty if you have a conscientious feeling that a not guilty
verdict would be a fair result in this case.” We disagree that the jury should
have been given a jury nullification instruction.
The trial court’s refusal to give a specific jury instruction on the principle
of jury nullification will not be reversed unless it was an unsustainable exercise
of discretion. State v. Hokanson, 140 N.H. 719, 721 (1996); cf. State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296 (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard). To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
Jury nullification is the undisputed power of the jury to acquit, even if its
verdict is contrary to the law as given by the judge and contrary to the
evidence. Hokanson, 140 N.H. at 721. The trial court ordinarily gives the
Wentworth instruction, see State v. Wentworth, 118 N.H. 832, 838-39 (1978),
which provides the equivalent of a jury nullification instruction. The decision
to give a more specific instruction on nullification lies within the sound
discretion of the trial court. Hokanson, 140 N.H. at 721. It is well established
that jury nullification is neither a right of the defendant, nor a defense
recognized by law. Id.
Here, the trial court gave the standard Wentworth instruction,
instructing the jury that it should find the defendant guilty of first-degree
murder if the State had met its burden. Wentworth, 118 N.H. at 838-39. We
have held that, “the effect of ‘should’ in the charge provide[s] the equivalent of a
jury nullification instruction that even if the jurors found that the State proved
beyond a reasonable doubt all the elements of the offense charged, they could
still acquit the defendant.” State v. Brown, 132 N.H. 520, 527 (1989)
(quotation and brackets omitted). The defendant has not demonstrated that
anything in this case warranted a more specific nullification instruction.
Accordingly, we find that the trial court’s decision not to give the jury
nullification instruction requested was a sustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, the defendant argues that the conspiracy conviction and
sentence violated her double jeopardy rights under Part I, Article 16 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
United States Constitution. Specifically, she argues that the “Conspiracy
charge and the First Degree Murder Charge, as charged, shows [sic] that proof
of the two charges requires identical evidence.” We disagree.
We first examine the defendant’s claim under the New Hampshire
Constitution. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983).
4
The double jeopardy clause of the New Hampshire
Constitution protects a defendant from multiple punishments for
the same offense. Two offenses will be considered the same unless
each requires proof of an element that the other does not. Thus,
multiple indictments are permissible only if proof of the elements
of the crimes as charged will in actuality require a difference in
evidence. The ultimate question is whether the facts charged in
the second indictment, would, if true, have sustained the first. As
these formulations of the relevant inquiry make clear, we review
and compare the statutory elements of the charged offenses in
light of the actual allegations contained in the indictments.
State v. MacLeod, 141 N.H. 427, 429 (1996) (citations, quotations and brackets
omitted).
When reviewing two separate indictments, “[i]t does not matter how
overlapping, reciprocal, or similar the evidence used to sustain the indictments
was if a difference in evidence is actually required to prove the crime charged.”
State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 717 (2003); see State v. McKean, 147 N.H. 198,
201-02 (2001) (no double jeopardy violation where defendant was convicted of
kidnapping and criminal threatening in the same transaction despite similar
elements and factual allegations in the charging documents). For the same
reason, it does not matter that the two charges arose out of the same
transaction. Hull, 149 N.H. at 717. In the context of a conspiracy conviction,
conspiring to commit a crime and actually committing it are two separate
offenses. State v. Chaisson, 123 N.H. 17, 24 (1983) (conspiracy to receive
stolen property is a separate and distinct crime from the crime of receiving
stolen property). The act which the crime of conspiracy punishes is an
agreement to commit or cause the commission of a crime. Id. Applying these
principles, we conclude that the defendant’s double jeopardy rights under the
New Hampshire Constitution were not violated.
The indictment for first degree murder, RSA 630:1-a; RSA 626:8, stated:
Sanchez purposely caused the death of her aunt, Lucienne
Lemaire, in that, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
murder of Lucienne Lemaire, Sanchez solicited Baltazar Salas-
Robles to commit the murder of Lucienne Lemaire by promising
him money for killing her; Sanchez transported Robles to Lemaire’s
residence; Sanchez waited while Robles killed Lemaire by
strangling her; and Sanchez transported Robles away from
Lemaire’s residence after the murder.
The indictment for conspiracy to commit murder, RSA 629:3; RSA 630:1-a,
stated:
5
In that, with the purpose that the murder of Lucienne Lemaire be
committed, Sanchez agreed with Baltazar Salas-Robles to cause
the commission of Lemaire’s murder, a crime defined by statute.
In furtherance of the conspiracy at least one of the following overt
acts was committed by at least one of the conspirators:
1. Sanchez promised Robles money for killing Lemaire; or
2. Sanchez called Lemaire to tell her that Robles would come to
her residence that evening to bring a gift or food in order to
insure that Lemaire would admit Robles to her residence; or
3. Sanchez transported Robles to Lemaire’s residence; or
4. Sanchez waited while Robles entered Lemaire’s residence; or
5. Robles strangled Lemaire; or
6. Robles pulled items out of drawers in Lemaire’s bedroom to give
her residence the appearance of having been ransacked; or
7. Sanchez picked Robles up outside of Lemaire’s residence; or
8. Sanchez transported Robles away from Lemaire’s residence
after the murder.
As charged, each indictment required the State to prove a fact not
necessary to the other. The statutory offense of conspiracy to commit murder,
as set forth in RSA 629:3, I, required the State to prove an agreement between
the defendant and Salas-Robles to commit the murder of Lemaire. Thus, the
State was required to prove that the defendant purposely agreed with Salas-
Robles to commit the crime of murder, and that one of them carried out an
overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. See RSA 629:3, I. The offense of
first degree murder required proof that the defendant purposely caused the
death of Lemaire. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a). In addition, RSA 630:1-a, II required
the State to prove that the act was “deliberate and premeditated.” Thus, the
State was required to prove that the defendant acted purposely in causing
Lemaire’s death and that she acted with premeditation and deliberation.
The State did not have to prove the existence of an agreement, required
for the conspiracy conviction, to prove the first degree murder charge. Thus,
the evidence required to prove the first degree murder charge would not have
sustained the conspiracy to commit murder charge. Likewise, the conspiracy
indictment did not require the State to prove the enhanced mental state of
deliberation and premeditation, required for a first degree murder conviction.
Thus, the evidence required to prove the conspiracy to commit murder charge
would not have sustained the first degree murder charge. Therefore, we
conclude that the defendant’s convictions for the two offenses as charged do
not offend double jeopardy under the New Hampshire Constitution.
6
Our analysis applying the State Constitution’s “difference in evidence
test” disposes of the defendant’s claim under the Federal Constitution. See
Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932); MacLeod, 141 N.H. at
434. Therefore, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we
do under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7