THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2003-627
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL J. LITTLEFIELD
Argued: October 13, 2004
Opinion Issued: June 16, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Jonathan Cohen on the brief, and Mark
L. Sisti orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Daniel J. Littlefield, appeals his
conviction for negligent homicide, see RSA 630:3 (Supp. 2004), following a jury
trial in the Superior Court (Smukler, J.). We affirm.
The defendant’s conviction stemmed from his operation of his father’s
thirty-six foot Baja performance boat on Lake Winnipesaukee during the night
of August 11, 2002. The night was dark, clear and moonless, with light boat
traffic, smooth water, and good visibility. At a speed of approximately twenty-
eight miles per hour, the bow of the defendant’s boat collided with the stern of
a twenty-foot Wellcraft motorboat and then the length of the larger boat rode
over the smaller boat. Both boats had departed from the Meredith public
docks and headed into Meredith Bay. The collision occurred at approximately
9:30 p.m. and resulted in the death of John Hartman, the owner of the smaller
boat.
The grand jury returned two indictments against the defendant, alleging
alternative theories of negligent homicide. The first indictment (#03-S-006)
alleged that he negligently caused the death of another by failing to keep a
proper lookout while operating a boat, a class B felony. The second indictment
(#03-S-007) alleged that he negligently caused the death of another by being
under the influence of intoxicating liquor while operating a boat, a class A
felony. The defendant moved unsuccessfully to have the indictments
dismissed. At the conclusion of a nineteen-day jury trial, the defendant was
found guilty solely of the class B felony. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) instructing the
jury concerning his alleged post-collision flight; (2) admitting testimony of an
individual who saw a boat acting “furtively”; (3) not instructing the jury on the
differences between the duties imposed upon a boater and a motorist involved
in an accident; (4) failing to instruct the jury that certain deposition testimony
of a forensic laboratory analyst could be considered substantively; (5) allowing
the State to argue that the jury should discount the testimony of a witness
because her husband lied; (6) failing to define “gross,” as used in the term
“gross deviation,” in response to a jury question; (7) denying his motions to
dismiss for insufficiency of the evidence; and (8) utilizing flight as an
aggravating factor in his sentencing. We address each issue in turn.
I
Several of the defendant’s arguments involve jury instructions. In
addressing these arguments, we recognize that “[t]he purpose of the trial
court’s charge is to state and explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible
language, the rules of law applicable to the case. When reviewing jury
instructions, we evaluate allegations of error by interpreting the disputed
instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood
them, and in light of all the evidence in the case. We determine if the jury
instructions adequately and accurately explain each element of the offense and
reverse only if the instructions did not fairly cover the issues of law in the
case.” State v. Bortner, 150 N.H. 504, 512 (2004) (quotations and citations
omitted). Whether or not a particular jury instruction is necessary, the scope
and wording of jury instructions, and the response to a question from the jury
are all within the sound discretion of the trial court, see State v. Cook, 148
N.H. 735, 741-42 (2002) (necessity); State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003)
(scope and wording); State v. Poole, 150 N.H. 299, 301 (2003) (response to jury
question), and we review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, see Poole, 150 N.H. at 301.
2
The defendant argues that the trial court erred by instructing the jury
concerning his alleged post-collision flight. At the outset, we note that in his
brief, the defendant made passing reference to “due process” within the context
of Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourteenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution. As these constitutional
arguments were neither made in his objection to the relevant jury instruction
at trial, nor identified in his notice of appeal, we decline to address them. See,
e.g., Smith v. Shepard, 144 N.H. 262, 264 (1999).
The defendant contends that the trial court erred by giving a flight
instruction that differed from the pattern jury instruction “in that it lacked the
language concerning ‘flight from the police.’” He argues that his actions were
“totally inconsistent with the concept of flight,” and that he was prejudiced
because:
[B]y giving the flight instruction when there was no evidence to
support it, the jury could easily infer that there was evidence that
the defendant fled and further, the jury could have followed the
trial court’s instruction and could have inferred guilt from the
defendant’s flight.
The trial court gave the following instruction:
[Y]ou have heard evidence that may show that the defendant fled.
It is up to you to decide whether the evidence shows this. If you
believe that it does, I instruct you that flight may be motivated by a
variety of reasons. Flight does not create a presumption of guilt.
Innocent people sometimes have a fear of authority or feelings of
guilt which do not necessarily reflect actual guilt.
However, you may consider flight as tending to show feelings
of guilt and you may also consider feelings of guilt as evidence
tending to show actual guilt, but you are not required to do so.
You should consider the evidence of flight by the evidence [sic] in
connection with all the other evidence in the case and decide how
important you think it is.
Earlier, the trial court had also specifically instructed the jury:
Throughout the trial I have tried to be fair and impartial.
Just as you are required to be. If anything that I have said or done
during the trial or in these instructions has caused you to think
that I favor any party, I now instruct you that I do not favor any
party. If you believe that I have expressed or suggested an opinion
3
as to the facts in my rulings, you should ignore such an opinion.
It is up to you alone to decide the facts in this case.
While it is correct that the trial court’s instruction did not contain
explicit language concerning flight “from the police,” see N.H. Criminal Jury
Instruction 1.19 (1985), we find no error either in that omission or in the
instruction as a whole. There need not be evidence that a defendant was in
direct flight from immediate police apprehension before an instruction on the
significance of purported flight may be properly given. See State v. Torrence,
134 N.H. 24, 26-27 (1991) (instruction on significance of flight justified
following testimony that defendant left jurisdiction following dismissal without
prejudice of original indictment, and before being reindicted on same charge);
see also State v. Bruneau, 131 N.H. 104, 117 (1988) (examples of fugitive
behavior customarily thought to justify instruction on significance of flight
include flight, escape from custody, resistance to arrest, concealment,
assumption of false name).
An instruction on flight is properly given if the jury could
reasonably infer that the defendant’s flight reflected consciousness
of guilt, and flight requires neither the physical act of running nor
the reaching of a far-away haven. Flight manifestly does require,
however, a purpose to avoid being observed or arrested.
People v. Crandell, 760 P.2d 423, 442 (Cal. 1988) (en banc) (citation omitted),
cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1037 (1989), overruled on other grounds by People v.
Crayton, 48 P.3d 1136, 1147 (Cal. 2002).
We also disagree with the defendant’s contentions that no evidence of
flight was introduced, and that his actions were totally inconsistent with the
concept of flight because the “evidence showed that [he] actually contacted the
police and voluntarily gave them access to himself, the passengers that were on
the boat, and consented to have the police search and seize the boat itself.”
The State presented extensive testimony indicating that the collision of the two
boats was not minor, that the defendant must have been aware that he had
collided with another boat, and that the individuals on the smaller boat
required assistance.
On the evening of August 11, the Hartman boat was occupied by four
individuals: John Hartman; his wife, Karen Hartman; their son, Kevin
Hartman; and Stephanie O’Brien. Karen and Kevin Hartman and Stephanie
O’Brien all testified that Karen screamed before the impact of the collision, and
that the collision was violent and loud. Sergeant Ouellette and Lieutenant
Dunleavy of the Marine Patrol, and Linda DeNoble, a criminalist with the State
Police forensics laboratory, all offered expert testimony that the Hartman boat
suffered significant damage.
4
Kevin Hartman testified that, immediately after the collision, he could see
three individuals on the other boat looking toward the Hartman boat. His
mother screamed at them for help and to call 911, but he heard no response
and saw no action being taken by the individuals. The other boat departed the
scene as he attempted to return the Hartman boat to the Meredith docks.
Karen Hartman and Stephanie O’Brien corroborated this testimony. Sergeant
Ouellette and Lieutenant Dunleavy testified that during sound tests conducted
under conditions described by the people on the Littlefield Baja — engines
running, CD player on, and the boats approximately 150 feet apart — marine
patrol officers on the Littlefield boat clearly heard another officer on a second
boat yell “help, call 911.”
Evidence was introduced that the defendant attempted to avoid
detection. Sergeant Ouellette testified that the Marine Patrol had received
reports from “several boaters out on the lake that evening in a close proximity
of time of this collision that had seen a boat fitting the description of the
defendant’s boat without lights on after the collision in that area.” Almon Dirth
testified that he encountered a boat, similar in description to the defendant’s
Baja, apparently operating with no navigational or stern lights, coming from
the direction of Meredith Bay and heading directly toward the Weirs between
9:30 and 9:45 p.m., in an area where a Marine Patrol boat with flashing blue
lights was also operating. Benjamin Heald, another boater on the lake that
evening, testified that he illuminated a boat, similar in description to the
defendant’s Baja, with his spotlight at approximately 9:45 p.m., between
Meredith Bay and the Weirs. He testified that the boat was dead in the water
with no lights on at all, and that the boat disappeared by the time Heald
reached its former position. Robert Phelps testified that he departed the
Meredith docks in his boat at approximately 9:30 p.m. and headed toward the
Weirs, shortly after a Baja with three people above deck left the docks. As he
proceeded, Phelps saw the blue lights of two or three Marine Patrol boats
headed toward Meredith. Phelps testified that after he slowed to enter the
Weirs channel, and observed no other boats around his, the Baja that he had
seen at the Meredith docks “literally appeared out of nowhere” and
unsuccessfully tried to pass his boat in an improper lane of the channel.
Sergeant Ouellette, who was “heavily involved” in the investigation of the
collision, testified that the defendant did not call the Marine Patrol or report
the collision at any time between August 11 and August 14; and the defendant
did not meet with him until September 13 at an interview at the office of
Attorney Carroll (the defendant’s original attorney). Sergeant Ouellette further
testified that it was the defendant’s father, William Littlefield, Sr., who
contacted Attorney Carroll on August 12, and that Carroll subsequently
contacted the Belknap County Attorney’s office. The defendant’s father and
counsel participated in a meeting with Ouellette and the deputy county
5
attorney, and it was the defendant’s father who brought the authorities to the
Littlefield Baja at a boathouse in the area of the Weirs channel. Lieutenant
Dunleavy also testified that it was the defendant’s father who notified the
Marine Patrol of the possibility that his Baja may have been involved in the
August 11 collision, and that the defendant’s father brought the authorities to
the boat and gave permission to search, seize, and examine it forensically.
The trial court’s instruction clearly explained that it was solely for the
jury to decide whether the evidence indicated flight by the defendant. Further,
the instruction explained that if the jury believed that flight was proven, then it
was permissible, but not mandatory, for the jury to infer guilt. See State v.
Cassell, 129 N.H. 22, 23-24 (1986). Finally, the jury was instructed to consider
any evidence of flight within the context of all the other evidence in the case.
We find no error in the trial court’s instruction.
II
The defendant next argues that the trial court’s error in instructing the
jury concerning flight was “exacerbated” by admitting “the prejudicial
testimony of [Almon Dirth] who saw a boat acting furtively when that boat was
clearly not that of the defendant and irrelevant to [the] case.” As previously
noted, Dirth testified that he encountered a boat, apparently operating with no
navigational or stern lights, coming from the direction of Meredith Bay and
heading directly toward the Weirs between 9:30 and 9:45 p.m. on the night of
the collision. The defendant argues that Dirth’s testimony is irrelevant, and
substantially more prejudicial than probative.
Whether evidence is relevant is a question for the trial
court’s sound discretion, and we will not overturn its
determination absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. To
show an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must
demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Evidence is relevant if it
has any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or
less probable than it would be without the evidence.
State v. Mitchell, 148 N.H. 293, 294-95 (2002) (citations and quotation
omitted). The fact of consequence was whether the defendant fled from the
scene of his collision with the Hartman boat. Dirth’s testimony had a tendency
to make the existence of flight more probable than it would have been without
the testimony.
While Dirth’s description of the boat differed in some respects from the
defendant’s Baja, those differences did not render his testimony irrelevant.
6
Rather, they simply affected the weight to be afforded his testimony by the jury.
Dirth testified that he saw “some sort of a performance boat,” approximately
twenty-six to twenty-eight feet long, without a large superstructure, but with a
low silhouette and a low sleek, swept back windshield. At the helm was one
person who was not fully standing in the cockpit, which was approximately
one-half to two-thirds forward from the boat’s stern. The Littlefield Baja was a
thirty-six foot performance boat with a low profile and swept back windshield.
The cockpit was approximately two-fifths forward from the stern, with a helm
seat that allowed for operation in a standing or seated position, with standing
operation as the norm.
The defendant further contends that the boat described by Dirth could
not have been the Littlefield Baja because the latter had a red and green light
on its bow, while he contends that Dirth saw “a white light on the bow.” On
direct examination, Dirth described his encounter with the boat that “all of a
sudden . . . appeared out of nowhere,” and explained:
And the reason it really caught my attention is because I
didn’t see the red light or the green light and I didn’t see the stern
or anchor light . . . . It was like it was black, except all of a sudden
I saw a little white light towards the front of the boat and I said
what the heck is that all about.
We see nothing in Dirth’s testimony to indicate that the boat he observed may
not have had a green and red bow light. Instead, his testimony indicated only
that such a light was not illuminated.
[E]vidence does not have to be infallible to be admissible. If it is of
aid to a judge or jury, its deficiencies or weaknesses are a matter of
defense, which affect the weight of the evidence but do not
determine its admissibility.
State v. Dahood, 148 N.H. 723, 727 (2002). In denying the defendant’s motion
to strike Dirth’s testimony, the trial judge elaborated on this difference:
Well, I think that the jury is going to have the opportunity to
evaluate the weight of the evidence.
I think given [Dirth’s] observations, the time, the angle, that
I’ll tell you straight out, I mean if the case is – if the [S]tate’s case
rose or fell on this witness, I would be granting a motion to
dismiss, but I recognize that this witness is one piece of evidence
among many pieces of evidence and I can’t say that it falls below
the threshold of admissibility, although its weight is certainly
arguable.
7
In addition, the defendant argues that there was no evidence to
corroborate Dirth’s testimony. To the contrary, the previously-detailed
testimony of Sergeant Ouellette, Benjamin Heald, and Robert Phelps provided
such corroboration. Dirth also testified that the boat he saw “wasn’t up on
plane, which means it was throwing more of a wake.” The defendant himself
provided corroboration when he testified that, subsequent to the collision, one
of the Baja’s two drives did not work, and he “plowed, basically, through the
water, all the way to the [Weirs] channel.”
Finally, the defendant contends that, even if Dirth’s testimony was
relevant, it should have been excluded as unfairly prejudicial under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403. The defendant bases his contention of unfair
prejudice upon his previous arguments that the trial court’s flight instruction
was in error. Having already decided that the trial court did not err in giving
the instruction concerning flight, we find that the defendant has not
demonstrated any unfair prejudice. In sum, we find no error on the part of the
trial court in admitting Dirth’s testimony.
III
The defendant further contends that the “trial court’s error in giving the
flight instruction was also enhanced by its error in refusing to instruct the jury
on the differences between the duties imposed upon a boater and a motorist
under the relevant conduct after an accident statute.” At the close of evidence,
the defendant sought this instruction “in an attempt to mitigate the prejudice
to [him] by the trial court’s erroneous flight instruction.” Having already
decided that the trial court did not err in giving the flight instruction, and
because the defendant has not demonstrated any unfair prejudice, we reject
his argument.
In denying the defendant’s request, the trial court stated:
With respect to the conduct after an accident [instruction], I
don’t think it follows that if you leave the scene of an accident or
leave the scene of a crime, if you run away, that that in itself is a
crime. In an automobile collision case, it is, but it is not in other
instances. The flight instruction is not tailored to automobile
collisions; it simply indicates a particular type of conduct which, if
the jury finds, may lead to particular inferences, and I instruct
them as inferences in accordance with pattern.
But the defendant was not charged with conduct after an
accident, and the defense had, if you will, notice before I instructed
that I was going to decline that instruction, I told you that in
8
chambers, and certainly could have brought to the attention of the
jury the law on conduct in its argument, and that could have been
the acceptable argument of the law. But I didn’t need to instruct
on it because he’s not been charged on it, and in my discretion,
didn’t think it was warranted.
The defendant’s proposed jury instruction was based upon RSA 270:1-a
(1999) (amended 2004) (“Drownings and Boating Accident Reports”). We
understand his argument to be that, because the statute in effect at the time of
the collision did not require a person involved in a boating accident to remain
at the scene, the trial court’s refusal to give his proposed instruction was error
in light of the State’s examination of “witnesses about the fact that the
defendant and other passengers on the boat did not contact Marine Patrol and
fled.” We disagree. Assuming, without deciding, that the defendant complied
with the requirements of the statute in effect at the time, we note that he was
never charged with a violation of the statute. Thus, we agree with the State
that the requested instruction was not necessary, as it would have essentially
instructed the jury that the defendant did not violate a statute he was not
charged with violating. See State v. Bird, 122 N.H. 10, 16 (1982) (no error in
failing to instruct jury on issue not in dispute).
In sum, we find no error in the denial of the defendant’s request for an
instruction concerning conduct after an accident.
IV
The defendant further argues that the trial court erred in failing to
instruct the jury that certain deposition testimony of a forensic laboratory
analyst could be considered as substantive evidence in the case pursuant to
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 801(d)(1)(A). On appeal, he contends that the
trial court’s error denied him his right to a fair trial, thus denying his right to
due process under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the
Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. We first address his claim
under the State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State
v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). Without reiterating our standard of
review, detailed earlier, we underscore that we review the trial court’s decision
as to whether or not a particular jury instruction is necessary, and the scope
and wording of jury instructions, for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
See Cook, 148 N.H. at 741-42; Evans, 150 N.H. at 420.
The jury heard testimony from various witnesses about whether or not
the stern light on the Hartman boat was illuminated on the night of the
collision. The status of the stern light was relevant to whether the Hartman
boat was visible to the defendant. During the post-collision forensic
investigation, Maurice Boudreau, a consultant with the State Police forensics
9
laboratory, examined the stern light. He testified that the light was still
operable, but that the lamp filament showed signs of “mild hot shock,” or
distortion. Boudreau opined that the distortion indicated that the stern light
had, at some point, suffered some kind of impact or inertial shock while the
lamp was illuminated. He could not, however, tie that impact to any specific
incident, such as the collision at issue. Thus, he could not determine whether
the stern light was illuminated or not at the time of the collision. Boudreau
was cross-examined with his prior sworn deposition testimony about the stern
light, but his deposition itself was not admitted into evidence.
During a chambers conference after the jury had been charged, the
defendant argued that Boudreau’s prior sworn deposition testimony was
inconsistent with his trial testimony, and requested that the jury be instructed
that his inconsistent deposition testimony could “be used substantively for
proof of the facts” under Rule 801(d)(1)(A). The defendant’s motion was denied.
The trial court’s earlier instructions read, in part:
[Y]ou are to decide the facts based only on the evidence in this
case. The evidence consists of the testimony under oath of the
witnesses, exhibits that have been admitted into evidence, the
views, and the facts of which I took judicial notice. . . .
. . . .
In deciding which witnesses to believe and how much of their
testimony to believe, you should consider both the direct and the
cross-examination of the witnesses. If you believe that part of a
witness’s testimony is false, you may choose to distrust other parts
also, but you are not required to do so. Inconsistencies and
contradictions within a witness’s testimony or between witnesses,
do not necessarily mean that you should disbelieve the witness.
. . . You should evaluate inconsistencies and contradictions and
determine whether they are important or unimportant.
. . . .
Some evidence was introduced for a limited purpose.
Specifically, in deciding whether you believe a witness you may
consider whether the witness made nonsworn statements before
trial that were not consistent with what the witness said at trial. If
you find that a witness made an unsworn, inconsistent statement
before trial, you may use that statement in deciding whether to
believe that witness. You may not use the statement made before
trial as proof . . . that the facts in the statement are true. The
10
statement made before trial is only to be used by you in deciding
whether to believe a witness.
Contrary to the defendant’s contention, the instructions did not prevent
substantive use of any inconsistent sworn deposition testimony. All of
Boudreau’s testimony concerning his earlier deposition was elicited either
during direct or cross-examination, and the jury was specifically instructed
that it should consider both. Furthermore, the trial court’s limiting
instruction, regarding credibility, applied only to prior unsworn inconsistent
statements. If the jury did consider Boudreau’s testimony concerning his prior
sworn deposition to be inconsistent, the instructions placed no limitation on its
use as substantive evidence.
The trial court’s instructions, viewed in their entirety, explained in clear
and intelligible language the issues of law applicable to the case. We find no
unsustainable exercise of discretion on the part of the trial court, and no denial
of the defendant’s right to a fair trial, in the instructions. The Federal
Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than does the State
Constitution under these circumstances. See, e.g., State v. Parker, 142 N.H.
319, 324-25 (1997); United States v. Park, 421 U.S. 658, 673-76 (1975); United
States v. Smith, 145 F.3d 458, 460 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 953 (1998).
Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
During deliberations, the jury asked, “Would it be possible to get a
transcript of Maurice Boudreau’s testimony. He was the forensic expert.” The
trial court responded, “A transcript can not be provided. You are to rely on
your best recollection of the testimony.” The defendant now argues that the
“error [in the trial court’s instructions] was further aggravated by [its] refusal to
allow the jury access to the deposition of Mr. [Boudreau] despite [the jury’s]
specific request to have it.” We disagree for several reasons. First, as
explained above, there was no error in the applicable jury instructions.
Second, the defendant’s claim is factually inaccurate. The jury requested a
transcript, not of Boudreau’s deposition, which had not been entered into
evidence, but of his trial testimony. The trial judge has wide discretion in
deciding which items admitted into evidence are to be brought into the jury
room during deliberations. Hodgdon v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 147 N.H. 286, 291
(2001). Courts have taken a dim view of allowing a jury to have testimonial
evidence during deliberations that repeats or emphasizes portions of a
witness’s trial testimony:
The triers of fact may place more emphasis on written rather than
spoken words since the written words are readily before them
physically while the spoken words uttered at trial can only be
conjured up by memory.
11
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). Third, nothing in the record indicates
that the defendant objected to the trial court’s response to the jury.
Consequently, the defendant has not properly preserved this issue for our
review. See State v. Gordon, 147 N.H. 576, 577-78 (2002) (contemporaneous
objection required to preserve issue for appeal, particularly where alleged error
involves jury instruction). We find no unsustainable exercise of discretion in
the trial court’s response to the jury’s request.
Finally, the defendant apparently contends that the trial court erred by
allowing the State to improperly argue in closing “that . . . Boudreau’s opinion
was that the damage done to the stern light was consistent with the lamp being
on when the defendant’s boat struck the lamp-post.” We agree with the State
that the defendant has not sufficiently developed this argument for appellate
review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003). Further, the record
indicates that the defendant did not specifically object to the State’s
characterization of the substance of Boudreau’s opinion. See State v.
Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 246 (2003). Even if the defendant had sufficiently
developed this argument, however, we fail to see any error by the trial court.
We note that Boudreau did testify that the condition of the lamp filament was
consistent with the condition he would expect to find if the Hartman boat’s
stern light had been on when the Littlefield Baja scraped across it with enough
force to slowly bend the stern light pole over, which was the scenario proposed
by the accident reconstruction team.
V
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by allowing “the
State to argue that the jury should discount the testimony of [Nancy DeVivo,]
because her husband lied.” During the course of the trial, the defense called
DeVivo, a long-time friend of the defendant and his wife. DeVivo testified that,
at approximately 9:15 p.m. on August 11, she and her husband departed the
Meredith public docks in their own boat, after they had drinks and dinner with
the Littlefields at the Town Docks restaurant in Meredith. The DeVivos
departed before the Littlefield Baja did, and they headed for the Weirs channel.
Approximately ten minutes later, and for a period of no more than two seconds,
DeVivo saw a white boat with a light that went on and off twice. She testified
that at the time she saw the other boat, it was headed in the direction of the
Weirs, but she could not estimate the distance to the other boat, nor did she
know where the other boat had come from. DeVivo’s testimony was offered as
evidence that the stern light of the Hartman Wellcraft was not illuminated at
the time of the collision.
Over the defendant’s objection, the trial court allowed the State to argue
that DeVivo was not a credible witness. Specifically, the State contended that
12
DeVivo was aware her husband had written “Business lunch” on the receipt for
their personal meal that evening, and that the receipt’s annotation was a “lie.”
On appeal, the defendant contends that it was error to allow the State to argue
DeVivo’s credibility as a witness because her husband may have attempted to
falsely claim a business tax deduction for their meal. He argues that this error
“further increased” the “prejudice” of the trial court’s earlier error of failing to
instruct the jury that Maurice Boudreau’s deposition testimony was
substantive evidence. Although the defendant cites no authority for this thinly
developed argument, he apparently contends that DeVivo’s testimony was
exculpatory; it was therefore consistent with the prior sworn deposition of
Boudreau; and the State had no evidence to tie the receipt’s annotation to her.
We disagree.
First, we reiterate our finding above that the trial court did not err in its
instructions to the jury concerning Boudreau’s testimony. As such, the
defendant’s premise of further prejudice is fundamentally flawed. Second, we
agree with the State that the defendant has not sufficiently developed this
argument for appellate review. See Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49. We also agree
with the State that his claim is factually inaccurate. While the defendant
claims error in the State’s argument concerning the DeVivo’s “lunch tab,” the
record clearly shows that the receipt was for the drinks and dinner, and not for
a lunch, that the DeVivos shared with the Littlefields at the Meredith
restaurant.
Even if we assumed that it was error for the State to argue DeVivo’s
credibility, and that the jury consequently discounted DeVivo’s testimony, we
find that any such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The State
has the burden of proving that error in the course of a criminal trial is
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. In determining whether error was
harmless, we consider, among other things, whether the evidence was
cumulative, or inconsequential in relation to the State’s evidence. See State v.
MacDonald, 150 N.H. 237, 240 (2003).
DeVivo testified that she saw a boat with a light that went on and off
twice in a period of no more than two seconds. The defendant concedes that
four people on the Littlefield Baja — the defendant, his wife, Brian Connelly,
and Christine Poulicakos — had already testified that they “had seen no lights
on the smaller boat prior to the impact.” DeVivo’s testimony was, therefore,
cumulative. It was also inconsequential. Lieutenant Dunleavy testified that a
“flickering light” could be explained by some obstruction between the light bulb
and the observer. He also testified that, in the case of the Hartman boat, the
intermittent flapping of a portion of the boat’s canvas top could have caused
this obstruction. Because DeVivo’s testimony was both cumulative and
inconsequential, we find that any error in allowing the State to argue DeVivo’s
credibility was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
13
VI
The defendant argues that the trial court erred when it failed to define
“gross,” as used in the term “gross deviation,” in response to a jury question.
After the close of evidence, the trial court gave the following instruction:
Indictment 03-S-006 accuses the defendant of negligent
homicide by failing to keep a proper lookout when he was
operating his boat. The definition of this crime has two parts, or
elements. The State must prove each part of the definition beyond
a reasonable doubt. Thus, the State must prove, first, that the
defendant caused the death of another person, and second, that
the defendant acted negligently.
The first part of the definition requires the State to prove
that the defendant did a certain act, in this case, that he caused
the death of another. This means that the death of another person
was the direct result of the defendant’s actions. The second part of
the definition requires the State to prove the defendant’s mental
state at the time he acted; here, that he acted negligently.
To prove that the defendant acted negligently, the State must
prove, first, the defendant failed to become aware of a substantial
and unjustifiable risk. This means that you must decide whether
the defendant should have been aware that the risk existed and
failed to become aware of the risk. Second, the risk was so
substantial that the defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk
was a gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person
would observe in the situation.
The key words here are “gross deviation.” If you find that the
defendant’s actions were unreasonable or thoughtless, that is not
enough. You must find that the defendant’s failure to become
aware of the risk was a substantial departure from how a
reasonable person would have acted under the same
circumstances.
Negligence in criminal cases is different from negligence in
civil cases. . . .
In criminal cases, negligence requires proof of more than an
ordinary risk, that is of a substantial and unjustifiable risk. In
addition, the defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk must
14
be a gross deviation from how a reasonable person would have
acted in the same situation.
Keep in mind that there is often no direct evidence of a
defendant’s mental state, because there is no way of examining
the operation of a person’s mind. You should consider all the
facts and circumstances in evidence in deciding whether or not
the State has proved that the defendant acted negligently.
On the first day of deliberations, the jury asked, “Can we have better
clarification of the term ‘gross deviation’ in the first charge.” The trial court
responded:
I refer you to my [earlier] instructions at page nine. As it states
there, you must first determine how a reasonable person would
have acted under the same circumstances. Then you must
determine whether the defendant’s conduct was a departure from
how a reasonable person would have acted. If you determine that
the defendant’s conduct was a departure, you must determine
whether it was a “gross deviation” — in other words, a substantial
departure. The words “gross” and “substantial” have no specific
legal definition; they are to be considered within their common
meaning.
The defendant objected, arguing that the trial court should provide the
“common meaning” of the words, utilizing dictionary definitions to define
“gross” as “flagrant.” On appeal, he contends that the trial court’s failure to
provide a “dictionary definition of the word ‘gross’ . . . had the effect of denying
[him] his right to having a unanimous jury verdict and a fair trial,” thus
denying his right to due process under Part I, Article 15 of the State
Constitution and the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal
Constitution. Further, he claims:
[T]he trial court’s answer was not supported by the plain language
of RSA 626:2, II(d). Further, it was a misstatement of the law as it
instructed the jury to only decide whether the defendant’s conduct
was a substantial departure from that of a reasonable person in
order to find him negligent. The instruction absolves the jury of
the two step process of first determining whether there was a
substantial and unjustifiable risk and second, whether the
defendant’s failure to become aware of that risk constituted a
“gross deviation” from the conduct of a reasonable person.
Further, the trial court’s answer does not refer back to the alleged
criminal conduct by the defendant, that is, that he did not have a
proper lookout while he was operating a boat. The trial court’s
15
answer would allow the jury to convict the defendant if it thought
his operation of the boat was negligent in any way. It thus served
to expand the idea of negligence to include possible uncharged
conduct.
The State contends that the defendant did not preserve these further
claims for appeal because he failed to object to the court’s original negligence
instruction, failed to make these specific objections below, and objected only to
the final sentence of the trial judge’s response. In response to the jury
question, the trial judge read his proposed answer in a chambers conference.
The defendant asked if the trial judge “want[ed] our position,” the judge
responded that he did want the defendant’s position and any suggestions, and
the defendant stated:
I agree with the — we agree with the Court’s instruction up
to where you get to, “If you determine that the defendant’s conduct
was a departure, you must determine whether there was a gross
deviation.” We agree to it up to that point. Actually, after that,
where it says, “in other words . . . ,” it’s a substantial departure,
we agree up to that point. . . .
. . . .
Oh. The last sentence now reads: “The words ‘gross’ and
‘substantial’ have no specific legal definition, they are to be
considered within their common meaning.”
We disagree with that, on both parts of that sentence, there
are two parts to it. And we believe that, first of all, the jury must
know the common meaning; and secondly — the common meaning
that applies to the situation; secondly, there’s a specific meaning,
legal meaning that applies to homicide cases.
We agree with the State that the defendant objected only to the final
sentence of the trial court’s response to the jury question. Consequently, the
defendant has preserved only his argument that the trial court’s failure to
provide a “dictionary definition of the word ‘gross’” violated his constitutional
right to due process. See Gordon, 147 N.H. at 577-78 (contemporaneous
objection required to preserve issue for appeal, particularly where alleged error
involves jury instruction). We first address his claim under the State
Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. Ball, 124 N.H. at
231-33. Without reiterating our standard of review, detailed earlier, we
underscore that we review the trial court’s response to a question from the jury
for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Poole, 150 N.H. at 301.
16
The trial court’s response specifically directed the jury to refer to the
written copy of the court’s previous instructions. As such, those instructions
were incorporated into the court’s response. The jury is presumed to follow the
instructions given by the trial court. State v. Smith, 149 N.H. 693, 697 (2003).
As detailed above, the instructions clearly delineated that: (1) the definition of
negligent homicide contained two elements, and that it was the State’s burden
to prove each element beyond a reasonable doubt; (2) the second element,
whether or not the defendant acted negligently, entailed a two-part test,
requiring the State to prove that the defendant failed to become aware of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk, and that the risk was so substantial that the
defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk was a gross deviation from the
conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the situation; (3) there was
a difference between criminal negligence and civil negligence; (4) “gross
deviation” was a key concept in that difference; (5) gross deviation did not
mean that the defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk was simply
unreasonable or thoughtless; and (6) gross deviation meant that the
defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk was a “substantial departure”
from how a reasonable person would have acted under the same
circumstances.
A trial court is under no obligation to answer a jury’s question with the
specific language requested by a defendant; it is within the trial court’s
discretion to decide how best to aid the jury in its deliberations. State v.
Zwicker, 151 N.H. 179, 190 (2004). The legislature has not provided a
definition of “gross” in RSA 626:2, II(d) (1996) (definition of “negligently”), and
we construe the statute according to the fair import of its terms and to promote
justice. See RSA 625:3 (1996). “Gross” is not a technical term requiring an
elaborate definition by the court. See Bird, 122 N.H. at 16 (no error in court’s
definition of “cause”). The jury instructions made clear that “gross deviation”
meant more than a deviation that was simply unreasonable or thoughtless.
While “flagrant” might be an adequate definition of “gross,” it is by no means
an exclusive definition. For all of these reasons, we see no error in the trial
court’s response, which equated “gross deviation” with “substantial departure”
and directed the jury to consider those words as having their common
meaning. See State v. Garcia, 838 A.2d 1064, 1075 (Conn. App. Ct. 2004) (“[A]
gross deviation is a ‘great or substantial deviation, not just a slight or moderate
deviation.’”).
In sum, the trial court’s response, which incorporated the earlier
instructions, explained in clear and intelligible language the issues of law
applicable to the case. We find no unsustainable exercise of discretion on the
part of the trial court, and no denial of the defendant’s right to a fair trial, in
the response given to the question from the jury. The Federal Constitution
offers the defendant no greater protection than does the State Constitution
under these circumstances. See, e.g., Parker, 142 N.H. at 324-25; Park, 421
17
U.S. at 673-76; Smith, 145 F.3d at 460. Accordingly, we reach the same result
under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
VII
At the conclusion of the State’s case, and again at the close of all the
evidence, the defendant unsuccessfully moved to dismiss indictment #03-S-
006. The defendant contends that the State “did not present sufficient
evidence to support the charge that [he] failed to maintain a proper lookout.”
To succeed on his motions to dismiss:
[T]he defendant had to establish that the evidence viewed in its
entirety, giving the State the benefit of all reasonable inferences,
was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was
guilty of the crime charged. When reviewing the trial court's denial
of a motion to dismiss, we view the evidence and reasonable
inferences arising therefrom in the manner most favorable to the
State. We review the entire trial record because, even though the
defendant is not required to present a case, if he chooses to do so,
he takes the chance that evidence presented in his case may assist
in proving the State's case. Therefore, the issue on appeal as to
both motions is the same.
State v. Pittera, 139 N.H. 257, 260 (1994) (quotations and citations omitted).
Further:
To prevail on his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence,
the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all
of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it
must exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Under this
standard, however, we still consider the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State and examine each evidentiary item in
context, not in isolation.
Evans, 150 N.H. at 424 (citations omitted).
At the outset, we emphasize the difference between negligence in criminal
cases and negligence in civil cases. Neither the State nor the defendant
challenged the trial court’s instruction concerning this difference:
Negligence in criminal cases is different from negligence in
civil cases. Civil cases involve decisions as to money damages
18
resulting from, for example, an automobile accident. In such cases
the negligence standard is lower. Negligence in civil cases is
simply the failure to exercise the degree of care that a reasonable
person would exercise under the same circumstances.
In criminal cases, negligence requires proof of more than an
ordinary risk, that is of a substantial and unjustifiable risk. In
addition, the defendant’s failure to become aware of the risk must
be a gross deviation from how a reasonable person would have
acted in the same situation.
We recognize that not every act of carelessness that results in a death
entails criminal negligence. Accordingly, a person charged with criminal
negligence may not be convicted on evidence that establishes only ordinary
negligence. Instead:
A person acts negligently with respect to a material element of an
offense when he should be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable
risk that the material element exists or will result from his
conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree that the
actor's failure to perceive it, considering the nature and purpose of
his conduct and the circumstances known to him, involves a gross
deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would
observe in the actor's situation.
State v. Strescino, 106 N.H. 554, 556 (1965) (quotation and emphasis omitted);
see RSA 626:2, II(d). We have previously stated that “[w]hether the defendant
failed to become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk is determined by
an objective test, not by reference to the defendant’s subjective perception.”
State v. Ebinger, 135 N.H. 264, 265 (1992) (quotation omitted). We find
compelling the words of the Court of Appeals of New York:
[We] have emphasized that criminal liability cannot be predicated
on every act of carelessness resulting in death, that the
carelessness required for criminal negligence is appreciably more
serious than that for ordinary civil negligence, and that the
carelessness must be such that its seriousness would be apparent
to anyone who shares the community's general sense of right and
wrong. . . . [C]riminally negligent homicide requires not only a
failure to perceive a risk of death, but also some serious
blameworthiness in the conduct that caused it. The risk involved
must have been substantial and unjustifiable, and the failure to
perceive that risk must have been a gross deviation from
reasonable care.
19
. . . [T]he crime of criminally negligent homicide serves to
provide an offense applicable to conduct which is obviously socially
undesirable. It proscribes conduct which is inadvertent as to risk
only because the actor is insensitive to the interests and claims of
other persons in society. The Legislature, in recognizing such
conduct as criminal, endeavored to stimulate people towards
awareness of the potential consequences of their conduct and
influence them to avoid creating undesirable risks.
. . . Hence, unless a defendant has engaged in some
blameworthy conduct creating or contributing to a substantial and
unjustifiable risk of death, he has not committed the crime of
criminally negligent homicide; his nonperception of a risk, even if
death results, is not enough.
People v. Boutin, 555 N.E.2d 253, 254-55 (N.Y. 1990) (citations, quotations,
brackets, ellipsis and emphasis omitted).
Keeping in mind this heightened standard for criminal negligence, and
our overall standard of review for a motion to dismiss, we have reviewed the
evidence concerning the defendant’s failure to keep a proper lookout, only some
of which we detail here. We have previously detailed that the collision between
the thirty-six foot Littlefield Baja performance boat and the twenty-foot
Hartman Wellcraft motorboat occurred on a dark, clear, moonless night, with
light boat traffic, smooth water, and good visibility. The Baja was traveling at a
speed of approximately twenty-eight miles per hour at the time of the collision.
Lieutenant Dunleavy provided expert accident reconstruction testimony that at
that speed — some thirty feet per second — it would have taken only one to
one and one-half seconds for the length of the defendant’s boat to ride over the
smaller boat.
There was substantial evidence that the stern light of the Hartman boat
was properly illuminated at the time of the collision. Lieutenant Dunleavy
testified that the State requires all recreational vessels to carry a white stern
light, visible for 360 degrees at a distance of two miles. Kevin Hartman
testified that he checked for the “proper navigation lights” before piloting the
boat away from the Meredith public docks, and that those lights remained on
during and after the collision. Karen Hartman testified that the navigation
lights of their boat were on “from the time we left the dock until after we left
the docks again in the ambulance.” Stephanie O’Brien testified that the
navigation lights were turned on when the Hartman boat left the public docks,
and that she was able to see the hull of the Baja, including its color and
striping, as it ran over Mr. Hartman’s chest, because the stern light was on
and remained illuminated. Christopher Tsakiris, an assistant service manager
20
at a Laconia marina, testified that he was at the Meredith docks when the
Hartman boat returned and that its stern light was on. Steven Plimpton,
Tsakiris’ friend who was with him that evening at the Town Docks restaurant,
testified to the same, and that the stern light was “[v]ery bright.”
There was evidence that visibility was good to excellent on the night of
August 11. Lieutenant Dunleavy testified that boats can be seen at night even
without the proper navigation lights illuminated. Almon Dirth testified that he
was able to see the boat he encountered at approximately 150 feet and
maneuver to avoid it, although he could not see any navigational or stern
lights on the boat. Benjamin Heald testified that the boat he initially
illuminated with his spotlight was several thousand feet away from him; that
after extinguishing his spotlight he could see that the boat had no navigational
lights on; and that he had often encountered boats on the lake at night
without some or all of their lights on, yet he had seen them in time to avoid a
collision.
There was significant evidence presented concerning the defendant’s
consumption of alcohol and his attention level that evening. The defendant
testified that he drank four beers during the afternoon of August 11. He also
testified that he drank two full glasses of wine, and a portion of a third glass,
over the course of the evening in Meredith. Steven Plimpton testified that at
approximately 9:00 p.m., he observed the defendant grab a railing after
apparently stumbling up the stairs from the beach to the bar area of the Town
Docks restaurant. Plimpton also testified that he commented to Tsakiris,
“Wow, he seems intoxicated.” Tsakiris testified to this same incident. Diane
Girard, who had known the Littlefields for a number of years, testified that she
started to talk with the defendant that evening, but eventually walked away
because she couldn’t understand him very well; it appeared to her that he had
been drinking too much — he was slurring his words, and was unsteady on
his feet. Jeff Jaran, the chief of police in Sandwich, knew the defendant as an
acquaintance for many years. Chief Jaran testified that he spoke with the
defendant that evening. He believed the defendant had had “a lot to drink”;
the defendant was obviously impaired and “visibly intoxicated,” his speech was
slurred, and he was unsteady on his feet.
Judith Kelley, a long-time friend of the defendant’s, spoke to the
defendant at the Town Docks restaurant that evening. Aware that the
defendant had returned the previous day from a two-week business trip
overseas, she testified that he “looked tired,” and she thought “that maybe he
had jet lag or . . . he just didn’t seem wide awake and bright-eyed.” Robert
Phelps testified that as the Baja prepared to leave the Meredith docks shortly
before 9:30 p.m., he observed that the operator had difficulty installing the
boat’s stern light, and in pulling away from the dock, because he “realized that
he hadn’t undone the stern line.” The defendant testified that as he piloted
21
the Baja, he held the boat’s wheel with one hand and had his other arm
around his wife, with whom he carried on a conversation. He further testified
that prior to the collision, he was looking “straight ahead” at the lights on the
Weirs and some boats “way out in the distance.”
Given our standard of review in this case, we believe there was
substantial evidence of the defendant’s intoxication, his attention level while
piloting the Baja, the speed at which he operated his boat on a dark, moonless
night, and his failure to see a properly illuminated boat in front of him.
The defendant contends, however, that the jury’s verdict of not guilty on
indictment #03-S-007 meant that it had reached a unanimous decision that
Mr. Hartman’s death did not occur because the defendant’s ability to operate
the Baja was impaired by alcohol to any degree. The defendant further
contends that because the jury acquitted him on indictment #03-S-007, it
could not take into account evidence of his intoxication in deciding its verdict
on the charge of failure to keep a proper lookout. Thus, he argues that we
cannot consider that same evidence in our review of the sufficiency of the
evidence. The State argues that the jury could consider the evidence of the
defendant’s intoxication on the charge of failure to keep a proper lookout. We
agree with the State, as our established jurisprudence regarding inconsistent
verdicts, and the ability of the jury to consider all of the evidence in
deliberating on either charge, belies the defendant’s argument. See State v.
Brown, 132 N.H. 321 (1989); Ebinger, 135 N.H. 264; Pittera, 139 N.H. 257.
In State v. Brown, the defendant was convicted on one count of a three-
count indictment for being an accomplice to receiving stolen property on three
separate dates. On appeal, he argued that the jury’s guilty verdict was
inconsistent with the jury’s simultaneous acquittals on the other two charges.
He asserted that if the jury’s verdicts could not be reconciled on a rational
basis, his conviction must be reversed. See Brown, 132 N.H. at 323, 328. In
affirming the defendant’s conviction, we stated:
[U]nder federal and State law, the inconsistency of simultaneous
jury verdicts against a single defendant on a multiple-count
criminal indictment need not be rationally reconciled, and does not
entitle the defendant to relief. . . .
The United States Supreme Court held in 1932 that
consistency among multiple-count verdicts is not necessary.
Instead, the Court stated that although inconsistent verdicts may
show that the jury did not voice its true conclusions in either the
acquittal or the conviction, this does not mean that the jury was
not convinced of the defendant's guilt. The rationale supporting
the Court's decision . . . has been expanded and continues to be
relied upon today.
22
As [United States v. Powell, 469 U.S. 57 (1984)] explains,
even if inconsistent verdicts reflect jury error, it should not be
assumed that they necessarily aid the government. It is just as
likely that the jury correctly reached the guilty verdict on one
count, and through leniency or mistake arrived at the not guilty
verdict on a different count of the same offense. Under these
circumstances, the government is prevented by the United States
Constitution's double jeopardy clause from appealing an acquittal
based upon jury error. The defendant, however, is in a superior
position to determine whether the jury irrationally or erroneously
arrived at its guilty finding, because he or she can appeal the
verdict based on insufficient evidence. If the appellate court
concludes that sufficient evidence was introduced at trial to
support a determination of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the
conviction will stand. Before a court could determine which of two
or more inconsistent verdicts, if any, was based on error, mistake,
or leniency, it would be necessary to inquire into the jury's
deliberations. According to Powell, the better rule is to insulate
jury verdicts from review under these circumstances.
This court has recently noted, similar to the United States
Supreme Court . . . , that although it may be assumed that one of
the two inconsistent verdicts is wrong, their inconsistency does
not, standing alone, indicate where the error lies. If we were to
vacate each verdict, one of our decisions would presumably be
wrong on the merits. If we were to vacate only one, we would never
know which one to choose.
Id. at 328-30 (citations, quotations and brackets omitted).
In this case, the jury’s verdict of not guilty of negligent homicide by
operating a boat while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, meant that
the jury unanimously agreed that the defendant was not guilty of that charge.
Even assuming that the two verdicts are inconsistent, we cannot infer that the
acquittal stemmed either from jury error, leniency, nullification, insufficiency of
the evidence, or any other particular reason. We thus conclude that the
acquittal on indictment #03-S-007 does not require us to reverse the
defendant’s conviction. See id.
Our jurisprudence also makes clear that the jury was free to consider all
of the evidence, including that of the defendant’s intoxication, in its
deliberation on the charge that he negligently caused the death of another by
failing to keep a proper lookout while operating a boat. In State v. Ebinger, the
defendant was driving his truck when it struck and killed a fifteen-year-old
23
bicyclist, who had been riding in the breakdown lane. The defendant was
charged in a two-count indictment for negligent homicide, pursuant to RSA
630:3. The first count alleged that he was driving while under the influence of
alcohol and caused the death of another; the second count alleged that he
negligently crossed over the white fog line into the breakdown lane, thereby
causing the death of another. See Ebinger, 135 N.H. at 265.
The jury convicted the defendant on the second count, but was unable to
reach a decision on the intoxication count. The defendant appealed on the
grounds of sufficiency of the evidence. We affirmed the conviction and stated
that in finding that the defendant failed to become aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that death would result from his conduct,
the jury could have found that a reasonable person, in the
defendant's place, would have seen [the victim] and avoided hitting
her. Furthermore, the jury could have combined this finding with
the evidence that the defendant had been drinking on the day of
the accident to conclude that the defendant's failure to become
aware of the risk constituted a gross deviation from the conduct
that a reasonable person would observe in the situation.
Id. at 265-66 (quotation and brackets omitted). We concluded:
The jury's failure to reach a verdict on the first count
indicates that one or more of the jurors may have considered the
evidence of the defendant's intoxication insufficient to establish his
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury's inability to convict the
defendant on the first count, however, did not preclude it from
factoring evidence of alcoholic consumption into its conclusion that
the defendant was criminally negligent. As the defendant
acknowledged . . . , the jury was properly permitted to consider the
defendant's alcoholic intake and its effect upon his behavior.
Id. at 266-67.
In State v. Pittera, the defendant was operating his motorboat on Lower
Suncook Lake when the boat and its propeller struck and killed a young boy
who was swimming in the lake. The defendant was charged in two
indictments, pursuant to RSA 630:3, alleging alternative theories for negligent
homicide. The first indictment alleged negligence, based upon operating a boat
at excessive speed and excessively close to shore; the second indictment alleged
that he failed to pay due attention and failed to see a person in the water while
operating the boat, thereby causing the death of another. The jury acquitted
the defendant on the first indictment, but convicted him on the second. The
24
defendant appealed his conviction, arguing insufficiency of the evidence. See
Pittera, 139 N.H. at 259-60.
We affirmed the conviction and stated that in finding the defendant failed
to become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that death would result
from his conduct, the jury
could have found that a reasonable person, in the defendant's
place, would have seen [the victim] in the water and avoided hitting
him. Furthermore, the jury could have combined this finding with
the evidence that the defendant was traveling rapidly through a
cove area containing numerous docks and adjacent to a known
swimming area while watching the shoreline, to conclude that the
defendant's failure to become aware of the risk constituted a gross
deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe
in the situation.
. . . .
The acquittal of the defendant on the first count indicates
that the evidence of the defendant's excessive speed alone was
insufficient to establish his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The
acquittal, however, did not preclude the jury from considering
evidence regarding the defendant's speed in determining whether
the defendant was criminally negligent under the second
indictment.
Id. at 261 (citation, quotation and brackets omitted).
Given all of the evidence in the instant case, the jury could have found
that the defendant failed to become aware of a “substantial and unjustifiable
risk” that death would result from his conduct, see RSA 626:2, II(d); that his
failure constituted a “gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable
person would observe in the situation,” id.; see Ebinger, 135 N.H. at 265; and
that he was consequently guilty of negligent homicide for failure to keep a
proper lookout while operating a boat. Further, we cannot say that no rational
trier of fact could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, we
see no error in the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motions to dismiss for
insufficient evidence.
VIII
Finally, the defendant contends that the trial court erred when it utilized
flight as an aggravating factor in his sentencing. We again note that while
introducing this argument in his brief, the defendant made passing reference to
“due process” within the context of Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
25
Constitution. As these constitutional arguments were neither included in his
notice of appeal or in the questions presented in his brief, nor developed in his
brief, we decline to address them. See, e.g., Shepard, 144 N.H. at 264.
A trial judge has broad discretion to choose the sources and types of
evidence upon which to rely in imposing sentence, and we review that
sentencing decision under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 295-96 (2001). An unsustainable exercise of
discretion will occur if the trial judge fails to consider all the relevant factors
necessary to that exercise. State v. Stone, 122 N.H. 987, 989 (1982).
The trial judge included flight as one of the aggravating circumstances in
his determination of the sentence, and sentenced the defendant to two and
one-half to seven years in the State Prison. While acknowledging the broad
discretion of the trial court to determine the duration of a sentence, the
defendant contends it was error for the trial court to consider flight because a
“review of the record clearly demonstrates that the defendant complied with the
requirements of RSA 270:1-a and did not flee.” We disagree.
We have previously detailed that the State presented significant evidence
indicating that the collision of the two boats was not minor, that the defendant
must have been aware that he had collided with another vessel, that the
individuals on that other vessel required assistance, and that the defendant
attempted to avoid detection. We have already held that the trial court did not
err in giving the jury a flight instruction, as this evidence could support a
determination that the defendant had fled. The trial judge could also rely upon
this evidence in imposing the sentence. See Lambert, 147 N.H. at 295-96.
In addition, and in explaining the reasons for the sentence, the trial
judge stated, in part:
But I also have to consider the aggravating factors, and
that’s the nature of the crime, which is . . . criminal negligence, a
gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would
engage in under the same or similar circumstances. It’s not an
accident, not civil negligence, and in that sense . . . I don’t want to
indicate by my sentence I’m not agreeing with your counsel or even
your own testimony with respect to leaving the scene. I agree with
your counsel that that’s not a separate crime . . . . You’re not
being punished for that separately, but that’s certainly an
aggravating factor. I have to consider that an aggravating factor.
. . . .
26
Even if I assume and accept your testimony . . . that you did
not hear the cries for help after you had powered down on a quiet
night on Lake Winnipesaukee. . . . Kevin Hartman’s first instinct
. . . was to go over to the other boat . . . .
Your instinct was not that. There was no going over to the
other boat to assume everyone was okay. There was no picking up
the cell phone and saying I was just involved in a collision with
another boat. I want to make sure everything is okay or there’s
nothing — there was nothing until the next day, and I do consider
that an aggravating factor. I have to consider it. . . . [U]nder all
those circumstances, given the death of Mr. Hartman, given the
serious nature of the accident, given the fact that — of your
conduct occurring and immediately after the accident . . . I think
in the totality of the circumstances a State Prison sentence is
warranted.
A review of the trial judge’s complete remarks reveals that he properly
considered the traditional goals of sentencing — punishment, deterrence, and
rehabilitation — in crafting the sentence. See State v. Hammond, 144 N.H.
401, 408 (1999). The trial judge clearly considered the defendant’s life history,
his lack of any criminal record, his demeanor throughout the length of the
trial, and the tremendous impact of the trial and sentence on both the
defendant and his family, as relevant mitigating factors in his determination of
the sentence. See State v. Stearns, 130 N.H. 475, 493 (1988) (no abuse of
discretion where, among other things, trial court considered defendant’s age,
health needs, and lack of prior criminal involvement in determining sentence).
As the trial court could rely upon the evidence of flight in imposing the
sentence, and as it considered all of the relevant factors in determining the
sentence, we find no error in its sentencing order. See Hammond, 144 N.H. at
408.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
27