THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2003-594
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRADLEY J. MACINNES
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and supplemental brief and orally), for the State.
Decato Law Offices, of West Lebanon (R. Peter Decato on the brief), and
DesMeules, Olmstead & Ostler, of Norwich, Vermont (Timothy A. Clark and
Christopher A. Dall on the supplemental brief, and Mr. Clark orally), for the
defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant, Bradley J. MacInnes, appeals his conviction
following a jury trial for felony criminal threatening with a firearm. See RSA
631:4, II (a)(2) (Supp. 2004). He argues that the Trial Court (Vaughan, J.) erred
in ruling upon: (1) the admissibility of certain evidence; (2) his motions for
directed verdict and for a mistrial; and (3) his request for a curative instruction.
We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On May 31, 2002, Jeremy
Poljacik (victim) and Rocky Marsh went to Pine Tree Lane Apartments to visit
friends. They stopped in the parking lot to talk to a friend of Marsh and her
sister. Around the same time, the defendant left one of the apartments with a
group of people. He and his girlfriend approached her car, which was parked
near the car where Marsh was talking. As the defendant walked past Poljacik,
he scanned Poljacik from head to toe. After more looks, the defendant asked
Poljacik if he had a problem with him. Poljacik said he did not, that he didn’t
know who the defendant was and that the defendant should leave him alone.
The defendant stepped back, and after taking off his shoes and putting
down his cigarettes, attacked Poljacik. Poljacik caught him in a headlock and
hit him in the head. Marsh also hit him. After a minute or two, Poljacik let the
defendant go and told him to leave. The defendant pulled out a gun and,
pointing it at Poljacik, asked if he wanted the defendant to shoot him. When
the defendant pointed his gun in another direction, Poljacik and Marsh ran to
an apartment. When they later emerged into the hallway, they saw the
defendant coming at them with his right arm raised, holding a dark-colored
object in his hand and threatening to kill them. The police arrived and the
defendant was arrested.
The victim was deposed prior to trial. During his deposition, he stated
that he had pled guilty to three unrelated charges. On the day of trial, the
State advised defense counsel that the pleas had not yet been accepted by the
court. Defense counsel then requested permission to impeach the victim with
his deposition testimony about his alleged pleas. The trial court denied his
request.
At the close of the State’s case, the prosecutor referred to the hallway
encounter arguing:
If [the defendant] was in fear of serious bodily injury, would he
continue to pursue a fight? Would he have run after them into the
apartment building? Would he have tried to keep this fight going?
Are those indicators of someone who is in fear or someone who is
enraged and wants to fight?
Defense counsel objected at the conclusion of the State’s argument,
stating: “[The prosecutor] has suggested to the jury that if my client was not in
fear of serious bodily harm when he went out the second time, that somehow
that impacts on his defense --”
Both the State and the trial court disagreed with defense counsel’s
interpretation of the State’s argument; the trial court then ruled the objection
was untimely.
2
After the jury had been deliberating for about two hours, the court clerk
checked on the status of deliberations. The clerk reported that the foreperson
had asked whether an alternate could be substituted for one of the jurors. At
this point, defense counsel moved for a mistrial. The trial court sent the clerk
back to request that the inquiry be put in writing. The written inquiry did not
ask about substituting an alternate juror, but rather indicated that the jury
had deadlocked 11-1 for conviction and that they did not believe that returning
in the morning would change the outcome; they asked what they should do.
The court advised them they could go home but should return in the morning
for further deliberations. The jury returned the next morning and the trial
court gave them a deadlocked jury instruction. An hour and a half later, the
jury returned a guilty verdict.
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court erred by: (1)
denying his request to impeach the victim about his pending pleas; (2) denying
his request for a directed verdict; (3) refusing to give a curative instruction
following an alleged misstatement of the law by the prosecutor in her closing
argument; and (4) denying his request for a mistrial after the jury advised the
trial court it was deadlocked.
I. Admissibility of Victim’s Pending Pleas
A trial court’s determination about the introduction of evidence is a
matter within its sound discretion. Absent an unsustainable exercise of that
discretion, we will not overturn a trial court’s ruling. State v. Wellington, 150
N.H. 782, 788 (2004). To meet this standard, the defendant must demonstrate
that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
In this case, defense counsel sought to elicit testimony from the victim
that he had testified in his deposition that he had entered Alford pleas on three
charges. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970). Defense counsel
identified two of these charges as felonies.
While the defendant cites the State Constitution in passing in his brief as
a basis for admission of the victim’s deposition testimony, he did not raise any
constitutional claims before the trial court or in his notice of appeal. The only
legal bases that he cited in his argument before the trial court were New
Hampshire Rules of Evidence 607 and 609. We therefore confine our review to
the applicability of those rules. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Rule 607 provides that “[t]he credibility of a witness may be attacked by
any party, including the party calling the witness.” Rule 609(a) provides in
relevant part: “For the purpose of attacking the credibility of a witness,
evidence that the witness has been convicted of a crime shall be admitted if
3
elicited from the witness or established by public record during cross-
examination but only if the crime (1) was punishable by . . . imprisonment in
excess of one year under the law under which he . . . was convicted, and the
court determines that the probative value of admitting this evidence outweighs
its prejudicial effect to the defendant, or (2) involved dishonesty or false
statement, regardless of the punishment.”
The trial court ruled that the victim’s deposition testimony was
inadmissible because the requirements of Rule 609 had not been met. We
agree. By its very language, Rule 609 is limited to impeachment of a witness
with prior convictions. In this case, the victim’s guilty pleas had not yet been
accepted by the trial court; he had therefore not been convicted of the offenses
which defense counsel sought to introduce and which were not otherwise
admissible. See, e.g., N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). Accordingly, we sustain the decision
of the trial court.
II. Motion for Directed Verdict
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred in denying his
motion for a directed verdict. He argues that the State presented insufficient
evidence to negate his claim of self-defense. See State v. Santamaria, 145 N.H.
138, 141 (2000) (when evidence of self-defense admitted, conduct negating
defense becomes element of charged offense which State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt).
The defendant concedes that he based his defense at trial on his use of
deadly force to repel deadly force. The record contains evidence that the
defendant provoked the victim verbally, that he attacked the victim, that he
failed to retreat when he could safely do so and that he used an unreasonable
degree of force. Based upon the record, we conclude that the jury could have
reasonably resolved the conflicting evidence in favor of the State and that no
reasonable juror could have found that the defendant acted in self-defense.
See id.
On appeal, the defendant also argues that if his theory of self-defense
was incorrect, the trial court should have interceded to correct the error. It is
clear from the record that this issue was neither raised before the trial court
nor listed in the defendant’s notice of appeal and has therefore not been
preserved for our review. State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48-49 (2003).
We have, however, recently adopted the plain error rule, which would
allow us to consider an error that affects substantial rights even though not
raised by either party. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. The rule should be used
sparingly, its use limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of
justice would otherwise result. Cf. United States v. Frady, 456 U.S. 152, 163
4
n. 14 (1982) (discussing federal plain error rule). The United States Supreme
Court has stated that the federal plain error rule contains four elements: (1)
there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect
substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity
or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Johnson v. United States, 520
U.S. 461, 466-67 (1997). We believe the same standards should inform our
application of the State plain error rule.
In this case, the defendant argued in his opening statement that if the
victim had used deadly force on him, the defendant was entitled to use deadly
force to repel it. At the close of the State’s case, he moved for a directed
verdict, arguing that the State had failed to meet its burden. On appeal he
argues that, although he did not raise the issue, the trial court should have
considered, before ruling on his motion, whether the evidence might support a
conclusion that his use of the gun constituted non-deadly force. He also
contends that the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury on this issue.
We are aware of no case in which we have addressed whether the act of
pointing a gun at an individual without discharging it constitutes the use of
deadly or non-deadly force under RSA 627:9 and the defendant cites none. See
RSA 627:9 (1996). For that reason, even assuming there were an error, we
cannot say that the trial court’s failure to direct a verdict or to give an
instruction sua sponte on the issue of non-deadly force was plain error.
III. Closing Argument
After the State completed its closing argument, defense counsel objected,
arguing that the prosecutor “suggested that if [the defendant were] not in fear
of serious bodily harm when he went out the second time, that somehow that
impacts on his defense --.” The State argues that this issue has not been
preserved because the objection was not made at the time the alleged improper
statement was made and was thus untimely. After the State filed its brief, we
issued an opinion holding that objections made immediately following an
opponent’s closing argument are made within a reasonable time and are thus
preserved for appellate review. State v. Hearns, 151 N.H. 226, 232 (2004). We
note, however, that the timing of the objection may affect the relief available.
Even if the prosecutor’s remarks were somehow improper, the trial
court’s instructions addressed the principles of self defense and also advised
that if counsel stated the law differently from the way the court stated it, the
jury should ignore counsel’s statements. The jury received a written copy of
the court’s instructions. During deliberations, the jury sent out a question; in
response, the trial court instructed the jury that the defendant was not on trial
for the subsequent event in the hallway. Because the trial court correctly
instructed the jury on the law and juries are presumed to follow instructions,
5
State v. Barnes, 150 N.H. 715, 718 (2004), we find no merit in the defendant’s
argument that the trial court’s failure to give a curative instruction after the
State’s closing argument requires that his conviction be reversed. See State v.
Lamprey, 149 N.H. 364, 366 (2003) (allegations of error in jury instructions are
evaluated by interpreting instructions in their entirety as reasonable juror
would have understood them and in light of all evidence in case).
IV. Motion for Mistrial
The defendant also argues that the trial court erred in denying his
request for a mistrial. He contends that because the jury had informed the
court that it wanted to replace the hold-out juror and that deliberating further
would not be helpful, the court’s decision to require the jury to return the next
day and its delivery of a deadlocked jury instruction, see State v. Jordan, 130
N.H. 48 (1987), was of such a coercive nature that it improperly swayed the
jury to reach a unanimous decision to convict. As a preliminary matter, we
note that the record is unclear as to whether the entire jury knew of the
foreperson’s question to the clerk about whether a hold-out juror could be
replaced. We note also that when the jury returned for a second day of
deliberation, the trial court advised counsel that it intended to give the
deadlocked jury instruction. Defense counsel responded, “Without waiving the
objection we had yesterday to the mistrial, we have no objection to your
instruction on deadlocked jury.”
A trial judge enjoys broad discretion in determining whether to give a
deadlocked jury instruction. State v. Chapman, 149 N.H. 753, 757 (2003). In
evaluating whether a jury instruction is coercive, we consider four factors: (1)
the content of the instruction; (2) the length of deliberations after the
challenged charge; (3) the total length of deliberations; and (4) any indicia in
the record of coercion or pressure upon the jury. Id.
In this case, the total length of deliberations did not exceed three and a
half hours. The trial court gave the deadlocked jury instruction that we
endorsed in State v. Jordan, 130 N.H. at 50. The record is unclear whether the
hold-out juror was aware of the foreperson’s inquiry to the clerk about a
substitute juror. The question posed to the clerk was not sent to the court in
writing. The jury deliberated for an additional ninety minutes after receiving
the Jordan instruction. Based upon the record before us, we cannot say that
the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion for a mistrial was error.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6