THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2003-085
JTR COLEBROOK, INC. d/b/a THE COLEBROOK HOUSE
v.
TOWN OF COLEBROOK
Argued: July 10, 2003
Opinion Issued: August 19, 2003
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (James Q. Shirley and James P. Harris on the brief, and Mr. Harris
orally), for the petitioner.
Mitchell & Bates, P.A., of Laconia (Timothy Bates on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Mary P. Castelli, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief), for the State, as
amicus curiae.
Finis E. Williams, III, of Concord, by brief, for American Heart Association, American Lung Association of New
Hampshire, American Cancer Society, New Hampshire Medical Society, New Hampshire Public Health Association,
Smoke-Free New Hampshire Alliance, and Tobacco Control Resource Center, Inc., as amici curiae.
BRODERICK, J. The petitioner, JTR Colebrook, Inc. d/b/a The Colebrook House (the Colebrook House), a
restaurant, appeals from the order of the Superior Court (Perkins, J.) upholding the no-smoking ordinance of the
respondent, the Town of Colebrook (town). We reverse.
The relevant facts follow. In the spring of 2002, the town passed the "Environmental Tobacco Smoke Regulations for
Restaurants" ordinance, the stated purpose of which is to "protect and improve the public health and welfare by
prohibiting smoking in restaurants" in recognition of "the right of those who wish to breath [sic] smoke-free air." After the
ordinance was enacted, the town’s board of health adopted it as a health regulation pursuant to RSA 147:1, I (1996).
The ordinance prohibits smoking in "any restaurant." It contains an exception for restaurant cocktail lounges that are
"effectively segregated from any non-smoking area." To be "effectively segregated," a smoking area and a non-smoking
area must be separated by an enclosed place. There must also be a "continuous, physical barrier such as a wall . . . (that
spans from the floor to the ceiling) that separates the no-smoking from a smoking-permitted area." In addition, for
cocktail lounges, "up to 30 cubic feet per minute of outdoor air per occupant" must be provided for 100 people per
1,000 square feet and more air must be exhausted from the room than is supplied to it.
In August 2002, the Colebrook House sought a declaration that the State Indoor Smoking Act preempted the
ordinance. See RSA 155:64-:77 (2002). The Act became effective in January 1991. Its stated purpose "is to protect the
health of the public by regulating smoking in enclosed workplaces and enclosed places accessible to the public,
regardless of whether publicly or privately owned, and in enclosed publicly owned buildings and offices." RSA 155:64. "
[N]otwithstanding any law to the contrary," and except as provided in RSA 155:67, the Act prohibits smoking in "[a]ll
enclosed places of public access and publicly owned buildings and offices, including workplaces, except in effectively
segregated smoking-permitted areas." RSA 155:66. "If smoking cannot be effectively segregated in any such enclosed
place," then it is "totally prohibited." Id. The Act defines an "enclosed place" as "a structurally enclosed location, or
portion of such location, enclosed by a floor, ceiling, and 3 or 4 solid walls, partitions, or windows, exclusive of doors or
passageways." RSA 155:65, VI.
"Effectively segregated" means that the following conditions are met: (1) procedures for accurately and fairly determining
smoking preference have been followed; (2) the size and location of no-smoking and smoking-permitted areas are
designed so that smoke does not "harm or unreasonably intrude" into the no-smoking area; (3) a contiguous portion of
the enclosed public place measures a minimum of 200 square feet; (4) there is either a continuous, physical barrier of at
least fifty-six inches in height or a space of at least four feet in width to separate the no-smoking and smoking areas; and
(5) in buildings with existing ventilation systems, designated smoking areas are proximate to exhaust vents. RSA 155:65,
V.
The Act exempts from its provisions restaurants seating fewer than fifty people and cocktail lounges, among other places.
RSA 155:67, VIII-IX. The Act requires that those in charge of enclosed places in which smoking is prohibited and of
designated smoking-permitted areas develop written policies and procedures relative to complying with the Act. RSA
155:68, :69.
The Act authorizes the Commissioner of the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services to adopt rules
relating to, among other things, criteria for smoking-permitted areas that effectively segregate such areas, and procedures
for resolving complaints regarding the failure to comply with the Act. RSA 155:71. Individuals who smoke in designated
no-smoking areas are guilty of a violation-level offense for which they may be fined no less than $100. RSA 155:76.
The sole issue for our review is whether the State Indoor Smoking Act preempts the town ordinance. "It is well settled
that towns cannot regulate a field that has been preempted by the State." Town of Hooksett v. Baines, 148 N.H. 625,
627 (2002). Municipal legislation is preempted if it expressly contradicts State law or if it runs counter to the legislative
intent underlying a statutory scheme. Casico v. City of Manchester, 142 N.H. 312, 315 (1997). Generally, a detailed
and comprehensive State statutory scheme governing a particular field demonstrates legislative intent to preempt that field
by placing exclusive control in the State’s hands. Id. "In such circumstances, municipal legislation dealing with that field
‘runs counter’ to the State statutory scheme." Id.
The State Indoor Smoking Act contains detailed provisions governing the circumstances under which smoking may be
allowed in restaurants, defining, for instance, in minute detail, the term "effectively segregated" down to the square
footage of permissible smoking areas. See RSA 155:65, :69. It provides for State rulemaking and enforcement, including
detailed provisions governing complaints and investigations, waivers, and penalties for non-compliance. See RSA
155:71-:76.
We hold that the State Indoor Smoking Act constitutes a comprehensive and detailed scheme that regulates smoking in
restaurants. A "conclusion that the State regulatory scheme is comprehensive and detailed does not end the preemption
inquiry, however, because a comprehensive scheme could nonetheless authorize additional municipal regulation." Casico,
142 N.H. at 316. The town argues that RSA 155:77 allows additional municipal regulation of smoking in restaurants to
protect the public health. We disagree.
"We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written, and therefore, we will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add words that the legislature did not include." Baines, 148 N.H. at 630 (quotation omitted). When
construing a statute’s meaning, we first examine the language found in the statute. McKenzie v. City of Berlin, 145 N.H.
467, 470 (2000). "Although we give undefined language its plain and ordinary meaning, we must keep in mind the intent
of the legislation, which is determined by examining the construction of the statute as a whole, and not simply by
examining isolated words and phrases found therein." Cross v. Brown, 148 N.H. 485, 486 (2002). We must construe
this statutory provision in a manner that is "consistent with the spirit and objectives of the legislation as a whole." Stablex
Corp. v. Town of Hooksett, 122 N.H. 1091, 1102 (1982) (quotation omitted).
RSA 155:77 provides that: "Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to permit smoking where smoking is prohibited
by any other provision of law or rule relative to fire protection, safety and sanitation." We interpret this provision
according to its plain meaning and hold that it permits additional municipal regulation of smoking only with respect to fire
protection, safety and sanitation, not with respect to public health. See LDM, Inc. v. Princeton Reg. Health, 764 A.2d
507, 518 (N.J. Super. Ct. Law Div. 2000) (interpreting similar provision of New Jersey statute and holding that "[t]he
authority of the municipality to restrict smoking in restaurants is limited to protecting life and property from fire").
The comprehensiveness of the State Indoor Smoking Act’s regulation of smoking in restaurants dictates against the
town’s construction of RSA 155:77. As the New Jersey Superior Court observed when faced with a similar argument:
The State Legislature promulgated requirements designed to regulate when, where, and under
what circumstances smoking is allowed. Their varying requirements seek to balance the rights
of smokers and nonsmokers, a balance that would be thwarted by municipal smoking bans
like that under challenge.
LDM, Inc., 764 A.2d at 526. The New Hampshire law likewise reflects a careful balancing of the rights of smokers and
non-smokers. As its senate sponsor noted, the law was intended to replace ten years of no-smoking legislation with a
more comprehensive law that "provides equal protection to the 73 percent of non-smokers in both the public and the
private sectors while still providing reasonable accommodation to the 27 percent of those who are smokers." N.H.S.
Jour. 140 (1990). We regard it as highly improbable that the legislature, after establishing detailed guidelines and having
considered and balanced multiple interests, intended to leave the ultimate public health regulation of indoor restaurant
smoking to the vagaries of local regulation. See Public Serv. Co. v. Town of Hampton, 120 N.H. 68, 71 (1980); Stablex
Corp., 122 N.H. at 1102.
The town argues that because the word "sanitation" is related to "public health," and because RSA 147:1, I, generally
grants towns authority to regulate to protect the public health, RSA 155:77 preserves local authority to enact no-
smoking standards that are more stringent than those under State law. Such an interpretation is strained at best.
Had the legislature intended to permit municipalities to enact stricter no-smoking standards to protect the public health, it
could have explicitly done so. In other statutory schemes, the legislature has explicitly authorized localities to enact more
stringent requirements than those provided under State law. See RSA 485-C:20 (2001) ("Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to preempt the authority of municipalities, under other statutes, to enact local ordinances or regulations affecting
groundwater, other than groundwater withdrawals; provided, however, that requirements imposed under this chapter
shall be considered as minimum."); RSA 205-C:2, III (Supp. 2002) ("Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as . . .
superseding any local law . . . and all modular buildings and building components shall comply with all applicable state or
local building requirements that exceed the modular building code . . . ."). We would therefore regard it as incongruous
for the legislature to rely obliquely upon the reference to sanitation as establishing local control over smoking in
restaurants to protect the public health. See Town of Pelham v. Browning Ferris Indus. of N.H., 141 N.H. 355, 363
(1996).
The town’s argument rests upon an overly broad interpretation of RSA 147:1, I. That statutory provision permits town
health officers to "make regulations for the prevention and removal of nuisances, and such other regulations relating to
public health as in their judgment the health and safety of the people require." It is part of a statutory scheme entitled,
"NUISANCES; TOILETS; DRAINS; EXPECTORATION; RUBBISH AND WASTE," which includes provisions
related to municipal regulation of toilets, sewers and septic tanks, garbage, slaughterhouses, spitting, waste from fruit sold
for retail, rubbish and discarded refrigerators. See RSA 147:8 (Supp. 2002), :9 (1996), :10 (Supp. 2002), :15 (Supp.
2002), :17-a (1996), :18 (1996), :19-:21-a (1996).
If we were to interpret RSA 147:1, I, as broadly as the town urges, the result would be "a total abdication and
delegation of legislative authority to towns, without any guidelines, supervision or legislative review whatsoever" with
respect to protecting the public health. Girard v. Town of Allenstown, 121 N.H. 268, 272 (1981); see D.A.B.E. v.
Toledo-Lucas Cty. Bd. of Health, 773 N.E.2d 536, 542 (Ohio 2002) (declining to interpret statute similar to RSA
147:1, I, as vesting "local boards of health with unlimited authority to adopt regulations addressing all public-health
concerns").
Such a sweeping interpretation of RSA 147:1, I, would potentially conflict with the New Hampshire Constitution, which
grants municipalities only limited legislative authority. See Girard, 121 N.H. at 272. Under the New Hampshire
Constitution, "[t]he supreme legislative power . . . [is] vested in the senate and house of representatives." N.H. CONST.
pt. II, art. 2. As subdivisions of the State, towns "have only such powers as are expressly or impliedly granted to them
by the legislature." Public Serv. Co., 120 N.H. at 71.
We rejected a similar argument in Casico, 142 N.H. at 317. At issue in Casico was a city ordinance requiring those
selling alcoholic beverages on site to obtain a city-issued license in addition to the license required by the State statutory
scheme. Id. at 314. The city argued that because RSA 47:17, IV (1991) expressly authorized municipal regulation of
liquor sales, the State statutory scheme governing the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages did not preempt the
city ordinance. Id. at 317.
We ruled that the State statutory scheme preempted the city ordinance, notwithstanding the general licensing authority
conferred by RSA 47:17, IV. Id. In effect, the general authority conferred by 47:17, IV was suspended in operation
while the State scheme for licensing and regulation of on-premises sales of alcoholic beverages remained in force. Id.;
see State v. Angelo, 71 N.H. 224, 228 (1902). Similarly, in this case, we conclude that whatever power towns may
have to regulate to protect the public health under RSA 147:1, I, is subordinate to the State law governing indoor
smoking in restaurants. See Public Serv. Co., 120 N.H. at 71.
Because the State indoor smoking law constitutes a comprehensive and detailed statutory scheme, and because we hold
that there is no statutory provision permitting additional municipal regulation of smoking in restaurants, we conclude that
the State law preempts the town ordinance.
The town asserts that the ordinance is not preempted because it is consistent with the overall goals of the State law. "We
have stated repeatedly that towns may not regulate a field that the State has preempted." Stablex Corp., 122 N.H. at
1104 (quotation and brackets omitted). Because the State has preempted the field of regulating indoor smoking in
restaurants to protect the public health, the town has no power to regulate that field. See id.; see also Public Serv. Co.,
120 N.H. at 71. The town ordinance, adopted specifically to protect the public health, is therefore inconsistent with and
necessarily preempted by the State law.
We need not address the parties’ arguments concerning whether various provisions of the ordinance directly conflict with
the State law. "Where the state has preempted the field, local law regulating the same subject is inconsistent with the
state’s transcendent interest, whether or not the terms of the local law actually conflict with the statewide legislation." 5 E.
McQuillin, Municipal Corporations § 15.20, at 109 (3d ed. rev. 1996).
Reversed.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.