THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Employment Security
No. 2003-016
APPEAL OF LAKEVIEW NEUROREHABILITATION CENTER, INC.
(New Hampshire Department of Employment Security)
Argued: September 10, 2003
Opinion Issued: October 29, 2003
Getman, Stacey, Tamposi, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Edwinna C. Vanderzanden and Jill A. DeMello on the
brief, and Ms. Vanderzanden orally), for the petitioner.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Heather M. Burns and Lauren S. Irwin on the brief, and Ms. Burns orally), for the
claimant.
Peter W. Heed, attorney general (Mary E. Schwarzer, assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the New
Hampshire Department of Employment Security.
BRODERICK, J. The petitioner, Lakeview NeuroRehabilitation Center, Inc. (Lakeview), appeals a final decision of the
appeal tribunal (tribunal), as affirmed by the appellate board, of the New Hampshire Department of Employment
Security awarding unemployment benefits to the claimant, Joseph K. McCusker. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Lakeview is a residential treatment and rehabilitation facility for brain injured,
neurologically impaired and emotionally disturbed children, adolescents and adults. McCusker began working there in
1997 as a temporary grounds crew worker who shortly thereafter became a permanent member of the staff. He has
suffered from Type I diabetes since 1978 and is medically required to monitor his blood sugar several times each day,
eat at regular intervals, and adjust his medication as needed. If his blood sugar drops substantially he is subject to a
hypoglycemic reaction, which triggers sweating, blurred vision, confusion and/or loss of consciousness. Lakeview was
aware of McCusker’s disease when it hired him.
McCusker was discharged from his job on April 24, 2002, because of alleged inappropriate and unsafe behavior on
four separate occasions between June 2000 and the date of his discharge. The first incident occurred in June 2000,
when McCusker suffered a hypoglycemic reaction while driving a maintenance truck on the Lakeview grounds. As a
result, he lost control of the vehicle and struck the maintenance barn. McCusker was then transferred to a new position
as a residential trainer. In that capacity he was required to provide direct personal care and assistance to patients.
In June 2001, a Lakeview staff member allowed a patient to use the telephone in an office where McCusker had been
instructed by Lakeview to keep his insulin kit. Left unsupervised, the patient discovered the kit and took a syringe.
McCusker was reprimanded. In December, McCusker lost consciousness at work during a hypoglycemic reaction. A
Lakeview nurse revived him by administering glucose and he was able to finish his shift.
Subsequently, Lakeview placed McCusker on thirty-days probation to ensure that he was able to monitor his blood
sugar effectively. He was directed to check his blood sugar four times a day and eat meals and snacks in accordance
with his dietary requirements. McCusker completed his probation without incident.
On March 11, 2002, McCusker was given a very high rating in his job performance appraisal. In particular, his review
noted that "[a]long with the unexpected schedule changes, Joe holds safety above all else for the staff and [patients] he is
responsible for." The "Areas For Improvement & Plan" section of the review stated, "None noted at this time."
The following month, McCusker experienced another hypoglycemic reaction despite checking his blood sugar at the
appropriate times. He became loud, kidded adolescent patients in a forceful way, grabbed a patient by the shoulders and
shook him lightly and tapped another patient on the head with a newspaper. He was argumentative with staff members
and waved an empty syringe in the air.
As a result of these episodes, Lakeview terminated McCusker’s employment. Thereafter, he filed for unemployment
benefits with the New Hampshire Department of Employment Security, alleging that he had been discharged due to his
diabetic condition. Lakeview contended that he was fired for "inappropriate/unsafe behavior in the presence of
[patients]." McCusker’s request for benefits was denied upon a finding that he was discharged due to "misconduct
connected with his work," see RSA 282-A:32, I(b) (1999). McCusker appealed the denial to the tribunal, which,
following an evidentiary hearing, reversed the decision denying benefits. The tribunal found that while McCusker was
discharged for his inability to do his job, his inability did not arise from misconduct connected with his work. Specifically,
the tribunal found that McCusker "worked to the best of his ability," "did his best to control his diabetic condition" and
had not engaged in misconduct. After its request for reopening was denied, Lakeview appealed to the appellate board,
which affirmed the tribunal’s decision. This appeal followed. See RSA 282-A:67, II (1999).
Lakeview asks this court to overturn the award of unemployment benefits to the claimant on the grounds that the tribunal:
(1) misapplied or ignored the proper legal standard for assessing employee misconduct under RSA 282-A:32, I(b); (2)
failed to base its decision upon competent medical evidence; and (3) failed to hold employees in the health care
profession to a more demanding standard in assessing misconduct. Lastly, Lakeview contends that the tribunal’s finding,
that the claimant’s hypoglycemic reactions were the uncontrollable result of his medical condition, was clearly erroneous.
In reviewing a decision of the tribunal we are confined to the record and will not substitute our judgment for its judgment
as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact. RSA 282-A:67, IV, V (1999); see Appeal of N.H. Sweepstakes
Commission, 130 N.H. 659, 662 (1988). We will uphold the decision of the tribunal unless its findings or conclusions
are unauthorized, affected by an error of law, or clearly erroneous in view of all the evidence presented. See RSA 282-
A:67, V; Appeal of John Hancock Distributors, 146 N.H. 124, 127 (2001).
New Hampshire’s unemployment compensation system is predicated upon benefits being paid to those who become
unemployed through no fault of their own. See Appeal of Miller, 122 N.H. 993, 994 (1982). No benefits are to be paid,
however, to an employee who is terminated as a result of "misconduct connected with his work." RSA 282-A:32, I(b).
Both parties agree upon the applicable law for assessing employee misconduct under RSA 282-A:32, I(b). It is well
established that New Hampshire uses a two-pronged definition of employee "misconduct." Appeal of N.H. Sweepstakes
Commission, 130 N.H. at 664. Under the first prong:
Isolated or inadvertent instances of unsatisfactory conduct are not sufficient for a finding of
"misconduct," but recurring careless or negligent acts are enough to constitute "misconduct."
As well, the negligence need not be of such a degree or recurrence as to manifest wrongful
intent or evil design or to show intentional and substantial disregard.
Id. (citation and quotations omitted). Under the second prong, if there are no recurring acts of carelessness or
negligence, "a single instance of misconduct may be sufficient for a finding of misconduct if it is a deliberate violation of a
company rule reasonably designed to protect the legitimate business interests of the employer." Id. (quotation, emphasis
and brackets omitted); see Appeal of Beebe Rubber Co., 124 N.H. 533, 536 (1984).
Lakeview first argues that McCusker’s repeated failure to properly monitor his blood sugar, despite verbal and written
warnings, constituted "recurring careless or negligent acts" sufficient to establish misconduct. In the alternative, it
contends that McCusker’s failure to meticulously follow his treatment regimen, after having been warned by Lakeview
that such strict adherence was essential, constituted a "deliberate violation" of its rules and procedures.
Lakeview argues that the tribunal misapplied or ignored the recognized standards for assessing employee misconduct
when it awarded McCusker benefits on the basis that he "worked to the best of his ability" and did "his best" to control
his diabetic condition and, thus, did not engage in employee misconduct. Lakeview asserts that these findings imply that
the absence of misconduct was assessed using a willfulness standard rather than the "recurring careless or negligent acts"
test. We disagree. The tribunal’s factual findings on each episode at issue indicate that it found no misconduct, either
careless, negligent or willful on McCusker’s part. The tribunal essentially concluded that Lakeview had not established
that the claimant was able to control his diabetic condition and thus there was no misconduct at all. The tribunal’s
acknowledgement that McCusker had done "his best" to properly monitor and accommodate his diabetes while at work
can only be fairly interpreted to mean that he was free from fault and not complicit in misconduct, however assessed.
Lakeview argues in the alternative that the claimant’s failure to follow his treatment regimen constituted a deliberate or
willful violation of its rules and procedures. We disagree. We need not decide whether the claimant’s conduct as
characterized by Lakeview would, as a matter of law, satisfy the deliberate violation prong of employee misconduct
under RSA 282-A:32, I(b), see Appeal of Beebe Rubber Co., 124 N.H. at 536; Appeal of United Parcel Service, 125
N.H. 753, 756-57 (1984), because, as a matter of fact, the tribunal found that the claimant could not be faulted for his
inability to perform his job functions. Accordingly, it cannot follow that his behavior resulting from his diabetic condition
constituted a deliberate violation of Lakeview’s rules and procedures. We cannot say that the tribunal’s conclusion that
the claimant treated his diabetic condition appropriately was clearly erroneous.
Lakeview next contends that the tribunal erred by failing to base its decision upon competent medical evidence and,
instead, improperly grounded its decision upon its own lay assessment of the claimant’s efforts to control his diabetic
condition. Lakeview argues that the tribunal failed to require the claimant to satisfy his statutory burden of providing
competent medical evidence that he was unable to control his diabetic condition. Although Lakeview’s request to reopen
the tribunal’s decision was denied, in part, because it failed to argue before the tribunal that the claimant needed to
submit expert medical testimony, we assume, without deciding, that the issue was preserved for appellate review.
The tribunal must apply a preponderance of the evidence standard when assessing the evidence before it. Appeal of
Kelly, 129 N.H. 462, 466-67 (1987). The tribunal’s findings of fact will not be disturbed if they are supported by
competent evidence in the record, upon which the tribunal’s decision reasonably could have been made. Appeal of
Kehoe, 141 N.H. 412, 415 (1996).
In this case it was undisputed that the claimant suffered from diabetes and had experienced multiple hypoglycemic
reactions. The claimant testified, before the tribunal, that his hypoglycemic reactions could occur despite conscientious
monitoring. In addition, the claimant’s physician submitted a "Physician’s Statement" to the tribunal stating that because of
the claimant’s diabetic condition he could have hypoglycemic reactions without warning. In contrast, there was no
credible testimony or evidence that the claimant did not attempt to properly monitor his condition or failed to follow the
directions of his physician or employer as to when and how often he should monitor his condition. No medical expertise
was required to interpret the evidence in this case. See Appeal of Demeritt, 142 N.H. 807, 810-11 (1998) (finding that
no medical expertise was required to interpret the claimant’s medical history as recorded by her treating physicians).
Therefore, the tribunal’s finding, that the claimant was unable to control his diabetic condition, was reasonably based
upon competent evidence in the record.
Lakeview further argues that the tribunal erred because it failed to hold employees in the health care profession to a more
demanding standard in assessing misconduct under RSA 282-A:32, I(b) than is the case for other occupations.
Lakeview reasons that employees in the health care profession are responsible for the health and safety of others and
should therefore have their conduct judged by a more demanding standard.
Lakeview cites numerous cases from other jurisdictions in support of its argument that employees in the health care
profession should be held to more rigorous review in assessing misconduct. While there can be no doubt that health care
workers and professionals must act for the benefit and safety of clients and patients under their charge, there is no need
to impose a different legal standard for assessing misconduct for unemployment purposes. Obviously, the conduct of
employees should be assessed within the context in which it occurs in calculating whether it evidences "recurring careless
or negligent" behavior or a "deliberate violation" of an employer’s rules and procedures. In each of the authorities cited
by Lakeview, the conduct at issue on the part of the employee was the result of negligent or deliberate behavior. The acts
at issue in this case were found not to be within the claimant’s control and thus did not constitute misconduct. Whether a
health care provider can terminate a worker who is unable to perform his job functions to its satisfaction is a different
inquiry from whether the perceived inability is the result of misconduct for purposes of unemployment compensation.
Finally, Lakeview contends that the finding of the tribunal, that the claimant’s hypoglycemic reactions were the
uncontrollable result of his medical condition, was clearly erroneous. See RSA 282-A:67, V(d). Lakeview argues that
the record compels a finding that the claimant was capable of controlling his diabetes and avoiding conduct that placed
patients at risk of physical and emotional harm. In support, Lakeview argues that the claimant had complete control over
monitoring and testing his blood sugar level. While the claimant could control monitoring and testing, the tribunal
specifically found that the claimant, despite conscientious monitoring and testing, could not control his diabetes so as to
prevent all hypoglycemic reactions. The claimant testified that the longer he lived with diabetes the less he was able to
detect the onset of hypoglycemic reactions. Moreover, the "Physician’s Statement" submitted to the tribunal by the
claimant’s physician stated that the claimant could have a hypoglycemic reaction without warning. Based upon the
evidence, the tribunal could reasonably have found that the claimant’s hypoglycemic reactions were the result of his
medical condition and not misconduct.
Affirmed.
BROCK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.