THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Nashua District Court
No. 2003-807
MANSFIELD ADAMS, JR.
v.
WOODLANDS OF NASHUA
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: January 7, 2005
Mansfield Adams, Jr., pro se, filed no brief.
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John G. Cronin and John F.
Bisson on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Woodlands of Nashua, appeals from a
ruling of the Nashua District Court (Ryan, J.) awarding the plaintiff, Mansfield
Adams, Jr., $26,000 in liquidated damages, see RSA 540-A:4, IX (1997)
(amended 2003), for willfully violating the plaintiff’s right to quiet enjoyment of
his tenancy. We reverse.
The record reflects the following facts. The plaintiff, who has two young
children, has lived in a twenty-four unit building in the defendant’s apartment
complex since November 2002. Prior to that, a roach problem had existed at
the property, and the defendant had hired a professional pest control service to
treat the entire building for roaches. Though the problem had existed before
the plaintiff moved into the building, he was not made aware of the problem at
the time he signed his lease, and did not become aware of the problem until he
received a notice in February 2003 stating that the pest control service would
be performing an inspection and to contact the property manager if any activity
was noticed. The plaintiff reported seeing a roach on March 11, 2003, and an
appointment was scheduled for March 19, 2003, at which time the pest control
service treated his apartment.
Two months later, the plaintiff reported that the apartment was again
infested by roaches. The defendant notified the pest control service, which
returned on May 20, 2003, to perform the same procedure it had previously
performed. Once again, this procedure failed and the plaintiff contacted the
Nashua code enforcement officer who then contacted the defendant. The
defendant, for a third time, had the pest control service return to perform the
same treatment. As of October 16, 2003, the date of trial, the plaintiff testified
that the third treatment had failed and he had seen numerous roaches.
An employee of the defendant testified that the nature of the problem
was that a single unit, within the twenty-four unit building, had been
improperly maintained by its tenant. This caused the roach population to
flourish despite the pest control service’s treatments. That employee further
testified that the defendant had now taken steps to remedy the problem by
evicting the tenant and changing pest control companies.
The trial court found that the defendant had willfully violated the
plaintiff’s and his family’s right to quiet enjoyment of his tenancy, see RSA 540-
A:2 (1997), and ordered damages pursuant to RSA 540-A:4, IX. On appeal, the
defendant argues that the trial court erred in concluding that the defendant
had disturbed the plaintiff’s right to quiet enjoyment of his tenancy under RSA
540-A:2. We agree.
The trial court’s interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. The starting point in any statutory interpretation case is the
language of the statute itself. Where the language of a particular statutory
provision is at issue, we will focus upon the statute as a whole, not on isolated
words or phrases. We will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add words that the legislature did not include. Crowley v. Frazier, 147 N.H.
387, 389 (2001).
RSA 540-A:2 provides, “No landlord shall willfully violate a tenant’s right
to quiet enjoyment of his tenancy . . . .” Pursuant to RSA 540-A:4, IX, “Any
landlord . . . who violates RSA 540-A:2 or any provision of RSA 540-A:3 shall
be subject to the civil remedies set forth in RSA 358-A:10 . . . .” RSA 540-A:2
does not further define a tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment; however, we rely
upon the common law doctrine that the covenant obligates the landlord to
refrain from interference with the tenant’s possession during the tenancy. See
2
Echo Consulting Services v. North Conway Bank, 140 N.H. 566, 571 (1995)
(holding that breach of the covenant of quiet enjoyment occurs when landlord
substantially interferes with tenant’s beneficial use or enjoyment of the
premises); see also Crowley, 147 N.H. at 389.
In Crowley v. Frazier, we held that a tenant’s claims of rodent infestation,
plumbing problems, electrical problems, a residual garbage problem, loose and
falling ceiling plaster, leaking roofs and walls, and structural problems, absent
a finding that the tenant lost any use of the premises, did not constitute claims
that could be construed as violating that tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment
under RSA 540-A:2, so as to constitute a basis for damages under RSA 540-
A:4, IX. Id. at 388, 390. We further held, relying upon the principle that we
ordinarily construe a general term in a statute in light of related, specific
terms, that the claims made by the tenant were not similar in scope to those
prohibited by former RSA 540-A:3 (1997) (amended 1998, 2001, 2003), which
also constitute a basis for damages under RSA 540-A:4, IX. Id. at 391.
We now hold that the insect infestation claim made in this case, like the
rodent infestation claim made in Crowley, does not constitute a violation of the
right to quiet enjoyment under RSA 540-A:2 because the trial court did not
find, nor would the record have supported a finding, that the insect infestation
caused the plaintiff to lose the use of his premises. Furthermore, this claim is
not similar in scope to the specific acts described in RSA 540-A:3 (Supp. 2003)
(amended 2003) (prohibiting landlord from, among other things, interrupting
utility service, denying tenant access to rented premises, and entering rented
premises without consent). See Crowley, 147 N.H. at 391.
We do not hold today that no pest infestation claim could violate the
covenant of quiet enjoyment, as there may be circumstances where a pest
infestation could cause a tenant to lose the use of part or all of the premises.
Further, as we stated in Crowley, a tenant whose premises are unsafe or
unsanitary may have a remedy because such conditions could violate the
implied warranty of habitability. Id. The proper remedy in such a case would
be an award of damages measured by the difference between the agreed upon
rent and the fair rental value of the premises as they were during the tenant’s
occupancy in the unsafe, unsanitary or unfit condition. Id. As the trial court
made no finding with regard to the implied warranty of habitability, we need
not further discuss this issue.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
3