THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-510
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL AYER, SR.
Argued: September 27, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Simon R. Brown, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
Daniel E. Ayer, Sr., by brief, pro se.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Daniel Ayer, Sr., appeals his conviction for
first-degree murder, see RSA 630:1-a, following a jury trial in Superior Court
(Hampsey, J.). We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. Beginning in 1998, the
New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF) became
involved with the defendant’s family, and in July 1999, Family Counselor Mark
Rowland of the Nashua Children’s Home was assigned to the defendant’s case.
On August 20, 1999, Rowland was scheduled to meet with the defendant’s
family. When Rowland arrived that day, the defendant was leaving in his
truck. He informed Rowland that he did not want to meet and that he hoped
Rowland would leave. The defendant then left the property but remained in the
immediate area. Rowland did not leave. When the defendant returned a few
minutes later, Rowland told the defendant that he would not leave. The
defendant then shot Rowland in the head and fled in his truck. Rowland later
died from the gunshot wound.
Within minutes of the shooting, Officer Martin Matthews of the Nashua
Police Department received a radio dispatch about the shooting and rushed to
the scene. Immediately after he arrived, emergency medical personnel arrived
and began treating Rowland. As soon as the scene was secured, Matthews was
ordered to begin investigating this urgent situation. He scanned the area for
potential witnesses to the shooting and for anyone who might know where the
shooter was. His attention was drawn to a woman, later identified as Joan
Ayer, the defendant’s wife, who was standing near the scene, crying
hysterically. As Matthews approached Mrs. Ayer, but before he asked any
questions, she blurted out, “He had said that morning that he was going to
shoot him,” and, “he’d been sitting across the street in his truck all morning
waiting for him.” Matthews asked to whom Mrs. Ayer was referring and she
responded that it was her husband. When asked who her husband was, Mrs.
Ayer identified the defendant. She then described the defendant’s truck and
informed Matthews that the defendant had access to firearms.
Matthews conveyed Mrs. Ayer’s description of the defendant’s vehicle to
his dispatcher, who then issued an alert to other officers. Shortly thereafter,
Officers Matthew Eskridge and Scott Anderson saw the defendant’s truck. The
officers stopped the truck and arrested the defendant without incident. While
arresting the defendant, the officers noticed firearms and ammunition in his
truck. One of the firearms was later determined to be the murder weapon. The
defendant was transported to the Nashua Police Department for booking.
Approximately forty minutes elapsed from the time the original dispatch was
sent until the defendant was booked at the police station.
At the police station, the defendant waived his Miranda rights, see
Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), and gave a formal statement to
police. He stated that he felt he had been harassed by DCYF and other
agencies for some time and that when Rowland arrived at his home and would
not leave, he “snapped.” He also stated that he had been contemplating
making a “demonstration” for some time and that a “demonstration” was
necessary to make DCYF and others heed his complaints and concerns.
In 2003, the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder. That
conviction was reversed on appeal. See State v. Ayer, 150 N.H. 14 (2003).
2
Upon retrial, the defendant was again convicted of first-degree murder. This
appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1)
permitting the State to introduce Mrs. Ayer’s statements to Officer Matthews;
(2) permitting the State to introduce evidence of the firearms and ammunition
found in his truck; (3) failing to allow him to present evidence on, and have
jury instructions regarding, certain defenses and lesser offenses; (4) appointing
counsel for him when he desired to proceed pro se; (5) partially denying a
motion to suppress and failing to find that he invoked his right to counsel
during booking; (6) only partially suppressing his statement to Nashua police
officers; and (7) denying pretrial motions to suppress regarding items seized
from his truck as the fruits of unlawfully obtained statements. We address
each argument in turn.
I. Mrs. Ayer’s Statements to Officer Matthews
The defendant first argues, based upon Crawford v. Washington, 541
U.S. 36 (2004), that because Mrs. Ayer did not testify at his trial, the State
should not have been permitted to introduce her statements to Officer
Matthews. The defendant contends that admitting Mrs. Ayer’s statements
violated his right to confrontation under the New Hampshire and United States
Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amends. VI, XIV.
Because the defendant has raised his claim under the State and Federal
Constitutions, we would normally address his State claim first. See State v.
Dedrick, 132 N.H. 218, 226 (1989). However, in this case, the defendant has
raised an issue under the Federal Constitution and has not enunciated either a
State standard different from the Federal one or a reason to adopt such a
standard; we will therefore address his claim under the Federal Constitution
first. Id.
In Crawford, the defendant was arrested for stabbing a man who, he
claimed, attempted to rape his wife. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 38. The
defendant’s wife was interrogated at the police station, and gave a taped
statement about the incident. Id. at 38-39. At trial, the defendant’s wife did
not testify. Id. at 40. The State, therefore, sought to introduce her tape-
recorded statement. Id. The defendant objected on the ground that
introducing the tape would violate his Sixth Amendment right to confrontation.
Id.
In ruling that the admission of the taped statement violated the “Sixth
Amendment’s guarantee that, in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall
enjoy the right to be confronted with the witnesses against him”, id. at 38
(quotations and ellipsis omitted), the Court overruled, in part, a line of cases
3
beginning with Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56 (1980). Under the Roberts
analysis, certain out-of-court statements could be admitted if the declarant
was unavailable and the statements fell within a “firmly rooted” exception to
the rule against hearsay, or if they bore particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness. Roberts, 448 U.S. at 66. In rejecting the Roberts formulation
as it pertained to testimonial statements, the Court stated, “Where testimonial
statements are involved, we do not think the Framers meant to leave the Sixth
Amendment’s protection to the vagaries of the rules of evidence, much less to
amorphous notions of ‘reliability.’” Crawford, 541 U.S. at 61. Accordingly, the
Court ruled that testimonial statements of a declarant absent from trial would
only be admitted when the declarant is unavailable and the defendant has had
a prior opportunity to cross-examine the declarant. Id. at 59. The Court did
not alter the Roberts analysis pertaining to the admissibility of nontestimonial
statements. See, e.g., Horton v. Allen, 370 F.3d 75, 84 (1st Cir. 2004)
(“[U]nless [the] statements qualify as ‘testimonial,’ Crawford is inapplicable and
Roberts continues to apply.”).
Under Crawford, “a declarant’s ‘testimonial’ out-of-court statement is not
admissible under the Confrontation Clause unless (1) the declarant testifies, or
(2) the defendant had a prior opportunity for cross-examination and the
declarant is unavailable, or (3) the evidence is admitted for purposes other than
establishing the truth of the matter asserted.” United States v. Maher, 454
F.3d 13, 19-20 (1st Cir. 2005). Therefore, “[a]ssuming the declarant does not
testify and is in fact available, and/or there was no prior opportunity for cross-
examination of the declarant, Crawford claims will usually turn on one of two
issues. First, was the out-of-court statement testimonial? Second, if so, is it
admissible for reasons other than the truth of the matter asserted?” Id. at 20.
Resolution of the matter before us turns on the first issue.
In Crawford, the Supreme Court did not define what statements qualify
as testimonial. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 68. Instead, the Court listed, for
illustrative purposes, various types of statements that fall within the “core
class” of testimonial statements. With only the Supreme Court’s illustrations
to guide them, however, state and federal courts developed numerous, and
often conflicting, analyses for determining which evidence is testimonial and
therefore subject to Crawford. See, e.g., Flores v. State, 120 P.3d 1170, 1177
(Nev. 2005). Recently, in Davis v. Washington, 126 S. Ct. 2266 (2006), the
Supreme Court clarified the definition of testimonial statements.
Davis involved two consolidated cases. In the first, Davis v. Washington,
a woman made a 911 call during the course of a domestic disturbance with her
former boyfriend. Id. at 2270-71. The victim gave numerous statements to the
911 operator about her assailant during and immediately after the assault. Id.
at 2271. When police arrived a few minutes later, they observed the victim’s
shaken state, her fresh injuries and her frantic efforts to collect her belongings
4
in order to leave. Id. When her attacker, Davis, was tried for the assault, the
victim did not testify and the State sought to introduce her statements to the
911 operator. Id. The Supreme Court of Washington held that some of the
statements to the 911 operator were nontestimonial and thus not barred by
Crawford, and that admitting any statements which were testimonial was
harmless. Id. at 2271-72.
In the second case, Hammon v. Indiana, police responded to a report of a
domestic disturbance. Id. at 2272. Upon arriving, the police found a woman,
Amy, sitting on the front porch of her home. Id. She informed the police that
nothing was wrong, but that they could, nonetheless, enter. Id. Once inside,
the police noticed signs of a physical altercation and sought to question Amy as
well as a man found inside, the defendant. Id. The police took the two people
into separate rooms and questioned them about what had happened. Id. After
hearing Amy’s account of how the defendant had attacked her, the police had
her fill out a “battery affidavit.” Id. At the defendant’s trial, Amy did not
appear and the State, over the defendant’s objection, introduced her oral
statements to the officers and her statements in the battery affidavit. Id. The
Indiana Supreme Court held that her oral statements were admissible as
excited utterances and were not testimonial so as to be barred by Crawford. Id.
at 2273. The Indiana Supreme Court found that the battery affidavit was
testimonial, but that its admission was harmless. Id.
In addressing these cases, the United States Supreme Court noted that
“[a] critical portion of th[e] holding [in Crawford], and the portion central to
resolution of the two cases now before us, is the phrase ‘testimonial
statements’” because “[o]nly statements of this sort cause the declarant to be a
‘witness’ within the meaning of the Confrontation Clause.” Id. Accordingly, the
Court stated:
Without attempting to produce an exhaustive classification of all
conceivable statements—or even all conceivable statements in
response to police interrogation—as either testimonial or
nontestimonial, it suffices to decide the present cases to hold as
follows: Statements are nontestimonial when made in the course of
police interrogation under circumstances objectively indicating that
the primary purpose of the interrogation is to enable police
assistance to meet an ongoing emergency. They are testimonial
when the circumstances objectively indicate that there is no such
ongoing emergency, and that the primary purpose of the
interrogation is to establish or prove past events potentially relevant
to later criminal prosecution.
Id. The Court made sure “not to imply, however, that statements made in the
absence of any interrogation are necessarily nontestimonial.” Id. at 2274 n. 1.
5
This is so because “[t]he Framers were no more willing to exempt from cross-
examination volunteered testimony or answers to open-ended questions than
they were to exempt answers to detailed interrogation.” Id. Thus, “even when
interrogation exists, it is in the final analysis the declarant’s statements, not
the interrogator’s questions, that the Confrontation Clause requires us to
evaluate.” Id.
Applying its new definition of testimonial statements to the facts of
Davis, the Supreme Court held that the victim’s statements to the 911 operator
were nontestimonial. Id. at 2276-77. The Court noted that the victim was
speaking about events as they happened and immediately afterward as
opposed to describing past events, any reasonable listener would realize that
the victim was facing an ongoing emergency, the questions asked and
answered were relevant to the resolution of the ongoing emergency, and the
victim gave frantic answers in an environment that was not tranquil or safe.
Id. In sum, the victim in Davis “simply was not acting as a witness; she was
not testifying.” Id. at 2277.
Conversely, in evaluating Hammon, the Court found that Amy’s oral
statements and those in the affidavit were testimonial. Id. at 2278. In
Hammon, as in Crawford, there was no ongoing emergency, there was no
immediate threat to Amy or anyone else, and the purpose of the officers’
questioning was to determine what had happened at some point in the past.
Id. According to the Court, “[o]bjectively viewed, the primary, if not indeed the
sole, purpose of the interrogation was to investigate a possible crime . . . .” Id.
In comparing the statements in Hammon to those in Crawford, the Court found
that:
Both statements deliberately recounted, in response to police
questioning, how potentially criminal past events began and
progressed. And both took place some time after the events
described were over. Such statements under official interrogation
are an obvious substitute for live testimony, because they do
precisely what a witness does on direct examination; they are
inherently testimonial.
Id. The Court also noted:
Although we necessarily reject the Indiana Supreme Court’s
implication that virtually any “initial inquiries” at the crime scene
will not be testimonial, we do not hold the opposite—that no
questions at the scene will yield nontestimonial answers. We have
already observed of domestic disputes that officers called to
investigate need to know whom they are dealing with in order to
assess the situation, the threat to their own safety, and possible
6
danger to the potential victim. Such exigencies may often mean that
“initial inquiries” produce nontestimonial statements. But in cases
like this one, where Amy’s statements were neither a cry for help nor
the provision of information enabling officers immediately to end a
threatening situation, the fact that they were given at an alleged
crime scene and were “initial inquiries” is immaterial.
Id. at 2279 (italics, brackets, quotations and citations omitted).
In the wake of Crawford and Davis, we are left with a two-step analysis
for determining whether an unavailable declarant’s statements may be
admitted at trial. First, it must be determined whether the statements at issue
are testimonial under the Crawford and Davis criteria. If the statements are
testimonial, then it must be determined whether the declarant is, in fact,
unavailable, and whether there has been a prior opportunity to cross-examine,
or whether the statements are admissible for some reason other than their
truth. If the statements are not testimonial, the second step is to determine if
the statements are admissible under Roberts.
With the above framework of Crawford and Davis in mind, we turn to the
issue presented. Whether a statement is testimonial under Crawford and
Davis is a legal conclusion which is determined by an objective analysis of the
primary purpose of the interrogation which produced the disputed statement.
Davis, 126 S. Ct. at 2273. Thus, although we defer to the trial court’s
determination of historical facts, we review its legal conclusion that Mrs. Ayer’s
statements were nontestimonial de novo. See State v. Allen, 150 N.H. 290, 292
(2003).
During trial, the defendant objected to Officer Matthews’ testimony about
Mrs. Ayer’s declarations that “He had said that morning that he was going to
shoot him,” and, “he’d been sitting across the street in his truck all morning
waiting for him.” Although the trial court did not have the benefit of Davis, it
ruled that Mrs. Ayer’s statements were not testimonial and thus not subject to
Crawford. The trial court also found that the statements were admissible
hearsay because they qualified as excited utterances. We agree with the trial
court that the statements were not testimonial and were otherwise admissible.
Because the declarant, Mrs. Ayer, was not the victim of the charged
crime, we note that Davis is not precisely on point. However, it is sufficiently
analogous to inform our analysis. As quoted above:
Statements are nontestimonial when made in the course of police
interrogation under circumstances objectively indicating that the
primary purpose of the interrogation is to enable police assistance to
meet an ongoing emergency. They are testimonial when the
7
circumstances objectively indicate that there is no such ongoing
emergency, and that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to
establish or prove past events potentially relevant to later criminal
prosecution.
Davis, 126 S. Ct. at 2273. For the purpose of resolving this matter, we
assume, without deciding, that by approaching Mrs. Ayer, Officer Matthews
“interrogated” her, as the term is used in Crawford. Crawford, 541 U.S. at 53
n. 4 (“We use the term ‘interrogation’ in its colloquial, rather than any technical
legal, sense.”). Therefore, the relevant inquiry under Davis is whether the
primary purpose of this interrogation was to enable police assistance to meet
an ongoing emergency.
At the point that Matthews’ interrogation began, he knew only that a
shooting had occurred just moments before. He did not know whether the
perpetrator was still in the immediate area or whether he would return to the
area. Nor did he know whether the perpetrator was armed, or whether any
potential witnesses or other members of the public were or would become
targets. In short, Matthews did not know anything about the perpetrator that
would indicate whether the violence had ended or whether it might continue
there or elsewhere. Thus, obtaining information about the perpetrator would
enable Officer Matthews to address an existing threat to his safety and the
safety of others.
Furthermore, it was in a chaotic, non-tranquil setting filled with police,
medical personnel and other bystanders, that Matthews approached a woman
who was, like the victim in Davis, distraught, crying and hysterical, and who
might have seen the shooting or might know the whereabouts of the
perpetrator. Without any prompting, Mrs. Ayer offered the statements objected
to by the defendant and then gave information about the perpetrator, including
the fact that he had continued access to firearms. Here, as in Davis, Matthews’
interrogation, objectively viewed, was primarily for the purpose of resolving an
ongoing emergency.
The information Matthews obtained permitted him to know with whom
he was dealing so that he could assess the situation, the threat to his safety,
and the possible danger to other potential victims. See Davis, 126 S. Ct. at
2279. His initial inquiries thus resulted in the provision of information that
enabled officers immediately to end a threatening situation. Id. As such, they
were the type of initial inquiries that the Supreme Court identified as likely to
produce nontestimonial statements. Id. Under these facts, we hold that the
circumstances objectively indicate that the primary purpose of Matthews’
interrogation was to enable police assistance to meet an ongoing emergency
and, therefore, Mrs. Ayer’s initial statements were not testimonial as defined in
Crawford and Davis.
8
The defendant argues that the “ongoing emergency” language of Davis
ought to be read narrowly. He contends that because Rowland had been shot
and the gunman had fled, the emergency had abated and the police were
primarily investigating past events. We do not read Davis so narrowly. Viewed
objectively, as required by Davis, the interrogator knew that an armed
assailant, who had just shot an unarmed individual in public in broad
daylight, was loose, and could have remained in the immediate vicinity or could
have gone elsewhere in search of other victims. The emergency created by the
shooting had not necessarily ended merely because more shots had not yet
been fired. See State v. Camarena, 145 P.3d 267, 275 (Or. Ct. App. 2006)
(although defendant had left the scene of an assault, the fact that he could
easily return meant that the emergency had not ended); State v. Alvarez, 143
P.3d 668, 674 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2006) (“Although the criminal activity that
resulted in [the victim’s] injuries and the ensuing charges against [the
defendant] had ended, the emergency that those events set in motion was very
much ongoing.”). We do not believe that under these circumstances – when
mere minutes had passed since the public shooting of an unarmed man by an
unknown, at-large assailant – any rational police officer would believe that the
emergency had subsided and that the primary concern would be to interrogate
persons to obtain information potentially relevant to a future prosecution.
Davis, 126 S. Ct. at 2273.
Alternatively, the defendant invites us to admit only Mrs. Ayer’s
statements of identification as relevant to resolving an ongoing emergency, but
to exclude all other statements as testimonial. We decline the defendant’s
invitation. It is true that “a conversation which begins as an interrogation to
determine the need for emergency assistance [can] . . . evolve into testimonial
statements, once that purpose has been achieved,” id. at 2277 (quotations and
citation omitted) (emphasis added), and that therefore a single conversation
may have portions subject to Crawford’s requirements and portions that are
not. However, that analysis is not applicable here. Mrs. Ayer’s disputed
statements were made prior to any determination regarding the need for
emergency assistance or the degree of danger presented by the circumstances.
Therefore, the purpose of determining the need for emergency assistance had
not yet been achieved and the interrogation had not evolved into the collection
of testimonial statements. See Alvarez 143 P.3d at 674 (“The Confrontation
Clause does not prohibit questioning when, as here, its purpose, viewed
objectively, is to ascertain if there is an ongoing emergency.” (quotation
omitted)).
For the above reasons, we hold that Mrs. Ayer’s statements were not
testimonial under Crawford and Davis and that their admission did not,
therefore, violate the defendant’s rights under the Federal Constitution.
Additionally, while the defendant argued during trial that Mrs. Ayer’s
9
statements were testimonial and thus barred by Crawford, he did not contend
that the statements were barred by the Rules of Evidence or Roberts.
Accordingly, as the admissibility of Mrs. Ayer’s statements under Roberts and
the Rules of Evidence was not raised before the trial court, we do not address
it. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Regarding the defendant’s State constitutional claims, we have
traditionally applied Roberts to Confrontation Clause challenges under the
State Constitution. See, e.g., State v. Cook, 135 N.H. 655, 661-62 (1992). As
noted, the defendant has not argued that Mrs. Ayer’s statements were barred
by Roberts; thus we do not address the admissibility of her statements under
the Roberts standard. Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49. To the extent the defendant
argues that Crawford applies to claims under the State Constitution, we need
not decide the issue because, even assuming Crawford applies, for the reasons
set out above we would not reach a different result. Accordingly, we conclude
that admitting Mrs. Ayer’s statements did not violate the defendant’s rights
under Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
II. Evidence of Weapons and Ammunition in the Defendant’s Truck
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in allowing the State
to introduce evidence of firearms, weapons and ammunition, not used in the
charged crime, but seized from his truck. He contends that the seized items
should not have been admitted because they were: (1) not used in the
commission of the charged crime; (2) irrelevant and highly prejudicial; (3)
inadmissible under New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 404(b) and 403; and (4)
barred as a matter of due process under the New Hampshire and United States
Constitutions.
As to the first issue, the State acknowledged that the items seized were
not used in the charged crime. The trial court found the presence of weapons
and ammunition in the defendant’s truck relevant to the issue of the
defendant’s intent, irrespective of their use in the charged crime. “Generally,
we accord considerable deference to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings and will
only intervene when they demonstrate an unsustainable exercise of discretion.”
State v. Belton, 150 N.H. 741, 743 (2004). “Unless a party establishes that
such a ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the
party’s case, it will not be disturbed.” Id. We agree that the weapons were
relevant to an issue in dispute, and conclude that the fact that the items were
not used in the charged crime, without more, does not establish that the trial
court’s ruling was untenable or unreasonable.
The defendant next argues that that evidence was highly prejudicial,
irrelevant and barred under Rules 403 and 404(b). Under Rule 404(b),
10
“[e]vidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the
character of a person in order to show that the person acted in conformity
therewith.” N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). “It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan,
knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or accident.” Id. Evidence is
admissible under Rule 404(b) when it is relevant for a purpose other than
proving the defendant’s character or disposition, there is clear proof that the
defendant committed the act, and the probative value of the evidence is not
substantially outweighed by its prejudice to the defendant. State v. Watkins,
148 N.H. 760, 767 (2002). Because the first and third prongs of this test entail
determinations of relevance and probative value versus prejudice, we need not
separately address the defendant’s other arguments. Id.
Prior to the defendant’s first trial, the trial court ruled that evidence of
the weapons was relevant to the issue of the defendant’s premeditation and
deliberation because the amount of weaponry could support the theory that the
defendant had planned and prepared for this violent act. The trial court
affirmed that ruling prior to the second trial. “Relevant evidence need only
have a tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” Id. (quotation omitted). Evidence of numerous weapons
in the defendant’s truck could tend to show that he had planned and prepared
to stage some type of violent act. Accordingly, the record supports the trial
court’s ruling that the presence of weapons in the defendant’s truck was
relevant for a purpose other than showing the defendant’s character or
disposition.
Turning to the clear proof requirement, it is satisfied when the State
presents evidence firmly establishing that the defendant, and not some other
person, committed the prior act. State v. Berry, 148 N.H. 88, 92 (2002). The
record reveals that the defendant did not below, and does not now, argue that
the State did not meet its burden under the clear proof requirement. Thus, the
issue is not before us.
Regarding the third factor, the record supports the finding that the
probative value of the evidence is not substantially outweighed by the prejudice
to the defendant. As noted by the trial court, the presence of numerous
weapons in the defendant’s truck was probative of his intent, plan or
preparation to commit a violent act. Further, because the issue of the
defendant’s intent was central to the trial of this matter, the probative value
was significant. Conversely, the prejudicial impact to the defendant was
limited. The trial court admitted the evidence for the sole purpose of
determining the defendant’s intent and so instructed the jury. Because the
jury is presumed to follow the instructions given by the trial court, see State v.
Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 348 (2005), any prejudice caused by the admission of
11
the evidence of the firearms and ammunition was slight. In sum, because the
record supports the admission of the evidence of the weapons and ammunition
in the defendant’s truck under Rule 404(b) we conclude that the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion.
Lastly, the defendant contends that admitting the evidence of weapons
and ammunition violated his due process rights under the New Hampshire and
Federal Constitutions. The defendant, however, does not explain how his
rights were violated. He argues only in conclusory terms that “the evidence
should have been excluded as a matter of due process.” Because, in the realm
of appellate review, a mere laundry list of complaints regarding adverse rulings
by the trial court, without developed legal argument, is insufficient to warrant
judicial review, see Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49, we decline to address the
defendant’s constitutional argument.
III. Lesser Offenses and Proposed Defenses
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in refusing to
instruct the jury on the lesser offenses of reckless manslaughter under RSA
630:2, I(b) (1996), and provocation manslaughter under RSA 630:2, I(a) (1996),
and on the defense of a person justification under RSA 627:4 (1996). The
defendant also argues that he was improperly denied the right to present the
defense of “Right to Revolution” under the New Hampshire Constitution.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a notice of defense stating that he might
raise the defense of physical force in defense of a person under RSA 627:4, and
requested that if he did raise the defense, the appropriate jury instruction be
given. According to the defendant, he was justified in using physical force to
protect his son from being illegally removed from his home. More specifically,
the defendant contended that he was justified in using deadly force to protect
his son from being kidnapped by DCYF or others working on its behalf. The
trial court, ruling on the State’s motion to strike following a hearing, found that
no evidence or facts were presented to support the defendant’s claimed defense
and therefore no instruction would be given.
“Although the scope and wording of jury instructions is generally within
the sound discretion of the trial court, the court must grant a defendant’s
requested jury instruction on a specific defense if there is some evidence to
support a rational finding in favor of that defense.” State v. Haycock, 146 N.H.
5, 9 (2001) (quotation omitted). “By ‘some evidence,’ we mean that there must
be more than a minutia or scintilla of evidence.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“Where, however, there is simply no evidentiary basis to support the theory of
the requested jury instruction, the party is not entitled to such an instruction,
and the trial court may properly deny the party’s request.” State v. Hast, 133
12
N.H. 747, 749 (1990). “We will review the trial court’s decision not to give a
jury instruction for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Chen,
148 N.H. 565, 569 (2002).
RSA 627:4 provides that a person is justified in using deadly force on
another person when he reasonably believes that the other person is
committing or about to commit kidnapping. RSA 627:4, II(c). A person is
guilty of kidnapping if he knowingly confines another under his control with a
purpose to:
(a) Hold him for ransom or as a hostage; or
(b) Avoid apprehension by a law enforcement official; or
(c) Terrorize him or some other person; or
(d) Commit an offense against him.
RSA 633:1, I (1996). The trial court found that although the defendant had
shown frustration and dissatisfaction with state actions relative to his son, the
defendant did not present facts that could support his defense. Having
reviewed the record, we agree that the defendant failed to present some
evidence to support a rational finding in favor of the defense of physical force in
defense of a person. While the defendant presented evidence of his alleged
mistreatment by DCYF, other agencies, and their representatives, there is
simply no evidence that Rowland, DCYF, or any other person or entity had any
intent to kidnap the defendant’s son or that the defendant reasonably believed
they had such intent. Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s decision
not to give the requested instruction.
Regarding the defendant’s claim that he was entitled to an instruction
regarding provocation manslaughter under RSA 630:2, I(a), the trial court
found that the evidence presented did not support it. Under RSA 630:2, I(a), a
person is guilty of manslaughter, and not murder, when he causes the death of
another while under extreme mental or emotional disturbance caused by
extreme provocation. “It is generally recognized that provocation is adequate to
reduce a homicide from murder to manslaughter only if it would cause a
reasonable person to kill another out of passion.” State v. Smith, 123 N.H. 46,
48 (1983). However, “a lawful act cannot provide sufficient provocation to
support a finding of manslaughter.” Id. at 49.
Here, Rowland had been assigned to the defendant’s family’s case
following a referral from DCYF and had gone to meet with the defendant
pursuant to a scheduled visit, which he would not abandon despite the
defendant’s request. According to the defendant, his long running problems
with DCYF, coupled with Rowland’s refusal to leave, constituted sufficient
provocation to justify a manslaughter instruction. Rowland, however, was
engaged in a lawful act when he refused to leave, and a lawful act cannot
13
provide sufficient provocation to support a finding of manslaughter. See id.
Accordingly, the trial court did not err in declining to give the requested
instruction.
Finally, with regard to the defendant’s claims that he ought to have been
given the opportunity to present defenses of reckless manslaughter under RSA
630:2, I(b) and the “Right to Revolution” under the New Hampshire
Constitution, those claims were not raised before the trial court. Accordingly,
we do not address them. See Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 48.
IV. Appointment of Counsel
The defendant next argues that the trial court improperly appointed
counsel to represent him when he had elected to proceed pro se. The
defendant contends that he had the right to refuse counsel, that he did so, and
that the trial court, nonetheless, appointed counsel to represent him.
Therefore, the defendant argues, the trial court violated his rights under Part I,
Articles 14 and 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. We first address
the defendant’s claims under the State Constitution and cite federal opinions
for guidance only. See State v. Thomas, 150 N.H. 327, 328 (2003). Because
Part I, Article 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution does not bear on the
defendant’s right to self-representation, we do not consider it.
“Both Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Sixth
Amendment to the United States Constitution guarantee a criminal defendant
the right to self-representation and the right to counsel.” State v. Sweeney,
151 N.H. 666, 670 (2005); see also Faretta v. California, 422 U.S. 806 (1975).
“The two rights are mutually exclusive; the exercise of one right nullifies the
other.” Sweeney, 151 N.H at 670. “To be effective, an assertion of the right to
self-representation must be: (1) clear and unequivocal; (2) knowing, intelligent
and voluntary; and (3) timely.” Id.; see also State v. Thomas, 150 N.H. at 328-
29.
The defendant argues that the trial court, in its December 29, 2003
order, “made it clear” and “finalized” that he was appearing pro se. Therefore,
the defendant argues, the trial court erred in later appointing counsel to
represent him. The State, in turn, contends that the defendant did not clearly
and unequivocally assert the right to self-representation at any point and,
therefore, the trial court was justified in appointing counsel. Based upon our
review of the record, we agree that the defendant did not clearly and
unequivocally assert the right to self-representation.
14
During a hearing in December 2003, the trial court asked the defendant
whether he wished to proceed pro se or with counsel. Rather than choose, the
defendant stated that his appointed counsel did not support filing various
motions in the New Hampshire Supreme Court and would not aid him in
various matters he had filed with the federal courts. The defendant requested
a stay of his case until his other matters in the New Hampshire Supreme Court
and the federal courts were resolved.
The defendant’s counsel was appointed for the purpose of aiding him in
his defense in superior court. The trial court ruled that matters outside
superior court had no direct bearing on the defendant’s case and that the case
would not be stayed in order to facilitate the defendant’s other actions. The
trial court informed the defendant that regardless of any pending matters in
other courts, his case would go forward unless stayed by the order of a higher
court and the defendant needed to decide whether he would represent himself.
The defendant made no choice.
Following the hearing, the trial court issued an order stating, in relevant
part:
Mr. Ayer has requested additional time to resolve the status of
counsel issue. He was not prepared today to make a decision as to
whether he will represent himself and appear pro se at the trial or
whether he will have Attorney Guerriero and Attorney Nye be his fully
appointed counsel for the trial. Accordingly, as the docket permits, a
further thirty (30) minute status of counsel hearing shall be
scheduled before me on or about February 1, 2004.
. . . Finally, until this Court otherwise rules with respect to legal
representation in this case, I will view Mr. Ayer as appearing pro se in
this matter.
The plain language of the trial court’s order states that the defendant would be
deemed pro se until the status of his counsel could be finally resolved at some
later date because he was not prepared to make a decision at that time. Thus,
contrary to the defendant’s claim, the trial court did not rule that he would
appear pro se for the duration of the trial, but only that he would be deemed
pro se until the status of counsel was resolved. Nor did the trial court state
that the defendant had clearly and unequivocally invoked the right to self-
representation, but only that he was not prepared to make a choice at the time
of the hearing.
At the next status of counsel hearing, the trial court again inquired
whether the defendant would accept appointed counsel or whether he would
represent himself. Again, the defendant would not choose, but only objected to
making a choice. The defendant also requested that a specific attorney from
15
Massachusetts be appointed if the trial court insisted on appointing counsel for
him.
The trial court correctly declined the defendant’s request for the
appointment of a specific attorney. See State v. Mikolyski, 121 N.H. 116, 117
(1981); see also 1 R. McNamara, New Hampshire Practice, Criminal Practice
and Procedure § 18.12, at 395 (2003) (“Although the indigent defendant has a
right to the effective assistance of counsel, he does not have a right to the
assistance of any particular counsel.”). Further, according to the trial court’s
order following the hearing:
Approximately seven times I requested from Mr. Ayer a decision as to
whether he wished to proceed pro se or have counsel appointed for
him. Mr. Ayer made it very clear that he was not invoking his right to
proceed pro se. He repeatedly declined to make a decision and stated
that he was not about to “give up one right for another.” . . . Mr. Ayer
declined to make a decision as to whether he would accept the
appointment of counsel or proceed pro se. . . . Accordingly, I
appointed Attorney Julia Nye and Attorney Richard Guerriero as his
trial counsel.
The record supports the trial court’s characterization of the proceedings and
the defendant’s failure to choose whether he would be represented by counsel
or whether he would proceed pro se. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s
determination that the defendant did not clearly and unequivocally invoke his
right to self-representation and we likewise uphold its decision to appoint
counsel for the defendant. As the defendant’s rights under the New Hampshire
Constitution were not violated, and as the Federal Constitution does not give
the defendant any greater protection, we reach the same conclusion under the
Federal Constitution. Thomas, 150 N.H. at 328-30; see Faretta, 422 U.S. at
834-35.
V. Right to Counsel During Booking and Unrecorded Interview
Next, the defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to find
that he had invoked his right to counsel during booking and during an
unrecorded interview. According to the defendant, because the trial court did
not find that he had invoked his right to counsel, it improperly denied portions
of his motions to suppress in violation of Part I, Article 15 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
United States Constitution.
We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and
cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983).
16
“Both the United States Supreme Court and this court have developed
procedural protections to be adhered to during custodial interrogations.” State
v. Plch, 149 N.H. 608, 613 (2003). “Accordingly, before interrogating a person
in custody, the police must inform him that he has a right to remain silent,
that anything he says can and will be used against him, and that he has a
right to counsel.” Id. (quotation omitted). “If the individual states that he
wants an attorney, the interrogation must cease until an attorney is present.”
Id. (quotation omitted). “While we review a trial court’s finding concerning
which words a defendant used to invoke the right to counsel under the clearly
erroneous standard, whether those words constitute an invocation of the right
to counsel is a question of law, which we review de novo.” State v. Grant-
Chase, 140 N.H. 264, 267 (1995) (citations omitted), cert. denied, 517 U.S.
1140 (1996).
In ruling on the defendant’s motion to suppress, the trial court found
that the video tape of the booking procedure and the testimony of the booking
officer, Officer Barry Fenton, demonstrated that the defendant did not request
counsel during the booking process. Upon review of the record, we agree that
the defendant did not use any words that invoked the right to counsel during
booking. Therefore, the trial court’s finding was not clearly erroneous.
Regarding the defendant’s contention that he requested counsel during
an unrecorded interview, the trial court received conflicting testimony: two
police officers testified that the defendant did not use any words that would
invoke the right to counsel, while the defendant testified that he requested an
attorney. “The weight to be given testimony depends on the credibility of the
witnesses, and the credibility of witnesses is for the trial court to determine.”
State v. Gourlay, 148 N.H. 75, 78 (2002) (quotation omitted). Since we cannot
say that no reasonable person would have reached the same decision in light of
the conflicting testimony, we defer to the finding of the trial court. See id.
Accordingly, we hold that the defendant’s right to counsel under the State
Constitution was not violated either during booking or during the unrecorded
interview. Further, because the Federal Constitution does not provide any
greater protection than does the State Constitution, we reach the same result
under the Federal Constitution. Plch, 149 N.H. at 620; see United States v.
Ogbuehi, 18 F.3d 807, 813 (9th Cir. 1994).
VI. Statement to Nashua Police
Next, the defendant argues in his notice of appeal that the trial court
erred in only partially suppressing the results of his interrogation at the
Nashua Police Department. The defendant, however, has not briefed the issue,
and thus it is deemed waived. See State v. Mountjoy, 142 N.H. 648, 652
(1998).
17
VII. Motions to Suppress – Unlawfully Obtained Statements
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motions to suppress various items allegedly seized from his truck as the result
of unlawfully obtained statements. Specifically, the defendant contends that
paragraphs 4 and 9 of the affidavit submitted with the application for a search
warrant rely on statements he gave in violation of his rights. He argues that
those statements should be stricken from the affidavit and that without those
statements, the affidavit is insufficient to establish probable cause to issue a
warrant for the search of his truck.
In ruling on the defendant’s motion to suppress the items seized from his
truck, the trial court found that the police conducted a valid consensual
search. According to the trial court, there was no evidence that the defendant
was scared or intimidated or that the police used any improper tactics when
obtaining consent. Therefore, the trial court found that the defendant had
freely, knowingly and voluntarily consented to the search.
“A voluntary consent free of duress and coercion is a recognized
exception to the need of both a warrant and probable cause.” State v.
Johnston, 150 N.H. 448, 453 (2004) (quotation omitted). “The burden is on the
State to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the consent was free,
knowing and voluntary.” Id. “The validity of the consent is determined by
examining the totality of the circumstances.” Id. “We will disturb the trial
court’s finding of consent only if it is not supported by the record.” Id.
The trial court heard from two police officers who testified that the
defendant consented to a search of his home and vehicle, and that he freely
signed a form indicating his consent. Also, the trial court reviewed a video
taped interview with the defendant during which he signed a consent to search
form without objection. Accordingly, the trial court’s finding that the defendant
consented to the search of his vehicle is supported by the record and will not
be disturbed. Because the search of the defendant’s vehicle was conducted
with the consent of the defendant, we need not address his argument regarding
the sufficiency of the search warrant affidavit.
VIII. Testimony of Norman Bleau
Finally, in his brief the defendant argues that the trial court erred in
admitting the testimony of Norman Bleau. This issue, however was not raised
in the defendant’s notice of appeal; nor did he file a motion to add a question.
See Sup. Ct. R. 16(b). Because an argument that is not raised in a party’s
18
notice of appeal is not preserved for appellate review, Blackmer, 149 N.H. at
49, we do not address the issue of Mr. Bleau’s testimony.
Affirmed.
BROCK, C.J., and HORTON, J., retired supreme court justices, specially
assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred; MURPHY, C.J., and HOLLMAN, J.,
retired superior court justices, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred.
19