THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-337
RICHARD TAYLOR & a.
v.
TOWN OF PLAISTOW
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 22, 2005
Engel & Associates, P.A., of Exeter (David C. Engel on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (John P. Sherman on the
brief, and Donald E. Gardner orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, Dick Taylor’s Tire and Truck Sales, Inc. and
its proprietor, Richard Taylor, appeal a decision of the Superior Court (Morrill,
J.) upholding the validity of a zoning ordinance enacted by the defendant, Town
of Plaistow (Town). We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. In April 1997, the Town
adopted an amendment to its zoning ordinance that requires a minimum of
1,000 feet between vehicular dealerships in the Commercial I district. Taylor
filed an application for a variance with the Town’s zoning board of adjustment
(ZBA) for property that he was planning to purchase at 147 Plaistow Road
(Route 125). On February 26, 1998, the ZBA granted Taylor’s variance request,
allowing him to establish a used car dealership less than 1,000 feet from an
existing car dealership.
The Town’s board of selectmen appealed the ZBA’s decision to grant the
variance. The Superior Court (Murphy, J.) reversed on the basis that denial of
Taylor’s request for a variance would not result in unnecessary hardship. See
generally Town of Plaistow Bd. of Selectmen v. Town of Plaistow Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 146 N.H. 263 (2001). We vacated the trial court’s decision, see id.
at 267, and remanded for further proceedings in light of the new criteria for
unnecessary hardship set forth in Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington,
145 N.H. 727, 731-32 (2001). Subsequently, the ZBA again granted the
variance request and that decision was not appealed.
The plaintiffs brought the instant action in April 1999, seeking a
declaration that the zoning ordinance is unconstitutional and requesting
damages for the time during which Taylor owned the property but could not
use it for vehicular sales. The trial court found that the ordinance is
constitutional on its face and as applied to the plaintiffs’ property, and thus
denied the plaintiffs’ petition for declaratory judgment.
The plaintiffs raised several issues in their notice of appeal, including
whether the trial court erred in finding that: (1) the ordinance is constitutional
on its face and as applied to the plaintiffs’ property; (2) the ordinance’s
distinction between vehicular dealerships and other businesses bears a
substantial relationship to the Town’s stated goals; and (3) the Town was
primarily concerned with aesthetics, safety and planning when enacting the
ordinance. The plaintiffs also raised issues concerning the trial court’s failure
to rule on the arbitrariness of the proximity regulation and the trial court’s
consideration of the plaintiffs’ economic damages in light of a prior trial court
order bifurcating the plaintiffs’ legal issues from a hearing on damages.
In a previous order in this case, we summarily affirmed the trial court’s
factual findings, which were supported by the record, and the trial court’s
decision to bifurcate the plaintiffs’ damages claims from the legal claims. We
limited our consideration to the plaintiffs’ constitutional claims, specifically
whether proximity regulations are invalid per se.
The plaintiffs argue that the ordinance is unconstitutional because no
legitimate purpose is served by the imposition of the 1,000-foot proximity
regulation. Furthermore, they argue that the ordinance violates their right to
equal protection because there is no valid basis for treating vehicular
dealerships differently from other retail businesses in terms of their proximity
to each other. Because the constitutionality of an ordinance involves a
question of law, we review the trial court’s decision de novo. Webster v. Town
of Candia, 146 N.H. 430, 434 (2001).
2
“A substantive due process challenge to an ordinance questions the
fundamental fairness of an ordinance both generally and in the relationship of
the particular ordinance to particular property under particular conditions
existing at the time of litigation.” Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H. 121,
124 (2002) (quotation omitted). When a party contests the validity of an
ordinance on the basis that it burdens all seeking to engage in the proscribed
action, the appropriate inquiry is whether the claimant has proved that the
ordinance constitutes a restriction on property rights that is not rationally
related to the town’s legitimate goals. Id. at 125; see also Quirk v. Town of New
Boston, 140 N.H. 124, 129 (1995). Under this standard, there is a
presumption favoring the constitutionality of the regulation, and in
determining the validity of a zoning ordinance, its reasonableness will be
presumed. Dow, 148 N.H. at 125. In reviewing the reasonableness of a
particular zoning provision, we are mindful that zoning is a legislative function
and judging the wisdom of the legislation is not the function of this court.
Quirk, 140 N.H. at 129.
The State zoning enabling act grants municipalities broad authority to
pass zoning ordinances for the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community. Asselin v. Town of Conway, 137 N.H. 368, 371 (1993); see RSA
674:16, I (1996). In enacting a zoning regulation, a town may consider the
knowledge of town selectmen and planning board members concerning such
factors as traffic conditions and surrounding uses resulting from their
familiarity with the area involved. Quirk, 140 N.H. at 129. Furthermore, a
municipality may exercise its zoning power solely to advance aesthetic values
because the preservation or enhancement of the visual environment may
promote the general welfare. Asselin, 137 N.H. at 371-72.
The zoning ordinance provides: “No lot used for a vehicular, trailer or
recreational vehicle dealership in Commercial I District may be located any
closer than one thousand (1,000) feet in any direction to any other lot used for
a vehicular, trailer and recreational vehicle dealership.” Plaistow, N.H., Zoning
Ordinance § 300:14(b).
The trial court found that the Town primarily focused on aesthetics,
safety and planning concerns when drafting and enacting the 1,000-foot buffer
between vehicular dealerships. In particular, the planning board considered
that vehicle dealers display their goods outdoors, often in a disorderly manner,
and that the positioning of the vehicles creates potential traffic and fire access
problems. These are legitimate reasons for which a town may exercise its
zoning power. See Quirk, 140 N.H. at 130 (holding that 200-foot “buffer zone”
around recreational campgrounds was rationally related to the town’s
legitimate goals of avoiding unsightliness, containing noise and protecting
abutters from safety hazards). Likewise, we defer to the planning board’s
3
judgment as to the proximity regulation’s necessity and efficacy in meeting
these goals. See id. Moreover, other jurisdictions have upheld proximity
regulations that are reasonably related to public health, safety or welfare as
valid exercises of a municipality’s police power. See, e.g., Orange County v.
Costco Wholesale Corp., 823 So. 2d 732, 739 (Fla. 2002) (upholding 5,000-foot
buffer between package liquor sales businesses); Mobil Oil Company v.
Township of Westtown, 345 A.2d 313, 316 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1975) (upholding
500-foot buffer between gasoline service stations); City of Norfolk v. Tiny
House, Inc., 281 S.E.2d 836, 839 (Va. 1981) (upholding 1,000-foot buffer
between businesses that engage in “adult uses”). We hold that the ordinance
at issue here is rationally related to legitimate town goals and, therefore,
comports with the due process requirements of our constitution. See Dow, 148
N.H. at 125.
We next address whether the ordinance violates the plaintiffs’ right to
equal protection because the proximity regulation applies only to vehicular
dealerships and not other businesses. “[A]n equal protection challenge to an
ordinance is an assertion that the government impermissibly established
classifications and, therefore, treated similarly situated individuals in a
different manner.” Dow, 148 N.H. at 124. Whereas substantive due process
challenges are evaluated under a rational basis test, we review equal protection
challenges to ordinances with heightened scrutiny. Id.; see also Asselin, 137
N.H. at 372. In order for a classification in a zoning ordinance to be
constitutional, it must be reasonable, not arbitrary, and must rest upon some
ground of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the
legislation. Quirk, 140 N.H. at 132.
The trial court found that vehicular dealerships impair the town’s
aesthetics more than other types of businesses because they display their
goods outdoors in full view to the general public, while other businesses
operate indoors and the outside areas are reserved for employee and customer
parking. Furthermore, the court found that vehicular dealerships have a
greater impact on traffic safety than other businesses because motorists are
likely to look at the inventory displayed outside the dealership as they drive by.
Thus, the trial court concluded that the ordinance’s “distinction between
vehicular dealerships and other businesses bears a fair and substantial
relation to the Town’s goals sufficient to warrant disparate treatment with
respect to the [1,000-] foot buffer requirement.”
The plaintiffs disagree, arguing that other businesses also display their
goods outside and that there is no visual or aesthetic difference between
vehicles parked in front of a dealership and customers’ vehicles parked in
parking spaces at a retail store or other business. The plaintiffs point to
Asselin v. Town of Conway, 135 N.H. 576, 578 (1992), where we struck down,
on equal protection grounds, a zoning ordinance that permitted readerboard
4
signs with changeable lettering only for businesses featuring the performing
arts or nightly live entertainment. We held that the ordinance’s distinction
between types of businesses was not substantially related to the Town’s goals
of improving aesthetics and traffic safety because all signs had to meet the
same design requirements and the readerboards were likely to have the same
impact on aesthetics and safety regardless of the type of business advertised.
Id.
The present case is distinguishable from Asselin. See id. Here, the
Town’s planning board considered the differences between the ways that
vehicular dealerships display and market their goods as compared to other
businesses that primarily operate indoors and use their parking lots for
customer parking. We agree with the trial court that the classification created
by the ordinance bears a fair and substantial relationship to the Town’s goals
of preserving aesthetics and ensuring traffic safety. See Quirk, 140 N.H. at
132; see also Harvard Enterprises, Inc. v. Board of Adjustment, 266 A.2d 588,
592 (N.J. 1970) (upholding 2,000-foot buffer between gasoline stations based
upon town’s fire, traffic and aesthetic concerns).
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s order denying the plaintiffs’
petition for declaratory judgment.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.
5