THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2004-050
PROGRESSIVE NORTHERN INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
CONCORD GENERAL MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY & a.
Argued: September 23, 2004
Opinion Issued: January 10, 2005
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (John A. Lassey on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg, orally), for the defendant.
Jeremy Heath, pro se, filed no brief.
Christina Brown, pro se, filed no brief.
Lara J. Saffo, of Orford, for defendant Gary Collins, filed no brief.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Progressive Northern Insurance
Company (Progressive), appeals, and defendant Concord General Mutual
Insurance Company (Concord General) cross-appeals, an order of the Superior
Court (Burling, J.) partially granting their respective motions for summary
judgment. The trial court concluded that an exclusion in the Concord General
insurance policy eliminated liability coverage for an unlicensed driver of the
insured vehicle, who was allegedly at fault for a motor vehicle accident, but
that the New Hampshire Accidents and Financial Responsibility Act
(hereinafter referred to as Financial Responsibility Act or law), RSA chapter
264, required Concord General to provide the unlicensed driver with insurance
coverage up to the maximum statutory limits. See RSA 264:18, VI (2004). We
affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
The following facts are undisputed. In June 2002, Jeremy Heath was
operating a car in Lebanon when he was involved in an accident with a
motorcycle driven by Gary Collins. Heath did not have a valid driver’s license
at the time and was not the owner of the car. Heath’s girlfriend, Christina
Brown, was a passenger in the car and had given him permission to drive.
While Brown was the primary operator of the vehicle, her step-father, John
Chestnut, was its registered owner, and had instructed Brown not to let
anyone else drive it. Concord General provided liability insurance for the car
operated by Heath, with Chestnut as the named insured. The motorcycle was
insured by Progressive.
In December 2002, Collins filed suit against both Heath and Brown,
seeking damages for his injuries. Progressive then filed a petition for
declaratory judgment, naming Concord General, Collins, Brown and Heath as
respondents, and sought an order that Concord General was required to defend
and indemnify Heath and Brown for the Collins lawsuit, and that it had no
obligation to provide uninsured motorist coverage to Collins. In its answer,
Concord General contended that because Heath did not hold a valid driver’s
license at the time of the accident, an exclusion under its policy precluded
coverage for him.
Progressive moved for summary judgment on the bases that it owed no
obligation to provide uninsured motorist coverage for the accident, that
Concord General was obligated to defend and indemnify Heath and Brown, and
that even if the Concord General policy excluded Heath from coverage, Concord
General was required to provide coverage under the Financial Responsibility
Act, RSA 264:18, VI. Concord General objected, and filed a cross-motion for
summary judgment, seeking a ruling that it owed no duty to defend, indemnify
or otherwise provide Heath with insurance coverage. The trial court partially
granted both motions, ruling that an exclusion under the Concord General
policy operated to bar liability coverage for Heath but that “Brown’s implied
consent . . . [made] Heath eligible for limited coverage up to the maximum
statutory limits provided under [the Financial Responsibility Act].” Both
parties appealed.
2
We review de novo the trial court's application of the law to the facts in
its summary judgment ruling. Iannelli v. Burger King Corp., 145 N.H. 190,
193 (2000). All evidence presented in the record, as well as any inferences
reasonably drawn therefrom, must be considered in the light most favorable to
the party opposing summary judgment. Id. If our review of that evidence
discloses no genuine issue of material fact and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, then we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment. Id. at 193.
I
We first consider the exclusion at issue under the Concord General
policy. It states: “We do not provide Liability Coverage for any ‘insured’ . . .
[u]sing a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that ‘insured’ is entitled to do
so” (entitlement exclusion). The trial court determined that under this
exclusion, Heath could not have had a reasonable belief that he was entitled to
use the car, despite Brown’s permission, because he knew he did not have a
valid driver’s license, and thus knew he lacked lawful authority to operate any
motor vehicle upon a public way. We agree.
Progressive argues that the so-called entitlement exclusion is ambiguous
because the term “entitled” is reasonably susceptible of more than one
meaning, and thus the policy must be interpreted in favor of providing
coverage. It urges us to follow the reasoning of the Georgia Supreme Court in
Hurst v. Grange Mutual Casualty Co., 470 S.E.2d 659, 663 (Ga. 1996), where a
similar exclusion was interpreted to have at least three different meanings:
that the user must be authorized by law to drive in order to
reasonably believe he is entitled to use a vehicle; that the user
must have the consent of the owner or apparent owner in order to
reasonably believe he is entitled to use the vehicle; or, that the
user must have both consent and legal authorization in order to be
entitled to use the vehicle.
Concord General contends, however, that no ambiguity exists because an
unlicensed driver who knows he lacks a valid driver’s license cannot as a
matter of law reasonably believe he is entitled to use a motor vehicle upon a
public way, regardless of consent given by the owner or apparent owner of the
vehicle.
“The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for
this court to decide.” Godbout v. Lloyd’s Ins. Syndicates, 150 N.H. 103, 105
(2003). Insurers are free to contractually limit the extent of their liability
through use of a policy exclusion, Curtis v. Guaranty Trust Life Ins. Co., 132
N.H. 337, 340 (1989), provided it violates no statutory provision, see O’Neill v.
3
Long, 54 P.3d 109, 114 (Okla. 2002). “Such language must be so clear,
however, as to create no ambiguity that might affect the insured’s reasonable
expectations.” Contoocook Valley Sch. Dist. v. Graphic Arts Mut. Ins. Co., 147
N.H. 392, 393 (2001). “In determining whether an ambiguity exists, we look to
the claimed ambiguity, consider it in its appropriate context, and construe the
words used according to their plain, ordinary, and popular definitions.” Curtis,
132 N.H. at 342 (ellipsis omitted). Policy terms create an ambiguity when the
parties may reasonably differ about the interpretation of the language.
Contoocook Valley Sch. Dist., 147 N.H. at 393-94. Ultimately, we interpret
exclusion language to mean “what a reasonable person would construe it to
mean.” Curtis, 132 N.H. at 341. The insurer asserting an exclusion of
coverage, Concord General in this case, bears the burden of proving that the
exclusion applies. See id. at 340. Given these parameters, we examine the
language of the contested entitlement exclusion in this case.
The Concord General policy excludes coverage for an insured who uses
an insured vehicle without “a reasonable belief” that he is “entitled to do so.”
The term “reasonable belief” requires both that the driver have a subjective
belief that he is “entitled” to use the car and that such belief is objectively
sound. See Omaha Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co. v. Peterson, 865 S.W.2d 789, 790
(Mo. Ct. App. 1993); General Accident v. Perry, 541 A.2d 1340, 1350 (Md. App.
1988). The term “entitled” is not defined in the policy. When disputed terms
are not defined in the policy, we construe them objectively, in context, and in
light of what a more than casual reading of the policy would reveal to an
ordinarily intelligent insured. Weeks v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 140
N.H. 641, 644 (1996). Dictionary definitions may be used in the interpretive
process and “are of some value . . . to the extent they inform us of the common
understanding of terms.” Hudson v. Farm Family Mut. Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 144,
147 (1997).
The term “entitle” commonly means, “to give a right or legal title to:
qualify (one) for something: furnish with proper grounds for seeking or
claiming something.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 758
(unabridged ed. 2002). Our laws governing motor vehicles prohibit any person
from driving any motor vehicle upon the ways of this State without a valid
driver’s license. RSA 263:1 (2004). Our laws also prohibit any person from
knowingly permitting “a motor vehicle owned or controlled by him to be driven
by a person who is not properly licensed or otherwise entitled to drive.” RSA
263:1-a (2004); see also RSA 263:14 (Supp. 2004) (provision concerning youth
operator’s license); RSA 263:25 (2004) (provision creating exception for persons
learning to drive). Thus, in the context of operating a motor vehicle, consent of
the owner or apparent owner of the vehicle, standing alone, is not sufficient for
a person to reasonably believe he is entitled to drive a vehicle upon the public
ways when that person knows he lacks a valid driver’s license. See Huggins v.
Bohman, 578 N.W.2d 326, 329 (Mich. Ct. App. 1998).
4
We acknowledge that a split exists among the jurisdictions concerning
whether entitlement exclusions are ambiguous, or otherwise operate to bar
coverage, when the driver lacks a valid driver’s license. Compare, e.g., Farm
and City Ins. Co. v. Gilmore, 539 N.W.2d 154, 157 (Iowa 1995) (entitlement
exclusion ambiguous regarding whether unlicensed driver can reasonably
believe entitled to use car) and Safeco Ins. Co. of America v. Davis, 721 P.2d
550, 552-53 (Wash. 1986) (same) with Century Nat. Ins. Co. v. Tracy, 789
N.E.2d 833, 836 (Ill. 2003) (entitlement exclusion bars coverage for unlicensed
drivers) and Huggins, 578 N.W.2d at 329 (entitlement exclusion not ambiguous
and excludes driver who lacks valid driver’s license). On the facts of this case,
we conclude that the entitlement exclusion is not ambiguous in its application,
and that Heath could not as a matter of law have had a reasonable belief that
he was entitled to drive the car when he knew he did not have a valid driver’s
license, despite any permission extended to him by his girlfriend.
Progressive identifies numerous circumstances where it argues “an
insured may operate a motor vehicle ‘illegally’ without negating that person’s
reasonable belief that he or she is entitled to operate it, at least with respect to
a reasonable expectation of liability coverage,” including operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, RSA 265:82 (2004), operating an
uninspected vehicle, RSA 266:5 (2004), or driving a vehicle with an
unrestrained minor, RSA 265:107-a (2004). Progressive contends that
“[i]llegality of itself, therefore, cannot be used to defeat the reasonableness of a
person[’s] belief that he or she is entitled to operate a vehicle.” We, however,
limit our holding to the undisputed facts of this case, and do not resolve the
myriad of circumstances in which a driver with a valid driver’s license
otherwise illegally operates a motor vehicle upon a public way.
We also are unpersuaded by Progressive’s argument that we should
interpret the entitlement exclusion in favor of coverage because Concord
General used the term “unlicensed drivers” in other sections of its policy, but
failed to use it in the entitlement exclusion. Although specific reference to
unlicensed drivers in the entitlement exclusion might have prevented the
present dispute, its omission does not alter the clear meaning of the term
“entitled” in the context of this case. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s
grant of summary judgment in Concord General’s favor on the entitlement
exclusion.
II
We next address whether the trial court erred in ruling that Concord
General is obligated to provide protection under the Financial Responsibility
Act. The relevant provision of the Act provides:
5
The insurance applies to any person who has obtained possession
or control of the vehicle of the insured with his express or implied
consent even though the use in the course of which liability to pay
damages arises has been expressly or impliedly forbidden by the
insured or is otherwise unauthorized. This provision, however,
shall not apply to the use of a vehicle converted with the intent to
wrongfully deprive the owner of his property therein.
RSA 264:18, VI. Concord General disputes the trial court’s ruling that because
Brown had given Heath implied consent to drive the car, Heath had
“possession or control” of the insured vehicle for purposes of the Financial
Responsibility Act.
Many States, like ours, have enacted statutes requiring that insurers
extend liability coverage to persons who use an insured vehicle with the
insured’s permission. See, e.g., State Farm Mut. Ins. v. AMCO Ins. Co., 621
N.W.2d 553, 560 (Neb. Ct. App. 2001); United Services Auto. v. Nat. Farmers,
891 P.2d 538, 540 (N.M. 1995); O’Neill, 54 P.3d at 113. This type of coverage
is commonly referred to as omnibus coverage. See St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins.
Co. v. Guthrie, 773 N.E.2d 763, 765 (Ill. App. Ct. 2002). An omnibus clause,
“in effect, protects third parties wrongfully injured by the use of the insured
vehicle by persons other than the owner.” O’Neill, 54 P.3d at 113. Indeed, the
“paramount purpose” of our Financial Responsibility Act is “to provide
compensation to persons harmed by the negligent operation of motor vehicles.”
Peerless Ins. Co. v. Vigue, 115 N.H. 492, 494 (1975).
Courts around the country have adopted different standards, varying in
the degree of restriction, in considering whether an omnibus clause extends
statutory liability coverage to a permissive driver who exceeds the scope of
consent initially granted by the named insured. The three most common
standards are: “(1) the strict or conversion rule; (2) the minor deviation rule;
and (3) the liberal or initial permission rule.” State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v.
Ragatz, 571 N.W.2d 155, 159 (S.D. 1997). New Hampshire has adopted the
latter “initial permission” rules. See Gov’t Empl. Ins. Co. v. Johnson, 118 N.H.
899, 903 (1978) (GEICO).
Under the strict or conversion rule, “once initial permission is given by
the owner of a vehicle to a permittee, the permittee must conform to the time,
place and uses specified or intended by the parties as of the time of granting
such permission.” Id. “[T]he slightest deviation from the time, place and use
restrictions will preclude coverage under the omnibus clause.” Id. The minor
deviation rule is more forgiving. Under the rule, “once permission is conferred,
the protection afforded by the omnibus clause will not terminate unless the
permittee commits a material violation [of] or deviation from the terms of the
permission conferred or contemplated at the time permission was given in the
6
first instance.” Id. at 160. Under this intermediate approach, courts
determine whether the deviation was minor or material, considering “the extent
of deviation in actual distance or time, the purpose for which the vehicle was
given, and other factors.” Id. (quotations omitted). “A deviation is material if it
is alien or foreign to the original permitted objective or operation.” Id.
(quotations omitted).
Under the “initial permission” or, as some authorities have described it,
the “hell or high water” rule, see Barry v. Tanner, 547 N.W.2d 730, 733 (Neb.
1996), “once permission to use [an insured] vehicle is given in the first
instance, any subsequent deviation is wholly immaterial and will not defeat
coverage under an omnibus clause,” Ragatz, 571 N.W.2d at 159. Coverage is
defeated only where “the deviation from the permitted use rises to the level of
theft or conversion.” Wiglesworth v. Farmers Ins. Exchange, 917 P.2d 288, 291
(Colo. 1996). This liberal approach is based upon the following policy
considerations: “(1) it effectively furthers the state’s policy of compensating
and protecting innocent accident victims from financial disaster, (2) the rule
serves to discourage collusion between lender and lendee in order to escape
liability, and (3) the rule greatly reduces a most costly type of litigation.”
Manzella v. Doe, 664 So. 2d 398, 402 (La. 1995) (quotations and brackets
omitted).
Even among these three most common standards, however, jurisdictions
have developed varying criteria for determining whether omnibus coverage
extends to a permissive driver when the use failed to adhere to the named
insured’s express limitations. See, e.g., Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Dunning,
252 F.3d 712, 717 (5th Cir. 2001) (under Mississippi law, standard for
determining coverage for permissive use varies generally depending upon
whether named insured granted restricted or unrestricted use); Ragatz, 571
N.W.2d at 159 n.3 (outlining varying criteria that jurisdictions consider
regarding whether second permittee has implied consent to use car despite
named insured prohibition of third party use).
In GEICO, we applied the “initial permission” rule to circumstances
similar to the facts in the case before us to determine whether the insurer was
obligated to provide liability coverage under a former version of the omnibus
clause. See GEICO, 118 N.H. at 901-02 (decided under former RSA 268:16,
VI). A father went on vacation and left his sixteen-year-old son at home with
permission to use his car. The father told his son not to allow anyone else to
drive the car. One evening, the son invited some friends to his home, where
they all consumed alcohol. The son permitted his friend to use his father’s car.
Tragically, the friend crashed the car into a tree, and both occupants were
killed.
7
Because the father had not provided express consent for his son’s friend
to use the car, we considered whether “[c]onsent [could] be implied from the
totality of circumstances surrounding a given use of [an insured] vehicle.”
GEICO, 118 N.H. at 902. Despite the father’s admonition to his son not to
allow anyone to use his car, we concluded that the son’s friend, as a second or
subsequent permittee, gained “possession or control” over the insured vehicle
with the implied consent of the father as the named insured or owner of the car
because
[t]o all appearances, [the son] had possession and full control of
his parents’ home and automobile while they were out of town[;]
[the friend] had good reason to believe that he was using the
vehicle with the permission of a person authorized to give consent[;
and, the friend] had no way of knowing of the instructions from
[the father] restricting that authority.
Id. (citation omitted). In essence, we held that a subsequent permittee obtains
possession or control over an insured vehicle with the implied consent of the
named insured or owner of the vehicle when an initial permittee, with apparent
authority to authorize consent to use the car, allows that subsequent permittee
to use the car, and that subsequent permittee has no way of knowing that the
named insured or car’s owner restricted the initial permittee’s authority to
allow others to use the car. Id. at 902, 903; see also Raitz v. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins. Co., 960 P.2d 1179, 1184 (Colo. 1998) (agreeing with courts
following initial permission rule that extend omnibus coverage to subsequent
permittee even when named insured expressly prohibited initial permittee from
allowing third party use of car). Further, we determined whether the
subsequent permittee, i.e., the driver, possessed or controlled the insured
vehicle with the implied consent of the owner or named insured from the
standpoint of the subsequent permittee. See GEICO, 118 N.H. at 902.
Compare Metropolitan v. Hertz Corp., 981 P.2d 1091, 1094 (Colo. 1999)
(implied permission considered from perspective of subsequent permittee and
exists as long as permittee does not know named insured prohibited third party
use), with Wade v. Autoland, Inc., 767 So. 2d 766, 770 (La. Ct. App. 2000)
(implied permission depends upon whether named insured could reasonably
foresee that initial permittee would allow third party to use car).
We conclude, as have other courts, that the liberal approach to omnibus
coverage under the “initial permission” rule best preserves the legislature’s goal
of protecting accident victims from financial hardship. See, e.g., St. Paul Fire
& Marine Ins. Co., 773 N.E.2d at 765; State Farm Mut. Ins. Cos., 621 N.W.2d
at 560; O’Neill, 54 P.3d at 113-14; Milbank Mut. Ins. Co. v. U.S. Fidelity and
Guar. Co., 332 N.W.2d 160, 166 (Minn. 1983). The “initial permission” rule
also reduces the need for factual inquiries regarding the scope of permission
and the extent of deviation from that scope, which would proliferate litigation
8
in this area. See Wiglesworth, 917 P.2d at 291; Barry, 547 N.W.2d at 733. We
favor a standard that provides efficiency and finality in the adjudicative
process, especially where the protection of accident victims is the primary
concern of the statutory scheme.
In the case before us, Concord General disputes the trial court’s ruling
that Heath thought Brown owned the car, and thus obtained possession or
control of the insured vehicle through her consent. Concord General
additionally argues that the evidence shows Heath knew both that the step-
father owned the car and that the step-father would not have allowed him to
use the car had he asked. Thus, according to Concord General, whether
Brown gave Heath permission to use the car is “irrelevant because she is not
the owner insured” and Heath “knew that the owner [Chestnut] of the vehicle
would not let him drive [the car].” Progressive contends that the dispositive
factor in this case is “that Heath clearly believed that Brown had authority to
give him permission – whether or not Chestnut would have agreed, if he had
been asked.”
The trial court concluded that “Brown had given Heath implied consent
to drive” the insured vehicle, and thus, following GEICO, it ruled “Heath had
possession and control of the motor vehicle with the implied consent of the
owner for purposes of the Financial Responsibility Law.” The court based its
ruling upon the following conclusions it drew from the summary judgment
record:
Brown considered herself the true owner of the car since she
made payments on the vehicle and paid the insurance. Heath also
thought the vehicle belonged to his girlfriend, who was in the
vehicle with him at the time of the accident. Brown had Heath
drive because she was tired and thought it would be safer for him
to drive. Even if she did not expressly tell him that he could drive,
her presence in the car with him clearly implies consent. This
Court holds that Heath drove the car with the implied consent of
Brown.
(Citations omitted.) After reviewing the record de novo, we conclude that the
trial court’s reasoning contains several material errors and that genuine issues
of material fact exist on the record precluding a grant of summary judgment.
First, the trial court relied upon Brown’s belief that she was the owner of
the car. For omnibus coverage under the Act to apply, however, “the person
operating the vehicle must have the express or implied consent of the named
insured or owner of the [insured] vehicle.” GEICO, 118 N.H. at 902. Because
consent must be given from the actual owner or named insured, Brown’s belief
that she was the owner of the vehicle is irrelevant. Second, the trial court
9
stated that Heath also believed Brown was the owner of the car. While Heath’s
subjective belief may inform whether he thought she had the authority to grant
him consent to drive, the record is inconsistent as to which person Heath
believed was the owner of the car. In his statement to the police, Heath stated
that he was driving his “girlfriend’s dad’s car.” During his deposition, Heath
again referred to Chestnut as the owner of the car, but also stated that he
thought Brown was “the owner of the car [on] that day.”
We are also troubled by the trial court’s failure to address Heath’s
statements during his deposition that while he never asked Chestnut for his
permission to use the vehicle, he did not “think that [Chestnut] would [have
given Heath] his permission, if [Heath had] asked him to use the vehicle.”
Heath’s belief may simply amount to reflective speculation. See State Farm
Mut. Ins. Co., 621 N.W.2d at 565 (implied permission depends upon what was
actually said and done prior to accident). His belief may, however, reflect that
at the time he operated the insured vehicle, he did not subjectively believe that
Brown had the authority to grant him permission to use the car, or even
perhaps that he had reason to know of Chestnut’s prohibition on third party
use of the car. Compare GEICO, 118 N.H. at 902 (subsequent permittee had
no way of knowing of owner’s admonition to initial permittee not to allow
anyone else to use insured vehicle) with Raitz, 960 P.2d at 1186 (no omnibus
coverage for persons who use vehicle with knowledge that named insured has
prohibited third party use) and Dairyland Ins. Co. v. General Acc. Ins. Co., 435
So. 2d 1263, 1264 (Ala. 1983) (no coverage when subsequent permittee knew
that insured’s permission was limited to initial permittee). Heath’s averment
during his deposition that Chestnut never spoke with him about the insured
vehicle only dispels Chestnut himself as the source of Heath’s potential
knowledge of his admonition. We also note that Brown’s undisputed status as
the primary operator of the car and the apparent fact that Heath drove the car
on occasions prior to the accident may also shed light on whether Heath
actually and reasonably believed Brown had authority to grant him use of the
car on the day of the accident.
After viewing the facts and inferences in the light most favorable to
Concord General as the non-moving party, we conclude that genuine issues of
material fact exist in the record regarding: (1) Heath’s belief that Brown had
apparent authority to grant him consent to use the vehicle; and (2) Heath’s
knowledge of Chestnut’s admonition regarding third party use of the car. Cf.
Metropolitan, 981 P.2d at 1094 (subsequent permittee had implied permission
to use insured vehicle because no suggestion from evidence that he knew he
was prohibited from using vehicle). Therefore, on the record before us we
conclude that summary judgment on the omnibus clause of the Financial
Responsibility Act should not have been granted.
10
In sum, we affirm the trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of
Concord General on the entitlement exclusion under its policy, we vacate the
trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Progressive on the omnibus
clause under the Financial Responsibility Act, and remand.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
and remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
11