THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2004-526
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSEPH LECOUFFE
Submitted: February 17, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 22, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Dianne H. Martin, attorney, on the
brief), for the State.
Joseph LeCouffe, by brief, pro se.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Joseph LeCouffe, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Burling, J.) denying his motion to modify his sentence. We
vacate and remand.
The defendant was convicted of burglary, see RSA 635:1 (1996), and
aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I (1986) (amended 1992,
1995) on April 15, 1992. He is currently serving two consecutive seven and
one-half to fifteen year sentences in New Hampshire State Prison.
In response to the defendant’s June 6, 2002 motion for reduction of
sentence, the Superior Court (Smith, J.) held: “Provisions of RSA 651 are
waived. May reapply after completion of prison sex offender program.” The
defendant moved for reconsideration on the grounds that he had already
completed the prison sex offender program. In its October 22, 2002 order on
the motion to reconsider, the court indicated it had “misstated a requirement
placed on defendant to achieve probation.” The court stated:
[The order] should have required [the defendant] to
attend and complete Summit House.
The Court correctly waived the provisions of RSA
651 to allow [the defendant] to come back before me
immediately upon completing Summit House.
The defendant must complete Summit House prior
to petitioning this Court again for release.
The defendant was not allowed to enter the Summit House program,
which was a substance abuse program, until he was within two years of his
minimum parole date, March 23, 2007. Summit House, however, was
terminated on June 1, 2003. Thereafter, the department of corrections created
a new program, the Substance Abuse Services (SAS) program. The department
of corrections indicated, in a notice issued to prisoners, that the SAS program
would replace the Summit House program.
On February 29, 2004, the defendant once again moved to modify his
sentence. He alleged that he had completed the SAS program, which he
contended should be treated as the equivalent of completing Summit House
under the October 22, 2002 order. Following a hearing, the Trial Court
(Burling, J.) ruled as follows:
At the Defendant’s request, this Court (Smith, J.)
on October 22, 2002 ordered that the Defendant
attend and complete the Summit House program. In
that Order, the Court waived the provisions of RSA
651 to allow the Defendant to come back before the
Court immediately upon completing Summit House.
‘The Defendant must complete Summit House prior to
petitioning this Court again for release.’
. . . .
The Court notes that it is uncontroverted that the
Level 2 Substance Abuse Services program now offered
at the New Hampshire State Prison is an educational
2
program and not a treatment program, and therefore,
it is not equivalent to the Summit House program.
Since the Defendant has not received a treatment
program, this Court declines to suspend his sentence,
after finding that he has neither attended [the] Summit
House program nor attended an equivalent program.
Accordingly the Defendant’s Motion to Suspend all
or a portion of his sentence is DENIED.
The court also denied the defendant’s motion for reconsideration and
supplemental motion for reconsideration.
The defendant makes three arguments on appeal. First, he argues that
the court has placed an additional condition upon him before it will consider a
request for modification or suspension of his sentence; namely, a condition
that he complete a treatment program similar to the Summit House program.
This additional condition, the defendant argues, violates due process and equal
protection. Second, he argues that the court erred in not accepting his
completion of the SAS program as fulfillment of the condition. Finally, he
argues that the requirement that he complete a program which no longer exists
in order to be eligible for parole, probation or a reduction of his sentence,
violates equal protection and due process.
The State makes several arguments in response. First, the State argues
that these issues were not preserved for appeal, as they were not timely raised
below; second, that the October 22, 2002 order did not unconstitutionally
augment the defendant’s sentence; third, that the trial court did not err by
denying the defendant’s motion to modify his sentence, because the defendant
has no constitutional right to a modification of his sentence, and because the
trial court has broad discretion in determining whether to modify a sentence;
and fourth, that the trial court’s order denying the defendant’s motion to
modify his sentence did not create an unconstitutional insurmountable barrier.
We first address the State’s argument that these issues were not properly
preserved for appeal. The State argues that if the treatment program condition
imposed by the October 22, 2002 order unconstitutionally augmented the
defendant’s sentence, or was otherwise an unsustainable exercise of discretion,
he should have objected to it on these grounds earlier. This argument
misconstrues the procedural history of this case.
Initially, the recommendation that he complete the Summit House
program was a boon to the defendant. RSA 651:20, at the time, allowed a state
prisoner to petition the court to suspend his sentence every two years. RSA
651:20 (Supp. 1990) (amended 1992, 1994). The State concedes, without
3
commenting on whether the trial court had authority to do so, that the trial
court attempted to waive this statutory time limit in its October 22, 2002 order,
by allowing the defendant to petition the court again upon completion of the
Summit House program, which would have allowed the defendant to bring
another petition for sentence modification sooner than statutorily permitted.
However, the benefit became a burden – an additional requirement
attached to the defendant’s sentence – when the trial court later relied upon it
to deny the defendant’s motion to suspend his sentence. The court’s order of
June 8, 2004 was the first time the court used the defendant’s failure to
complete a treatment program to deny his request for a suspended sentence.
The defendant urged the trial court to reconsider its motion, and properly
raised for the trial court the issues before us today. Therefore we hold that the
defendant has preserved these issues for appeal.
We now turn to the defendant’s arguments. The defendant first argues
that the additional condition imposed by the court’s order violates due process
and equal protection under both the State and Federal Constitutions. We first
address these claims under the State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Due process requires a sentencing court to make clear at the time of
sentencing in plain and certain terms what punishment it is exacting, as well
as the extent to which the court retains discretion to impose punishment at a
later date and under what conditions the sentence may be modified. The
sentencing order must clearly communicate to the defendant the exact nature
of the sentence. State v. Burgess, 141 N.H. 51, 52 (1996). Thus, unless the
terms of a sentence at the time it is imposed specifically allow augmentation at
a later date, the court may not increase a defendant’s penalty at a probation
revocation hearing or a hearing on whether to impose a deferred or suspended
sentence. Id.
However, the order of June 8, 2004, did not augment the defendant’s
sentence in violation of due process. While we have found that when a trial
court retains the power to impose incarceration at a later time, the defendant
has been afforded liberty, albeit conditional, which may not be revoked without
due process, Stapleford v. Perrin, 122 N.H. 1083, 1088 (1982), “[i]t is quite
another matter . . . to hold that an incarcerated defendant has an equal liberty
interest in gaining his freedom. There is a crucial distinction between being
deprived of a liberty one has . . . and being denied a conditional liberty that one
desires.” State v. Gibbons, 135 N.H. 320, 321 (1992) (quotation omitted).
The June 8, 2004 order did not augment the defendant’s sentence;
rather, it denied the defendant’s request for suspension of his sentence.
Therefore, we find that the trial court’s order did not violate the defendant’s
4
due process rights under the State Constitution. See Stapleford, 122 N.H. at
1088. Because the defendant failed to adequately brief or argue his equal
protection claim, we decline to address it. State v. Schultz, 141 N.H. 101, 104
(1996).
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. State v. Burgess, 141
N.H. at 52; Sattazahn v. Pennsylvania, 537 U.S. 101, 115 (2003). Accordingly,
we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the
State Constitution.
We next address the defendant’s second and third arguments, that the
trial court erred by not accepting his completion of the SAS program and that
this error required him to participate in a non-existent program in order to be
eligible for any relief from his sentence.
The State correctly asserts that the defendant has no right to a
suspension of any remaining portion of his sentence, and that the trial court
has broad discretion in deciding whether or not to grant a motion to suspend a
sentence. Therefore, a trial court's sentencing decision will be overturned only
if an unsustainable exercise of discretion is found. State v. Timmons, 145 N.H.
149, 151 (2000); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). The defendant has no right to
early release from his sentence. State v. Carter, 146 N.H. 359, 362 (2001).
In Cable v. Warden, N.H. State Prison, 140 N.H. 395, 397 (1995), we
found that the parole board has the independent authority to require a
prisoner to complete the prison’s sexual offender program prior to being
released on parole. We found that this requirement did not constitute
augmentation of the prisoner’s sentence, because the prisoner’s refusal to
participate in the program results only in his serving the full sentence handed
down by the sentencing court. Id. at 398. The State urges us to apply this
analysis to a trial court’s decision to suspend a sentence.
We agree with the State that the trial court may impose conditions upon
a defendant when deciding whether to suspend all or part of a defendant’s
sentence. See Stapleford, 122 N.H. at 1087. We now hold that a trial court,
upon review of a timely-filed motion to suspend a sentence currently being
served, may similarly impose conditions precedent to its grant of the
defendant’s request because such conditions would not augment the
defendant’s sentence, but, instead, would afford him an opportunity to reduce
it.
However, we agree with the defendant that the trial court’s reliance upon
the October 22, 2002 order to deny the defendant’s motion was an
5
unsustainable exercise of discretion because the trial court may not impose
impossible conditions upon a defendant’s motion for suspension of his
sentence. The legislature has vested in the trial court the power to adapt
sentencing to best meet the constitutional objectives of punishment,
rehabilitation and deterrence. Timmons, 145 N.H. at 151. Imposing an
impossible condition upon a motion to modify a defendant’s sentence does not
accord with these objectives.
The condition that the defendant complete a treatment program before
his sentence may be suspended is impossible, because the department of
corrections does not currently offer such a program. The trial court found that
the SAS program did not satisfy the requirements of the October 22, 2002
order to complete Summit House because it was an educational program, not a
treatment program. The department of corrections does not offer another
substance abuse treatment program. Thus, the trial court made it impossible
for the defendant to meet the conditions of the October 22, 2002 order. The
defendant cannot complete a program which does not exist.
We hold, therefore, that the trial court erred when it denied the
defendant’s motion to suspend his sentence, because the trial court cannot rely
upon non-performance of an impossible condition in order to deny a
defendant’s request to suspend his sentence. This holding does not mean that
the defendant is entitled to a suspension of his sentence, however. It means
only that it was an error for the trial court to rely upon his failure to complete
the Summit House program, or an equivalent program, as a basis for its denial.
The terms of a criminal defendant’s sentence, particularly those
addressing when he is allowed to bring petitions to suspend his sentence, are
governed by the statutes in effect when he committed his crime. See State v.
Reynolds, 138 N.H. 519, 522-23 (1994). The defendant committed his crimes
in 1990, and the version of RSA 651:20 in effect at the time allowed state
prisoners to bring petitions to suspend their sentences every two years. RSA
651:20. Following the rule laid out in Reynolds, the defendant’s sentence is
governed by the 1990 version of RSA 651:20. He is, therefore, entitled to
petition the court for suspension of his sentence every two years.
The defendant filed a motion for reduction of sentence on June 6, 2002.
Even if we assume that the trial court was incorrect in its attempt to waive the
provisions of RSA 651:20 in its August 26, 2002 order, the defendant is still
entitled to have the trial court consider his motion to modify his sentence.
Though he may not have been legally permitted to file another petition as early
as February 29, 2004, the order issued in response to that petition was flawed
for the reasons stated above. The defendant would have been permitted by
RSA 651:20 to file another petition on June 6, 2004. As this case is remanded
6
for a new hearing, we note that the hearing on remand is within the statutory
time limits.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7