THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-283
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRANDON YATES
Argued: April 5, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 23, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Ann M. Rice, associate attorney general,
on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Brandon Yates, was tried before a jury
in Superior Court (Hicks, J.) on two counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault (AFSA), see RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2004); two counts of felonious sexual
assault (FSA), see RSA 632-A:3 (Supp. 2004); one count of sexual assault, see
RSA 632-A:4 (Supp. 2004); two counts of endangering the welfare of a child,
see RSA 639:3 (Supp. 2004); and four counts of prohibited sales, see RSA
179:5 (2002). The jury found the defendant guilty of one endangerment
charge, all four charges of prohibited sales and one charge of FSA, and
acquitted him of the remaining charges. On appeal, the defendant challenges
his convictions for FSA and endangering the welfare of a child, arguing that the
trial court erred in allowing the State to play the tape of a 911 call at trial, and
in failing to dismiss the endangerment charge. We affirm in part, reverse in
part, vacate in part, and remand for resentencing.
A jury could have found the following facts. In mid-afternoon on
November 2, 2002, the fourteen-year-old victim and three of her juvenile
friends met with the defendant, who was then eighteen years old, at the
Memorial School in Hudson. The group gathered in the woods behind the
school, and the defendant produced a bottle of vodka from his backpack. The
victim drank more of the vodka than anyone else. At some point, the group
went further into the woods and up a small hill, where the defendant built a
fire. Thereafter, the victim began to appear impaired. She slurred her words,
talked nonsensically and had difficulty walking.
Several members of the group tried to assist the victim to the school so
she could call her mother, but she kept falling and was unable to walk down
the hill. Eventually, they abandoned their efforts and returned the victim to
the fire. Two of the victim’s friends then left, at which time the victim was lying
on the ground near the fire with her eyes closed, not responding when people
spoke to her.
At approximately 5:00 p.m., a third member of the group, Amy, left the
woods to call her mother, Laurie M. The defendant remained behind with the
victim. Amy was unable to find a working pay phone nearby, so she walked
home and called her mother at work to tell her that the victim was in trouble
and to ask her to come home. When Ms. M. arrived, she and Amy went to the
woods and called for the victim and the defendant. They heard no response,
and returned home to get a flashlight. Amy’s stepfather, Joseph M.,
accompanied them on their return to the woods.
After several minutes of searching, they found the victim lying on the
ground, approximately three feet away from a pile of burning embers remaining
from the fire. The victim was wearing pajama bottoms, which were pulled
down by her ankles. Her shirt was off, her bra was up near her neck, and she
was not responsive. The defendant was gone. It was very cold outside, so Mr.
and Ms. M. covered the victim with their coats. Ms. M. then used her cell
phone to call the victim’s mother and 911. After speaking briefly with the 911
operator, Ms. M. handed the cell phone to her husband so that he could
remain on the line with 911 while she met emergency response personnel to
direct them to the victim.
The victim was transported to St. Joseph’s Hospital. At the hospital,
Joanna Rix, a registered nurse and a certified sexual assault nurse examiner,
treated the victim. The victim was initially unresponsive to loud voices,
shaking, touching and a “sternal rub.”
2
About two hours later, while the victim was still unresponsive, Ms. Rix
performed a sexual assault examination using a rape kit. Ms. Rix observed
bits of dead leaves, moss, grass and other types of woodland debris in the
victim’s navel, between her buttocks and in her genital area. She also observed
fresh injuries to the victim’s genital area.
At approximately 12:30 a.m. on November 3, two detectives from the
Hudson Police Department arrived at the defendant’s house and told him that
they wanted to speak with him concerning the events of the previous evening.
At their request, he accompanied them to the Nashua Police Department.
When questioned by the police, the defendant admitted to being in the woods
behind the Memorial School with the group of teenagers, and to providing them
with alcohol. Although he initially denied having any sexual contact with the
victim, the defendant eventually admitted, both orally and in writing, to such
contact. When asked about the victim’s level of impairment, the defendant
responded that on a scale of one to ten, with ten being the most impaired, he
thought she was an eight or nine.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to exclude the tape of the 911 call,
based, in part, on his contention that the prejudicial effect of the tape
outweighed its probative value. The court ordered the State to edit the second
half of the tape, containing Mr. M.’s conversation with the 911 operator, and
allowed the State to play for the jury only Ms. M.’s conversation. Both before
and after the State played the tape, the trial court gave the jury limiting
instructions. The trial court denied the State’s request to play the tape during
its closing argument, and also denied the State’s request to admit the tape into
evidence as a full exhibit. At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved
unsuccessfully to dismiss both charges of endangering the welfare of a child,
arguing that he did not owe the victim a “duty of care” within the meaning of
RSA 639:3.
I
Relying upon New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403 and State v. Jordan,
148 N.H. 115 (2002), the defendant first argues that the trial court erred in
allowing the State to play the 911 tape for the jury. Although he concedes that
Ms. M.’s statements during the 911 call qualified as excited utterances under
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 803(2), he maintains that the tape lacked
probative value because: (1) several witnesses, including Ms. M., testified to
the same information about the victim’s physical condition contained on the
tape; and (2) Ms. M.’s statements were not a contemporaneous account of the
events underlying the charged offenses. He contends that the tape was
unfairly prejudicial to his case because: (1) Ms. M. offered an opinion during
the 911 call that she could not have offered as a witness testifying at trial,
namely, that the victim appeared to have been “sexually abused”; and (2) the
3
911 operator referred to the victim being “sexually abused,” and asked Ms. M.
whether the “attacker” was still nearby, twice reinforcing the conclusion that
the defendant was guilty of assaulting the victim. Thus, according to the
defendant, the prejudicial effect of the tape substantially outweighed its
probative value, and was not sufficiently mitigated by the trial court’s limiting
instructions to the jury, its ruling that the State could not play the tape during
its closing or its ruling that the State could not admit the tape as evidence.
The State, for its part, argues that the trial court did not err in allowing
the tape to be played because Ms. M.’s description of the victim’s physical
condition, conveyed just a short time after the defendant had left her in the
woods, demonstrated how the victim may have appeared at the time of the
assault and abandonment. The State maintains that the tape was therefore
relevant to material elements of the two AFSA charges and the two
endangerment charges: (1) whether the victim was physically incapacitated;
and (2) whether the defendant knew of her condition.
We accord the trial court considerable deference in determining the
admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its decision absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Jordan, 148 N.H. 115, 117
(2002). To demonstrate that the trial court exercised unsustainable discretion,
the defendant must show that the ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 401 defines relevant evidence as
“evidence having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of
consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable
than it would be without the evidence.” However, evidence that is relevant may
be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice. N.H. R. Ev. 403; State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 671, 675 (2002). As
we explained in Jordan:
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect
is to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror,
provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of
human action that may cause a jury to base its decision on
something other than the established propositions in the case.
Unfair prejudice is not, of course, mere detriment to a defendant
from the tendency of the evidence to prove his guilt, in which sense
all evidence offered by the prosecution is meant to be prejudicial.
Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible error is an
undue tendency to induce a decision against the defendant on
some improper basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.
Jordan, 148 N.H. at 117-18 (quotation, citation and brackets omitted).
4
In Jordan, we upheld the trial court’s decision to admit into evidence a
redacted 911 tape. Id. at 117-18. In that case, the defendant’s wife instructed
her daughter, Erica, to call 911 after the defendant hit a man who was at the
house and pushed his wife to the ground, fracturing her arm, such that she
could not get up off the ground. Id. at 116. Erica told the 911 operator that
“my father came home drunk . . . and he slammed my mother on the ground,”
and further stated that her father “was punching this guy who was helping us.”
Id. (brackets omitted). At trial, the court permitted the State to play the tape to
the jury in its opening statement, during its case-in-chief and in its closing
argument. Id.
While we expressed our concern at the number of times the prosecution
played the tape during trial – an issue that the defendant did not contest, and
therefore an issue we did not consider on appeal – we determined that the
record supported the trial court’s decision to admit the tape into evidence. Id.
at 118-19. Specifically, we concluded that the record supported the trial
court’s finding that the tape was highly probative of the defendant’s
involvement in the altercations because the tape was “as contemporaneous an
account of the events as they occurred as possible.” Id. at 118. Furthermore,
because several of the State’s witnesses, including Erica, were hesitant to
testify against the defendant, we noted that the probative value of the tape was
strengthened. Id.
As to whether the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant
substantially outweighed the probative value of the tape, we disagreed with the
defendant’s assertion that Erica was “hysterical” throughout the call, and
instead concluded that she was “fairly calm and lucid at times, answering
questions posed to her and following instructions.” Id. Finally, we noted that
because the trial court redacted various prejudicial statements from the tape,
any prejudicial effect on the defendant was sufficiently minimized. Id.
The circumstances of this case are readily distinguishable from Jordan.
Unlike the 911 call in Jordan, which occurred so close in time to the assaults
that the defendant’s wife was still unable to get up off the ground, Ms. M.’s call
to 911 occurred approximately fifty-four minutes after Amy left the defendant
and the victim in the woods. There is no evidence indicating when during that
period of time the assault occurred. Moreover, in speaking with the 911
operator, Ms. M. was only able to describe what she observed after the fact of
an alleged assault that she did not witness, unlike Erica, who was able to
describe the assaults moments after they occurred, apparently based upon her
own observation of them. Additionally, unlike in Jordan, there is no evidence
that any one of the State’s witnesses in this case was reluctant to testify
against the defendant. Finally, Ms. M. and at least three other witnesses
testified about the victim’s appearance at the scene based upon observations
5
they made either at the same time, or only minutes after, Ms. M. called 911.
Thus, unlike Jordan, the record in this case does not indicate that the 911 tape
was “highly probative.” Id.
Furthermore, in this case, the trial court exercised unsustainable
discretion in finding that the danger of unfair prejudice did not substantially
outweigh the minimal probative value of the tape. The State posits that Ms.
M.’s conversation with the 911 operator is “not highly emotional,” and notes
that although she is “distraught,” she “is neither crying nor screaming” during
the call and answers the 911 operator’s questions in a “calm and coherent
manner.” Having listened to the tape, we agree with the State that Ms. M. was
distraught. Although she was not crying or screaming, she appears to be
yelling and out of breath. On several occasions, the 911 operator has to tell
her to “stay on the line,” as though attempting to keep her focused on the
operator’s questions and instructions. Thus, while the tape may not be so
unduly emotional as to inflame a jury, it is considerably more emotional than
the State suggests.
The unfair prejudice inherent in the 911 tape in this case comes not from
the emotional nature of the call, however, but from the content of the
discussion between Ms. M. and the 911 operator. Specifically, when asked the
nature of the emergency, Ms. M. tells the 911 operator that a “little girl” is in
the woods and opines that she “appears to be sexually abused.” The 911
operator asks if “the attacker” is still there, and when speaking to the
ambulance attendant, repeats Ms. M.’s opinion that the victim “appears to be
sexually abused.” These criminal characterizations and opinions, the likes of
which were not present on the 911 tape in Jordan, are highly and unfairly
prejudicial.
In Jordan, Erica recited to the 911 operator the facts she observed.
Here, however, the jury was presented not only with Ms. M.’s factual
description of the victim as she appeared, but also with her opinion that the
victim was “sexually abused.” Such opinion, as the trial court recognized, was
inadmissible.
Thus, weighed against the minimal probative value of the tape, the
danger of unfair prejudice was substantial. Accordingly, we conclude that the
defendant has met his burden of demonstrating that the trial court’s decision
to allow the State to play the tape to the jury was “clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. at 117.
The State contends that any potential unfair prejudice to the defendant’s
case was minimized by the trial court’s limiting instructions to the jury, and its
rulings that the State could not play the tape during its closing or move the
tape into evidence as a full exhibit. We disagree.
6
Prior to playing the tape, the trial court instructed the jury:
Ladies and gentlemen, you’re about to hear portions of a 911
tape. In some respects, many respects, the 911 tape contains – its
content, rather, is exactly what you would expect. There are,
however, on the tape certain conclusions and/or characterizations
drawn by the participants to the conversation. You are not to draw
any inference at all, in fact, you are to disregard any conclusions
drawn by the participants in this particular 911 tape. The
conclusions in this case are to be drawn only by you. As an aid to
you in how to follow this instruction, I suggest to you that you –
and I don’t suggest to you, I’m instructing you, not to consider any
of the statements made by the 911 emergency operator as evidence
in this case. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.
After the State played the tape, the court again instructed the jury:
Ladies and gentlemen, once again, you are to draw no adverse
inference toward [the defendant] from any of the conclusions or
characterizations that were made or drawn by the participants in
that phone call, and again as an aid to you in your deliberations,
do not consider any of the statements of the operator, the 911
operator in any way.
Juries are presumed to follow instructions. State v. Pelkey, 145 N.H.
133, 137 (2000). Presuming the jury did so in this case, there was nothing left
on the tape for it to consider except Ms. M.’s description of the victim’s
appearance upon her arrival at the scene. However, Ms. M., as well as at least
three other witnesses, testified at trial about the victim’s condition and
appearance at the scene, and they were not cross-examined as to their ability
to accurately recall. Consequently, the tape was, at best, minimally probative
and, furthermore, it was unnecessary cumulative evidence. Cf. N.H. R. Ev. 403
(relevant evidence may be excluded if probative value substantially outweighed
by consideration of “needless presentation of cumulative evidence”).
Additionally, and perhaps most importantly, the limiting instructions
indicate that the trial court itself believed portions of the tape were
inadmissible and yet, notwithstanding that belief, the court let the jury hear
the tape. In so doing, the trial court unnecessarily exposed the jury to evidence
that was unfairly prejudicial to the defendant, even though that situation could
have been avoided. In the interest of avoiding similar situations in the future,
we take this opportunity to exercise our supervisory authority and provide
instructions to trial courts in their use of 911 tapes. See N.H. CONST. pt. II,
art. 73-a.
7
Trial courts must exercise caution in their rulings relative to the use of
911 tapes, because although such tapes may be relevant, they require
appropriate safeguards. Thus, if a 911 tape itself can be edited to eliminate
inadmissible evidence, that should be done. Where editing is not possible, the
tape of a 911 call should be transcribed and redacted, unless special
circumstances dictate otherwise.
In this case, it was not possible to further edit the tape, and the record
reveals no special circumstances that would have prevented the trial court
from directing the State to transcribe the tape and redact the offending
passages. Doing so would have eliminated the possibility that the jury would
be unable to erase from its collective memory the unfairly prejudicial content of
the tape, and would have preserved for the jury’s consideration only that which
lacked any danger of unfair prejudice. Moreover, the use of a redacted
transcript would have tempered the emotional nature of the call, which, as
stated, may not have risen to a level that would inflame the jury, but which
was nevertheless significant.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court’s limiting instructions to the
jury were not sufficient to minimize any unfair prejudice to the defendant.
Furthermore, considering the de minimis probative value of the tape, the
significant danger of unfair prejudice, and the insufficiency of the trial court’s
instructions to the jury, we conclude that any unfair prejudice to the defendant
resulting from the State playing the tape once was not mitigated by either the
fact that the State was not permitted to play it again or the fact that the tape
was not admitted into evidence as a full exhibit.
The State argues that any error in allowing the State to play the tape was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt because the tape was not “overly
emotional,” the evidence was “cumulative and unobtrusive” and, based upon
the acquittal verdicts, the tape did not make a significant impression on the
jury. We agree.
It is well settled that the erroneous admission of evidence is harmless
only if the State proves, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was not
affected by the admission. State v. Thompson, 149 N.H. 565, 567 (2003). An
error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of
the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity or weight and if
the inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to
the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id.
Here, we cannot say that the verdict was affected by the 911 tape.
Indeed, the jury acquitted the defendant on both charges of AFSA, one charge
of FSA and one charge of sexual assault. The sole FSA charge upon which the
8
defendant was convicted alleged statutory rape by digital penetration, see RSA
632-A:3, II (1996), thus evidencing that the jury was swayed by the defendant’s
theory of the case, which was that the victim was not, at the time of the
assault, physically incapacitated, unconscious or otherwise helpless to resist.
We conclude, therefore, that although the trial court erred in allowing the State
to play the 911 tape at trial, the error was harmless.
II
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to dismiss the charge of endangering the welfare of a child because he
did not owe the victim a “duty of care” within the meaning of RSA 639:3, I
(1996). We agree.
The endangerment charge upon which the defendant was convicted
reads, in pertinent part, that the defendant:
did knowingly commit the crime of Endangering the Welfare of a
Child, [the victim,] a child under the age of 18 in that while [the
victim] was incapacitated due to alcohol and drug consumption
[the defendant] disrobed her by pulling her pants down near her
ankles and removing her top then left her alone in the woods on a
night when the temperature was below freezing thereby
endangering her welfare in that she could have been injured or
died from exposure. By doing so, [the defendant] did violate a duty
of care he owed to [the victim] said conduct being contrary to RSA
639:3 (I) and against the peace and dignity of the State.
RSA 639:3, I, provides:
A person is guilty of endangering the welfare of a child or
incompetent if he knowingly endangers the welfare of a child under
18 years of age or of an incompetent person by purposely violating
a duty of care, protection or support he owes to such child or
incompetent, or by inducing such child or incompetent to engage
in conduct that endangers his health or safety.
For purposes of this appeal, the defendant concedes that the State
presented sufficient evidence from which a jury could have concluded that he
disrobed the victim and left her alone in the woods, and that the victim could
have suffered harm as a result of that conduct. He challenges only the
application of the term “duty of care” to the circumstances of this case. The
defendant’s challenge presents an issue of first impression.
9
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. State v. MacMillan, 151 N.H. __, __ (decided April 1, 2005). Our task is
to construe the Criminal Code provisions according to the fair import of their
terms and to promote justice. State v. Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. 336, 339
(2003). In doing so, we first look to the plain language of the statute to
determine legislative intent. Id. We will neither consider what the legislature
might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. State v.
Hofland, 151 N.H. 322, 324 (2004). We will not interpret a statute to require
an illogical result. Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. at 341.
The term “duty of care” is not defined in the statute and is subject to
more than one reasonable interpretation. See id. at 339. Thus, we turn first to
the legislative history of the statute to determine the legislature’s intent. Id.
RSA 639:3, I, is based upon Model Penal Code § 230.4, see Comm’n to
Recommend Codification of Criminal Laws, cmts. at 81-82 (1969). Section
230.4 provides: “A parent, guardian, or other person supervising the welfare of
a child under 18 commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly endangers the child’s
welfare by violating a duty of care, protection or support.” Model Penal Code
§ 230.4, at 444 (Official Draft and Revised Comments 1980). Comment 3 to
section 230.4 states, in relevant part:
Section 230.4 is violated only by an act or omission that
contravenes a legal duty imposed upon a parent, guardian or other
person supervising the welfare of a child under 18. The duty itself
need not be stated in the penal code but may arise from
contractual obligation, from settled principles of tort or family law,
or from other legal sources. The specification that the actor’s
conduct must violate a duty of “care, protection or support” makes
clear that the provision applies only to those legal duties arising by
reason of the actor’s status as a “parent, guardian, or other person
supervising the welfare of a child.” In other words, Section 230.4
does not authorize conviction of one who endangers the welfare of
a child by violating a legal duty owed by all citizens to one another
or by violating a duty which a stranger may owe to a minor. To the
extent that such actions should be covered, they are defined as
crimes in provisions of general applicability elsewhere in the Model
Code.
Model Penal Code, supra cmt. 3, at 450-51.
According to the State, the legislature’s use of the term “a person” in RSA
639:3, I, rather than “[a] parent, guardian, or other person supervising the
welfare of a child under 18,” indicates its intent to expand the scope of the
10
statute to include a broader population than those who have a familial, or
similar/supervisory relationship with a minor. We disagree.
The comment to section 230.4 quoted above indicates that the term
“duty of care” was intended to refer only to those who have a parental or
supervisory relationship with a child. Since “duty of care” refers only to those
in a parental or supervisory relationship with a child, the limitation in section
230.4 to parents, guardians or “other person[s] supervising the welfare of a
child” is arguably redundant. “The legislature is not presumed to waste words
or enact redundant provisions and whenever possible, every word of a statute
should be given effect.” Marcotte v. Timberlane/Hampstead School Dist., 143
N.H. 331, 339 (1999). In drafting RSA 639:3, I, the legislature avoided the
apparent redundancy in section 230.4 by imposing liability on “a person” who
owes a child a duty of care, thereby excluding the unnecessary limitation that
the statute apply only to parents, guardians or others in a supervisory capacity
with respect to the child.
Moreover, the legislature retained critical language used in section 230.4
in specifying that the “duty” owed under RSA 639:3, I, is one of “care,
protection or support.” That language “makes clear that the provision applies
only to those legal duties arising by reason of the actor’s status as a ‘parent,
guardian, or other person supervising the welfare of a child.’” Model Penal
Code, supra cmt. 3, at 451. Thus, we conclude that the legislative history of
RSA 639:3, I, demonstrates the legislature’s intent to limit criminal liability
thereunder to those who have a familial, or similar/supervisory relationship
with a minor. Consequently, we disagree with the State’s contention that the
legislative history of the statute demonstrates that the defendant owed the
victim a duty of care.
To avoid contradictory statutory interpretations, we next consider other
indicia of legislative intent, such as the title of the statute, the statute in the
context of its overall statutory scheme and the intent behind similar provisions.
Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. at 339; see State v. Woods, 139 N.H. 399, 400-01
(1995) (considering relevant statutory scheme in interpreting undefined
statutory term). RSA chapter 639 is entitled “Offenses Against the Family.”
The statutes contained in chapter 639 are entitled “Bigamy,” RSA 639:1 (1996)
(prohibiting marriage to multiple spouses); “Incest,” RSA 639:2 (Supp. 2004)
(prohibiting marriage, sexual intercourse, or living together under
representation of marriage among specified relatives); “Non-Support,” RSA
639:4 (Supp. 2004) (imposing liability on one who fails to provide support for
spouse, child or other dependent when legally obligated and able to do so); and
“Concealing Death of a Newborn,” RSA 639:5 (1996) (prohibiting knowing
concealment of corpse of newborn child). A review of the titles of these statutes
and the prohibitions contained therein demonstrates that the legislature
enacted the statutes primarily to address crimes within the family. Therefore,
11
the statutory scheme within which RSA 639:3, I, is located indicates that the
legislature intended to impose liability for endangering the welfare of a child
only upon persons having a familial, or similar/supervisory relationship with
the victim.
The State discounts the significance of the statutory scheme in which
RSA 639:3, I, is located, contending that sections II and III of the statute refer
to acts that in most instances would involve individuals who have no such
relationship with the minor. Section II states, “In the prosecution of any
person under this section, the tattooing or branding by any person of a child
under the age of 18 constitutes endangering the welfare of such child.” RSA
639:3, II (Supp. 2004). Section III provides,
In the prosecution of any person under this section, the
solicitation by any person of a child under the age of 16 to engage
in sexual activity as defined by RSA 649-A:2, III for the purpose of
creating a visual representation as defined in RSA 649-A:2, IV, or
to engage in sexual penetration as defined by RSA 632-A:1, V,
constitutes endangering the welfare of such child.
RSA 639:3, III (Supp. 2004).
The acts prohibited in these sections arguably would, in many instances,
involve individuals who do not have a familial, or similar/supervisory
relationship with a minor. However, section I, in addition to prohibiting a
person from endangering the welfare of a child by violating a duty of care,
protection or support, also prohibits “[a] person” from endangering the welfare
of a child “by inducing such child or incompetent to engage in conduct that
endangers his health or safety.” The term “duty of care” is not applicable to the
clause in RSA 639:3, I, that prohibits one from inducing a child to “engage in
conduct that endangers [the child’s] health or safety.” The statute is drafted in
the disjunctive; liability is imposed when “[a] person . . . purposely violat[es] a
duty of care, protection or support he owed to such child . . . or [when a
person] induc[es] such child . . . to engage in conduct that endangers his
health or safety.” RSA 639:3, I (emphasis added).
Thus, liability for inducing a child to engage in conduct that endangers
the child’s health or safety does not also require that the actor owe the child a
duty of care. Accordingly, liability under the inducement clause of RSA 639:3,
I, could be imposed upon any person, and not just those having a familial, or
similar/supervisory relationship with a minor. RSA 639:3, II and III merely
refer to such other persons, in addition to those who owe a minor a duty of
care, by imposing liability for certain acts “[i]n the prosecution of any person
under this section.” (Emphasis added.) Because the majority of the provisions
contained in chapter 639 unequivocally pertain to families and family-type
12
relationships, we do not discount the significance of the statutory scheme in
which RSA 639:3, I, is located based solely on sections II and III.
The State maintains that the prohibition in RSA 639:3, I, against
inducing a child to engage in endangering conduct evidences the legislature’s
intent to expand the scope of the statute beyond the reach of section 230.4 of
the Model Penal Code. We disagree for the reason discussed above: the term
“duty of care” is not applicable to the clause in RSA 639:3, I, that imposes
liability for inducing a child to “engage in conduct that endangers [the child’s]
health or safety.” Here, the State alleged that the defendant violated a duty of
care he owed to the victim, and did not allege that he induced her to engage in
conduct that endangered her health or safety. Accordingly, the legislature’s
inclusion of the inducement clause in RSA 639:3, I, is not relevant to our
determination of the scope of the term “duty of care.”
Finally, relying upon United States v. Hatatley, 130 F.3d 1399 (10th Cir.
1997), the State contends that the defendant, having placed the victim in
danger by providing her alcohol to the extent that she became incapacitated,
removing her clothing and abandoning her outside in below freezing
temperatures while she was still unclothed and unprotected from the cold,
“had a legal obligation to safeguard her.” The State argues that such a legal
obligation comports with the legislature’s intended meaning of the term “duty
of care” in RSA 639:3, I. Hatatley, however, is inapposite.
In Hatatley, the defendant was convicted of voluntary manslaughter after
beating the victim and abandoning him while he was seriously injured, drunk
and shirtless in the freezing desert. Hatatley, 130 F.3d at 1402-03. The court,
in rejecting the defendant’s argument that the trial court improperly instructed
the jury by implying that he had a duty to safeguard the defendant when he
did not, stated:
When a person puts another in a position of danger, he creates
for himself a duty to safeguard or rescue the person from that
danger. Thus, when a person places another in danger, fails to
safeguard or rescue him and he dies, such omission is sufficient to
support criminal liability.
Id. at 1406 (citation omitted). Thus, the issue in Hatatley was not, as it is here,
whether the defendant owed the victim a specific statutory duty of care such
that he could be held liable for endangering the victim’s welfare. Rather, the
question presented in Hatatley was whether the defendant’s omission, or
failure to act, was sufficient as a matter of law, under the circumstances of the
case, to establish criminal liability for manslaughter.
13
Having determined that the challenged portion of RSA 639:3, I, imposes
liability only upon individuals who have a familial, or similar/supervisory
relationship with a child, we conclude that the trial court erred in denying the
defendant’s motion to dismiss the endangerment charge. Thus, the
defendant’s conviction under RSA 639:3, I, is reversed. Because evidence of
the endangerment conviction may have affected the sentences the court
imposed for the defendant’s convictions for FSA and prohibited sales, we vacate
those sentences and remand for resentencing. See State v. Rezk, 150 N.H.
483, 493-94 (2004).
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; vacated
in part; and remanded for resentencing.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
14