Amended 4/20/05
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2004-254
APPEAL OF HYPERTHERM, INC.
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: December 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 18, 2005
Decato Law Office, of Lebanon (R. Peter Decato on the brief and orally),
for the respondent.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Stephen J.
Schulthess on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Hypertherm, Inc., appeals a decision
of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (board) that it is obligated
by RSA 281-A:23 (Supp. 2004) to pay medical costs associated with the
treatment of a cumulative trauma injury suffered by the respondent, Hyvis
Thatcher. We vacate and remand.
The facts relevant to this appeal are undisputed. In February 2001, after
voluntarily leaving her job as a nanny, the respondent began working for the
petitioner as an order filler and warehouse packer, a position that required her
to locate and select ordered pieces for packing. The pieces ranged in size and
varied in quantity. Some of the items the respondent was required to handle
weighed up to fifty pounds. The petitioner paid the respondent approximately
$10 per hour.
After working for the petitioner for only a few weeks, the respondent
experienced soreness in her hands. Eventually she noticed a bruise and a
lump on the back of her hand and, after reporting the condition to the
petitioner, she sought medical treatment for the problem. The lump was
diagnosed as a ganglion cyst, and the pain was attributed to tendonitis in her
right and left wrist flexor extensors. The respondent returned to work with
instructions from her medical provider that she continue with medical
treatment, perform home exercises, take anti-inflammatory medications, work
with modifications and wear wrist splints. The petitioner modified the
respondent’s duties to accommodate her condition, but her pay remained the
same and she did not lose time from employment as a result of her condition.
The respondent continued to obtain treatment for her wrists, and work in
a modified capacity for the petitioner until April 2001, when she resigned.
During her exit interview, the respondent explained that she was resigning
primarily because she could not perform her earlier duties filling orders, the job
for which she was hired, due to the problems with her wrists. She also stated
that she was resigning because she was offered a position as a nanny. There is
no indication in the record that the respondent was unable to perform her
modified duties at Hypertherm. Shortly thereafter, the respondent began
working as a nanny at the rate of approximately $30,000 per year, plus
benefits.
On June 21, 2001, the respondent was released from treatment to home
exercise. Either the petitioner or its insurance carrier, Travelers Insurance
Company (Travelers), covered all of the respondent’s medical expenses up to
that date. On July 30, 2002, the respondent again sought medical treatment
for hand and wrist pain, which she claimed had increased between September
or October 2001 and July 2002. The respondent then began a course of
occupational therapy treatments and incurred expenses totaling $4,593 for the
period beginning July 30, 2002, and ending in January 2003.
On January 22, 2003, the respondent filed a claim with the New
Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL) seeking a ruling that the petitioner was
responsible for the outstanding $4,593 in medical expenses. Following a
hearing, a DOL hearing officer concluded that Travelers was responsible for the
respondent’s expenses. The petitioner appealed and, following a second
hearing, the board concluded that the petitioner was responsible for the
medical expenses. The board denied the petitioner’s motion for
reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
The petitioner argues that the board erred in ruling that it is liable for
the respondent’s medical expenses because a cumulative trauma injury is not
2
compensable under the Workers’ Compensation Law unless and until the
claimant suffers a diminished earning capacity. Until that happens, according
to the petitioner, no cognizable injury has occurred. The respondent contends
that we should uphold the board’s decision because, when the only claim at
issue is for payment of medical bills, an employer is responsible for the bills
when the employee either can no longer perform her regular job or cannot do
so without medical assistance.
We will not disturb the board’s decision unless the party appealing the
decision demonstrates either that the board erred as a matter of law, or that
the board’s decision, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, was unjust or
unreasonable. RSA 541:13 (1997); Appeal of Fay, 150 N.H. 321, 324 (2003).
In its written decision, the board concluded, in relevant part, that the
respondent “did suffer a repetitive trauma injury while in the employ of the
[petitioner] that caused her bilateral wrist pain the amelioration of which
required the medical treatment beginning on July 31, 2002[,] for which she
seeks payment by the [petitioner].” The board explained:
In the matter before the panel, a medical provider has treated the
[respondent’s] pain, has concluded that the cause of the pain was
the work the [respondent] performed for the [petitioner] and has
submitted a bill for the reasonable and necessary treatment of the
[respondent’s] medical problem attributable to her work. The
panel has unanimously concluded that the [petitioner] is obligated
by RSA 281-A:23 to pay the costs of the treatment of the
[respondent’s] cumulative trauma injury.
We interpret the board’s decision as characterizing the nature of the
respondent’s injury as a cumulative trauma injury and as concluding that the
injury was compensable because she was treated for a condition that was
attributable to the work she performed for the petitioner. We find that
although the board erred in concluding that the respondent suffered a
cumulative trauma injury, it correctly determined that the respondent suffered
a compensable injury.
In the context of workers’ compensation disability claims, we have, on
numerous occasions, stated that cumulative trauma injuries occur, and are
compensable under the Workers’ Compensation Law, when a claimant suffers a
diminished earning capacity. See, e.g., Appeal of CNA Ins. Co., 148 N.H. 317,
320 (2002); Appeal of Wausau Ins. Co., 143 N.H. 478, 480-81 (1999); Appeal of
Briggs, 138 N.H. 623, 631 (1994). While the petitioner contends that the
foregoing analysis should apply to cases that involve medical bills, the
respondent argues that such cases should be analyzed differently. We agree
with the respondent.
3
Because cumulative trauma injuries adversely affect a claimant’s earning
capacity, they trigger a claimant's right to indemnity payments as well as
causally related medical bills. A compensable injury for purposes of medical
bills alone, however, need not arise from a cumulative trauma injury. In
issuing its decision, the board, although erroneously referring to the
respondent’s injury as a cumulative or repetitive trauma injury, aptly explained
why the respondent suffered a compensable injury for purposes of medical
bills:
It cannot be that the policy of the statutory regime established by
the legislature through RSA 281-A can be achieved by a conclusion
that the claimant’s repetitive trauma injury is not compensible [sic]
as it is not cognizable under the statute. Such a conclusion would
require employees experiencing repetitive trauma to compound
their injury by working until they are too broken by that work to
continue working and to forego medical treatment they are not able
to pay for until they are not able to secure the benefit of the care
intended by the statute. This cannot be the conclusion as to the
meaning of a statute intended to assure that injured employees
continue to be able to work and are returned to work as soon as
medically possible following a work limiting injury. The panel
believes that properly comprehended[,] the Briggs[/]Wausau
analysis applies only to cases in which indemnity benefits are
sought and not to insulate injuring employers from the
responsibility to pay medical bills necessary to the amelioration of
cumulative trauma injuries.
Courts in other jurisdictions have, with equal persuasiveness, reached similar
conclusions. See Ryciak v. Eastern Precision Resistor, 186 N.E.2d 408, 409-10
(N.Y. 1962) (rejecting notion that medical expense claimant not injured until he
lost time or wages); cf. Centrilift v. Evans, 915 P.2d 391, 394 (Okla. Ct. App.
1995), cert. denied (Okla. April 11, 1996) (in case involving disability benefits
and continuing medical treatment, noting that date of injury for purposes of
assessing liability or establishing rate of compensation is date claimant
becomes aware of defect and its relationship to job).
It is our practice to liberally construe the Workers’ Compensation Law,
resolving all reasonable doubts in statutory construction in favor of providing
the broadest reasonable effect to the statute’s remedial purpose of
compensating injured employees. Appeal of Weaver, 150 N.H. 254, 256 (2003);
Appeal of CNA Ins. Cos., 143 N.H. 270, 273 (1998). Consistent with that
practice, we hold that, for purposes of claims for medical bills alone, such bills
are payable for medical treatment a claimant receives for a condition that is
causally related to employment regardless of whether they arose from trauma
4
or cumulative trauma.
Applying our holding to the facts of this case, we conclude that the
respondent suffered a compensable injury while employed by the petitioner.
Specifically, although it is unclear from the board’s decision the precise date
upon which the respondent’s medical provider diagnosed her condition as
being causally related to her duties at Hypertherm, it is clear that the board
found such a diagnosis occurred while she was employed there. Thus, the
petitioner or its insurance carrier properly covered the respondent’s medical
expenses for the period of time during which she was employed at Hypertherm.
However, we are unable, on this record, to determine whether the
petitioner should be held responsible for certain medical bills the respondent
incurred after she resigned. The petitioner does not challenge the medical bills
the respondent incurred from the date of her resignation through June 21,
2001. Accordingly, the only bills at issue are those the respondent incurred
from July 2002 to January 2003. The board may have concluded that the
petitioner was responsible for such bills under the erroneous premise that her
condition arose from a cumulative trauma injury. Accordingly, we remand to
the board to determine, in the first instance, whether the petitioner is liable for
payment of the bills at issue.
To make that determination on remand, the board must decide whether
the respondent’s condition upon her resumption of medical treatment in July
2002 was a continuation of the condition she suffered as a result of her
employment with the petitioner. If it was, the petitioner should be held
responsible for payment of the bills. If, however, her condition was aggravated
such that it was no longer simply a continuation of the problem she
experienced as a result of working for the petitioner, the petitioner should not
be held responsible for the bills.
Vacated and remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5