THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-501
PORTSMOUTH COUNTRY CLUB
v.
TOWN OF GREENLAND
Argued: June 15, 2005
Opinion Issued: September 21, 2005
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth (Ralph
R. Woodman, Jr., on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Peter J. Loughlin, of Portsmouth, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant, the Town of Greenland (Town), appeals an
order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) ruling that the Town cannot continue
to tax the golf holes on the plaintiff’s golf course as improvements in addition to
taxing the underlying land as open space. The plaintiff, Portsmouth Country
Club (Club) cross-appeals, challenging the trial court’s refusal to apply its
ruling retroactively and to award the Club attorney’s fees. We affirm.
The following facts are recited in the trial court’s order or agreed to by
the parties. The Club operates an eighteen-hole golf course on 255 acres in
Greenland. Following a town-wide revaluation of property in 1987 and an
attendant increase in the assessed value of the Club’s property, the Club and
the Town negotiated a discretionary easement deed pursuant to former RSA
79-A:15-:21 (repealed and replaced by RSA ch. 79-C (2003)). That statute
provided a mechanism for taxing land subject to a discretionary easement
either according to the current use assessment category specified in the
easement or at a “fixed assessment . . . which does not exceed the highest per
acre valuation of any category of open space land established by the [current
use advisory] board.” RSA 79-A:18 (1991) (repealed 1996).
The Club’s discretionary easement deed, as later amended, provided that
247 acres of the Club’s property, which are used for playing golf, would be
subject to the easement and classified, “for purposes of current use tax
assessment[,] as open space.” The remaining five acres, on which a pro shop,
clubhouse, “snack shack” and parking lot were located, would be excluded
from the easement and taxed at fair market value. Although the deed was not
signed until 1991, implementation of its provisions began in 1987.
Since 1992, the current use rate for the 247 acres subject to the
easement has been set by the Town at $400 per acre. The Town has also,
however, separately assessed the golf holes located on those 247 acres. Prior
to 2001, the total additional assessment for these holes was $504,000, and
that value was listed on the Club’s tax bill under the category of buildings.
Between 1987 and 2000, the Club never inquired about the components of its
assessed valuation or complained about its tax bill.
In 2001, another property revaluation was conducted, resulting in an
increase in the Club’s taxes and prompting an inquiry by the Club into the
Town’s taxing policies. It was then that the Club first realized that in addition
to the current use assessment of $400 per acre, it was being taxed on the value
of the golf holes.
The Club applied to the Town for an abatement, which was denied. It
then filed a petition for abatement, declaratory judgment and damages with the
superior court, contending that according to the discretionary easement deed
and applicable statute, the Town could not assess the 247 acres at more than
its current use value. The trial court agreed, and ruled that the Town could
not assess “any additional tax on the 247 acres of open space land . . . except
for the agreed-upon current use amount. Thus, the Town cannot
independently assess the golf holes and add that amount to the current use
amount.” The trial court declined, however, to grant a rebate of erroneously-
assessed taxes for the years 1991 through 2001 or to award the Club its
attorney’s fees. The Town appeals the trial court’s ruling regarding the method
of tax assessment. The Club cross-appeals the trial court’s failure to apply its
ruling retroactively and to award attorney’s fees. We first address the Town’s
appeal.
2
The Town argues that golf course components such as tees, fairways and
greens are improvements to land, separate from the land itself, and “are
properly assessed and taxed separately from the land.” It contends that its
assessment practice is consistent with the easement deed, in which it “agreed
to classify the lands encumbered by this easement for purposes of current use
assessment as open space.” (Quotation omitted.) “The Discretionary Easement
Deed,” the Town argues, “says absolutely nothing about the improvements to
the golf course land.” Moreover, it argues that its separate assessment of the
golf course components is mandated by the current use statute, which, at the
time the discretionary easement deed was executed, directed the selectmen or
assessing officials to appraise, at current use values established by the current
use advisory board, “open space land, as classified under the provisions of this
chapter, excluding any building, appurtenance or other improvement thereon.”
RSA 79-A:5, I (1991) (amended 1991) (emphasis added).
The Club, on the other hand, contends that what the Town identifies as
golf course improvements are “part of the land” encumbered by the easement
and subject thereunder to assessment as open land. The Club argues that this
interpretation is consistent with the applicable statutory scheme, which allows
land used for a golf course to be eligible for a discretionary easement even
though “[a] golf course obviously must have some improvements to land in its
natural condition, all of which are a necessary part of a ‘golf course,’ i.e. tees,
greens, sand traps, fairways, roughs, etc.” Thus, the question before us is
whether, for purposes of the applicable statute and the discretionary easement
deed, golf course components such as tees and greens are to be treated as land
or improvements to land.
We begin with the applicable statute, as the discretionary easement deed
explicitly conveyed the easement “pursuant to New Hampshire RSA 79-A:15-
21,” and, in any event, could not contravene the statute. Cf. Albertson v.
Shenton, 78 N.H. 216, 217 (1916). “In matters of statutory interpretation, we
are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. We first examine the language of the statute and
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.” Carignan v. N.H.
Int’l Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 419 (2004) (citation omitted). We also interpret
statutes not in isolation, but in the context of the overall statutory scheme. In
the Matter of Glaude & Fogg, 151 N.H. 273, 275 (2004).
When interpreting two statutes which deal with a similar subject
matter, we construe them so that they do not contradict each
other, and so that they will lead to reasonable results and
effectuate the legislative purpose of the statute.
Sanborn Regional Sch. Dist. v. Budget Comm. of the Sanborn Regional Sch.
Dist., 150 N.H. 241, 242 (2003) (quotations, citation and ellipsis omitted).
3
The current use statute in force at the time the discretionary easement
deed was executed did not define the term “improvement.” See RSA ch. 79-A
(1991 & Supp. 1995). Nevertheless, even were we to assume that tees, greens
and other golf course characteristics would otherwise be improvements for
purposes of RSA 79-A:5, I (1991) (amended 1991), we still interpret the overall
statutory scheme to treat these features as part of the land on which a
discretionary easement has been granted and to preclude their separate
taxation as improvements.
RSA 79-A:15, I (1991) (repealed 1996), provided that an owner of land
which does not meet the criteria for open space land, so as to qualify for
current use taxation under that chapter, but who wishes to keep the land in a
use consistent with the purposes of that chapter, could apply to the city or
town planning board “for a permit to convey a discretionary easement to the
town or city.” The planning board was directed to approve the application if it
determined that the planned use of such land was consistent with any of a
number of enumerated objectives or provided “other similar benefits.” RSA 79-
A:15, II (1991) (repealed 1996). A discretionary easement, which had to be for
a term of at least ten years, RSA 79-A:18 (1991) (repealed 1996), would bind
the owner and any transferees or assignees of the land “not to subdivide,
develop, or otherwise change the use of such land to a more intensive use
inconsistent with the purposes” of the current use statute, RSA 79-A:17 (1991)
(repealed 1996).
RSA 79-A:15, III (1991) (repealed 1996) provided in part that “[i]f the land
is used for a golf course, the [current use advisory] board shall give due
consideration to the application.” Prior to August 17, 1991, the statute also
provided that “[a]s directed by the [current use advisory] board, the
commissioner [of the department of revenue administration] shall adopt by rule
under RSA 541-A, a definition of ‘golf course,’ based on open space objectives,
for the purpose of this subdivision.” RSA 79-A:15, IV (1991) (repealed 1991).
The parties agree that former New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Rev
1201.04 (repealed 1992) (former Rev 1204.01) defined golf course, “as provided
under RSA 79-A:15, [to] mean[] a parcel of land, ten acres or more, used in the
playing of the game of golf including greens, fairways, tees, sand traps, and
roughs, and such other areas which are located within the established playing
area.” (Emphasis added.) The plain and ordinary meaning of these words is
that the tees, greens and similar golf course components are included as part
of the land.
The Town notes, however, that at the time the discretionary easement
deed was signed, the definition of golf course was contained in an
administrative rule rather than a statute. Cf. RSA 79-C:2, III (2003) (defining
“golf course land” for purposes of the current discretionary easement statute).
It argues that the current use advisory board’s “definition of ‘golf course’ could
4
not, and did not, allow golf course improvements to be assessed as open space.
Such an interpretation would impermissibly contradict the statutory directive
that, in appraising open space land at current use values, selectmen exclude
from such appraisal improvements on the open space land.”
We agree that “[r]ules adopted by State boards and agencies may not add
to, detract from, or in any way modify statutory law.” Opinion of the Justices,
121 N.H. 552, 557 (1981) (quotation omitted). Administrative agencies may,
however, properly be delegated the authority to “fill in details to effectuate the
purpose of the statute.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Rules and regulations
promulgated by administrative agencies pursuant to a valid delegation of
authority have the force and effect of laws.” Id. at 559.
In providing that land used for a golf course could be subject to a
discretionary easement and explicitly directing the current use advisory board
and commissioner of the department of revenue administration to promulgate a
definition of golf course, the legislature left a gap for the agency to “fill in
details to effectuate the purpose of the statute.” Id. at 557 (quotation omitted).
As the agency was directed to adopt a definition “based on open space
objectives,” RSA 79-A:15, III (1991) (repealed 1996), we look to the objectives
cited by the legislature in the current use statute:
RSA 79-A:1 (1991) (amended 1991, 1996) provided:
It is hereby declared to be in the public interest to encourage the
preservation of open space in the state by providing a healthful
and attractive outdoor environment for work and recreation of the
state’s citizens, by maintaining the character of the state’s
landscape, and by conserving the land, water, forest, and wildlife
resources. It is further declared to be in the public interest to
prevent the conversion of open space to more intensive use by the
pressure of property taxation at values incompatible with open
space usage, with a minimum disturbance of the concept of ad
valorem taxation. The means for encouraging preservation of open
space authorized by this chapter are the assessment of land value
for property taxation on the basis of current use and the
acquisition of discretionary easements of development rights by
town or city government.
(Emphasis added.) As we explained in Blue Mountain Forest Ass’n v. Town of
Croydon, 119 N.H. 202, 203 (1979), the current use statute promotes these
objectives by directing that certain land be valued for taxation purposes at its
current, rather than its highest and best, use.
5
As noted above, the discretionary easement provisions in the statutory
scheme provided a mechanism for “[a]ny owner of land which does not meet
the criteria for open space land” to nevertheless qualify the land for current use
treatment by binding itself, in a discretionary easement conveyed to the town
or city, to “keep the land in a use consistent with the purposes of this chapter.”
RSA 79-A:15, I (1991) (repealed 1996) (emphasis added). Specifically, RSA 79-
A:17, I (1991) (repealed 1996) provided that “[a]ny owner of land who has
received a permit to convey a discretionary easement as provided in RSA 79-
A:15 may apply to the selectmen or the mayor and council to grant an
easement to the town or city not to subdivide, develop, or otherwise change the
use of such land to a more intensive use inconsistent with the purposes of this
chapter.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, the statutory scheme for discretionary
easements provided a means for maintaining land in a use that, although not
falling within the statutory definition of open space land, was deemed by the
legislature to be consistent with its open space objectives.
In RSA 79-A:15, III (1991) (repealed 1996), the legislature explicitly
provided that land that “is used for a golf course” was eligible to be considered
for conveyance of a discretionary easement. Thus, the legislature clearly
contemplated that this qualifying land would already be altered from its
natural condition. We conclude that by then directing the current use advisory
board to define golf course, the legislature delegated to it the authority to
specify which alterations could be present without disqualifying the altered
land from current use taxation. Thus, former Rev 1204.01, promulgated
pursuant to a valid delegation of authority, had the force and effect of law,
Opinion of the Justices, 121 N.H. at 559. Because we previously determined
that the plain and ordinary meaning of former Rev 1204.01 is that tees, greens
and similar golf course components are to be included as part of the land, we
affirm the trial court’s ruling that the Town cannot assess “any additional tax
on the 247 acres of open space land . . . except for the agreed-upon current use
amount.”
The Club cross-appeals the trial court’s refusal to apply this ruling
retroactively and to grant the Club a refund for taxes it paid from 1992 through
2000. RSA 76:16, I (2003) provides: “Any person aggrieved by the assessment
of a tax . . . may, by March 1, following the date of notice of tax under RSA
76:1-a, and not afterwards, apply in writing on the form set out in paragraph
III to the selectmen or assessors for an abatement of the tax.” The Club
contends that it should be excused from meeting this timeliness requirement
under the doctrines of equitable tolling, fraudulent concealment, and the
discovery rule. Specifically, it argues that it did not challenge its tax bills for
the years 1992 through 2000 because it “never actually knew nor should it
have reasonably assumed that its greens, fairways, tees, sand traps and
roughs were being assessed as ‘Buildings’ by the Town.”
6
“[E]quitable tolling, which allows a plaintiff to initiate an action beyond
the statute of limitations deadline, is typically available only if the claimant was
prevented in some extraordinary way from exercising his or her rights . . . .” 51
Am. Jur. 2d Limitation of Actions, § 174 (2000). It “applies principally if the
plaintiff is actively misled by the defendant about the cause of action.” Id. The
Club contends that the Town did mislead it by “disguising the assessments of
the 247 acres of greens, fairways, sand traps, tees and roughs as “Buildings”
on the tax bills.” Although the Town’s categorization did not make obvious all
that was actually being included, the trial court could have reasonably found
that the Town’s practice did not create the kind of extraordinary circumstance
that would invoke equitable tolling.
“[T]he doctrine of equitable tolling is applicable only where the
prospective plaintiff did not have, and could not have had with due diligence,
the information essential to bringing suit. A party attempting to invoke that
doctrine will be held to a duty of reasonable inquiry.” Protective Life Ins. Co. v.
Sullivan, 682 N.E.2d 624, 635 (Mass. 1997) (citation omitted). While exploring
ways to reduce its tax burden following the 1987 revaluation, the Club could
have informed itself about the Town’s assessing practices. That it failed to do
so supports the trial court’s ruling that the doctrine of equitable tolling should
not be applied. Under similar reasoning, the Club’s discovery rule argument is
without merit.
“The doctrine of fraudulent concealment is an equitable ground to justify
the tolling of the statute of limitations based on the wrongful conduct of the
defendant.” Conrad v. Hazen, 140 N.H. 249, 253 (1995). The trial judge found
that “the Town did not fraudulent[ly] conceal its taxing methodology.” The
record supports this finding. There was testimony that where a town’s tax bill
breaks down assessed value between land and buildings, all non-land items
are listed under the category “buildings.” Again, however imprecise this
categorization may seem, the trial court could reasonably have found that it is
not fraudulent.
Finally, the Club challenges the trial court’s failure to award it attorney’s
fees. The Club contends that it should be awarded fees under either of the
following theories: (1) It has been “forced to litigate against an opponent whose
position is patently unreasonable,” Kukene v. Genualdo, 145 N.H. 1, 3 (2000)
(quotation omitted); or (2) It has been “forced to seek judicial assistance to
secure a clearly defined right . . . [and] bad faith on the part of the [Town has
been] established,” Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H. 121, 133 (2002)
(quotation omitted).
“We will not overturn the trial court’s decision concerning attorney’s fees
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Grenier v. Barclay Square
7
Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc., 150 N.H. 111, 115 (2003) (quotation and
brackets omitted). The trial court found:
While the defendant has not prevailed in this litigation, the Court
cannot find that it acted in any way in bad faith. It put forth some
evidence to justify its legal conclusion that it was permitted to tax
the golf holes in addition to taxing the underlying land. Although
the Court has elected not to adopt that legal conclusion, it cannot
find that the position espoused by the defendant was frivolous or
made with any malice.
We conclude that the trial court’s exercise of discretion is sustainable. We
have noted that “[i]t would be inappropriate to assess attorney’s fees against a
litigant who contested an arguable issue of law that had not been settled by the
courts.” Rix v. Kinderworks Corp., 136 N.H. 548, 553 (1992). Until now, we
had not addressed whether such amenities as tees and greens on a golf course
subject to a discretionary easement are taxable improvements to land. Thus,
the issue “was a fair and reasonable ground for litigation,” Casico v. City of
Manchester, 142 N.H. 312, 318 (1997), and we accordingly affirm the denial of
attorney’s fees.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8