THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Durham District Court
No. 2004-150
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WADE HUDSON
Submitted: December 6, 2004
Opinion Issued: January 25, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Philip P. Bradley, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
Law Offices of Richard N. Foley, of Portsmouth (Richard N. Foley on the
brief), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a bench trial in Durham District Court (Taube,
J.), the defendant, Wade Hudson, was convicted of criminal mischief, RSA
634:2 (Supp. 2004) and sentenced to pay a $200 fine. The sole issue on appeal
is whether the evidence was sufficient to prove that the defendant damaged the
property of another. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On October 2, 2003, Scott
Shamesman arranged to meet the defendant, a contractor, at Shamesman’s
home to give him an estimate for certain renovations. Shamesman left work to
meet the defendant at the agreed-upon time of 1:00 p.m., but the defendant did
not arrive until 1:45 p.m. Shamesman met the defendant outside where a brief
conversation ensued about the defendant’s tardiness, during which
Shamesman said, “It would have been nice if you had called to let me know
that you were late.” At that point, the defendant, without saying anything, got
back into his truck, backed up to turn the truck around and then sped quickly
away. As he did so, his truck went off the paved portion of the driveway, ran
over a small bush and left a tire mark on the lawn.
Shamesman reported the incident to the Durham police. Officer Michael
Lyczak went to Shamesman’s property to take photographs and observed a
spin-out mark on one side of the driveway, a long continuous spin-out mark on
the other side of the driveway and one small recently-planted shrub that had
been “run over.” Officer Lyczak said that he could either issue a summons or
ask the defendant to apologize. Shamesman chose the latter. That same
afternoon, Officer Lyczak telephoned the defendant and explained
Shamesman’s concern. When he told the defendant that if he apologized,
Shamesman was “willing to let things go,” the defendant started yelling that he
was not going to apologize, that he did not cause the damage and that it could
have been Shamesman who caused the damage. Officer Lyczak then proceeded
with the criminal mischief complaint.
On appeal, the defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence to
prove that “anything of value” was damaged by him. Specifically, the defendant
relies upon the statutory definition of property, which means “anything of
value,” RSA 637:2, I (1996), to argue that the State was required to prove
pecuniary loss.
The State argues that under the relevant variant of criminal mischief, it
did not have to prove pecuniary loss, but merely damage to the property of
another, and that the evidence was sufficient to support that element. We
agree.
Resolution of the issue requires us to interpret the criminal mischief
statute and then to decide whether the evidence adduced at trial was sufficient
to prove the required elements. In matters of statutory interpretation, we first
examine the language of the statute. Blackthorne Group v. Pines of
Newmarket, 150 N.H. 804, 806 (2004). When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it. Id. We construe Criminal Code
provisions “according to the fair import of their terms and to promote justice.”
RSA 625:3 (1996); see State v. Nelson, 150 N.H. 569, 572 (2004). We review
the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo. Hutchins v. Peabody, 151
N.H. 82, 84 (2004).
The general definition of criminal mischief in RSA 634:2, I, states: “A
person is guilty of criminal mischief who, having no right to do so nor any
reasonable basis for belief of having such a right, purposely or recklessly
2
damages property of another.” Property is defined in relevant part as “anything
of value, including real estate.” RSA 637:2, I; see RSA 634:2, IV (1996). The
statute also provides different grades of criminal mischief. Under RSA 634:2,
II(a) (1996), criminal mischief is a class B felony if the person purposely causes
“[p]ecuniary loss in excess of $1000.” Under RSA 634:2, II-a (1996), criminal
mischief is a class A misdemeanor if the person purposely causes or attempts
to cause “pecuniary loss in excess of $100 and not more than $1000.” Finally,
under RSA 634:2, III (1996), “[a]ll other criminal mischief is a misdemeanor.”
The criminal mischief statute is structured so that the more serious
variants of criminal mischief are defined in terms of pecuniary loss. See RSA
634:2, II(a); RSA 634:2, II-a. The amount of the pecuniary loss establishes the
grade of the offense. See State v. French, 146 N.H. 97, 99-100 (2001). Thus,
to seek conviction of a more serious variant, the State must charge and prove
the amount of the pecuniary loss beyond a reasonable doubt. Cf. State v.
Belanger, 114 N.H. 616, 619 (1974).
In this case, however, the defendant was charged with the least serious
variant of criminal mischief. See RSA 634:2, III. Section III, unlike sections II
and II-a, does not require the State to prove pecuniary loss. Thus, the plain
language of section III does not support the defendant’s argument. We
conclude that under section III of the criminal mischief statute, the State did
not have to prove a specific pecuniary loss.
Next, we must determine whether there was sufficient evidence to prove
that the defendant “recklessly damage[d] property of another.” RSA 634:2, I.
To determine whether the evidence was sufficient in this case, we examine the
evidence in the light most favorable to the State. State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706,
712 (2003). We also take all inferences from the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State. Id.
Here, Shamesman testified that the defendant ran over a small bush and
left tire marks on the driveway and lawn. Officer Lyczak likewise testified that
he observed that there were tire marks on the driveway and a small shrub had
been “run over.” From this testimony, the trier of fact could infer that the lawn
and bush in Shamesman’s yard had been damaged. While there was no
evidence of a specific monetary amount of damage, the State did not have to
prove that under RSA 634:2, III. It was also a fair inference from the evidence
presented that the lawn and bush had value. See RSA 637:2, I. Thus, there
was sufficient evidence supporting the conviction.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
3