THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2004-570
IN THE MATTER OF B.T.
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 15, 2006
Disability Rights Center, Inc., of Concord (Cindy Robertson and James
Fox on the brief, and Mr. Fox orally), for the respondent.
Craig, Wenners, Craig and Capuchino, of Manchester (Linda Capuchino
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, B.T., appeals an order of the Hillsborough
County Probate Court (Cassavechia, J.) ordering her involuntary admission to a
hospital for purposes of conditional discharge pursuant to RSA chapter 135-C
(2005). We reverse.
The record supports the following facts. In June 2004, the petitioner,
Jennifer DeVoe of the Mental Health Center of Greater Manchester (MHC), filed
a petition in the probate court for the involuntary admission of B.T. At the
subsequent hearing, Dr. Timothy Breitholtz, the court-appointed psychiatrist,
DeVoe, and B.T. testified; Dr. Breitholtz also filed a report with the court.
The following evidence was presented to the court. B.T. is a woman with
a history of mental illness beginning in 1987, when she was first diagnosed
with “Schizophreniform Disorder.” In 1999, she overdosed on prescribed
medications and was hospitalized. During this hospitalization, the probate
court ordered her involuntarily admitted for a period not to exceed two years.
It is unclear from the record exactly when B.T. was released from the hospital,
but she was conditionally discharged prior to the expiration of her two-year
admission. In 2001, she was involuntarily admitted again for a period not to
exceed three years, expiring on June 4, 2004, but again received a conditional
discharge. One condition of her conditional discharge was that she take the
medications prescribed by the MHC staff psychiatrist.
In December 2002, B.T. discontinued her required medications on two
occasions and experienced what the petition describes as “agitation, pressured
speech, and preoccupation with side effects of the medications.” Due to her
violations of the conditional discharge, her conditional discharge was
temporarily revoked. The revocation resulted in B.T.’s admission to New
Hampshire Hospital for twenty days. Additionally, in June 2003, DeVoe was
informed by B.T. that she had decided on her own to decrease her dosage of a
prescribed medication. DeVoe warned B.T. that doing so would violate her
conditional discharge and could result in another revocation, which dissuaded
B.T. from lowering her medication level.
On May 13, 2004, DeVoe was notified that B.T.’s family members were
concerned about her condition. Later that day, the Manchester Police found
B.T. “wandering around Hanover Street in Manchester, NH in a confused state
and complaining of chest pains.” The police took B.T. to the Catholic Medical
Center Emergency Room, where a physician examined her for chest pains and
recommended a psychological assessment by MHC. At this assessment, B.T.
stated that she was not taking Abilify, a medication prescribed to her by her
MHC psychiatrist. This resulted in another temporary revocation of her
conditional discharge.
On June 7, 2004, DeVoe filed the instant petition for B.T.’s involuntary
commitment, which gave rise to a hearing on July 22, 2004, in the probate
court. At the hearing, DeVoe described B.T.’s history of not taking her
prescribed medications and testified that in early May 2004, DeVoe received a
call from B.T. in which she stated that she planned to stop taking Abilify and
planned to take St. John’s Wort, prescribed by her homeopathic physician,
instead.
Dr. Breitholtz examined B.T. in June 2004 and diagnosed her as having
“schizoaffective disorder bipolar type” and “narcissistic personality disorder.”
His testimony and report state:
[B.T.] has a long and extensive history of noncompliance with her
recommended treatment which has often resulted in rapid
decompensation of her mental condition manifested by severe
2
agitation, emotional lability, delusional thinking and paranoid
ideation. She expresses minimal insight into her mental condition
and I feel without a conditional discharge there is a very high risk
of noncompliance with taking her medication . . . . It is my opinion
that [B.T] remains in such a mental condition as a result of mental
illness as to create a potentially serious likelihood of danger to
herself or others.
The probate court ruled that B.T. was “of such mental condition as a
result of mental illness to create a potential serious likelihood of danger to
herself.” The probate court ordered that B.T. be “admitted to New Hampshire
Hospital for a period not to exceed three years for the express purpose of
conditional discharge.”
B.T. appeals the probate court’s order, arguing that the petitioner
presented insufficient evidence at the hearing to support an order of
involuntary commitment for the purpose of conditional discharge pursuant to
RSA 135-C:34 and RSA 135-C:45.
The petitioner responds that she proved by clear and convincing evidence
that B.T. posed a danger to herself or others and therefore met the standard of
proof under RSA 135-C:34. She also argues that she presented sufficient
evidence for an extension of B.T.’s conditional discharge under RSA 135-C:45,
III, which requires a lower standard of proof than an initial involuntary
commitment.
An overview of the applicable statutory scheme provides a context for our
analysis. RSA chapter 135-C, entitled “New Hampshire Mental Health Services
System,” establishes a system of mental health facilities in New Hampshire and
provides for procedures used in the admission, maintenance, and release of
individuals involved in that system. See RSA 135-C:1, :6, :27-:54. A person
may be involuntarily admitted into an approved treatment facility by either
involuntary emergency admission (IEA) or nonemergency involuntary
admission, which is commonly referred to as an “involuntary admission.” RSA
135-C:27, :34; see also In re Perley, 137 N.H. 209, 211 (1993) (referring to an
RSA 135-C:34 proceeding as an “involuntary admission”). An IEA may only
last for a maximum of ten days unless extended. RSA 135-C:31, :32. The
maximum duration of an involuntary admission is five years, unless renewed
under RSA 135-C:45 or :46. Along with determining the length of the
involuntary admission, the probate court shall include an appropriate period of
time, if any, to allow for conditional discharge. RSA 135-C:45, II.
Conditional discharge allows a person who has been involuntarily
admitted to participate in treatment on an out-patient basis, provided that the
patient agrees to abide by the rules of the conditional discharge. RSA 135-
3
C:50. Failure to comply with such rules may result in a temporary or
permanent revocation of the conditional discharge, which requires a return to a
treatment facility. RSA 135-C:51. A conditional discharge may not exceed the
period of time remaining on the involuntary admission ordered by the probate
court. RSA 135-C:50, II.
I. Renewal of Conditional Discharge
We first address DeVoe’s argument that she presented sufficient evidence
to support an extension of B.T.’s involuntary admission pursuant to RSA 135-
C:45, III.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. We
first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. When
a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that
the legislature did not see fit to include.
Woodview Dev. Corp. v. Town of Pelham, 152 N.H. 114, 116 (2005) (citations
omitted).
RSA 135-C:45, III states:
If the respondent is on a conditional discharge at the time of the
hearing, the court may order involuntary admission to a receiving
facility, or renew such an order, for the purpose of permitting the
respondent to remain on conditional discharge if such treatment is
necessary to prevent the recurrence of the circumstances which
led to the person’s dangerous condition.
RSA 135-C:45, III (emphasis added). This provision expressly requires that the
respondent be on a conditional discharge at the time of the hearing. According
to the record, B.T.’s latest involuntary admission expired on June 4, 2004,
prior to the filing of the instant petition. Cf. RSA 135-C:39 (2005). A
conditional discharge cannot exceed the period of time remaining on an
involuntary admission order. RSA 135-C:51, II. Accordingly, B.T.’s conditional
discharge also expired on June 4, 2004. The hearing at issue occurred on July
22, 2004. Since B.T.’s conditional discharge had expired at the time of the
hearing, the probate court could not have applied RSA 135-C:45, III to renew
the prior order for involuntary admission and conditional discharge.
4
II. Admission for the Purposes of Conditional Discharge
We next address whether DeVoe presented sufficient evidence to support
an involuntary commitment for the purposes of conditional discharge. “We
review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and uphold the
findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidential
support or tainted by error of law.” In the Matter of Alexander and Evans, 147
N.H. 441, 442 (2002). “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final
unless they are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably
made.” RSA 567-A:4 (1997). As our analysis also requires statutory
interpretation, which is a question of law, we apply our de novo standard for
statutory interpretation, as stated above.
RSA chapter 135-C permits a court to order admission for the purposes
of conditional discharge:
In any order of admission to a receiving facility, the court shall
include in the duration of said order an appropriate period of time,
if any, to allow for conditional discharge. Admission for purposes
of conditional discharge shall be appropriate when the person has
recovered from his mental illness to such an extent that he no
longer requires inpatient treatment but a prescribed regimen of
medical, psychiatric, or psychological care or treatment is
necessary to prevent the recurrence of the circumstances which
led to the person’s dangerous condition.
RSA 135-C:45, II. The plain language of this statute requires that an order of
admission precede an allowance for conditional discharge. Thus, the statutory
scheme creates a two-step process for an admission for the purposes of
conditional discharge. The respondent must be admitted before he can be
released on conditional discharge.
Because an order of admission for the purposes of conditional discharge
requires an initial admission, and a potential readmission, there must be
sufficient proof presented at the hearing to support an order for an involuntary
admission. The parties agree that the probate court correctly determined that
the following was the applicable standard for the involuntary admission in this
case:
The standard to be used by a court, physician, or psychiatrist in
determining whether a person should be admitted to a receiving
facility for treatment on an involuntary basis shall be whether the
person is in such mental condition as a result of mental illness as
5
to create a potentially serious likelihood of danger to himself or
others.
RSA 135-C:34 (emphasis added). To support such a finding, the petitioner
must plead specific acts or actions demonstrating dangerousness. In re Fasi
a/k/a Cass, 132 N.H 478, 485 (1989); RSA 135-C:36, I(b). The petitioner must
prove dangerousness by clear and convincing evidence. In re Sandra H., 150
N.H. 634, 640 (2004). We will uphold the probate court’s ruling unless no
rational fact finder could have made the findings by clear and convincing
evidence. Id. The standard of clear and convincing evidence is significant
because “[t]he private interests at stake in civil commitment proceedings, loss
of liberty and social stigmatization, are substantial.” In re Richard A., 146 N.H.
295, 298 (2001).
To determine whether the facts support the finding that B.T. poses a
potentially serious likelihood of danger to herself or others under RSA 135-
C:34, we must define “danger to himself or others” as used in that section.
RSA 135-C:34, which governs involuntary admissions, does not specifically
define “danger to himself or others,” though RSA 135-C:27 does. “Where a
term or phrase is not specifically defined, we look to other provisions of the
statutory scheme for guidance.” State v. Elementis Chemical, 152 N.H. ___, ___
(decided December 9, 2005). In establishing the criteria for proving either
danger to oneself or danger to others, in the context of an IEA, RSA 135-C:27
requires a threat of, a likelihood of, an attempt to inflict, or an actual infliction
of “serious bodily injury” to oneself or another or a lack of capacity to care for
one’s own welfare such that there is a likelihood of serious debilitation if
admission is not ordered. RSA 135-C:27. The same criteria reasonably apply
to our analysis of RSA 135-C:34, as both statutes employ similar standards.
The standard for an IEA set out in RSA 135-C:27 is: “A person shall be eligible
for involuntary emergency admission if he is in such mental condition as a
result of mental illness to pose a likelihood of danger to himself or others,”
which is similar to the involuntary admission standard in RSA 135-C:34. The
primary difference is that an IEA requires that the person pose a “likelihood of
danger to himself or others,” RSA 135-C:27, while the involuntary admission
standard requires that the person pose a “potentially serious likelihood of
danger to himself or others,” RSA 135-C:34. The difference lies in the
likelihood of danger, not in what the danger is. We conclude, therefore, that
the criteria for dangerousness under RSA 135-C:27 as stated above apply to
both types of admissions.
The evidence of B.T.’s dangerousness presented at the hearing was that
B.T. had poor insight into her illness and a history of choosing to discontinue
her medications. When she did, she experienced what DeVoe and Dr.
Breitholtz termed “decompensation,” which includes “severe agitation,
6
emotional lability, delusional thinking and paranoid ideation.” Additionally,
DeVoe presented evidence that, in 1999, B.T. overdosed on pain medications.
The evidence of agitation, delusion, and paranoia that B.T. experiences
when off her medication may support a finding that B.T. suffers from a mental
illness; however, such symptoms do not make her “dangerous” under RSA 135-
C:34 to herself or to anyone else. These symptoms do not satisfy the specific
acts or actions required to demonstrate a threat, a likelihood, an attempt, or an
actual infliction of “serious bodily injury” on herself or on another. In re Fasi
a/k/a Cass, 132 N.H at 485; RSA 135-C:36, I(b). The trial court made no
finding that B.T. demonstrated a lack of capacity to care for her own welfare
such that there was a likelihood of serious debilitation if admission was not
ordered. The evidence simply shows that, when off her medication, B.T.
experiences symptoms of mental illness.
“It is the policy of this state that mental illness in and of itself is
insufficient to involuntarily admit any person into the mental health services
system.” RSA 135-C:1, III. We must interpret a statute in light of the policy
that the statutory scheme seeks to advance. Hughes v. N.H. Div. of
Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 38-39 (2005). We may not, therefore, order an
involuntary admission based solely on the existence of a mental illness. RSA
135-C:34 requires clear and convincing proof of specific acts demonstrating
actual or likely serious bodily injury. We therefore conclude that B.T.’s
symptoms of agitation, delusion, disorganized thinking, and paranoia are
insufficient to prove by clear and convincing evidence that B.T. poses a
potentially serious likelihood of danger to herself or to others.
The physical manifestations of B.T.’s mental illness, specifically, her
walking on a street complaining of chest pains and her overdose in 1999, are
also insufficient to prove her present or future dangerousness. The record
reveals no likelihood of serious bodily injury caused by B.T.’s claims of chest
pains or her walking on a street.
B.T.’s overdose, on the other hand, was undoubtedly a specific act that
had the potential to cause her serious bodily injury. The overdose occurred
approximately five years prior to the hearing, however. The trial court may
attach substantial weight to past actions demonstrating dangerousness, but
whether the actions are sufficiently recent or sufficiently similar to affect the
court’s determination will depend upon the nature and circumstances of the
act and the history of the respondent. In re Fasi a/k/a Cass, 132 N.H. at 485.
Proof of the commission of past dangerous acts is not tantamount to proof of
present dangerousness. Id. at 484. Such acts merely help to predict the
possibility of future dangerousness. Id. Since B.T.’s overdose in 1999, she has
discontinued her medication multiple times and there is no evidence of a
subsequent overdose. Her overdose is neither recent nor similar to the events
7
that gave rise to the petition, and therefore has insufficient probative value for
determining her future dangerousness.
Additional evidence of B.T.’s dangerousness presented at the hearing was
Dr. Breitholtz’s expert opinion that B.T. met the involuntary commitment
standard. Dr. Breitholtz’s report and testimony assert that B.T. poses a
potentially serious likelihood of danger to herself or others due to her mental
illness. We have held, however, that “a psychiatrist’s finding of a dangerous
mental condition does not automatically operate to trigger commitment;
without evidence of dangerous conduct, even the most persuasive psychiatrist’s
report is insufficient to justify commitment.” Id. at 484 (quotations omitted).
Despite Dr. Breitholtz’s expert opinion, there cannot be an involuntary
commitment without clear and convincing evidence of specific acts or actions
demonstrating a potentially serious likelihood of dangerousness.
Though we recognize that B.T. might benefit from medical treatment for
her illness, she cannot be deprived of her personal liberty by an involuntary
commitment without clear and convincing proof of her dangerousness. We
hold that the evidence submitted to the trial court was insufficient as a matter
of law to support the finding of dangerousness.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
8