THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Brentwood Family Division
No. 2004-727
IN THE MATTER OF SONIA RAMADAN AND SAMER RAMADAN
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 14, 2006
Tober Law Offices, P.A., of Portsmouth (Stephen L. Tober and Tara C.
Schoff on the brief, and Ms. Schoff orally), for the petitioner.
Coughlin, Rainboth, Murphy & Lown, P.A., of Portsmouth (Timothy C.
Coughlin on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Samer Ramadan, appeals an order of the
Brentwood Family Division (Taube, J.) adopting the proposed divorce decree
and uniform support order of the petitioner, Sonia Ramadan. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The parties were married in
Tripoli, Lebanon on December 5, 1986. They have three children. Prior to
their marriage, on November 27, 1986, the respondent and the petitioner, as
represented by her father, entered into a “marriage contract” promising a
deferred “dower” payment of 250,000 Lebanese liras. The respondent was, at
the time, a resident of the United States, and the couple settled in
Massachusetts shortly after they were married.
The parties remained in Massachusetts from 1986 to 1990, and
thereafter lived in Texas from 1991 to 1992. In 1992, they moved to Lebanon
and resided there until 1997. They moved to Egypt in 1998, and returned to
the United States in 1999, settling in New Hampshire. The petitioner filed for
divorce on October 14, 2003, asserting that irreconcilable differences had led to
the irremediable breakdown of the marriage.
The respondent claims that on October 13, 2003 – the day before the
petitioner filed for divorce in New Hampshire – he initiated a divorce under
Islamic law by declaring “I divorce you” three times in succession in the
presence of the petitioner. The respondent also claims that he telephoned an
attorney in Lebanon on the same day and declared, with two witnesses
listening, that he had divorced his wife. On October 18, 2003, the respondent
traveled to Lebanon to see his attorney and “sign the necessary papers.”
The trial court issued an Order of Notice on October 30, 2003. The
respondent returned to New Hampshire on December 12, 2003, and was served
in hand on the same day. On December 18, 2003, a religious magistrate in
Lebanon issued a decree that the parties were divorced on October 13, 2003,
pursuant to the respondent’s repudiation of his wife. The respondent moved to
dismiss the petition for divorce in New Hampshire, asserting that the trial court
lacked jurisdiction over the divorce in light of the Lebanese decree.
On January 30, 2004, the trial court held a hearing on the respondent’s
motion to dismiss. The trial court, finding that “no valid judicial process was
instituted by [the] Respondent in Lebanon prior to the date the Petitioner filed
her Petition for Divorce,” denied the respondent’s motion on February 4, 2004,
and entered a temporary decree awarding the petitioner sole legal custody and
primary physical custody of the parties’ children, monthly child support and
alimony, and certain personal and real property. The temporary decree also
prohibited the respondent from speaking negatively about the petitioner or
referring to her “as a Muslim/Muslim woman” within the hearing of the
children. The respondent thereafter filed motions to reconsider, to stay the
temporary order, and to supplement the record. The trial court denied the
motions.
The respondent returned to Lebanon in 2004 and, through his attorney,
informed the trial court of his intent to ignore its orders because he claimed
lack of subject matter jurisdiction. On August 20, 2004, a notice of conditional
default was entered against the respondent for failure to answer
interrogatories. After he failed to appear for a pre-trial conference on
September 2, 2004, the trial court noted that the respondent had refused to
participate in discovery and scheduled a final hearing for September 16, 2004.
The respondent did not appear for the final hearing, and the trial court entered
a divorce decree approving and incorporating the petitioner’s proposed decree
and uniform support order without amendment.
2
On appeal, the respondent raises the following issues: (1) that the trial
court’s refusal to dismiss the divorce petition for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction was error; (2) that principles of comity required dismissal of the
divorce petition; (3) that the trial court’s refusal to consider additional
documentary evidence of the Lebanese divorce decree was error; (4) that the
trial court erred by adopting the petitioner’s proposed divorce decree; (5) that
the trial court decreed an inequitable property division without stating its
reasoning; and (6) that the trial court’s temporary order prohibiting the
respondent from referring to his wife as a Muslim woman in the presence of
their children was an unconstitutional abridgment of his rights. The petitioner
claims that the respondent continues to refuse to abide by the trial court’s
temporary order and urges this court to dismiss his appeal.
We first address the petitioner’s request that we dismiss the respondent’s
appeal because he refused to comply with the trial court’s orders and was
accordingly found to be in contempt. We have held:
[I]n limited circumstances, an appeal in a civil case
may be dismissed if the appellant has failed to comply
with an order of the trial court that relates directly to
the issues raised by the appellant on appeal, and the
issue of contempt is not being appealed. When a party
has consciously and deliberately disregarded a trial
court order that has direct bearing upon an issue for
which that party seeks relief, we may exercise our
discretion to dismiss.
DeMauro v. DeMauro, 147 N.H. 478, 482 (2002). In the instant case, the
respondent has appealed the trial court’s adoption of the petitioner’s proposed
divorce decree, an issue to which the orders of the trial court, which he
ignored, is directly related. However, the respondent also appeals the issue of
subject matter jurisdiction, which he has contested throughout the underlying
litigation, as well as the trial court’s refusal to consider evidence of the
Lebanese divorce decree’s validity. Because these latter issues are not directly
related to the ignored orders of the trial court, we decline to dismiss the
respondent’s entire appeal.
The respondent first argues that the trial court lacked jurisdiction over
the divorce because the parties entered into a marriage contract in Lebanon in
1986 and, moreover, a Lebanese court decreed the parties divorced as of
October 13, 2003, the day before the petitioner filed for divorce in New
Hampshire. We find the respondent’s arguments unconvincing.
Jurisdiction over parties to a divorce action in New Hampshire “exists . . .
where both parties were domiciled in the state when the action was
3
commenced.” RSA 458:5, I (2004). Jurisdiction over the cause of a divorce
action “exists when it wholly arose or accrued while the plaintiff was domiciled
in the state.” RSA 458:6 (2004); see Woodruff v. Woodruff, 114 N.H. 365, 366-
67 (1974). A review of the record confirms that the parties were domiciled in
New Hampshire when the divorce action was commenced on October 14, 2003,
and had been so for at least three years. As such, the trial court properly
exercised personal jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter jurisdiction
over the cause for divorce. Cf. Vazifdar v. Vazifdar, 130 N.H. 694, 696 (1988)
(where cause of action arose in New Hampshire, parties’ children were in New
Hampshire, and only assets which plaintiff sought to retain were located in
New Hampshire, trial court had compelling interest in retaining jurisdiction).
Though we conclude that the trial court properly exercised jurisdiction
over the parties’ divorce, this alone would not preclude another forum from
doing the same. See Stankunas v. Stankunas, 133 N.H. 643, 646 (1990). RSA
chapter 459 (2004), however, establishes the principle that “a divorce obtained
in another jurisdiction shall be of no force or effect in this state . . . if both
parties to the marriage were domiciled in this state at the time the proceeding
for the divorce was commenced.” RSA 459:1 (2004).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. In the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55, 58 (2005). When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used. Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski Resort, 152 N.H.
399, 401 (2005); see RSA 21:2 (2000). The term “jurisdiction,” as it is used in
the context of RSA 459:1, is ordinarily defined as “the limits or territory within
which any particular power may be exercised.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1227 (unabridged ed. 2002). We believe, therefore,
that RSA 459:1 is to be construed broadly, encompassing not only jurisdictions
within the United States, but also those of sovereign states existing outside of
our national borders, including Lebanon.
Since the parties had been domiciled in New Hampshire for at least three
years when the divorce action was commenced, the Lebanese divorce decree
proffered by the respondent can have no force or effect in New Hampshire
under RSA 459:1, regardless of its validity in Lebanon. As such, we conclude
that the trial court did not err when it refused to dismiss the divorce petition
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
Though we believe that RSA 459:1 precludes the Lebanese decree from
having force or effect in New Hampshire, we take note of the respondent’s
argument that principles of comity mandated the dismissal of the divorce
petition by the trial court. We have recognized foreign divorce decrees as a
matter of comity. Stankunas, 133 N.H. at 646-47. Comity, however, is a
4
discretionary doctrine that will not be applied if it violates a strong public
policy of the forum state, or if it leaves the court in a position where it is unable
to render complete justice. Vazifdar, 130 N.H. at 697.
In Vazifdar, the defendant in a New Hampshire divorce action claimed
that, as a matter of comity, the trial court should have deferred to the
jurisdiction of a Parsi court in India for the determination of the parties’ marital
status because it was under Parsi law that they had been married. Id. at 696-
97. The defendant was residing in India, having returned and remained there
after his family settled in New Hampshire. Id. at 695. We considered the
hardship that would befall the plaintiff, who had resided in New Hampshire
with the parties’ children for approximately ten years, noting that she would
have to seek partial relief in India, even though New Hampshire could
determine all the issues presented, and “bear the burdensome costs of
traveling to India, solely for the defendant’s convenience, since all evidence and
witnesses [were] here in New Hampshire.” Id. at 697. In light of the
discretionary nature of the comity doctrine, we found no unsustainable
exercise of discretion in the trial court’s decision to retain jurisdiction over the
divorce. Id.
In the instant case, the trial court properly exercised jurisdiction over the
parties and the subject matter of the divorce pursuant to RSA 458:5 and RSA
458:6. Much like the plaintiff in Vazifdar, the petitioner, who had resided in
New Hampshire with the respondent and their children for at least three years
at the time the divorce actions were commenced, would be subject to
considerable hardship in seeking relief in Lebanon, when all of the issues
presented could be determined in New Hampshire. The petitioner would be
forced to bear the burdensome cost of traveling to Lebanon, and the record
suggests that she and her children were left with minimal financial resources
after the respondent moved there.
Furthermore, we believe that public policy considerations support the
trial court’s decision to retain subject matter jurisdiction. “[C]ourts of a foreign
country have no jurisdiction to dissolve the marriage of parties not domiciled in
such foreign country at the commencement of the proceedings for divorce,” and
recognizing an ex parte divorce obtained in a foreign nation where neither party
is domiciled “would frustrate and make vain all State laws regulating and
limiting divorce.” Slessinger v. Secretary of Health & Human Services, 835
F.2d 937, 942-43 (1st Cir. 1987) (quotation omitted). We believe that, in
Slessinger, the First Circuit articulated a sound public policy that applies in
New Hampshire.
Therefore, even if RSA 459:1 did not settle this issue, we would hold, as
we did in Vazifdar, that the trial court did not engage in an unsustainable
5
exercise of discretion by declining to defer to the jurisdiction of a Lebanese
court as a matter of comity.
The respondent next argues that the trial court erred by refusing to
consider additional documentary evidence of the validity of the Lebanese
divorce decree. Because the validity of the Lebanese divorce decree proffered
by the respondent is irrelevant in light of RSA 459:1, we conclude that the trial
court did not err by refusing to consider additional evidence on that issue.
The respondent further contends that the trial court divided the parties’
marital assets and custodial rights in an inequitable fashion, and erred by
failing to articulate specific reasons for doing so. The trial court has broad
discretion in determining matters of property distribution and alimony when
fashioning a divorce decree. See In the Matter of Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150
N.H. 551, 554 (2004). Absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will
not overturn its ruling or set aside its factual findings. Id.
The petitioner submitted a proposed permanent decree at the final
hearing on September 16, 2004, which heavily favored her in terms of
distribution of marital assets, custody, support, and other matters pertaining
to the divorce. When the respondent failed to appear for the final hearing or,
as he concedes, to submit a proposed decree of his own, the trial court adopted
the petitioner’s proposed decree as the permanent decree of divorce. The
respondent now asserts that the trial court, knowing that the respondent
refused to recognize its jurisdiction or participate in the litigation, “should have
. . . devised a way to discern some salient facts regarding the parties’ marriage”
or allowed an interlocutory appeal to this court before entering a “patently
inequitable” decree. The respondent cites no authority, however, placing such
a burden upon a court faced with a litigant who refuses either to participate in
its proceedings or to comply with its orders.
A defendant in a divorce proceeding cannot argue that the disposition of
marital property is unequal when the defendant has effectively prevented the
trial court from being able to determine whether the disposition was in fact
equal or not. DeMauro, 147 N.H. at 483. The respondent deliberately ignored
the trial court’s orders, failed to answer interrogatories, refused to participate
in discovery, declined to submit a proposed permanent divorce decree to the
trial court, and did not appear for the final hearing. He was afforded ample
opportunity to provide the trial court with information that could have resulted
in a final divorce decree striking a more even balance between the interests of
the parties. The respondent cannot now, on appeal, challenge the precise
outcome that he could have prevented. See id.; cf. Bursey v. Bursey, 145 N.H.
283, 285-86 (2000) (trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion
when it entered divorce decree providing for unequal distribution of property
without hearing evidence of husband’s financial condition, where husband
6
previously failed to answer interrogatories about that very subject).
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has forfeited the right to appellate
review of this issue. See DeMauro, 147 N.H. at 483.
Though we need not reach the issue in light of our conclusion above, we
note the respondent’s claim that the trial court was required by RSA 458:16-a
(2004) to specify written reasons for the ordered division of property. The
respondent concedes, however, that his refusal to participate in the judicial
proceedings left the trial court without evidence favoring his interests. With
nothing to weigh the petitioner’s proposed final decree against, the trial court
had little choice but to adopt it without modification. Thus, were we to review
this issue on the merits, we would conclude that the trial court’s final decree
was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The respondent next challenges the provision in the trial court’s
February 2004 temporary order stating, in part, that he “shall not speak about
the Petitioner as a Muslim/Muslim woman to the children or within hearing of
the children.” The respondent asserts that this portion of the order comprises
an “unconstitutional abridgment of his rights,” specifically his “constitutionally
protected right to parent” and his “free speech rights.”
Assuming without deciding that the portion of the trial court’s temporary
order prohibiting the respondent from referring to his wife as a “Muslim” or
“Muslim woman” in the presence of their children was an impermissible prior
restraint on his freedom of speech, the offending language was not repeated in
the permanent divorce decree. As we now affirm that decree, this issue is
moot.
The petitioner requests that she be awarded attorney’s fees and costs
pursuant to New Hampshire Supreme Court Rule 23, which permits this court,
“[i]n the interest of justice in extraordinary cases, but not as a matter of right,”
to “award attorney’s fees related to an appeal to a prevailing party if the appeal
is deemed . . . to have been frivolous or in bad faith.” The respondent has
contested subject matter jurisdiction from a point early in the divorce litigation.
On June 24, 2004, he, through counsel, informed the trial court of his
intention to file a motion seeking permission to pursue an interlocutory appeal
with this court regarding the issue of subject matter jurisdiction, though there
is no evidence in the record that such a motion was ever submitted. We find
nothing in the record suggesting that the respondent acted frivolously or in bad
faith, and the interests of justice do not merit an award of attorney’s fees. As
such, we decline the petitioner’s request for attorney’s fees and costs pursuant
to New Hampshire Supreme Court Rule 23.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7