THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-241
IN THE MATTER OF ROBERT L. GOLDMAN AND
MARY E. (GOLDMAN) ELLIOTT
Argued: November 30, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 2, 2005
Marshall Law, of East Kingston (Keri J. Marshall on the brief), and
Robert E. Ducharme, of Stratham, orally, for the petitioner.
Law Office of Patrick J. Devine, P.C., of Plaistow (Patrick J. Devine on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. This case comes before us on an interlocutory
transfer without ruling. Sup. Ct. R. 9. The Superior Court (Coffey, J.) submits
for our resolution the following question:
Does the Amendment of RSA 458:17 preclude the Court from
considering contribution of college educational expenses for an
adult child when the Motion [for college contributions] was filed
prior to the enactment of the Amendment but the hearing was
scheduled after the effective date of the Amendment?
We respond in the affirmative.
The petitioner, Robert L. Goldman, and the respondent, Mary E.
(Goldman) Elliott, were divorced in 1991. They have two children, Elliott, born
on August 16, 1982, and Gillian, born on February 11, 1986. In a court order
issued while the children were still minors, the court indicated that it made no
order regarding college, trusting that the parents could discuss and agree upon
those issues. At the time, the trial court had authority under RSA 458:17 and
RSA 458:20 to order divorced parents to contribute toward their children’s
college expenses. See LeClair v. LeClair, 137 N.H. 213, 218-20 (1993); In the
Matter of Breault & Breault, 149 N.H. 359, 362 (2003). The record contains no
further order on the matter.
In August 2003, the respondent filed a motion to bring forward and
modify existing child support, in which she also sought contribution for college
expenses for Elliot, who was twenty-two years old at the time and enrolled as a
full-time student at the University of New Hampshire. The petitioner objected
and a hearing was scheduled for March 11, 2004. Effective February 2, 2004,
the legislature amended RSA 458:17 by inserting the following language:
No child support order shall require a parent to contribute to an
adult child’s college expenses or other educational expenses
beyond the completion of high school.
RSA 458:17, XI-a (2004). Thereafter, the trial court submitted this
interlocutory transfer.
The respondent argues that applying the amendment to preclude the
trial court’s consideration of her motion seeking college contributions would
violate the constitutional proscription against retrospective application of laws.
See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 23. She contends that because her motion was
pending at the time the new legislation took effect, she had a vested right to
seek contributions from the petitioner for their son’s college expenses.
According to the respondent, the new legislation “must only be applied
prospectively to causes of actions that arise after its enactment.” The
petitioner contends, however, that applying the new legislation to the
respondent’s pending motion would not impair any vested right because no
court order or agreement between the parties had obligated either of them to
contribute to their children’s post secondary education. He contends that the
new law affects only the remedy of seeking a discretionary award of college
contributions, and, thus, its application in this case would not offend the State
Constitution.
Before considering whether application of new legislation to a particular
matter violates the constitutional proscription against retrospective laws, we
first determine whether the legislature intended the new law to apply
prospectively or retroactively. See Eldridge v. Eldridge, 136 N.H. 611, 613
2
(1993). In this case, the legislature expressly stated that the amendment shall
take effect upon its passage, i.e., February 2, 2004. Laws 2004, 1:4. Thus, it
is clear that, at a minimum, the legislature intended to preclude the trial court
from issuing new court orders requiring a parent to contribute to an adult
child’s college or other educational expenses on or after February 2, 2004. See
State v. Comeau, 142 N.H. 84, 86-87 (1997). Accordingly, unless application of
RSA 458:17, XI-a to the case before us violates our State’s constitutional
proscription against retrospective laws, it would bar the trial court from
considering the respondent’s motion for college contributions.
Part I, Article 23 of our State Constitution provides that “[r]etrospective
laws are highly injurious, oppressive, and unjust. No such laws, therefore,
should be made, either for the decision of civil causes, or the punishment of
offenses.” In 1826, we interpreted Article 23 to mean that “every statute which
takes away or impairs vested rights, acquired under existing laws, or creates a
new obligation, imposes a new duty, or attaches a new disability, in respect to
transactions or considerations already past, must be deemed retrospective.”
Burrage v. N.H. Police Standards Council, 127 N.H. 742, 746 (1986) (citing
Woart v. Winnick, 3 N.H. 473, 479 (1826)). When engaging in an Article 23
analysis, we distinguish new laws that affect substantive rights and liabilities
from those that solely affect procedures or remedies enforcing those rights. See
Norton v. Patten, 125 N.H. 413, 417 (1984). If application of a new law would
adversely affect an individual’s substantive rights, it may not be applied
retroactively. See LaBarre v. Daneault, 123 N.H. 267, 272 (1983); Lozier v.
Brown Company, 121 N.H. 67, 70-71 (1981). When a statute is remedial or
procedural in nature, however, it may be applied to cases pending at the time
of enactment. Gelinas v. Mackey, 123 N.H. 690, 695 (1983).
Application of this dichotomy between substantive rights and liabilities
versus procedures and remedies is not, however, a simple matter. Indeed, we
long ago warned against using a formulaic approach to Article 23 analysis:
Retrospective laws are unconstitutional and void, because they are
injurious, oppressive, and unjust. That is the plain and simple
rule laid down in the bill of rights. And any generalization founded
on the distinction between right and remedy, is attended with
some danger, because of the difficulty of drawing that distinction
so accurately as not to impair the force of the constitutional
prohibition.
. . . [W]hen we have merely ascertained that a statute affects
the remedy in some sense or other, we have made very little
progress in the inquiry whether it affects a right, that is, whether it
is unjust on general principles. If a certain change can be made in
3
the remedy, it is because it can be justly made: if a change cannot
be made in the right, it is because it cannot be justly made.
. . . [T]he test given by the bill of rights is, not the distinction
between right and remedy, but the distinction between right and
wrong.
Kent v. Gray, 53 N.H. 576, 579-80 (1873); see also Eldridge, 136 N.H. at 613
(“the question of retrospective application rests on a determination of
fundamental fairness”). Thus, while the demarcation between substantive
rights and liabilities and procedures and remedies provides a helpful guidepost,
ultimately, we must discern “the nature of the rights affected by the [new] act,”
Farnum’s Petition, 51 N.H. 376, 380 (1871), to assess whether its application
to a particular matter offends the constitution.
Further, we are mindful that the legislature has the power to change,
modify and repeal existing law, and to enact new laws, and that
the individual citizen, with all his rights to protection, has no
vested interest in the existing laws of the State as precludes their
amendment or repeal by the legislature; nor is there any implied
obligation on the part of the State to protect its citizens against
incidental injury occasioned by change in the law.
State v. Burr, 142 N.H. 89, 93-94 (1997) (quotation omitted). “Citizens have no
general right to the continuance even of prior substantive law.” Town of
Nottingham v. Bonser, 131 N.H. 120, 134-35 (1988). The interplay between the
legislature’s authority to change existing laws and the prohibition against
retrospective legislation can be best summed up as follows:
Unless otherwise inhibited by either the State or Federal
Constitutions, the Legislature may change existing laws, both
statutory or common, at its pleasure, but in so doing, it may not
deprive a person of a property right theretofore acquired under
existing law. Those rights are designated as vested rights, and to
be vested, a right must be more than a mere expectation based on
an anticipation of the continuance of existing law; it must have
become a title, legal or equitable, to the present or future
enforcement of a demand, or a legal exemption from the demand of
another. If, before a right becomes vested in a person, the law
upon which it is based is repealed, that particular person no longer
has a remedy to enforce his claim, and if final relief has not been
granted to him on the enforcement of a demand before such repeal,
then no relief can be granted on his demand after the effective date
of the repeal.
4
Aetna Ins. Co. v. Richardelle, 528 S.W.2d 280, 284 (Tx. Civ. App. 1975).
We conclude that the respondent’s motion did not secure her a vested
right under the prior law. The respondent merely pursued an opportunity to
seek a discretionary award for college contributions, and “a mere expectancy of
future benefit, or a contingent interest in property founded on anticipated
continuance of existing laws, does not constitute a vested right,” Southwestern
Bell v. Kansas Corp. Comm’n, 29 P.3d 424, 430 (Kan. Ct. App. 2001). “A
perfect vested right can be no other than such as is not doubtful, or depending
on any contingency, but absolute, fixed and certain.” Lakeman v. Moore, 32
N.H. 410, 413 (1855). The respondent’s motion did not transform her hope for
a discretionary college contribution award into a fixed, certain and absolute
right that the court consider her request and issue an award. Indeed, “[i]t is
almost universally recognized that if a statute giving a special remedy is
repealed, without a saving clause in favor of pending suits, all suits must stop
where the repeal finds them; and, if final relief has not been granted before the
repeal goes into effect, it cannot be granted thereafter.” Aetna Ins. Co., 528
S.W.2d at 284. Because the respondent’s opportunity to have the trial court
consider ordering the petitioner to contribute to their adult son’s college
expenses derived solely from statute and no final judgment had been rendered,
the statutory amendment “deprive[d] the court of jurisdiction over the subject
matter.” Id.
We acknowledge that we have previously held that the legislature “cannot
constitutionally enact laws that affect existing causes of action, regardless of
whether suit upon that action has not been filed.” Lozier, 121 N.H. at 70.
However, a cause of action, in the context of Article 23 analysis, is a suit or
action contested before a court “which has for its object the recovery of private
or civil rights, or compensation for their infraction.” Farnum’s Petition, 51 N.H.
at 383. The respondent’s motion was not of that nature. Accordingly, because
we conclude that application of the amendment does not offend the
constitutional proscription under Article 23 against retrospective laws, we
answer the question transferred in the affirmative.
Remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
5