THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Exeter District Court
No. 2004-787
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CATHY BURKE
Submitted: February 22, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the State.
Patrick W. Fleming, of Portsmouth, by brief, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Cathy Burke, appeals her conviction in
Exeter District Court (Cullen, J.) for simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a, I(a)
(1996). We affirm.
The trial court could have found the following facts. On July 14, 2004,
the defendant attended a hearing at Rockingham County Superior Court. The
hearing involved a motion filed by the defendant seeking the return of her
personal property from a former boyfriend. This was the defendant’s third
hearing on that motion. The defendant’s attorney, Kathleen Sternenberg, and
the opposing attorney, Laura Gandia, were also present. After the hearing,
Gandia, Sternenberg and the defendant exited the courtroom together. Gandia
informed Sternenberg that her client was unlikely to comply with the trial
court’s order to return the defendant’s property because he was on vacation in
Florida. Gandia testified that the defendant then looked at her, said, “[H]e’s
not in Florida,” and pushed Gandia on her left shoulder with enough force to
move her body backwards. The defendant testified that she poked Gandia with
her finger on her shoulder “[t]o get her attention” and “let her know that she
was lying . . . about where her client was.” Gandia then said to Sternenberg,
“[D]id you see what happened? She just pushed me.” At that point, a bailiff
approached to investigate the commotion.
The defendant was charged with one count of simple assault. See RSA
631:2-a, I(a). The complaint alleged that the defendant “knowingly cause[d]
unprivileged physical contact to Laura Gandia by knowingly pushing her.”
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the complaint on the grounds
that RSA 631:2-a, I(a) is unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. The trial
court denied the motion and, after trial, convicted the defendant of one count
of simple assault. This appeal followed. See RSA 599:1-c, II (2001).
On appeal, the defendant argues that: (1) RSA 631:2-a, I(a) is
unconstitutionally vague; and (2) insufficient evidence supports her conviction.
Although the State does not challenge the adequacy of the defendant’s brief on
appeal, the special concurrence concludes that we should not reach the merits
of the defendant’s claims because it believes that she insufficiently briefed both
of her arguments. We recognize that we may address the inadequacy of a
party’s argument on appeal even when the issue is not raised by the opposing
party. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3), (6); cf. Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H.
248, 250 (2004). We should not normally do so, however, where the argument
is discernable and briefing inadequacies do not hinder or otherwise interfere
with our review of the appeal. Cf. 5 Am. Jur. 2d Appellate Review § 578 (1995)
(“Courts are least likely to dismiss an appeal or impose other sanctions when
briefing errors do not hamper the ability to dispose of the appeal or otherwise
interfere with their review. Courts prefer to dispose of a case on the merits
rather than to dismiss for deficiencies in a brief . . . . In a criminal case, the
appellate courts will address discernable issues on the merits.” (emphasis
added)); 5 Am. Jur. 2d Appellate Review § 867 (“Substantial compliance with
the rules of appellate procedure . . . may be found sufficient to avoid dismissal
of an appeal and allow the court to address the merits, at least where the
moving party has suffered no prejudice.”).
As to the vagueness issue, because the defendant failed to
“unambiguously and specifically” invoke any provision of the New Hampshire
Constitution in her brief, we address her vagueness claim under the Due
Process Clause of the Federal Constitution only. See Appeal of Morgan, 144
N.H. 44, 46-47 (1999). The special concurrence would not even address this
claim under the Federal Constitution because it argues that the defendant’s
brief “is devoid of any reference to the Federal Constitution, and she cites no
federal cases in support of her argument.”
2
We have never held that a party’s failure to include a citation to a specific
provision of the Federal Constitution precludes appellate review. In fact, in
State v. Goding, 128 N.H. 267, 270 (1986), we reviewed a due process claim on
appeal even though the defendant characterized it as a double jeopardy issue
at trial. Here, the defendant’s six-page argument clearly contends that the
term “unprivileged” is “unconstitutionally vague.” A citation to the Federal Due
Process Clause adds nothing to our understanding of her argument.
Moreover, although the defendant cites no specific constitutional
provision, she does cite statutory and case law. The defendant relies on cases
decided under our State Constitution and such reliance is appropriate
“because the Federal Constitution affords no greater protection than the State
Constitution with regard to whether a statute is unconstitutionally vague.”
State v. Porelle, 149 N.H. 420, 423 (2003). She goes on in her brief to rely on
the Model Penal Code and comparable statutes in other States. Thus, this is
hardly a case where “off-hand invocations of [constitutional rights] are
supported by neither argument nor by authority.” Keenan v. Fearon, 130 N.H.
494, 499 (1988).
As to the defendant’s sufficiency of the evidence claim, the special
concurrence would hold that the defendant did not adequately argue the issue
because “[t]he single paragraph in her brief devoted to this argument is merely
an extension of her first argument that the statute is vague because it leads to
absurd results.” In her brief, the defendant’s one and a quarter-page argument
begins by claiming that “[w]hatever the definition of unprivileged physical
contact, the conduct at issue in this case should not be included.” The
defendant notes that the facts must be viewed in the light most favorable to the
State and argues that the conduct here as a matter of law should not fall
within “the definition of unprivileged physical conduct.” While we agree that
the defendant incorporates her first argument into her second, she clearly
raises a separate sufficiency of the evidence claim that we will address on the
merits.
The constitutionality of a statute is a question of law. State v. Bortner,
150 N.H. 504, 510 (2004). We therefore review the trial court’s determination
de novo. A statute “may be impermissibly vague because it fails to establish
standards for the police and public that are sufficient to guard against the
arbitrary deprivation of liberty interests.” Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41, 52
(1999). “Vagueness may invalidate a criminal law for either of two independent
reasons.” Id. at 56. “First, if it fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a
reasonable opportunity to understand what conduct it prohibits.” Hill v.
Colorado, 530 U.S. 703, 732 (2000). “Second, if it authorizes or even
encourages arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.” Id.
3
RSA 631:2-a, I(a) provides that “[a] person is guilty of simple assault if he
. . . [p]urposely or knowingly causes bodily injury or unprivileged physical
contact to another.” The defendant first contends that this language is unclear
because neither the statute nor our case law defines “unprivileged physical
contact.” We disagree.
“Unprivileged” means a “lack of privilege.” See In re Nathan L., 146 N.H.
614, 621 (2001). Privilege is defined as “a right or immunity granted as a
peculiar benefit, advantage, or favor.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 1805 (unabridged ed. 2002). Privilege can serve as “[a]n affirmative
defense by which a defendant acknowledges at least part of the conduct
complained of but asserts that the defendant’s conduct was authorized or
sanctioned by law.” Black’s Law Dictionary 1235 (8th ed. 2004). Accordingly,
the plain meaning of “unprivileged physical contact” includes all physical
contact not justified by law or consent.
The defendant argues that a broad interpretation of RSA 631:2-a, I(a)
encourages arbitrary enforcement. The defendant hypothesizes that if we
interpret the statute to forbid all physical contact not authorized by law or
consent, even “slapping on the back as a form of greeting” could be
criminalized. The State asserts that the statute’s scienter requirement guards
against the threat of arbitrary enforcement. Although we agree that the
scienter requirement narrows the scope of conduct that the statute proscribes,
see Hill, 530 U.S. at 732, that requirement by itself does not necessarily
prevent arbitrary enforcement.
A statute encourages arbitrary enforcement where it promotes
application on an “ad hoc and subjective basis.” Grayned v. City of Rockford,
408 U.S. 104, 109 (1972). For example, in Morales, a plurality of the Court
found that an ordinance which defined loiter as “to remain in any one place
with no apparent purpose” encouraged arbitrary enforcement because it did
“not provide sufficiently specific limits on the enforcement discretion of the
police.” Morales, 527 U.S. at 56, 64 (plurality opinion). Unlike the ordinance
in Morales, however, RSA 631:2-a, I(a) does not relieve law enforcement of the
burden to clearly articulate some form of “unprivileged physical contact” in
order to allege a violation of the statute. Instead, the police must show that the
contact at issue was not justified by law or consent. Like other criminal
statutes, the enforcement of RSA 631-2:a, I(a) “requires the exercise of some
degree of police judgment.” Hill, 530 U.S. at 733. We conclude that our
construction of RSA 631:2-a, I(a) adequately limits police discretion so as to
make it unlikely that the law will be applied in an “ad hoc and subjective”
manner. Cf. Hill, 530 U.S. at 733; Grayned, 408 U.S. at 114.
The defendant further asserts that a “strict plain meaning analysis” of
“unprivileged physical contact” yields a “patently absurd result.” Specifically,
4
the defendant hypothesizes that the plain meaning of the statute criminalizes
tapping another on the shoulder “unless one asks for permission to touch the
other’s shoulder first.” We find this argument unpersuasive. First, the
defendant overlooks the general principle that consent may be express or
implied. See Fischer v. Hooper, 143 N.H. 585, 597-98 (1999). Second, the
defendant cites no authority for the proposition that a statute’s proscription of
a broad category of conduct, alone, renders it unconstitutionally vague.
Finally, the defendant argues that insufficient evidence supports her
conviction under RSA 631:2-a, I(a). “In an appeal challenging the sufficiency of
the evidence, the defendant carries the burden of proving that no rational trier
of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could have
found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Emery, 152 N.H. __, __, 887
A.2d 123, 127 (2005) (quotation omitted). The defendant, however, concedes
that she engaged in physical contact with Gandia. Moreover, the record
contains testimony that the defendant acted knowingly and that her conduct
was not justified by law or consent. Therefore, we find that the trial court
reasonably could have concluded that the defendant committed simple assault
under RSA 631:2-a, I(a) by “knowingly caus[ing] unprivileged physical contact
to [Gandia] by knowingly pushing her.”
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J.,
concurred specially.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurring specially. I agree with the affirmance in
this case. I write separately, however, simply because I would not reach either
of the issues addressed by the majority.
Prior to trial, the defendant, Cathy Burke, unsuccessfully moved to
dismiss the complaint against her “based on the Constitutional doctrine of
vagueness and overbreadth.” Specifically, she argued: “I believe that [RSA
631:2-a, I(a)] is unconstitutionally vague and/or overbroad, and should be
found that way and thus is a violation of due process, since that right is
guaranteed by both the State and Federal Constitutions.” The defendant’s
notice of appeal claims that the trial court erred in denying her motion to
dismiss, “based on the argument that the [statute] is unconstitutionally vague
and/or overbroad.” The majority refuses, and I agree with that refusal, to
address the defendant’s claim within the context of our State Constitution
because she failed to unambiguously and specifically invoke any provision of
the New Hampshire Constitution in her brief.
The majority does, however, proceed to address the defendant’s
argument under the Due Process Clause of the Federal Constitution. Given the
5
state of the defendant’s brief, I would additionally choose not to address her
claim of error within the context of our Federal Constitution. Compare, e.g.,
Appeal of Morgan, 144 N.H. 44, 46-47 (1999) (where petitioner cited State and
Federal Constitutions below, but failed to unambiguously and specifically raise
vagueness issue grounded in due process provision of State Constitution, we
addressed only federal claim), with State v. Burr, 142 N.H. 89, 91-92 (1997)
(where defendant’s brief advanced argument under both State and Federal
Constitutions, but failed to further devote anything more than passing
reference to Federal Constitution, federal claims waived and discussion of
argument limited to State Constitution).
The defendant’s brief is devoid of any reference to the Federal
Constitution, and she cites no federal cases in support of her argument. Of the
seven New Hampshire cases cited in her brief, only two concern statutory
vagueness, and, in those two cases, we addressed the vagueness issue only
under our State Constitution, see State v. Saucier, 128 N.H. 291, 296-97
(1986); State v. Glidden, 122 N.H. 41, 45-47 (1982). I would choose not to
employ a more lenient standard in deciding whether to reach the defendant’s
argument under the Federal Constitution in this case. See, e.g., State v. Chick,
141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996) (although defendant’s brief claimed violation of right
to due process under Part I, Article 15 of State Constitution, and Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments to Federal Constitution, claim waived where brief
failed to further elaborate on argument; passing reference to due process,
without more, not substitute for valid constitutional argument); see also State
v. McIntyre, 151 N.H. 465, 469 (2004) (declining to address arguments
concerning due process rights under State and Federal Constitutions when not
adequately briefed); State v. Schultz, 141 N.H. 101, 104 (1996) (same); Keenan
v. Fearon, 130 N.H. 494, 499 (1988) (off-hand invocations of constitutional
rights supported by neither argument nor authority warrant no extended
consideration).
In addition, I would not give the defendant credit for adequately arguing
that the evidence to support her conviction was insufficient. The single
paragraph in her brief devoted to this argument is merely an extension of her
first argument that the statute is vague because it leads to absurd results. See
e.g., State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003) (complaint without developed
legal argument insufficient to warrant judicial review).
6