THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Insurance Department
No. 2004-518
APPEAL OF ALPHADIRECTIONS, INC.
(New Hampshire Department of Insurance)
Argued: May 10, 2005
Opinion Issued: July 29, 2005
Bernstein, Shur, Sawyer and Nelson, P.A., of Manchester (Andru H.
Volinsky on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Anthony I. Blenkinsop, attorney, and
Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Mr.
Blenkinsop orally), for the New Hampshire Department of Insurance.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, AlphaDirections, Inc., appeals a decision of
the New Hampshire Department of Insurance finding that it provided insurance
brokerage and insurance consulting services without the required insurance
producer license and imposing a fine of $42,500. See RSA 400-A:15, III (1998);
RSA 402-J:3 (Supp. 2004); RSA 405:44-a (Supp. 2004); RSA 405:44-g (1998).
We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Prior to the change in
administration following the November 2002 gubernatorial election, the State
had a fully insured program of medical and dental insurance through a health
insurance contract with Anthem Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Hampshire
(Anthem) and a dental insurance contract with Northeast Delta Dental (Delta
Dental). At that time, Kenmore Associates was the duly-appointed broker of
record for the State with respect to these programs and received commissions
from Anthem and Delta Dental in that capacity.
Soon after the election, the new administration began to pursue cost-
saving measures with regard to the State’s health and dental insurance plans,
including the question of whether to switch to a self-insured program.
Kenmore Associates did not recommend a self-insured program because of the
upfront budgetary increase for the required funding reserves. Instead,
Kenmore Associates recommended that the State use a retention accounting
program for the health insurance, as it currently did for the dental insurance,
which could result in cost savings. The new administration, however, believed
that a program of self-insurance would result in more cost savings to the State.
Joseph D’Alessandro, a member of the Governor’s transition team, was
the designated point-person with respect to shifting the health benefits to a
self-insured basis. Linda Pepin, who had previously worked with D’Alessandro
in private industry, also worked on the transition team. In addition, Pepin was
appointed to the State negotiating committee for collective bargaining with the
State Employees Association (SEA). Pepin’s services during this period of time
were on a volunteer basis. At the same time, D’Alessandro and Pepin were
partners in AlphaDirections, Inc., a consulting business started by Pepin.
Neither AlphaDirections nor Pepin was licensed as an insurance producer to
provide insurance brokerage and consulting services under RSA 402-J:3.
In late 2002 and early 2003, D’Alessandro and Pepin began to gather
information, sometimes through Kenmore Associates, regarding the State’s
existing health and dental insurance programs. They also collected
information concerning the structure of a new program and the transition to a
new program. On March 7, 2003, D’Alessandro became the new director of
personnel for the State. Three days later, Pepin, on behalf of AlphaDirections,
submitted, through D’Alessandro, a cost estimate of $150,000 for consulting
services to the State. The cost estimate described the services for the “2003/04
Health Insurance Renewal” to include consulting work on, among other things,
active and retired employees, medical and dental plans, life and disability
programs and fully-insured and self-insured proposals. The cost estimate also
described the services for the “2003/04 Open Enrollment Activity” to include
work on communications and implementation.
On March 20, 2003, D’Alessandro met with a representative of Delta
Dental, who advised him that Pepin could receive consultant fees from the
State or commissions from Delta Dental only if she was licensed as an
insurance producer. Anthem also advised D’Alessandro that Pepin must be
licensed as an insurance producer in order to receive commissions.
Subsequently, Kenmore Associates was terminated as broker of record and, on
March 24, 2003, was replaced by Denis French, a licensed producer, and his
2
company NiBri Benefit Services, Inc. (NiBri). Days prior to French’s
appointment as broker of record, Pepin supplied French with the tax
identification information for AlphaDirections. In the months following his
appointment, French performed no more than six hours of work on the State
contracts, had very little contact with D’Alessandro and never had contact with
Anthem, Delta Dental or Cigna, which was eventually selected to administer
the State’s self-insurance plan. From the date of his appointment, French
intended to forward all the commissions he received to AlphaDirections.
Anthem and Delta Dental were informed of the change in the broker of
record and that commission payments previously made to Kenmore Associates
were thereafter to be made to NiBri. From April to November 2003, Anthem
issued nine checks to NiBri totaling $131,538.55, which, in turn, issued nine
checks to AlphaDirections totaling $131,538.55. At the same time, Delta
Dental issued nine checks to NiBri totaling $63,197.90, which, in turn, issued
eight checks to AlphaDirections totaling $55,474.07. NiBri retained the last
commission check from Delta Dental because it was received after the
department of insurance had initiated its investigation.
During this same time frame, Pepin, through AlphaDirections,
participated in the arrangement of a short-term renewal of the fully insured
plan, designed and proposed possible benefit changes to achieve cost savings,
managed the State’s conversion to a self-insured plan and performed other
functions with respect to the State’s insurance program. Pepin frequently
obtained information from Delta Dental, Anthem and Cigna including monthly
experience reports, claims data, options for changes in the benefit structure
and quotes for various changes in the plan designs. With this information,
Pepin analyzed the utilization of the insurance plans, the current benefit
structure, the cost effectiveness of proposed changes to the benefits and the
cost comparison between a fully insured and a self-insured program. She, in
turn, gave advice and recommendations based upon her analysis to
D’Alessandro; Donald Hill, the commissioner of administrative services; and
the State committee negotiating a collective bargaining agreement with the
SEA.
On April 28, 2003, Pepin made a presentation to Commissioner Hill and
D’Alessandro regarding the work she was doing and the cost savings associated
with the recommended benefits changes. With regard to the medical insurance
for both active and retired employees, Pepin recommended converting to a self-
insured program and implementing certain plan design changes including
premium sharing, higher co-pays and increased deductibles. Pepin also
recommended a self-insured program for prescription drugs and suggested
increasing the employees’ cost from a two-tier plan to a three-tier plan. With
regard to dental insurance, Pepin recommended remaining with Delta Dental
with a retention accounting program. In addition, Pepin intended to negotiate
3
a renewal rate that would be cost neutral compared to the previous year and to
change the plan design to include higher annual deductibles. The presentation
also covered the use of the Choicelinx program to administer the enrollment
and management of the insurance programs, recommendations on stop loss
coverage, the necessary requests for proposals, the projected savings based
upon her recommendations and a timeline for implementing the new insurance
programs.
Following the timeline, Pepin negotiated the proposed changes in plan
design with Anthem, Cigna and the SEA. In addition, Pepin requested
information from the various insurance carriers in order to put together a
proposal for a bid and sent proposed plan designs to the carriers for quotes.
Ultimately, Cigna was awarded the contract to administer the State’s self-
insurance plan.
On March 4, 2004, the insurance commissioner issued an order directing
the petitioner to appear at a hearing and show cause as to why the
commissioner should not find that the petitioner, acting through its owner and
president, Pepin, violated various insurance statutes by providing insurance
consulting services and negotiating insurance coverage for a fee without a
producer license. See RSA 402-J:3; RSA 405:44-a. The petitioner was also
ordered to show cause why the commissioner should not assess an
administrative fine of $42,500.
Following a four-day hearing, the hearing officer issued an order finding
that the commissioner proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the
petitioner violated the insurance brokering and consulting statutes. See RSA
402-J:3; RSA 405:44-a. The hearing officer also found that the commissioner’s
imposition of a $42,500 fine did not constitute an abuse of discretion. See RSA
400-A:15, III; RSA 405:44-g. This appeal followed. See RSA 400-A:24 (1998).
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the hearing officer erred in finding
that it violated the insurance brokering and consulting statutes and that the
fine of $42,500 was not arbitrary. Our review of the insurance commissioner’s
order is limited. An order of the commissioner is presumed to be prima facie
lawful and reasonable and will be overturned only when a petitioner shows by
a clear preponderance of the evidence that it is unreasonable or unlawful.
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. v. Whaland, 121 N.H. 400, 403 (1981). We address
each argument in turn.
I. Insurance brokering violations
The petitioner argues that the hearing officer erred in finding that it
violated the insurance brokering statute. See RSA 402-J:3. Specifically, it
4
argues that: (1) it could not “obtain” insurance for the State because only the
Governor and Executive Council can approve contracts; (2) the hearing officer
misinterpreted the statutory meaning of “negotiate”; (3) the statute does not
apply to a person obtaining a bid or price quote; and (4) interpreting the statute
to apply in this case violates the petitioner’s federal and State due process
rights and the Separation of Powers Clause of the State Constitution. See RSA
402-J:3; RSA 402-J:2, XI (Supp. 2004).
RSA 402-J:3 prohibits selling, soliciting or negotiating insurance without
an insurance producer’s license. RSA 402-J:2, XI defines “negotiate” as
the act of conferring directly with or offering advice directly to a
purchaser or prospective purchaser of a particular contract of
insurance concerning any of the substantive benefits, terms, or
conditions of such contract, provided that the person engaged in
that act either sells insurance, or obtains insurance from insurers
for purchasers.
We first address whether the term “obtain” requires the person subject to
licensure under the statute to have the actual authority to purchase insurance.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.
In the Matter of Jacobson & Tierney, 150 N.H. 513, 515 (2004). We look to the
plain and ordinary meaning of the statutory language in determining legislative
intent. In re Juvenile 2003-248, 150 N.H. 751, 751-52 (2004). We do not read
words or phrases in isolation, but rather in the context of the entire statute.
Id.
Considering the statute as a whole, we hold that the term “obtain” does
not require the person subject to licensure under the statute to have the actual
authority to purchase insurance. The statute requires that an individual be
licensed to negotiate insurance, which is defined in part as “offering advice
directly to a purchaser or prospective purchaser.” RSA 402-J:2, XI (emphasis
added); see RSA 402-J:3. Thus, the definition itself acknowledges that it is
sufficient for the person subject to licensure to offer advice to the ultimate
purchaser, and the person need not have the actual authority to purchase
insurance. As the hearing officer aptly noted:
It is generally the case that the prospective purchaser of insurance
retains the ultimate decision-making authority with respect to the
purchase, but the broker is no less “obtaining” the insurance for
purchase by the prospective insured. Adoption of the restrictive
interpretation advanced by AlphaDirections would render the
licensing required for brokers in order to receive commissions
meaningless in the vast majority of transactions. This . . .
5
represents an effort [by AlphaDirections] to snatch ambiguity from
the jaws of clarity.
In its brief, the petitioner next argues that the hearing officer
“misinterpreted the statutory meaning of ‘negotiate’ by adding his own
interpretation of the term that should have been plain.” The petitioner,
however, does not elaborate further on the alleged error, nor offer an
alternative definition or application of the term to this case.
The hearing officer found that many of the petitioner’s activities fell
“within the common meaning of the words ‘advice’ and ‘confer’ in the definition
of negotiate.” The hearing officer specifically referred to, among other activities,
the petitioner’s: (1) management of the State’s conversion to a self-insured
plan; (2) participation in the arrangement for a short-term renewal of the fully
insured plan; and (3) involvement in designing and proposing benefit changes
to achieve cost savings. These acts fit squarely within the statutory definition
of negotiate. See RSA 402-J:2, XI. These findings are adequately supported by
the record and the petitioner has failed to show by a clear preponderance of the
evidence that the findings are unreasonable or unlawful. See State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins., 121 N.H. at 403.
The petitioner next argues that the statute requires the producer to
obtain insurance, and thus does not apply to a person obtaining a bid or price
quote for insurance. See RSA 402-J:2, IV, XI (Supp. 2004). As we explained
above, it is generally the case that the prospective purchaser of insurance
retains the ultimate decision-making authority with respect to the purchase. It
necessarily follows that during negotiations, the producer could only obtain
bids or price quotes for the prospective purchaser. The producer, however, is
nonetheless “obtaining insurance” for purchase by the prospective insured.
Again, to hold otherwise would render meaningless the licensing required for
producers in order to receive commissions in the vast majority of transactions.
Finally, the petitioner argues that this interpretation of the insurance
brokering statute violates its rights to federal and State due process and
violates the Separation of Powers Clause of the State Constitution. We
conclude that these arguments were not adequately briefed and, therefore,
decline to address them. See In re Juvenile 2003-604-A, 151 N.H. 719, 721
(2005).
II. Insurance consulting violations
The petitioner argues that the hearing officer erred in finding that it
violated the insurance consulting statute. See RSA 405:44-a. Specifically, it
argues that: (1) its work from August 2003 to November 2003 did not involve
6
insurance consulting and thus the payments received during that time were
not in violation of the statute; (2) it never reviewed an insurance policy but
“simply discuss[ed] insurance concepts;” and (3) its management of the State’s
conversion to self-insurance does not fall within the statute’s licensing
requirements because “[a]n employer’s decision to self insure is not
‘insurance.’”
RSA 405:44-a, I, provides that:
No person, corporation, partnership or association shall, for
a fee received or to be received, offer to examine, or examine or aid
in examining, any policy of insurance . . . for the purpose of giving,
or give or offer to give, any advice, counsel, recommendation or
information in respect to the terms, conditions, benefits, coverage
or premium of any such policy or contract, or in respect to the
expediency or advisability of altering, changing, renewing or
rejecting any such policy or contract . . . from any company . . .
unless he or she holds a license as an insurance producer under
the provisions of RSA 402-J.
The petitioner first argues that, because its work from August 2003 to
November 2003 involved communications and implementation and not
insurance consulting, the payments received during that time were not in
violation of the statute. The statute does not require simultaneous payment for
consulting services rendered. See id. Rather, the statute requires a license for
consulting services that are performed “for a fee received or to be received.” Id.
It is logical to conclude, as the hearing officer did, that the brokerage fees
received by the petitioner related to previously-provided unlicensed consulting
services. To hold otherwise would result in the inability to prevent unlicensed
insurance consulting if there were any delay between the unlawful consulting
action and the receipt of payment.
The petitioner next argues that it never reviewed an insurance policy but
“simply discuss[ed] insurance concepts.” Thus, the petitioner contends that
because it did not review a specific policy or policy language, its conduct did
not violate the insurance consulting statute.
RSA 405:44-a prohibits the performance of a number of activities for a
fee without a producer’s license. One such activity is offering to examine,
examining or aiding in examining any policy of insurance. RSA 405:44-a, I.
Another activity is giving or offering to give “any advice, counsel,
recommendation or information in respect to the terms, conditions, benefits,
coverage or premium of any such policy or contract.” Id. A further activity is
giving or offering to give advice, counsel, recommendation or information “in
respect to the expediency or advisability of altering, changing, exchanging,
7
converting, replacing, surrendering, continuing, renewing or rejecting any such
policy or contract, or of accepting or procuring any such policy or contract from
any company.” Id.
While the first regulated activity under RSA 405:44-a involves examining
a specific policy or policy language, the other activities regulated by the statute
do not necessarily involve a specific policy. The hearing officer found that
many of the petitioner’s activities fell within the clauses dealing with giving or
offering to give “advice, counsel, recommendation or information,” and thus
constituted insurance consulting in violation of the statute. See id. In making
this finding, the hearing officer relied upon, among other things, the
petitioner’s management of the State’s conversion to a self-insured plan,
participation in the arrangement for a short-term renewal of the fully insured
plan, and work in designing and proposing benefit changes to achieve cost
savings.
There is ample evidence in the record to support this finding. As detailed
above, the petitioner obtained information from Delta Dental, Anthem and
Cigna including monthly experience reports, claims data, options for changes
in the benefit structure and quotes for various changes in the plan designs.
The petitioner analyzed this information and gave advice and recommendations
based upon her analysis to D’Alessandro, Commissioner Hill, and the State
negotiating committee for collective bargaining with the SEA. The petitioner’s
advice included, among other things, recommendations on plan changes and
the cost comparison between a fully insured and self-insured program. In
addition, the petitioner negotiated the proposed changes in plan design with
Anthem and Cigna and prepared proposed plan designs that were sent to the
insurance carriers for bids.
Finally, the petitioner argues that its management of the State’s
conversion to self-insurance does not fall within the statute’s licensing
requirements because “[a]n employer’s decision to self insure is not
‘insurance.’” As stated above, RSA 405:44-a regulates giving or offering to give
advice on the expediency or advisability of, among other things, altering,
converting, replacing or rejecting insurance. The petitioner provided cost
comparisons of a self-insured and fully insured program, made
recommendations based upon its analysis of the data and managed the State’s
conversion to self-insurance. The petitioner’s activities fall squarely within the
statute. See id. Accordingly, the petitioner has failed to show by a clear
preponderance of the evidence that the hearing officer’s findings are
unreasonable or unlawful. See State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins., 121 N.H. at 403.
8
III. Administrative fine
The petitioner argues that the hearing officer erred in finding that the
fine of $42,500 was not arbitrary. See RSA 400-A:15, III; RSA 405:44-g. We
may set aside an administratively imposed punishment if it is so harsh or
excessive as to be unreasonable or to constitute an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Appeal of Metropolitan Prop. & Liabil. Ins. Co., 120 N.H. 733, 736
(1980). But because appropriate sanctions must necessarily be tailored to
particular cases, we are disinclined to substitute our judgment for that of the
commissioner in all but exceptional cases. Id. at 736-37.
In determining the fine of $42,500, the insurance commissioner noted
that “AlphaDirections received [seventeen] payments from NiBri for providing
insurance consulting work” to the State. Relying upon RSA 405:44-e, the
commissioner reasoned that “[e]ach time AlphaDirections received a payment
for providing insurance consulting work, it violated New Hampshire law
regarding insurance consultants.” The commissioner also noted that the
petitioner’s conduct violated various other provisions of the insurance licensing
statutes. The commissioner thus concluded that, given the serious and
substantial violations and because each violation is subject to an
administrative fine not to exceed $2,500, a fine of $42,500 was warranted.
RSA 400-A:15, III provides that “[a]ny person who knowingly violates any
rule, regulation, or order of the commissioner may . . . be subject to such . . .
administrative fine not to exceed $2,500.” RSA 405:44-g provides that “[a]ny
person, corporation, partnership, or association who acts as an insurance
consultant without such license or during a suspension of his or its license
shall be subject to an administrative fine not to exceed $2,500 for each such
act.”
Both statutes provide for “an administrative fine not to exceed $2,500.”
The consulting statute references a fine for “each act,” RSA 405:44-g, while the
brokering statute does not, see RSA 400-A:15, III. We agree with the hearing
officer’s conclusion that “[t]here are many ways an appropriate penalty could
have been calculated, and [we] may have chosen another. However, given the
statutes’ common element of receipt of a fee, it was not an abuse of discretion
to look to the series of payments for guidance.” See Appeal of Metropolitan
Prop. & Liabil. Ins. Co., 120 N.H. at 736-37.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.
9