THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-814
DONNA BANFIELD, INDIVIDUALLY AND AS MOTHER AND NEXT FRIEND OF
DAVID BANFIELD, JR.
v.
ALLSTATE INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: May 10, 2005
Opinion Issued: July 29, 2005
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (John P. Fagan on
the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Bouchard, Kleinman & Wright, P.A., of Manchester (Nicholas D. Wright
on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Donna Banfield, individually and as
mother and next friend of her son, David Banfield, Jr., appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Morrill, J.) granting respondent Allstate Insurance Company’s
(Allstate) motion for summary judgment and denying her cross-motion. We
affirm.
The relevant facts are undisputed. On April 15, 2001, David Banfield
was a passenger on an all-terrain vehicle (ATV) that his friend, Adam Mecca,
was driving on Derryfield Road in Derry. Adam lost control of the ATV, and
David was thrown from the vehicle and injured. At the time of the accident,
Adam’s mother, Rhea Mecca, owned the ATV and had a homeowner’s
insurance policy issued by Allstate. Allstate denied coverage for David’s
injuries, and the petitioner brought a declaratory judgment action against
Allstate to compel it to provide coverage.
The policy contains the following relevant provisions:
Subject to the terms, conditions and limitations of this policy,
Allstate will pay damages which an insured person becomes
legally obligated to pay because of bodily injury or property
damage arising from an occurrence to which this policy applies,
and covered by this part of the policy.
. . . .
We do not cover bodily injury or property damage arising out of
the . . . use . . . of any motor vehicle . . . . However, this exclusion
does not apply to:
. . . .
b) any motor vehicle designed principally for recreational use off
public roads, unless that vehicle is owned by an insured person
and is being used away from an insured premises[.]
In addition to the facts recited above, the parties stipulated that:
(1) Rhea Mecca was an “insured person” under the policy; (2) the ATV was
“designed principally for recreational use off public roads”; (3) the injury to
David Banfield constituted an “occurrence” under the policy; (4) the “insured
premises” for purposes of the policy was the Mecca residence located at 46
Kendall Pond Road in Derry; and (5) at the time of the accident, the ATV was
not being operated on the “insured premises.”
In her cross-motion for summary judgment, the petitioner argued that
the policy was a “motor vehicle liability policy” and, consequently, that the
exclusion quoted above was void under New Hampshire law. After considering
the undisputed facts and relevant provisions of the policy, the trial court
denied the petitioner’s motion for summary judgment and granted Allstate’s,
ruling that Allstate was not obligated to provide coverage in connection with
the accident:
The policy in this case is entitled “Allstate Deluxe Plus
Homeowners Policy,” and its descriptions of coverage clearly show
it to be a property insurance policy. Attempting to transform it
into a “motor vehicle liability policy” so distorts its purposes and
2
terms that it is inconceivable that a reasonable person in the
position of the insured would ever believe that it was a motor
vehicle liability policy.
The petitioner unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and this appeal
followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. If there is no genuine
issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, the grant of summary judgment is proper. We review the trial
court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Marikar v. Peerless Ins. Co.,
151 N.H. 395, 397 (2004).
The petitioner contends that “[because] the Allstate policy specifically
affords liability coverage for its insured’s ATV, the policy must be treated as a
motor vehicle liability policy for accidents in which the ATV is directly
involved.” In support of this contention, she argues that the policy meets the
definition of a “motor vehicle liability policy” under RSA 259:61 (Supp. 2004)
because the policy “provide[s] liability coverage to its insured for use of a motor
vehicle identifiable as covered under the policy.” We disagree.
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. We first examine the language of
the statute, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to
the words used. When the language of a statute is plain and unambiguous, we
need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent. Bedford
Chapter-Citizens for a Sound Economy v. Sch. Admin. Unit #25, 151 N.H. 612,
614 (2004).
RSA 259:61, I (2004) defines “motor vehicle liability policy,” in pertinent
part, as:
[A] policy of liability insurance which provides:
I. Indemnity for or protection to the insured and any person
responsible to him for the operation of the insured’s motor vehicle
. . . who has obtained permission or control thereof with his
express or implied consent, against loss by reason of the liability to
pay damages to others for . . . bodily injuries . . . accidentally
sustained during the term of said policy by any person other than
the insured . . . to the amount or limit of at least $25,000 on
account of injury to or death of any one person, and subject to
such limit as respects injury or death of one person, of at least
3
$50,000 on account of any one accident resulting in injury to or
death of more than one person . . . .
Thus, a “motor vehicle liability policy” is defined as a type of “policy” that
provides certain protection. The term “policy,” however, is not defined in the
statute. Accordingly, we construe the term according to its plain and ordinary
meaning. Bedford Chapter-Citizens for a Sound Economy, 151 N.H. at 614. In
the context of insurance, the term “policy” means: “a certificate of insurance :
a writing whereby a contract of insurance is made : the document containing
the contract made by an insurance company with a person whose property or
life is insured : an annuity contract or certificate of an insurance company.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1754 (unabridged ed. 2002). The
definition of the term “policy” refers to certificates, writings, contracts and
documents, all of which indicate that “policy” refers to an entire contract of
insurance, and not just one provision within such a contract. Thus, we must
resolve whether Rhea Mecca’s policy, as a whole, must be construed as a
“motor vehicle liability policy” for purposes of injuries or property damage
arising from the insured’s use of an ATV under limited circumstances simply
because the policy contains a provision that affords liability coverage in those
instances.
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for
this court to decide. We construe the language of an insurance policy as would
a reasonable person in the position of the insured based on a more than casual
reading of the policy as a whole. Policy terms are construed objectively, and
where the terms of a policy are clear and unambiguous, we accord the
language its natural and ordinary meaning. We need not examine the parties’
reasonable expectations of coverage when a policy is clear and unambiguous.
Krigsman v. Progressive N. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 643, 645 (2005).
As recognized by the trial court, the policy is entitled, “Allstate Deluxe
Plus Homeowners Policy.” Moreover, the petitioner concedes that the relevant
provisions of the policy are not ambiguous and do not provide for coverage in
this instance; she admits that if coverage exists, it is solely by operation of
statute. Consistent with its title as a homeowner’s policy and the
unambiguous language of the challenged provision, the policy provides
coverage for bodily injury and property damage arising from the use of a
narrow class of motor vehicles that are designed principally for recreational use
and, when owned by the insured, are used on the insured premises.
In Davidson v. Motorists Mut. Ins. Co., the Ohio Supreme Court
considered whether a “homeowner’s insurance policy that provides limited
liability coverage for vehicles that are not subject to motor vehicle registration
and that are not intended to be used on a public highway is . . . a motor vehicle
liability policy” subject to the statutory requirement that such policies “offer
4
uninsured and underinsured motorist coverage.” Davidson v. Motorists Mut.
Ins. Co., 744 N.E.2d 713, 719 (Ohio 2001). Specifically, the insured sought
underinsured motorist benefits under his homeowner’s insurance policy in
connection with an automobile collision that left him seriously injured. Id. at
713.
In determining that underinsured benefits were not available because the
homeowner’s policy was not a “motor vehicle liability policy,” the court adopted
the reasoning of another court that had addressed a similar issue:
In this case, however, there is no direct liability coverage, even
in a limited sense, for motor vehicles. The policy provision [at
issue] specifically excludes coverage for bodily injury arising out of
the use of motor vehicles. While the exclusion . . . does not apply
to specific conveyances such as recreational off-road conveyances
and golf-carts, this incidental coverage is simply not enough to
transform a homeowner’s policy into an automobile liability policy.
A homeowner’s policy such as the policy at issue in this case
cannot be reasonably construed to provide uninsured or
underinsured motorist coverage where there is no automobile
liability coverage intended by the parties or contained within the
policy.
Id. at 718 (brackets and quotations omitted). “Although the homeowner’s
policy [in this case] affords limited coverage arising out of the use of certain
motorized vehicles, the mere fact that the policy provides coverage for these
motorized vehicles does not convert the policy into a motor vehicle liability
policy.” Id; see U.S. Automobile Assoc. v. Wilkinson, 132 N.H. 439, 446-49
(1989) (declining to construe umbrella policy as being subject to laws regarding
uninsured motorist coverage on basis that purpose of policy was not to insure
motor vehicles, but to insure against rare catastrophic liability by providing
coverage over and above that provided in business automobile liability policy).
The petitioner attempts to distinguish Davidson on the basis that here,
she seeks liability protection for the use of a motor vehicle for which coverage
was specifically provided – in limited circumstances – under a homeowner’s
policy, while in Davidson, the claimant sought underinsured motorist coverage
for the use of a motor vehicle that was not covered under any circumstances in
the homeowner’s policy. Consequently, she contends that the issue in
Davidson, unlike in this case, was whether the claimant “could recover
uninsured motorists benefits under a homeowner’s insurance policy which by
its terms provided no coverage for the insured’s use of an automobile.” We are
not persuaded.
5
The fact that the ATV in this case was subject to limited coverage under
Rhea Mecca’s homeowner’s policy is not dispositive. Rather, the dispositive
issue is whether the coverage that was provided relative to any motor vehicle
under the policy was “incidental primarily because coverage of [the] vehicles
was remote from and insignificant to the type of overall coverage the policy
provided.” Hillyer v. State Farm Fire & Cas. Co., 780 N.E.2d 262, 267 (Ohio
2002) (rejecting attempt to distinguish Davidson on basis that policy in
Davidson involved recreational vehicles not subject to registration and for use
off public roads). Here, as the trial court aptly noted, the descriptions of
coverage contained in the policy “clearly show it to be a property insurance
policy.” Indeed, any coverage of the ATV contained in the policy is incidental
because it is insignificant to the type of overall coverage the policy provides.
Accordingly, we hold that the limited coverage the policy provides for the ATV is
not sufficient to transform the policy into a “motor vehicle liability policy.”
The petitioner contends that for a policy to be a “motor vehicle liability
policy” under RSA 259:61, coverage of motor vehicles need not be the primary
purpose of the liability insurance. She posits that RSA 259:61, “by its terms
broadly applies to any policy of liability insurance providing indemnity for use
of a motor vehicle to which the insurance applies.” We disagree.
In order to construe RSA 259:61 as broadly as the petitioner urges us to,
we would need to add words to the statute that the legislature did not see fit to
include, contrary to one of our well-established canons of statutory
construction. See Verizon New England v. City of Rochester, 151 N.H. 263,
266 (2004). If the legislature intended to include within the statutory definition
of “motor vehicle liability policy” any liability policy that provides any type of
coverage for injuries or property damage resulting from the use of a motor
vehicle, it could have done so. It did not. Thus, we decline the petitioner’s
invitation to construe the statute in a manner broad enough to encompass
Rhea Mecca’s homeowner’s policy.
The petitioner argues that RSA 215-A:28 (Supp. 2004) compels a
conclusion that the policy at issue is a “motor vehicle liability policy” because it
evidences the legislature’s intent that “insurers which provide insurance to
ATVs comply with the Financial Responsibility Act.” The relevant portion of
RSA 215-A:28 in the current version of the statute is, in substance, the same
as that in effect at the time of the accident:
I. All provisions, including the penalties, suspensions, and
prohibitions of the New Hampshire financial responsibility law, and
the provisions of the statutes relative to the operation of a motor
vehicle, shall apply to an OHRV [off highway recreational vehicle]
being operated upon a public highway.
6
The petitioner maintains that “it is undisputed that the ATV insured by Allstate
is subject to RSA 215-A and was in use on a roadway at the time of this
incident.” She argues that because RSA 259:61 is part of New Hampshire’s
financial responsibility law, which is made applicable to ATVs by operation of
RSA 215-A:28, the policy in this case is a “motor vehicle liability policy.”
The parties stipulated that at the time of the accident, “Adam Mecca was
operating the ATV on Derryfield Road in Derry,” and that “the ATV was not
operating on the premises of Rhea Mecca.” We assume, for purposes of
addressing the petitioner’s argument, that Derryfield Road is a “public
highway” under RSA 215-A:28. Furthermore, we assume that RSA 259:61 is
part of New Hampshire’s financial responsibility law, and that the ATV is
subject to RSA 215-A:28. Even with these assumptions, however, we disagree
with the petitioner. As discussed, the definition of “motor vehicle liability
policy” contained in RSA 259:61 does not include every liability policy that
provides any type of coverage for injuries or property damage arising from the
use of a motor vehicle, and therefore does not include Rhea Mecca’s
homeowner’s policy. We decline to read RSA 215-A:28 as altering the definition
of “motor vehicle liability policy” under RSA 259:61 such that the homeowner’s
policy is converted into such a policy. Read together with RSA 259:61, RSA
215-A:28 is fairly construed as requiring that any “motor vehicle liability
policy” under RSA 259:61 provide coverage that complies with New
Hampshire’s financial responsibility laws for OHRVs operating on public ways.
Next, the petitioner contends that the trial court erred in using the
“reasonable expectations” test in ruling on the parties’ motions for summary
judgment, rather than addressing the question of whether the policy is a
“motor vehicle liability policy” under RSA 259:61. Even assuming that the
petitioner is correct, we nevertheless affirm because the trial court correctly
ruled that Allstate is not obligated to provide coverage in connection with the
accident. See Sherryland v. Snuffer, 150 N.H. 262, 267 (2003) (when trial
court reaches correct result, but on mistaken grounds, we will affirm if valid
alternative grounds support result).
The petitioner’s final argument is: “Holding that the Allstate policy is a
motor vehicle liability policy is consistent with reasonable legislative goals and
is not absurd.” The petitioner bases her argument on the premise that because
the legislature regulates ATVs, see, e.g., RSA 215-A:21, :29 (Supp. 2004), and
has expressed, through RSA 215-A:28, its desire that New Hampshire’s
financial responsibility laws apply to the use of ATVs on public highways, it
must be the goal of the legislature that any liability policy that provides any
type of coverage for injuries or property damage arising from the use of a motor
vehicle is a “motor vehicle liability policy” under RSA 259:61. As stated,
however, the legislature could have easily accomplished such a goal by defining
“motor vehicle liability policy” to include policies such as the homeowner’s
7
policy at issue in this case. It did not. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court’s
grant of summary judgment to Allstate.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
8