THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2004-831
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PHILIP S. HORNER
Argued: September 29, 2005
Opinion Issued: March 15, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Katherine Cooper, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Michael J. Sheehan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Philip Horner, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) dismissing without a hearing his motion to
suspend a portion of his sentence. We affirm.
The record reflects the following uncontested facts. In April 2000, the
defendant was convicted by a jury on five counts of sexual assault pursuant to
RSA 632-A:3, III (Supp. 2005). On each count, the trial court sentenced the
defendant to three-and-one-half to seven years in the State Prison. All five
sentences were made to run consecutively, but the fourth and fifth sentences
were suspended.
On the third sentence, the trial court recommended that the defendant
participate in the sexual offender program, adding, “2 ½ years of the minimum
may be suspended upon successful completion of sexual offender [program].”
At the sentencing hearing, the trial court explained:
And, Mr. Horner, as an additional incentive, I have already allowed
you to petition for sentence suspension upon completion of the
sexual offender program. The law also permits you to petition this
Court after serving four years of your minimum, and demonstrate
to this Court whether any portion of your minimum sentence may
be suspended. And I want – though that is part of the law, I want
to make it clear on the record that I will at least give you a hearing
at that time if you so request.
The defendant served the minimum three-and-one-half years on his first
sentence and was paroled to his second sentence in October 2003.
Approximately four years after sentencing, on September 29, 2004, the
defendant filed a Motion to Suspend Time for Successful Completion of Sexual
Offender Program. The State objected, arguing that the defendant was not
entitled to the relief requested in light of RSA 651:20 (Supp. 2005), which
provides in pertinent part:
I. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, except as provided
in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c), the sentence to imprisonment of
any person may be suspended by the sentencing court at the time
of imposition of the sentence or at any time thereafter in response
to a petition to suspend sentence which is timely brought in
accordance with the limitations set forth below in subparagraphs
(a), (b), and (c).
(a) Any person sentenced to state prison shall not bring a
petition to suspend sentence until such person has served at
least 4 years or 2/3 of his minimum sentence, whichever is
greater, and not more frequently than every 3 years thereafter.
. . . .
(d) Petitions filed which do not meet the criteria in (a), (b), or (c)
above shall be dismissed without a hearing.
The State argued that the defendant, having received a sentence of less than
four years, was not entitled to sentence suspension, despite the language used
by the sentencing court. The trial court, noting that it “[did] not have the
statutory authority to suspend the sentence as it originally suggested it could,”
denied the defendant’s motion.
2
The defendant raises five issues on appeal. First, he argues that the trial
court conditionally suspended his third sentence and retained jurisdiction;
thus, after the defendant had served four years, the trial court was required to
hear his subsequent motion to suspend his sentence. Second, he argues that
his consecutive sentences should be considered in the aggregate in applying
the time limits in RSA 651:20, I(a). Third, he argues that the trial court
violated the doctrine against judicial ex post facto decisions by reinterpreting
RSA 651:20 to deny him a hearing, and thus violated due process. Fourth, he
argues that the State is estopped from challenging the legality of his sentence
because it did not object at the time of sentencing. Fifth, he argues that even if
the original sentence was illegal, he is entitled to have it enforced by virtue of
his detrimental reliance on the trial court’s comments at sentencing. We
address each argument in turn.
The defendant’s first and second arguments challenge the trial court’s
interpretation of RSA 651:20. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a
statute considered as a whole. Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Fischer), 152
N.H. 205, 211 (2005). In interpreting a statute, we first look to the language of
the statute itself and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain
and ordinary meaning. Id. We review a trial court’s interpretation of a statute
de novo. Saviano v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 151 N.H. 315, 318-
19 (2004).
The defendant first argues that the trial court conditionally suspended
his third sentence at the time of sentencing, and thus was required to hear his
subsequent motion to suspend that sentence irrespective of the time
limitations provided in RSA 651:20, I(a). The defendant relies in part upon the
language in RSA 651:20, I, that authorizes the trial court to suspend a
sentence “at the time of imposition of the sentence.” The defendant argues
that, in this case, at the time of imposition of the sentence, the trial court
conditionally suspended two-and-one-half years of his third sentence upon
successful completion of the sexual offender program. Accordingly, he argues
that the trial court retained jurisdiction and the time limitations in RSA
651:20, I(a) do not apply.
The time limitations in RSA 651:20, I(a) are mandatory and cannot be
waived by the trial court. See Fischer, 152 N.H. at 213. We have recognized
that, despite the time limitations in RSA 651:20, I(a):
A court that is considering suspending a defendant’s sentence,
which does not believe that the defendant deserves an
unconditional sentence suspension, but which believes that
waiting [the full time period required by RSA 651:20, I(a)] for the
3
defendant to [file or] refile a petition would be unjust, may still
possess procedurally correct options to accomplish its goal. For
example, a court might issue an order in which it acts to suspend
a defendant’s sentence conditioned upon the occurrence of future
events, such as the defendant demonstrating good behavior and
completing treatment and/or education programs.
Id. However, the trial court here did not suspend the defendant’s sentence
conditioned upon the occurrence of a future event. Rather, the court at most
created the opportunity for the defendant to return to court, prove that he had
successfully completed the sexual offender program, and argue that the court
should suspend two-and-one-half years from his minimum sentence. This
opportunity to seek suspension of the sentence after its imposition is subject to
the mandatory time limitations in RSA 651:20, I(a), which cannot be waived by
the trial court at the time of the imposition of the sentence. See id. We thus
reject the defendant’s first argument.
The defendant next argues that where, as here, a defendant is sentenced
to consecutive sentences, the “minimum sentence” under RSA 651:20, I(a)
should be calculated by aggregating the minimum sentences for each
consecutive sentence. He contends that his minimum sentence is, accordingly,
three times three-and-one-half years, or ten-and-one-half years. Therefore, he
argues that RSA 651:20, I(a) authorizes him to petition the court for a
suspended sentence after he has served two-thirds of ten and one-half years, or
seven years.
The State disputes the defendant’s interpretation of RSA 651:20, I(a),
arguing that each minimum sentence must be considered separately, and that,
accordingly, the defendant must serve at least four years or two-thirds of the
minimum of each of his minimum sentences, whichever is greater, before he
can petition for suspension of that sentence. We agree.
Reviewing RSA chapter 651 as a whole, we are confident that the word
“sentence” plainly and unambiguously denotes the punishment prescribed by a
court in relation to a conviction on a single offense. See RSA 651:1, I (1996)
(“The provisions of this chapter govern the sentencing for every offense . . . .”
(Emphasis added.)); see also RSA 651:15 (1996) (“Whenever the sentence for an
offense is to be imprisonment for a maximum of more than one year, the
sentence shall be served in the state prison.” (Emphasis added.)). We
conclude, therefore, that RSA 651:20, I(a) permits an inmate serving multiple,
consecutive sentences to bring a petition to suspend an individual sentence
after serving at least four years or two-thirds of the minimum term of that
sentence, whichever is greater.
4
In the instant case, two-thirds of the minimum of each individual
sentence is approximately two years and five months. Accordingly, under RSA
651:20, I(a), the defendant must serve at least four years of a single sentence
before becoming eligible to suspend the remainder of that sentence.
The defendant asserts that the State’s interpretation of RSA 651:20, I(a)
unfairly prejudices inmates such as himself. To illustrate this alleged
prejudice, he hypothesizes the situations of two prisoners, one serving a single
fourteen to twenty-eight year sentence, the other serving four consecutive
three-and-one-half to seven year sentences. The defendant correctly points out
that, in the case of each prisoner, there is “no meaningful difference in the
overall length of the sentences imposed.” He further observes that the prisoner
with the single fourteen to twenty-eight year sentence may, pursuant to RSA
651:20, I(a) seek to suspend the sentence twice before serving the minimum
term, while the prisoner serving multiple sentences “may never seek
suspension.” Thus, the defendant suggests, the State’s interpretation of RSA
651:20 will bring about the inequitable treatment of two similarly situated
prisoners. We find this hypothesis unpersuasive.
Though there is “no meaningful difference in the overall length” of the
sentences imposed upon the defendant’s hypothetical prisoners, it cannot be
said that such prisoners are similarly situated. The first prisoner is serving
only one sentence, whereas the second prisoner is serving four consecutive
sentences for four separate convictions. Interpreting RSA 651:20, I(a) to permit
the second prisoner to seek suspension after serving two-thirds of the
aggregate minimum of his four sentences would, potentially, effect a de facto
pardon from a portion of the third sentence and the entirety of the fourth
sentence. We do not believe that the legislature, which amended RSA 651:20,
I(a) in 1994 with the primary intent of “reduc[ing] trauma to crime victims,”
N.H.H.R. Jour. 461 (1994), intended such a generous result.
The defendant, moreover, mischaracterizes the effect of the State’s
interpretation of RSA 651:20, I(a) when he asserts that a prisoner serving
multiple, consecutive three-and-one-half to seven year sentences “may never
seek suspension.” This is true only if such a prisoner is fortunate enough to be
granted parole upon serving the minimum term of each sentence. If the
prisoner is not granted parole after serving the three-and-one-half year
minimum of a single sentence, he may, pursuant to RSA 651:20, I(a), seek to
suspend that sentence a mere six months later.
RSA 651:20, I(a) permits Class A felons to petition for sentence
suspension while prohibiting some Class B felons serving shorter sentences for
less severe offenses from ever doing the same. We recognize that, in yielding
such a result, RSA 651:20, I(a) may be seen to work an unfair result on
5
prisoners such as the defendant in the present case. We, however, regard this
as an issue for the legislature.
The defendant’s third argument is that the trial court’s reinterpretation
of RSA 651:20 violated the doctrine against judicial ex post facto decisions, and
thus violated State and federal constitutional due process protections. We first
address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231, 233 (1983).
The doctrine against judicial ex post facto decisions prohibits the
deprivation of the due process right to fair warning, which can result from “an
unforeseeable and retroactive judicial expansion of statutory language that
appears narrow and precise on its face.” Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U.S. 451,
457 (2001); see Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347, 356 (1964) (state
court application of criminal trespass statute to sit-in demonstrators was
unconstitutional because it was “clearly at variance with the statutory
language [and had] not the slightest support in prior [state] decisions”). The
defendant alleges that sentencing courts in New Hampshire engage in a
widespread practice of allowing motions to suspend even when technically
untimely under RSA 651:20, and thus the doctrine against judicial ex post
facto decisions prohibits the trial court from denying him a hearing after only
four years. However, even if we accept that allegation as true, that practice
does not exist as part of the Criminal Code and that practice was not the
subject of appellate review until our opinion in Fischer, 152 N.H. at 213, which
was issued after the trial court rendered its most recent sentencing decision in
this case. Given that this purported practice directly contravenes the
mandatory language of RSA 651:20, it was not unforeseeable that the trial
court here would reverse its earlier interpretation of the statute. Cf. Rogers,
532 U.S. at 462-64 (state court’s abolition of a common law defense to murder
and refusal to apply it in the case at hand was not unconstitutional, as the
defense did not exist as part of the statutory criminal code and had been
abolished in other jurisdictions). Thus, the trial court’s reinterpretation was
not unconstitutional and did not violate the doctrine against judicial ex post
facto decisions.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See id. Accordingly,
we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the
State Constitution.
The defendant next argues that “[t]he state is estopped from challenging
the legality of the sentence to which it did not object at the time of sentencing.”
However, the defendant cites no authority for this argument, and so we decline
to address it further, see Franklin, 151 N.H. at 509, and note only that we
rejected a similar argument made by the defendant in Fischer, 152 N.H. at 210.
6
Finally, the defendant argues that he is “entitled to the benefit of the
contract he entered with the court by virtue of his detrimental reliance on the
court’s promises of suspended time.” He does not, however, provide any
authority supporting his theory that a contract was formed between him and
the court at the time of sentencing. He asserts only that he spent five years
expecting a “realistic release date” in 2008, based upon the incentive proposed
by the trial court at the 2000 hearing. The defendant cites Breest v. Helgemoe,
579 F.2d 95, 101 (1st Cir. 1978), where the United States Court of Appeals for
the First Circuit suggested, in dicta, that “[a]fter a substantial period of time, it
might be fundamentally unfair, and thus violative of due process for a court to
alter even an illegal sentence in a way which frustrates a prisoner’s
expectations by postponing his parole eligibility or release date far beyond that
originally set.” Id. The Breest court recognized, however, that a trial court is
not only permitted to alter a statutorily invalid sentence in a way that increases
its severity, it is required to do so “when the statute so provides.” Id. at 99.
Though the legislature has vested in the trial court the power to adapt
sentencing, it may also circumscribe the court’s power to suspend, provided
that the sentencing process as a whole complies with the requirements of due
process. Fischer, 152 N.H. at 211. We have held that it is error for a trial
court to act outside of the authority granted to it by RSA 651:20, I(a). See id.
at 213. As we note above, the mandatory time limitations of RSA 651:20, I(a)
cannot be waived by the trial court at the time of the imposition of the
sentence. See id. In the instant case, the trial court acted outside of its
statutory grant of authority by proposing to make the defendant eligible for
sentence suspension at a time that contravened the legislatively mandated time
limitations of RSA 651:20, I(a). As such, we conclude that the trial court was
not only permitted to amend its error, it was required to do so.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY, J., concurred; DUGGAN, J., concurred
specially.
DUGGAN, J., concurring specially. In my view, the legislature did not
intend to deprive defendants such as Philip Horner of the opportunity for a
sentence reduction. I therefore disagree with the majority’s interpretation of
RSA 651:20, I(a) (Supp. 2005), but concur with respect to the remaining issues.
The defendant argues that his “minimum sentence” under RSA 651:20,
I(a) should be calculated by aggregating the minimum sentences for each of his
consecutive sentences. However, the majority concludes that because the
statute uses the word “sentence” in the singular, each minimum sentence must
be considered separately. We construe Criminal Code provisions “according to
7
the fair import of their terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (1996);
accord State v. Grimes, 152 N.H. 310, 312 (2005). Application of the majority’s
literal interpretation of the statute to these facts does not promote justice.
Under the majority’s interpretation of the statute, this defendant can
only petition the court after serving four years of any one of his three and one-
half to seven year sentences. However, this defendant has already served the
minimum of three and one-half years of his first sentence and was paroled to
his second sentence in October 2003. He may be paroled to his third sentence
after serving the minimum of three and one-half years of the second sentence,
and then released after serving the minimum of three and one-half years of his
third sentence. He may thus serve a total of ten and one-half years in prison,
but never have the opportunity to petition the court for a sentence suspension
because he never served four years of any one of his consecutive sentences. At
the same time, a defendant serving a sentence of ten and one-half to twenty-
one years for a single offense is able to petition the court after serving two-
thirds of his minimum sentence, or seven years. Under the majority’s
interpretation, similarly situated petitioners are treated differently. While the
legislative purpose here may have been to curtail motions to reduce sentences,
I do not perceive a legislative purpose to treat similarly situated petitioners
differently.
“We construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall
purpose and avoid an absurd or unjust result.” Franklin v. Town of Newport,
151 N.H. 508, 510 (2004). In State v. Decker, 127 N.H. 468, 470 (1985), the
defendant argued at sentencing that he was entitled to credit for pretrial
confinement on each of his three consecutive sentences, which was, in effect,
triple credit. We pointed out that his argument would result in a significant
disparity between his sentence and the actual length of the same sentence for a
similarly situated defendant able to furnish bail. Id. “Such a disparity could
have no conceivable penological justification.” Id. Thus, we did “not presume
that . . . the legislature intended the absurd result that the defendant’s
argument entails.” Id.
I thus conclude that, to calculate this defendant’s minimum sentence for
purposes of RSA 651:20, I(a), his minimum sentence should be the aggregate of
the consecutive minimum sentences imposed. Accordingly, the trial court
should be able to consider the defendant’s petition after he has served two-
thirds of ten and one-half years, or seven years. However, because the
defendant has not yet served seven years, even under my interpretation of RSA
651:20, I(a), the trial court did not err in denying his petition for suspension of
a portion of his sentence.
8