THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2004-197
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
STEVE GUBITOSI
Argued: December 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: March 2, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
NADEAU, J., The State appeals a Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.) order
finding prosecutorial misconduct and bad faith for obtaining phone records
through a search warrant issued by the Franklin District Court after the
records had been suppressed by the superior court. We vacate and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The defendant, Steve Gubitosi,
was charged in Merrimack County with four counts of harassment pursuant to
RSA 644:4 (Supp. 2004), and three counts of stalking pursuant to RSA 633:3-a
(Supp. 2004). The defendant had a similar charge pending in Belknap County
that involved the same victim. The defendant filed identical motions to
suppress phone records in each county, arguing that the phone records had
been obtained without a warrant in violation of the Fourth Amendment to the
United States Constitution and Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire
Constitution. The State had initially obtained the U.S. Cellular telephone
records through a grand jury subpoena. The Belknap County case was the
first to go to trial. The Belknap County Superior Court denied the motion to
suppress from the bench and said that a written order would follow. The State
waited to receive the written order before responding to the same motion filed
in Merrimack County. On October 31, 2003, the Merrimack County Superior
Court issued an order granting the defendant’s motion to suppress the records,
stating that “no objection was filed.” The State moved to reconsider, asking the
court to consider the merits of the motion in light of the Belknap County order.
The defendant objected to the State’s motion to reconsider. On December 12,
2003, the Merrimack County Superior Court denied the State’s motion to
reconsider without comment.
Thereafter, the State submitted an application and affidavit to the
Franklin District Court and obtained a search warrant for the same phone
records. The defendant moved to suppress, claiming that the new records were
inadmissible under the “poisonous tree” doctrine, and that the State had
obtained the records in bad faith through “less than complete and forthright
representations” in the warrant affidavit. On January 12, 2004, the defendant
filed a motion in limine asking the court to exclude any evidence or testimony
of the defendant’s telephone records. After a hearing on the record that same
day, the court granted the defendant’s motion by order issued on January 15,
2004. The Merrimack County Superior Court found that it was bad faith for
the State not to have informed the Franklin District Court judge reviewing the
warrant application that the evidence had been previously suppressed, and
ruled that the State’s actions amounted to prosecutorial misconduct. The
State’s motion for reconsideration was denied, and this appeal followed.
On appeal the State argues that its act of obtaining a search warrant for
the telephone records that had been seized earlier without a warrant did not
constitute prosecutorial misconduct or bad faith where: (1) the court initially
suppressed the records without a hearing or discussion of the grounds for the
suppression; (2) there was no legal bar to seeking a search warrant; and (3) the
court’s earlier ruling had no legal bearing on whether there was probable cause
to seize the challenged records from U.S. Cellular. Further, the State argues
that the suppression of the telephone records seized pursuant to the search
warrant was an unsustainable exercise of discretion because the trial court
suppressed the records as a sanction after it found bad faith.
To constitute prosecutorial overreaching, the government must, through
gross negligence or intentional misconduct, cause aggravated circumstances to
develop that seriously prejudice the defendant, causing him reasonably to
conclude that continuation of the tainted proceeding would result in his
2
conviction. State v. Sylvia, 136 N.H. 428, 431 (1992). The State’s act in
obtaining a search warrant for the defendant’s cellular phone records after they
were initially suppressed by the Merrimack County Superior Court did not
amount to such misconduct or bad faith.
The trial court relied upon State v. Delisle, 137 N.H. 549 (1993), in ruling
that it was bad faith for the prosecution not to inform the district court judge
who reviewed the search warrant application that the evidence had been
suppressed. In Delisle, we noted that the preferred method of obtaining
evidence against a defendant already before the superior court is by a motion
to that court. Delisle, 137 N.H. at 552. However, Delisle is not controlling
here. Id.
In Delisle, the State obtained a search warrant to seize body hair and
blood from the defendant after he had already been arraigned and counsel had
been appointed. Id. at 550. After the warrant was read to the defendant, he
asked to speak to his attorney before the samples were taken, but his request
was denied. Id. On appeal, the defendant argued that his right to counsel
under the Sixth Amendment and Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire
Constitution was violated. Id. We rejected that argument, ruling that the
taking of blood was not a critical stage of the proceedings requiring the
assistance of counsel. Id. In the final sentence of the opinion, we noted that
since the defendant was already before the superior court, the preferred
procedure for obtaining the evidence would have been by motion to that court.
Id. at 552. However, Delisle does not stand for the proposition that a party
must go before the trial court to get a search warrant or inform the issuing
magistrate of another court about matters in the case when those matters are
not relevant to the existence of probable cause. Thus, in this case, the State
was not required to submit an application and affidavit to get the search
warrant for the defendant’s phone records to the Merrimack County Superior
Court or to inform the Franklin District Court of the previous action of the
Merrimack County Superior Court.
A careful review of the record reveals that the State did not act in bad
faith by obtaining the search warrant from the Franklin District Court. The
State first obtained the telephone records from U.S. Cellular through a grand
jury proceeding. In the defendant’s original motion to suppress the phone
records, he argued that he had an expectation of privacy in the records, and
therefore the seizure of the records required a warrant. In its initial order, the
trial court granted the defendant’s motion to suppress because the State failed
to object, and made no other comments with respect to the defendant’s
constitutional claim. After its motion to reconsider was denied, the State took
actions intending to comply with constitutional requirements by obtaining a
search warrant for the records. There was no “gross negligence” on the part of
the State because it sought and obtained a search warrant from the district
3
court rather than the superior court. State v. Boetti, 142 N.H. 255, 260 (1997).
There is no requirement that the State must go to the original court to obtain a
search warrant after charges have been filed. There was no “intentional
misconduct” or bad faith on the part of the State. Boetti, 142 N.H. at 260.
Likewise, the State did not act in bad faith by not informing the district court
that the records had been suppressed because that fact had no bearing on
whether the probable cause existed to obtain them.
Omissions, as well as positive misstatements, can be construed as
misrepresentations for the purposes of an affidavit in certain cases. The
materiality of an omission is a question of law which must be determined
before the degree of the affiant’s intent is considered. Materiality is determined
by whether, if the omitted statements were included, there would still be
probable cause. An omission is material if it is necessary for the finding of
probable cause. State v. Wilkinson, 136 N.H. 170, 174 (1992). Based on the
facts of this case, we find that the omission had no effect on the district court’s
determination of probable cause.
Similarly, in State v. Breest, 116 N.H. 734 (1976), the defendant
challenged the sufficiency of a search warrant affidavit on the grounds that the
affiant had intentionally omitted certain exculpatory information. Id. at 744.
The omitted information included a witness’s statement that the victim had
gotten into a car that was different from the one the police sought to search,
and the fact that the police had searched the defendant’s car before with his
consent and had found nothing. Id. On appeal, we held that “[d]ue process
does not require that the government make a complete and detailed accounting
of all police investigatory work on a case. The mere possibility that an item of
undisclosed information might have helped the defendant does not create a due
process requirement that it be disclosed in an affidavit for a search warrant.”
Id. We further held that “the omission of the items complained of in the
affidavit for the search warrant . . . did not materially affect its integrity to the
extent that it would negative its support for a finding of probable cause.” Id. at
745. In looking at the facts of this case we find the omission from the search
warrant affidavit that the telephone records had been suppressed by the trial
court was immaterial to the district court’s determination of probable cause.
Thus, as a matter of law there was no prosecutorial misconduct or bad faith on
the part of the State for not informing the district court of the suppression
order.
Next, we consider the trial court’s ruling suppressing the defendant’s
telephone records. The suppression of evidence as a sanction for prosecutorial
misconduct is a question for the trial court’s sound discretion, and we will not
overturn its determination absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Cf.
State v. Bain 145 N.H. 367, 372 (2000); State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). To show an
4
unsustainable exercise of discretion, the State must demonstrate that the
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its
case. See Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296. Since there was no prosecutorial
misconduct or bad faith on the part of the State for not informing the district
court of the suppression order, no sanction was justified. Thus, we hold that it
was an unsustainable exercise of discretion to suppress the telephone records
on this basis.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5