THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Brentwood Family Division
No. 2004-106
IN THE MATTER OF JOYCE K. NYHAN AND WILLIAM J. NYHAN
Argued: January 19, 2005
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2005
McKittrick Law Offices, of North Hampton (J. Joseph McKittrick on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The respondent, William J. Nyhan, appeals an order
of the Brentwood Family Division (Maher, J.) following remand. See In the
Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768 (2002). We affirm.
The following facts are undisputed. In July 2000, the trial court issued a
divorce decree. See id. at 769. The decree provided, in relevant part, that the
petitioner, Joyce K. Nyhan, was to receive 45% of the proceeds from the sale of
the respondent’s Office Environments of New England (OENE) stock, and the
respondent was to receive 55%. The OENE stock sale proceeds were the only
marital asset that the trial court sought to divide on an equitable, rather than
an equal, basis. In addition to being ordered to pay the petitioner her share of
the OENE assets, the respondent was ordered to pay the petitioner a fixed sum
of money to equalize the distribution of the parties’ remaining assets.
The respondent filed a motion to reconsider the decree and did not pay
the petitioner her share of the OENE assets. See id. The petitioner filed
several motions before the trial court ruled on the respondent’s motion to
reconsider, including a request for interest on her share of the OENE assets.
See id. The trial court granted the petitioner’s request, amending the divorce
decree to award interest pursuant to RSA 336:1 (Supp. 2004) as compensation
for the delay in distributing the marital property due to both the respondent’s
post-decree motions and the possibility of an appeal to this court. See id. at
769-70. The respondent appealed. See id. at 770.
In Nyhan we held, among other things, that statutory interest under RSA
336:1 did not apply to property divisions under RSA 458:16-a (2004). See id.
at 771. Accordingly, we vacated the portion of the divorce decree awarding the
petitioner interest under RSA 336:1, and remanded the case to the trial court
to determine whether interest should be awarded under RSA 458:16-a, and if
so, at what rate to achieve an equitable division of the marital assets. Id. at
772.
Before the multi-day remand hearing concluded, the petitioner filed a
motion to prohibit the further dissipation of assets by the respondent and for
other relief. In late September 2003, the trial court issued an interim order,
“based on that which was undisputed during that portion of the [remand]
hearing already conducted.” The order provided, in relevant part:
By way of brief background, the petitioner was originally awarded
45% of certain assets. The parties agree that this amount is
$4,600,000 as of May 18, 2000. To date, $2,000,000 of this award
has been paid to [the petitioner].
Along with arguing that an award of interest from May 18,
2000 is not equitable, the respondent also argues that due to
certain offsets, the petitioner is only owed another $1,792,309.
The petitioner objects and argues that an award of interest is
equitable in this case and in addition, [that] she is owed another
$2,600,000.
The issue surrounding the interest will be finally addressed
following the remainder of the evidentiary hearing. However, the
respondent, through his own testimony and evidence has conceded
that he owes the petitioner $1,792,309. Given that the respondent
has already lost significant sums of money in the stock market
since the original decree, the Court is concerned that the money
owed to the petitioner since May of 2000 will be lost if action is not
taken. As such, the Court ORDERS that the respondent pay . . .
$1,729,309 to the petitioner within ten (10) days of the date of the
Family Division’s notice of this Order.
2
The respondent moved the court to reconsider the interim order, arguing
that: (1) he did not agree that 45% of certain assets, as of May 18, 2000, was
$4,600,000; (2) the court lacked authority to order a partial distribution of
property other than the marital homestead prior to the issuance of a final
decree; (3) the trial court committed an unsustainable exercise of discretion in
ordering him to pay the petitioner $1,792,309 within ten days without first
hearing evidence of whether he was able to do so; and (4) the trial court erred
in ruling that the hearing on remand was limited to the calculation of interest,
because the court was obligated to consider all relevant factors to reach an
equitable result as directed in Nyhan.
On December 16, 2003, the trial court issued its final order relative to
the remand hearing, in which it denied the respondent’s motion for
reconsideration, and ruled that an award of interest to the petitioner was not
warranted because the respondent had been paying her $6,000 per month in
alimony under the existing temporary order, and had also been paying for her
healthcare insurance. The court stated:
The remaining offsets argued by the respondent have not swayed
the Court to further adjust the division of assets determined as of
May 18, 2000. The petitioner is owed another $2,600,000. As
noted above, the respondent has already lost significant sums of
money in the stock market since the original decree. The Court
was and continues to be concerned that the money owed to the
petitioner since May 2000 [sic]. As such, the respondent is hereby
ORDERED to pay the petitioner the sum of $2,600,000 within ten
(10) days of the Clerk’s notice of this ORDER.
Finally, the trial court granted certain of the petitioner’s requests to
prohibit the respondent from further dissipating marital assets. The
respondent’s motion to reconsider was denied, and this appeal followed.
The respondent contends that the trial court, on remand, committed
several errors. First, he argues that the trial court impermissibly narrowed the
scope of the remand hearing by refusing to consider the same expenses that
weighed against an award of interest to the petitioner as credits to the
respondent against the amount he owed the petitioner for the OENE proceeds.
Second, he contends that the trial court committed legal error in calculating
the numerical value of the petitioner’s 45% share of the OENE proceeds. Third,
he argues that the trial court committed an unsustainable exercise of
discretion and violated his State and federal due process rights when it ruled
on the petitioner’s motion to prohibit further dissipation of assets without first
affording him a hearing. Finally, he asserts that the trial court lacked
authority to order him to pay the petitioner $2,600,000 within ten days of the
3
clerk’s notice of its remand order, and failed to consider the equities in ordering
him to do so.
We first address the respondent’s argument relative to the scope of the
remand hearing. In Nyhan, we stated:
In this case, the trial court’s imposition of interest under
RSA 336:1 exceeded the actual rate of interest earned upon the
OENE proceeds. Further, it appears from the record that the trial
court did not consider other equitable factors, such as any tax
liability the respondent incurred upon the interest earned from the
OENE proceeds. It may well have been appropriate for the trial
court to amend the property distribution to account for the time
value of money due to delay. However, to the extent the trial court
applied RSA 336:1, it was an error of law. Therefore, we vacate
this portion of the divorce decree, as amended, and remand for an
evidentiary hearing to determine whether the imposition of interest
in this case is warranted and, if so, what constitutes a fair rate in
order to achieve an equitable distribution of the marital assets.
Id. at 772 (citations omitted; second emphasis added). The respondent
maintains that the trial court erred as a matter of law in refusing to consider
whether he was entitled to an offset credit for alimony and healthcare
payments he made under the temporary order, and for half of the expenses he
incurred for the care, education and extracurricular activities of his children
during the pendency of his first appeal and subsequent remand proceedings.
We disagree. Our instructions in Nyhan were for the trial court, on remand, to
address the narrow issue of whether interest in this case was warranted and, if
so, to determine what rate of interest would result in an equitable distribution
of the marital assets. Id. We did not, as the respondent argues, instruct, or
intend for, the trial court to determine, on remand, whether the equities
required a redistribution of the marital assets.
Moreover, the respondent in his initial appeal did not challenge the trial
court’s distribution of the marital assets. Rather, he argued only that the trial
court erred in setting a valuation date for certain IRA and 401(k) accounts,
awarding the petitioner interest and ruling on the petitioner’s untimely post-
divorce decree motions. Id. at 769. Thus, the trial court’s initial distribution of
the parties’ marital assets was not challenged and any attempted contest now
is untimely.
We next address the respondent’s argument that the trial court erred in
calculating the dollar value of the petitioner’s 45% share of the OENE proceeds.
Both parties presented expert testimony on this issue during the remand
hearings, and the parties’ experts agreed that the petitioner’s 45% share of the
4
OENE proceeds equaled $4,692,810. The respondent disagreed with the
experts, but was unable to provide the trial court with what he believed to be
the correct calculation of the petitioner’s share of the OENE proceeds.
The trial court, as finder of fact, has the discretion to evaluate witnesses’
credibility and may choose to reject their testimony in whole or in part. Society
Hill at Merrimack Condo. Assoc. v. Town of Merrimack, 139 N.H. 253, 256
(1994). “Credibility of witnesses is a question of fact and we will not overrule
the trial court’s decision unless the finding is clearly erroneous or unsupported
by the evidence.” Id. Here, the trial court’s calculation of the petitioner’s 45%
of the OENE proceeds was amply supported by the testimony of two expert
witnesses and was not clearly erroneous. Accordingly, we find no error in the
trial court’s calculation.
We now turn to the respondent’s argument that the trial court committed
an unsustainable exercise of discretion and violated his State and federal due
process rights when it declined to hold a hearing before ruling on the
petitioner’s motion to prohibit further dissipation of assets and for other relief.
Assuming, without deciding, that the respondent was entitled to a hearing on
the petitioner’s motion, our review of the transcripts of the remand hearings
reveals that the respondent had ample opportunity to present evidence and
argument relative to this motion. Specifically, the transcript of the remand
hearing reveals that the trial court heard over 150 pages of testimony from the
respondent before ruling on the petitioner’s motion, and that the respondent’s
testimony included detailed discussions of his finances. Accordingly, we find
no constitutional violation or unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, we consider the respondent’s argument that the trial court erred
in ordering him to pay the petitioner $2,600,000 within ten days of the clerk’s
notice of the December 16 remand order. At the outset, we note that the
respondent has not made the payment in compliance with the trial court’s
order. Thus, we could dismiss the respondent’s argument on this issue. See
DeMauro v. DeMauro, 147 N.H. 478, 482 (2002) (where party consciously and
deliberately disregarded trial court order that bears directly on issue for which
party seeks relief on appeal, this court may exercise discretion and dismiss).
However, in this case we exercise our discretion in favor of addressing the
merits of the respondent’s argument.
The respondent contends that the trial court erred for two reasons.
First, he asserts that the trial court lacked authority under RSA 458:16-a to
order him to make the payment notwithstanding his right to appeal. Second,
he argues that the trial court failed to act equitably because it did not allow
him to be heard on whether liquidating assets to make the ordered payment
would compromise his ability to maximize the return on the assets, or whether
5
liquidating the assets would force him to sell his home, thus affecting his
ability to continue exercising joint custody of his children.
As to the respondent’s first argument, we agree that a trial court’s
authority to divide marital property in the context of divorce proceedings is
conferred by statute. See RSA 458:16-a. However, that proposition does not
end the inquiry, for there is nothing in the statute preventing a trial court from
issuing an order such as the one at issue in this case. Rather, the relevant
portion of the statute simply provides that “[w]hen a dissolution of a marriage
is decreed, the court may order an equitable division of property between the
parties.” RSA 458:16-a, II. Here, a decree was issued, amended, appealed
and, on remand, amended again requiring the respondent to pay the petitioner
$2,600,000 within ten days of the clerk’s notice of the order. Accordingly, the
trial court was not acting outside the scope of its statutory authority in issuing
the order as part of its equitable division of the parties’ marital property.
We also conclude that the trial court’s order was in accord with our case
law relating to property distributions. Generally, a decree issued by the trial
court does not go to final judgment if a timely appeal is taken. Rollins v.
Rollins, 122 N.H. 6, 9 (1982); see also Super. Ct. R. 74. Thus, in the event of a
timely appeal, a final decree does not go to judgment and a temporary decree
remains in effect. Rollins, 122 N.H. at 10. However, it is settled law that
[a]n appeal to this Court from a nisi prius court does not
necessarily stay all further proceedings in the trial court, nor does
it strip said court of all power over the proceeding in which the
appeal has been taken. The trial court may act with reference to
matters not relating to the subject matter of, or affecting, the
proceedings; make such orders and decrees as may be necessary
for the protection and preservation of the subject matter of the
appeal; and it may do anything that may be necessary for the
presentation of the case in this Court, or in furtherance of the
appeal. But, when an appeal is taken, it does affect the operation
or execution of the order, judgment or decree from which the
appeal is taken, and any matters embraced therein. After the
appeal has been perfected, this Court is vested with the exclusive
power and jurisdiction over the subject matter of the proceedings,
and the authority and control of the lower court with reference
thereto are suspended.
The general rule stated above does not prohibit the Trial
Court from passing on collateral, subsidiary or independent
matters affecting the case and the Trial Court has adequate
authority and jurisdiction to preserve the status quo.
6
Rautenberg v. Munnis, 107 N.H. 446, 447-48 (1966) (quotation and citations
omitted; emphasis added). Further, in the context of alimony and child
support, we have recognized that the trial court is in the best position to assess
the parties’ circumstances during an appeal and to fashion its orders
accordingly. Nicolazzi v. Nicolazzi, 131 N.H. 694, 696-97 (1989).
We find it appropriate to apply the principles set forth in Rautenberg and
Nicolazzi to the instant case. In doing so, we conclude that the trial court did
not err in ordering the respondent to pay the petitioner $2,600,000 within ten
days of the clerk’s notice of the remand order. The trial court conducted a
remand hearing that lasted three days, during which the respondent testified
in detail about his current financial situation and admitted to having lost a
significant amount of money in the stock market, including funds that had
been allocated to the petitioner. Under these circumstances, the trial court, in
ordering the respondent to pay the petitioner $2,600,000, was attempting to
prevent further dissipation of assets to which it believed the petitioner was
entitled; in essence, the trial court’s order was an attempt to preserve the
status quo by protecting and preserving the funds.
Furthermore, we disagree with the respondent’s contention that the trial
court failed to act equitably in ordering the respondent to pay the petitioner.
To the contrary, after hearing three days of evidence, including direct testimony
from the respondent as to his loss of funds that he admitted were, in his mind,
allocated to the petitioner, we conclude that the trial court considered the
equities and properly concluded that the equities weighed in favor of an
immediate transfer of funds to the petitioner.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7