THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2004-079
WINNISQUAM REGIONAL SCHOOL DISTRICT
v.
DANIEL J. LEVINE & a.
WINNISQUAM REGIONAL SCHOOL DISTRICT
v.
BUTLER MANUFACTURING COMPANY & a.
Argued: April 5, 2005
Opinion Issued: August 18, 2005
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and
Donald L. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Dunn orally), for the plaintiff.
D'Amante Couser Steiner Pellerin, P.A., of Concord (R. James Steiner and
Gayle M. Braley on the brief, and Mr. Steiner orally), for defendant Dutton &
Garfield, Inc.
Donovan Hatem LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Jeffrey L. Alitz on the
brief), for American Institute of Architects (New Hampshire Chapter), Structural
Engineers of New Hampshire, American Council of Engineering Companies of
New Hampshire, Board of Associated Builders and Contractors (New
Hampshire/Vermont Chapter), and Associated General Contractors of New
Hampshire, as amici curiae.
NADEAU, J. Defendant Dutton & Garfield, Inc. (D & G) appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Perkins, J.) arguing that the court erred by: (1) holding
that the statute of repose found in RSA 508:4-b (1997) was unconstitutional
and denying the motion to dismiss; and (2) denying its motion for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict. We reverse.
This appeal follows a jury verdict awarding the plaintiff, Winnisquam
Regional School District (Winnisquam), damages in the amount of $136,500
resulting from D & G’s alleged negligent construction of a replacement roof on
a middle school in Winnisquam. D & G began the roof replacement in the
summer of 1991 and it was substantially completed by the spring of 1992.
Structural problems with the roof were discovered in the spring of 2001.
Winnisquam filed suit against D & G seeking damages for negligent
construction and design of the replacement roof. D & G filed a motion to
dismiss based upon the eight-year statute of repose found in RSA 508:4-b, II.
In its objection, Winnisquam argued that RSA 508:4-b was unconstitutional.
The trial court denied D & G’s motion to dismiss and held that RSA 508:4-b
was unconstitutional because it violated equal protection. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, D & G argues that the trial court erred: (1) by holding that
the statute of repose was unconstitutional; and (2) by refusing to grant its
motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. In response, Winnisquam
argues that: (1) the statute of repose is unconstitutional because it creates
unreasonable and arbitrary distinctions between classes of plaintiffs and
classes of defendants; (2) the eight-year period in the statute is “inherently
unreasonable because it eliminates a cause of action before the wrong giving
rise to the action can be discovered”; and (3) the statute is unconstitutional
because it “creates an unreasonable and arbitrary distinctions [sic] between the
classes of defendant’s [sic] involved in the building industry who are entitled to
protection.”
We first note that the right to recover for one’s injuries is not a
fundamental right, but rather “an important substantive right.” Carson v.
2
Maurer, 120 N.H. 925, 931 (1980). We turn then to the issue of whether the
statute violates State equal protection rights.
RSA 508:4-b, I, provides:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to
recover damages for injury to property, injury to the person,
wrongful death or economic loss arising out of any deficiency in the
creation of an improvement to real property, including without
limitation the design, labor, materials, engineering, planning,
surveying, construction, observation, supervision or inspection of
that improvement, shall be brought within 8 years from the date of
substantial completion of the improvement, and not thereafter.
In defending the trial court’s ruling, Winnisquam argues that RSA
508:4-b creates distinctions between plaintiffs and defendants depending upon
“whether the injury giving rise to the claim involves an improvement to real
property.” It argues that:
[A] plaintiff injured by an undiscoverable defect in a building that
was substantially completed nine years ago is prohibited from
suing those involved in creating the unsafe condition, while a
plaintiff injured by a undiscoverable defect in the design of an
automobile that was placed in the stream of commerce nine years
ago is free to sue those involved in placing the unsafe automobile
in the stream of commerce. Similarly, an architect who negligently
designs a building is relieved of all liability after eight years, while
a doctor who negligently performs an operation is subject to an
“almost infinite period of liability.”
Winnisquam contends these are arbitrary and unreasonable classifications
under the statute and thus violate the equal protection provisions of Part I,
Articles 1 and 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution. Cf. State v. Basinow,
117 N.H. 176, 177 (1977). In addition, it argues that the eight-year statute of
repose period is “inherently unreasonable because it eliminates a cause of
action before the wrong may reasonably be discovered.” We disagree. For ease
of analysis we will address both arguments together.
We have held that the equal protection guarantee of the New Hampshire
Constitution does not forbid classifications, but requires us to examine the
rights affected and the purpose and scope of the classification. LeClair v.
LeClair, 137 N.H. 213, 222 (1993); see In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 638
(2004). The issue is whether a difference in treatment is constitutionally
permissible.
3
In determining whether RSA 508:4-b denies Winnisquam equal
protection of the laws, the test is whether the challenged classifications are
reasonable and have a fair and substantial relation to the object of the
legislation. Carson, 120 N.H. at 932-33. In applying this test, however, we will
not examine the factual basis relied upon by the legislature as justification for
the statute. “In the absence of a suspect classification or a fundamental right,
courts will not second-guess the legislature as to the wisdom of or necessity for
legislation. Our sole inquiry is whether the legislature could reasonably
conceive to be true the facts on which the challenged legislative classifications
are based.” Id. at 933 (quotations and citations omitted).
In Big League Entertainment, Inc. v. Brox Industries, Inc., 149 N.H. 480
(2003), we held that RSA 508:4-b acts as a statute of repose. In reaching that
conclusion we looked to the legislative history, which clearly demonstrates that
the purpose of the statute is to relieve potential defendants from infinite
liability perpetuated by the discovery rule. As stated in Laws 1990, 164:1:
The general court finds that, under current law, builders,
designers, architects and others in the building trade are subject
to an almost infinite period of liability. This period of liability,
based on the discovery rule, particularly affects the building
industry and will eventually have very serious adverse effects on
the construction of improvements to real estate in New Hampshire.
Therefore, it is in the public interest to set a point in time after
which no action may be brought for errors and omissions in the
planning, design and construction of improvement to real estate.
This act is determined to be in the public interest and to promote
and balance the interests of prospective litigants in cases involving
planning design and construction of improvements to real
property.
A review of the legislative findings and stated purpose for the current
enactment of RSA 508:4-b makes clear that the lawmakers intended to
promote the public interest by protecting the building industry from infinite
liability. The current version of the statute reflects the legislature’s concern
that those involved in the construction trade not be subject to an almost
infinite period of liability. The legislature’s rationale for conferring upon the
building industry a limited period of time in which a claim could be brought is
reasonable, not arbitrary, and bears a fair and substantial relationship to the
legislative purpose. Because there is no suspect classification or fundamental
right affected here, we disagree with the trial court’s conclusion that RSA
508:4-b violates equal protection under our State Constitution.
In Henderson Clay Products Inc. v. Edgar Wood Associates, Inc., 122
N.H. 800, 801 (1982), we held that the classification of potential defendants in
4
a prior version of the statute was unconstitutional. The prior version “set up a
classification whereby architects and contractors [were] singled out for
protection not granted to materialmen or the suppliers of labor.” Id. at 801.
However, this distinction among potential defendants has been eliminated from
the current version of the statute. The current version applies to all
participants in the construction industry.
Winnisquam argues that the current version of the statute violates the
Equal Protection Clause because it excludes owners and lawful possessors of
the property from the protected group of defendants. See RSA 508:4-b, VI.
However, the classifications created by the statute are permissible so long as
they are “reasonable, not arbitrary, and . . . rest upon some ground of
difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the legislation
in order to satisfy State equal protection guarantees.” Carson, 120 N.H. at 932
(quotation omitted). RSA 508:4-b was enacted to protect builders and there are
significant differences between builders and owners or occupiers. Because of
those differences, it is legitimate to treat builders differently from owners or
occupiers.
Such reasonable distinctions include the ability of owners to inspect and
maintain; the ability of owners to restrict and control those who come on the
property; the ability of owners to insure at a lower rate; and the greater
likelihood that an owner who participated in construction activities will have
retained records relating to the project, and will be better able to identify
natural forces or third parties who might have contributed to an injury. In
addition, when an owner both constructs and controls an improvement, it is
more difficult for a court to determine when construction activities were
actually completed. Cf. 1519-1525 Lakeview Blvd. Condo. Ass’n v. Apt. Sales
Corp., 29 P.3d 1249, 1254 (Wash. 2001). Thus it was reasonable for the
legislature to have excluded owners and possessors from the protection of RSA
508:4-b. The exclusion, therefore, is directly related to a legitimate legislative
objective.
Accordingly, we conclude that the classifications in RSA 508:4-b have a
fair and substantial relation to a legitimate State purpose and do not violate
principles of equal protection under the New Hampshire Constitution. In light
of our decision upholding the constitutionality of RSA 508:4-b, we need not
address the remaining arguments because resolution of those issues would
have no effect on the outcome of this case. See Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148
N.H. 121, 133 (2002).
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
5