THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Claims
No. 2004-119
APPEAL OF THE NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(New Hampshire Board of Claims)
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: October 28, 2005
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (William L. Chapman on the brief and
orally), for the claimant.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Mark P. Hodgdon, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
BRODERICK, C.J. The State appeals a decision of the New Hampshire
Board of Claims (Board) awarding compensation to the claimant, Mary Van Der
Bosch, for damages to her motor vehicle. We reverse.
On February 2, 2003, the claimant was involved in a motor vehicle
accident on Route 16B in Ossipee. The accident occurred towards the end of a
winter storm. Milton Norcross, a full-time State employee, was engaged in
plowing operations on the two-lane road across a short bridge. At the time of
the accident, the plow truck’s yellow lights were activated and the fixed plow
with attached wing was scraping along the bridge’s right-hand curb line of the
southbound travel lane. The claimant approached from the northbound travel
lane in a GMC van. While passing on the bridge, the two vehicles, traveling at
low speeds, sideswiped one another within a few inches of the double yellow
centerline.
The claimant filed a claim with the Board. The parties stipulated that
the damage to the vehicle was $3,000. After a hearing the Board granted the
claim based upon a centerline violation, finding “that the Claimant ha[d] proved
that the State was negligent when the snow plow driver crossed over the double
yellow line while on the bridge and caused the front left portion of the plow [to
come] into contact with and damage the claimant’s vehicle.” The Board denied
the State’s motion for rehearing without comment.
The State appealed, raising several issues including: (1) whether the
Board erred when it failed to address the comparative fault of the claimant; (2)
whether the Board erred by concluding that RSA 265:6 (2004) did not apply to
claims of civil liability; (3) whether the Board’s award of damages could be
sustained in the absence of a finding of unreasonable conduct on the part of
the State employee; and (4) whether the Board erred in finding that the plow
operator had crossed the yellow line.
Following oral argument, we remanded the case for the Board to make
findings of fact and rulings of law on the comparative fault of the claimant.
The Board determined that the claimant was forty-five percent at fault for the
accident and reduced the claimant’s damages pursuant to RSA 507:7-d
accordingly. We then ordered supplemental briefing.
The State’s supplemental brief challenges several of the Board’s findings
and rulings, including: (1) that the Board erroneously concluded that the State
did not raise the issue of comparative fault at the time of the hearing; (2) that
the Board’s finding that the plow truck was not an emergency vehicle is
erroneous as a matter of law; and (3) that the Board’s finding of proportional
fault between the parties cannot be rationally justified when the Board
identified no negligent act by the plow operator.
On appeal from the Board’s decision, the standard of review requires that
“the order or decision appealed from . . . not be set aside or vacated except for
errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 541:13
(1997); see Appeal of Pritchard, 137 N.H. 291, 293 (1993).
Following remand from this court, the Board “met, reviewed their notes,
the exhibits, and [the] transcript,” and made findings of fact and rulings of law
on the comparative fault of the claimant. These findings and rulings included
the following:
8. The State is subject to civil liability laws for work performed
on highways. N.H. RSA 265:6.
2
9. The unreasonable speed of each vehicle was not a
contributing factor to the accident.
10. The point of impact of the two vehicles was on the center
line.
. . . .
12. Claimant’s lane had sufficient width for Claimant’s vehicle
to cross [the] bridge while staying within her travel lane.
. . . .
15. The plow truck had yellow warning lights in operation at the
time of [the] accident.
. . . .
17. No determination is made as to whether yellow warning
light[s] are considered emergency lights under N.H. statutes,
and administrative rules.
18. The State plow truck wing blade was against the right side
curb for about two truck lengths before it came to rest.
19. The State plow truck was across the double yellow line
prior to the wing plow blade plowing against the right side
curbing.
. . . .
22. The Claimant did not take adequate evasive action to avoid
the collision, after observing the plow truck over the center line.
In addition, the Board granted the claimant’s requested rulings of law that
“[t]he driver of the State snowplow was negligent in the operation of the State
snowplow” and that “[t]he driver’s negligence was a substantial contributing
factor in causing the plow to hit Claimant’s van.”
RSA 265:6-a, II (2004) provides that: “The driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way to any authorized vehicle obviously and actually engaged in
work upon a highway whenever such vehicle displays emergency lights as
authorized under RSA 266:74.” Pursuant to RSA 266:74, I (2004):
3
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle equipped with an
emergency light to be driven on the ways of the state. This
provision shall not apply to vehicles of any . . . state, city, or
town highway or public works departments . . . or . . . private
snow removal vehicles . . . . Emergency lights shall not be in
operation except during an emergency, and in the case of private
snow removal vehicles, while such vehicle is actively in use in
snow removal . . . .
In addition, rules promulgated by the department of safety provide that public
works department vehicles may be equipped with amber emergency lights. See
N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C 3217.02(b)(9), (d)(3)(a).
There is no dispute that at the time of the accident the State-owned snow
plow was actively plowing snow on the two-lane bridge with its amber lights
operating. Although the Board did not determine “whether yellow warning
light[s] are considered emergency lights under N.H. statutes, and
administrative rules,” we hold that such lights are, as a matter of law,
emergency lights under the plain language of RSA 266:74 and department of
safety rules. See RSA 266:74, III (department of motor vehicles director
determines color of emergency lights by rule).
Given that the State snowplow was an “authorized vehicle obviously and
actually engaged in work upon a highway,” displaying authorized emergency
lights, the claimant had a statutory obligation to yield the right-of-way. RSA
265:6-a, II. The Board’s express findings reveal, however, that the point of
impact between the vehicles was on the center line of the roadway, that the
claimant’s lane had sufficient width for her vehicle to cross the bridge while
staying in its lane of travel and that the claimant did not take adequate evasive
action to avoid the collision. The evidence is clear that prior to the vehicles
sideswiping one another, the snow plow’s fixed wing blade was scraping the
right side curbing; thus the snow plow was as far to the right side of its travel
lane as was physically possible.
Despite these undisputed facts, the Board concluded that pursuant to
RSA 265:6, “violation of the rules of the road can support a claim for civil
liability as was made in this case.” RSA 265:6 provides:
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, vehicles and other
equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a highway when a violation of any of such provisions is
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. The
provisions of this chapter relative to civil liability shall apply to
4
such persons and vehicles, and all provisions of the chapter
shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or
from such work.
Presumably, the Board’s finding of liability was based upon the finding in its
initial order that the snow plow driver had crossed the double yellow line and
caused the plow to strike the claimant’s vehicle. However, the Board
subsequently found, following remand from this court, that the point of impact
of the two vehicles was “on the center line.”
In this case, it was the claimant who had a statutory duty to yield the
right-of-way to the State plow truck. Not only did the Board not identify a
standard of care owed by the State employee to the claimant, it failed to
identify any negligent act on the part of the State employee. Further, the Board
did not find, nor on this record could it have found, that the plow operator
acted unreasonably. For these reasons, we hold that the Board erred as a
matter of law in finding the State liable for damages.
Reversed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5