THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2004-095
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHELLE L. LAVOIE (BYRON)
Argued: June 22, 2005
Opinion Issued: August 18, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Andrew Winters, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a jury trial, the defendant, Michelle L. Lavoie,
was convicted of one count of manslaughter. See RSA 630:2, I(b) (1996). The
defendant appeals from various rulings by the Superior Court (Mohl, J.),
arguing that the court erred in: (1) allowing an expert witness to testify about
her blood alcohol concentration (BAC); (2) striking her notice of affirmative
defenses; (3) failing to instruct the jury on the defense of competing harms; and
(4) failing to set aside the verdicts or suppress all blood test results because the
State negligently failed to preserve her blood samples. We affirm.
On the evening of July 12, 2003, the defendant and the victim, Derran
Smith, were out drinking at a bar. In the early morning hours of July 13,
2003, the defendant and Smith went to visit their friend, Marc Labrie. While
visiting, Labrie and Smith drank beer and tequila and smoked marijuana. The
defendant also drank one or two beers and may have had some tequila. Some
time later, the defendant and Smith left Labrie’s house.
Outside, Smith was standing in front of the defendant’s 1987 Dodge
conversion van. The defendant accelerated forward, nudging him with the van.
The defendant backed the van up and then drove forward at a faster speed,
hitting Smith and pinning him against a tree. The defendant backed the van
up again, turned the ignition off and went over to Smith. Emergency personnel
were unable to revive Smith.
Wolfeboro Police Sergeant Christopher Keaton arrived on the scene and
observed the defendant crying hysterically next to Smith’s body. While Keaton
spoke with other witnesses, the defendant ran into the woods. Keaton yelled
for the defendant to come out and then went into the woods and eventually
caught up with her. The defendant fell down and Keaton tried to help her to
her feet. Keaton carried the defendant back to the accident scene because she
could not stand on her own.
The defendant was taken to the hospital. At 5:35 a.m., in the back of the
ambulance on the way to the hospital, the defendant’s blood was drawn to be
tested for medical purposes. The defendant’s BAC was .26. At 7:55 a.m., her
blood was taken once more at the hospital for medical purposes and her BAC
was .22. State Police Trooper Bruce Ela ordered two additional blood draws for
police investigative purposes. Trooper Ela directed that all four blood samples
be sent to the state laboratory for testing. Later that day, the police obtained a
search warrant for the defendant’s blood and she was taken to the hospital for
a fifth blood draw. At that time, her BAC was .04.
Prior to trial, the trial court suppressed the two blood draws ordered by
Trooper Ela in the hospital. The results of the other three blood draws were
admitted into evidence at trial. Based upon these test results, the State’s
expert forensic toxicologist, Dr. Alex Novak, testified that, in his opinion, the
defendant’s BAC was .25 at the time of the incident.
The defendant was subsequently convicted on the alternative theories of
manslaughter and negligent homicide. The trial court sentenced the defendant
on the manslaughter conviction and vacated the negligent homicide conviction.
This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in allowing Dr. Novak
to testify about the defendant’s BAC at the time of the crash. She challenges
his testimony on the grounds that it was not properly disclosed and was
unreliable.
2
We will uphold a trial court’s decision to admit evidence absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Roldan, 151 N.H. 283, 286
(2004). To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the defendant
must demonstrate that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id. In the context of a discovery violation, actual
prejudice exists if the defense has been impeded to a significant degree by the
nondisclosure. Id. at 287. The trial court has wide discretion in admitting or
excluding expert opinion. Id. at 286.
The defendant argues that the State’s pre-trial disclosure of Dr. Novak
and his report did not give the defense adequate notice that at trial he would,
by extrapolation, estimate the defendant’s BAC at the time of the incident.
Former Superior Court Rule 98(A)(2)(i) (2004) (amended 2004) requires the
State to provide the defendant prior to trial copies of all “results or reports of
physical or mental examinations, scientific tests or experiments, or any other
reports or statements of experts, as well as a summary of each expert’s
qualifications.” In State v. Gamester, 149 N.H. 475, 479 (2003), we held that
former Rule 98 does not require the State to summarize the testimony of the
experts whose reports the State has provided to the defense. Nor does it
mandate that an expert’s report contain all of the opinions regarding which the
expert may be called upon to testify at trial. Id.
Here, the State notified the defense that Dr. Novak would be called as a
witness and provided the defense with the blood test results. Under Gamester,
this satisfies the requirements of former Rule 98. See id.
The defendant next argues that Dr. Novak’s extrapolation testimony of
the defendant’s BAC at the time of the incident was unreliable. We disagree.
We have recognized that based upon the results of a blood alcohol test at
a certain time, an expert can calculate the estimated blood alcohol at an earlier
time. Chalmers v. Harris Motors, 104 N.H. 111, 112-13 (1962); State v. Baron,
98 N.H. 298, 299-300 (1953). The defendant argues, however, that for
extrapolation testimony to be admissible under State v. Dahood, 143 N.H. 471,
475 (1999), Dr. Novak was required to know or reasonably infer the time the
defendant consumed alcohol, the defendant’s body weight, the amount of
alcohol the defendant ingested and the defendant’s burn-off rate.
We find that Dahood is distinguishable from the present case. In
Dahood, the defendant refused to take a blood test. Id. at 472. Nonetheless,
the expert testified that the defendant’s BAC at the time he was stopped by the
police officer was approximately .10, with a margin of error of .02. Id. at 473.
The expert based his estimate of the defendant’s BAC on the defendant’s
known body weight and the defendant’s admitted consumption of four beers.
3
Id. The expert, however, had no information as to when the defendant
consumed the beers. Id. The expert also made several assumptions in making
the estimate, including the number of ounces and the percentage of alcohol
that each beer contained. Id. Although we reversed the admission of the
expert’s extrapolation testimony on the facts presented, we reaffirmed our
previous holding in State v. Wheeler that approved the general use of the
mathematical formula to calculate a person’s BAC without any blood test of the
person’s BAC. Id. at 475; see State v. Wheeler, 120 N.H. 496, 498 (1980),
overruled in part by State v. Landry, 131 N.H. 65, 66 (1988).
Here, Dr. Novak utilized a later blood test BAC measurement to calculate
the defendant’s BAC at the time of the accident. In making this calculation,
Dr. Novak considered the time elapsed, the average “social drinker” burn-off
rate and the amount of alcohol in the defendant’s stomach that would not yet
be absorbed. We find this extrapolation testimony reliable. See Chalmers, 104
N.H. at 112-13; Baron, 98 N.H. at 300. Any other unknown data or
assumptions are matters which affect the weight of the evidence but do not, on
this record, preclude its admissibility. See State v. Arsenault, 115 N.H. 109,
111 (1975).
The defendant next argues that the court erred in striking the
defendant’s notice of affirmative defenses as untimely. The admissibility of
evidence is generally within the trial court’s sound discretion. Gamester, 149
N.H. at 478. We will not reverse the trial court’s admission of evidence absent
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. This same standard applies to
review of the trial court’s decision with respect to alleged discovery violations.
Id.
There is no dispute that the defendant did not file her notice within the
required thirty days. See Super. Ct. R. 98(B)(1) (2004) (amended 2004), 101
(2004). Rather, she argues that because she received untimely discovery from
the State, she has established good cause for filing a late notice of affirmative
defenses. See Super. Ct. R. 101 (allowing the trial court to extend the time
limitations for filing a notice of defense “for good cause shown”).
At the final pretrial conference on October 9, 2003, the State filed a
motion seeking to bar evidence at trial of any Criminal Code defenses on the
basis of lack of notice under Superior Court Rules 98 and 101. That same day,
the State provided the defense with a letter in which the prosecutor advised
that, during a telephone interview, the defendant’s mother reported that the
defendant said that, on the night of the incident, Smith and Labrie were
pressuring her for three-way sex, they spiked her drinks with Visine and she
was in a semi-comatose state. In addition, the defendant’s mother stated that
the defendant claimed that she ran to her van and thought she was pressing
the brake but accidentally pressed the accelerator. On October 16, 2003, six
4
days before trial, the defendant responded with a notice under Rule 101 of her
intent to pursue one of two statutory defenses at trial: competing harms, RSA
627:3 (1996), or, in the alternative, self-defense, RSA 627:4(II)(c) (1996).
Although the discovery of truth in criminal proceedings should not suffer
by an overly technical application of the rules of court, we find that the trial
court’s application of Rules 98 and 101 was justified in this case. See State v.
Chen, 148 N.H. 565, 569 (2002). The information provided to the defense in
the October 9, 2003 letter solely concerned statements the defendant allegedly
made to her mother. In addition, the defendant had been notified previously
that the State might call her mother as a witness. Thus, the factual basis for
the defense was reasonably available to the defendant well before she filed the