THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
Nos. 2004-466
2004-756
SANDRA TOTHILL
v.
THE ESTATE OF WARREN CENTER
MT. WASHINGTON ASSURANCE CORPORATION
v.
PHENIX MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY & a.
Argued: May 18, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 24, 2005
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (James E. Owers and Chantalle
R. Forgues on the brief, and Mr. Owers orally), for Mt. Washington Assurance
Corporation.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green P.A., of Manchester (Robert R. Lucic on
the brief and orally), for the Estate of Warren Center.
Seufert Professional Association, of Franklin (Douglas A. Grauel on the
brief and orally), for Sandra Tothill.
DALIANIS, J. This is a consolidated appeal arising from two actions in
the superior court. The first is a negligence action in which Sandra Tothill
sued her former employer, Warren Center, for injuries she suffered during the
course of her employment. The second is a declaratory judgment action in
which Mt. Washington Assurance Corporation (Mt. Washington) sought a
declaration that it had no obligation to indemnify Center for any compensation
owed by him to Tothill. We reverse the decision in the negligence action; the
declaratory judgment action is, accordingly, moot.
The relevant facts follow. Tothill began working for Warren and Vera
Center on April 16, 2001. She was hired “to provide general companionship to
the Centers.” She worked approximately eight hours a day, five days a week.
On July 6, 2001, while in the course of her employment, Tothill accompanied
the Centers in their car. Warren Center was driving, and the car was involved
in an accident in which Vera Center was killed and Tothill was injured.
At the time of the accident, Center was insured by three carriers. He had
a homeowner’s policy issued by Phenix Mutual Fire Insurance Company
(Phenix), an automobile policy issued by Mt. Washington and a personal
liability umbrella policy issued by The Automobile Insurance Company of
Hartford, Connecticut (Automobile Insurance).
Tothill sought workers’ compensation benefits under Center’s Phenix
policy on September 13, 2001. Although its policy contained a workers’
compensation endorsement, Phenix initially denied Tothill’s claim for benefits,
asserting that she did not fall within the statutory definition of “domestic
employee” under RSA 281-A:2, V-a and -b. RSA 281-A:2, V-a, -b (Supp. 2004).
Tothill notified the department of labor that she wanted to appeal Phenix’
decision. Shortly thereafter, she sued Center in the Belknap County Superior
Court for negligence in connection with the accident. Center, who passed away
while this litigation was pending, and whose interests are now represented by
his estate, filed a motion to dismiss the negligence case, asserting that it was
barred by RSA 281-A:8, I, so Tothill’s only remedy was workers’ compensation.
RSA 281-A:8, I (1999). Tothill objected and filed a motion for summary
judgment.
Because it was aware of Phenix’ initial denial of workers’ compensation
benefits for Tothill, Mt. Washington filed a petition for declaratory judgment
against Phenix, Tothill, Center and Automobile Insurance on August 1, 2002,
in the Merrimack County Superior Court. In its petition, Mt. Washington
asked the court to determine whether Tothill was a “domestic employee” within
the definition of RSA 281-A:2, V-a, to declare that it was not obligated to
provide coverage to Center and to determine whether Tothill was entitled to
2
workers’ compensation benefits. The negligence case was transferred from
Belknap County to Merrimack County.
Phenix filed an answer to Mt. Washington’s petition, asserting that
Tothill was not a “domestic employee” within the meaning of RSA 281-A:2, V-a
and -b and, therefore, it was not responsible for paying her workers’
compensation benefits. Center filed a cross-petition for declaratory judgment.
In his petition, Center requested the court to find that Mt. Washington and
Phenix were both responsible for providing coverage under his insurance
policies.
All of the parties attempted to mediate the dispute. Though the
mediation was ultimately unsuccessful, it produced an agreement among the
insurance carriers whereby Phenix agreed to accept Tothill’s workers’
compensation claim. Phenix sent a notice to the department of labor,
informing the department of its acceptance of Tothill’s workers’ compensation
claim.
Mt. Washington, Center and Phenix all filed motions assenting to
voluntary nonsuit of Mt. Washington’s declaratory judgment action, and urging
summary judgment in the negligence action. Phenix indicated to the trial court
that it had accepted Tothill’s workers’ compensation claim. Tothill objected to
these motions.
On September 15, 2003, the parties, including Tothill, signed a second
agreement indicating that Tothill’s acceptance of workers’ compensation
benefits was without prejudice to the question of whether she was an
“employee.” Tothill accepted from Phenix approximately $70,000 in workers’
compensation benefits, including medical expenses. The agreement also
provided that the declaratory judgment action would be stayed pending a
decision on the parties’ motions for summary judgment in the negligence case.
On April 15, 2004, the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) granted summary
judgment to Tothill on the issue of whether she was a “domestic employee”
under RSA 281-A:2, V-a and -b and must, therefore, accept workers’
compensation benefits from Phenix. The trial court found that she was not a
domestic employee as defined by RSA 281-A:2, V-a and -b. The trial court also
rejected arguments, proffered by Mt. Washington and Phenix, that Tothill could
not sue her employer because Phenix had accepted her workers’ compensation
claim. The trial court’s order allowed Tothill to proceed with her negligence
case against Center. Center filed an appeal with this court on July 9, 2004.
On July 7, 2004, Mt. Washington filed a motion for summary judgment
in the declaratory judgment action, seeking a declaration that it was not
obligated to indemnify Center for liability in the negligence action. Phenix,
3
Center and Tothill all objected to Mt. Washington’s motion, and Center filed a
cross-motion for summary judgment.
On October 20, 2004, the trial court denied Mt. Washington’s motion for
summary judgment, finding as a matter of law that, notwithstanding that
Tothill was not a “domestic employee” for the purposes of the workers’
compensation statute, she was a “domestic employee” under Mt. Washington’s
policy. Accordingly, Mt. Washington was obligated to provide coverage to
Center. In its order, the trial court noted, “It is undisputed that Ms. Tothill was
an employee of the Centers at the time of the accident . . . .” The trial court
granted Center’s cross-motion for summary judgment. Mt. Washington
appealed this decision.
We are faced with several issues on appeal. As a preliminary matter, we
note that Tothill argues that Mt. Washington lacks standing to appeal the trial
court’s decision in the negligence case. Mt. Washington had standing to file its
petition for declaratory judgment pursuant to RSA 491:22, III (1997). The
declaratory judgment action and negligence action were consolidated in the
trial court by agreement of the parties. A decision in the negligence case,
regarding Tothill’s ability to sue Center in tort, clearly exposes Mt. Washington
to potential coverage liability, as evidenced by its petition for declaratory
judgment. We conclude, therefore, that Mt. Washington has a sufficient
interest in the outcome of the negligence litigation to appear as a party in this
appeal. See State v. Miskell, 122 N.H. 842, 845 (1982) (finding standing to
appeal where appellant was not party to action below, but was real “party in
interest.”)
We asked the parties to brief the question of whether each appeal was an
improper interlocutory appeal, so we will answer this question before
addressing the merits of each case as necessary. We must then determine if
the trial court correctly granted Tothill’s motion for summary judgment in the
negligence case. And finally, we must determine if the trial court erred in
granting Center’s motion for summary judgment in the declaratory judgment
action.
The trial court’s decision did not resolve the entire negligence case;
rather, the trial court granted Tothill summary judgment on the issue of
whether she was barred by the Workers’ Compensation Law from suing Center
in negligence. Her negligence case against Center remains pending. Center did
not file an interlocutory appeal under Supreme Court Rule 8, but instead filed
an appeal under Rule 7, as if from a final decision of the trial court. Rule 8
requires the interlocutory appeal statement to include the signature of the
lower court transferring the question. Sup. Ct. R. 8(1)(e). Center’s appeal did
not meet this requirement.
4
Supreme Court Rule 1 allows the court to suspend the requirements or
provisions of its rules in order to expedite a decision or for other good cause
shown. We waive the requirement of Rule 8 for good cause shown because the
issue of whether RSA chapter 281-A controls this case is dispositive, see
Guyette v. C & K Development Co., 122 N.H. 913, 918 (1982), and resolution of
the question of whether an initial denial by a workers’ compensation carrier
triggers an automatic right to sue in negligence is important to all future
workers’ compensation carriers and claimants.
The trial court’s decision in the declaratory judgment action, however,
was a final decision on the merits. The declaratory judgment case turned upon
the interpretation of an insurance policy and the workers’ compensation
statute. No issues remained after the trial court granted summary judgment to
Tothill. We hold that Mt. Washington correctly filed its appeal in the
declaratory judgment action as a Rule 7 appeal.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts in its
summary judgment ruling de novo. We consider the evidence in the record, as
well as any inferences drawn therefrom, in the light most favorable to the party
opposing summary judgment. If our review of that evidence discloses no
genuine issue of material fact and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law, then we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.
Progressive N. Ins. Co. v. Concord General Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. ___, ___, 864
A.2d 368, 371 (2005).
I. Negligence Action
To determine whether Tothill is barred from suing Center, we turn to the
Workers’ Compensation Law, RSA chapter 281-A. From the beginning of this
controversy, when Phenix initially denied Tothill’s claim for workers’
compensation, the parties have been incorrectly focused upon the definition of
“domestic employee” under the statute. This focus carried the parties, and the
trial court, off course, away from the substance and purpose of the statute.
It is undisputed that Tothill is an employee for purposes of the statute.
See RSA 281-A:2, VI(a) (1999). RSA 281-A:8, I, states that an employee is
“conclusively presumed” to have accepted the provisions of the Workers’
Compensation Law, and to have waived all rights of action at law against the
employer.
Employees whose employers fail to secure payment of workers’
compensation may sue their employers for injury, “free of the waivers and
immunities conferred by RSA 281-A:8.” RSA 281-A:7, IV (1999). An employee
may only sue the employer, however, when that employer has failed to provide
5
compensation benefits. In order to be able to pursue her lawsuit, Tothill must
establish that Center failed to secure workers’ compensation insurance
covering her employment.
To do so, Tothill argues that she was not a domestic employee as defined
by the statute, RSA 281-A:2, V-a, -b, and therefore was completely excluded
from the remedy of workers’ compensation. This argument may be based in
part upon the requirement found in RSA 281-A:6 that insurance companies
providing homeowner’s insurance must also provide workers’ compensation
insurance covering the domestic employees of its insured, unless the insured
has arranged for workers’ compensation insurance elsewhere. RSA 281-A:6
(1999).
Tothill’s argument misses the mark, however, as the definition of
“domestic” in the statute does not limit the class of worker for which an
employer may secure workers’ compensation insurance. It merely defines the
word “domestic” for its appearances in other sections of the statute. That
Center may not have been required to secure workers’ compensation insurance
covering Tothill, however, does not lead to the conclusion that he failed to do
so. In fact, employers not bound by the Workers’ Compensation Law may bring
both themselves and their employees within its purview if they so choose by
purchasing valid workers’ compensation insurance. RSA 281-A:3 (1999).
Tothill’s status as a domestic or domestic employee under the statute is,
therefore, irrelevant.
Center’s homeowner’s insurance policy from Phenix contained a workers’
compensation endorsement and Phenix accepted Tothill’s claim. It is possible,
though unlikely, that despite Phenix’ acceptance of Tothill’s claim, she was not
covered by the policy. We decline to address this possibility, as we find the
very fact of Tothill’s application for and acceptance of workers’ compensation
benefits dispositive.
As an employee subject to the statute, Tothill has waived all rights of
action against Center. Her only remedy is through workers’ compensation.
Once a workers’ compensation act has become applicable
either through compulsion or election, it affords the exclusive
remedy for the injury by the employee or the employee’s
dependents against the employer and insurance carrier. This is
part of the quid quo pro in which the sacrifices and gains of
employees and employers are to some extent put in balance, for
while the employer assumes a new liability without fault, it is
relieved of the prospect of large damage verdicts.
6
6 A. Larson, Larson’s Workers’ Compensation Law § 100.01(1), 100-2 to 100-3
(2004). The workers’ compensation scheme is based upon this fundamental
quid pro quo: tort immunity for the employer in exchange for no-fault workers’
compensation benefits. Hull v. Town of Plymouth, 143 N.H. 381, 384 (1999).
The exclusiveness of the remedy is integral to this quid pro quo.
An employee who seeks workers’ compensation, and is granted workers’
compensation, has no right to then question whether the employee is entitled
to that grant. Such a result would nullify the exclusiveness of the remedy and
unravel the workers’ compensation scheme. Having both sought and received
workers’ compensation benefits, Tothill is, therefore, barred from suing Center
for negligence.
We recognize that Tothill signed an agreement indicating that her
acceptance of the workers’ compensation benefits was without prejudice to her
status as an “employee.” Her acceptance of benefits did not affect the question
of whether she was an employee. Tothill herself asserted that she was an
employee, failed to contest opposing assertions that she was an employee, and,
in fact, sought workers’ compensation benefits because she was an employee.
This was ostensibly an attempt to preserve her right to sue Center for
negligence after accepting workers’ compensation benefits. The language of the
agreement fails to achieve that effect, however, as it is undisputed that Tothill
was an employee for the purposes of the Workers’ Compensation Law without
regard to her acceptance of benefits.
II. Declaratory Judgment Action
Our decision in the negligence action, that Tothill is barred from suing
Center by the Workers’ Compensation Law, renders moot the question of Mt.
Washington’s liability to indemnify Center.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7