THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2004-257
DR. LELAND WHITE & a.
v.
ASPLUNDH TREE EXPERT COMPANY
Argued: October 20, 2004
Opinion Issued: December 10, 2004
Cook & Molan, P.A., of Concord (Glenn R. Milner and Ronald E. Cook on the brief, and Mr. Milner orally), for
the plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas Quarles and Pamela N. Morales on the brief, and Mr.
Quarles orally), for the defendant.
Broderick, C.J. The plaintiffs, Dr. Leland and Carol White, appeal and the defendant, Asplundh Tree Expert
Company (Asplundh), cross-appeals an order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) granting Asplundh’s motion
for summary judgment on the plaintiffs’ negligence action for personal injuries. We reverse and remand.
The record, viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, supports the following facts. In November 2001,
prior to commencing tree trimming and removal activities in the area adjacent to power lines located along
Route 103 in Warner, Asplundh obtained Dr. White’s permission to do tree work on his property. On November
28, 2001, an Asplundh crew trimmed and cut trees on the Whites’ property. The following day, when the
plaintiffs returned to their home around noon after a morning trip, Asplundh was working on a State-owned strip
of land situated between the plaintiffs’ home and Route 103. Sometime before 1:00 p.m., Dr. White left his
house and walked to Asplundh’s work area, where he was struck in the head by a tree felled by the Asplundh
work crew. The weather that day was inclement, with freezing rain and snow, and reduced visibility. As a result
of the accident, Dr. White suffered fractured ribs and vertebrae, a blunt head trauma and a fractured clavicle.
The plaintiffs sued Asplundh, seeking damages for personal injury, loss of enjoyment of life and loss of
consortium. Asplundh moved for summary judgment, arguing first, that based upon this court’s holding in
Ouellette v. Blanchard, 116 N.H. 552 (1976), it, as legal occupant of the State-owned land at the time the
accident occurred, owed no duty of care to Dr. White because he had entered its work area despite directives that
he stay away. Second, and alternatively, Asplundh argued that it was immune from liability under RSA 212:34
(Supp. 2004) because Dr. White entered its work area with a purpose to engage in at least one of the several
activities enumerated in the statute. The plaintiffs did not contest Asplundh’s assertion that because it was
legally occupying the State-owned land at the time of the accident, it was entitled to the same liability defenses
available to owners of land. Rather, they argued that under Ouellette, the directives of an owner or occupier of
land to stay away are not factors to be considered in determining whether a duty existed in favor of third parties,
but should only be considered in determining if a duty was breached. The plaintiffs further contended that
because material facts remained in dispute as to why Dr. White entered Asplundh’s work area, Asplundh was not
entitled to summary judgment on its statutory immunity claim.
The trial court granted Asplundh’s motion for summary judgment, ruling, in relevant part:
Dr. White argues . . . that the holding in Ouellette abolishes the traditional
classifications of invitee, licensee and trespasser, and [imposes a duty on all
landowners] to use reasonable care under the circumstances with respect to all persons
who enter their land. The Court agrees with the [plaintiffs’] statement of the law but
finds as a matter of law that Asplundh used reasonable care under the circumstances
and therefore, cannot be found liable for Dr. White’s injuries.
(Citation omitted.) Having concluded that Asplundh had "satisfied its duty [of care]" to Dr. White, the trial court
did not address Asplundh’s immunity claim. The plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration was denied; in its ruling
the trial court declined to rule on Asplundh’s claim of immunity because there was "an insufficient factual basis
to do so." This appeal followed.
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in ruling that Asplundh had satisfied any purported duty of care to
Dr. White because Asplundh’s motion for summary judgment only contended that no duty of care existed. They
further assert that it was error for the trial court to rule that Asplundh satisfied its purported duty because
material facts were in dispute.
In its cross-appeal, Asplundh argues that although the trial court correctly determined that it did not breach any
duty of care to the plaintiffs, the court erred in declining to grant summary judgment on the basis of Asplundh’s
immunity under RSA 212:34. Specifically, Asplundh contends that the record established that Dr. White entered
its work area with a purpose to engage in at least one of the several activities enumerated in the immunity
statute.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider the affidavits and other evidence, and
all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Estate of Joshua T.
v. State, 150 N.H. 405, 407 (2003). If our review of the evidence does not reveal a genuine issue of material fact,
and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
To recover on a claim of negligence, a plaintiff must establish that a defendant breached its duty of care and that
the breach proximately caused the claimed injury. See Weldy v. Town of Kingston, 128 N.H. 325, 330 (1986).
Under New Hampshire law, for a landowner to owe a duty of care to a party entering his property, it must be
reasonably foreseeable that injury may occur as a result of the landowner’s conduct. Kellner v. Lowney, 145
N.H. 195, 198 (2000). Whether a landowner’s challenged conduct created such a foreseeable risk of harm is a
question of law. Paquette v. Joyce, 117 N.H. 832, 834 (1977).
To determine whether, once found, a duty of care has been breached, an examination of what reasonable
prudence would demand under similar circumstances is required, Weldy, 128 N.H. at 330-31, because
reasonable conduct under all the circumstances is the true test of due care, Morse v. Goduti, 146 N.H. 697, 699
(2001). In cases involving personal injuries on the property of another,
[t]he character of and circumstances surrounding the intrusion will be relevant and important
in determining the standard of care applicable to the landowner. When the intrusion is not
foreseeable or is against the will of the landowner many intruders will be denied recovery as a
matter of law. In other words, a landowner cannot be expected to maintain his premises in a
safe condition for a wandering tramp or a person who enters against the known wishes of the
landowner. Essentially the traditional tort test of foreseeability determines the liability or
nonliability of the landowner in these cases. If the defendant could not reasonably foresee any
injury as the result of his act, or if his conduct was reasonable in the light of what he could
anticipate, there is no negligence, and no liability.
Ouellette v. Blanchard, 116 N.H. 552, 557-58 (1976) (quotations omitted).
Asplundh moved for summary judgment on two grounds: first, that it did not owe Dr. White a duty of care; and
second, that it was immune from liability under RSA 212:34. Asplundh contends that as to the former, the trial
court ruled only that it did not owe Dr. White a duty of care, and did not decide the related issue of whether
Asplundh breached a duty of care. We disagree. The trial court specifically ruled that Asplundh "satisfied any
duty it owed to Dr. White." Our reading of the trial court’s ruling is that the trial court either decided or assumed
that Asplundh owed Dr. White a duty of care, and then concluded that Asplundh was entitled to summary
judgment because any duty it owed had been satisfied. While it would be proper for the trial court to determine
whether Asplundh owed Dr. White a duty of care under the circumstances, see Paquette, 117 N.H. at 834, it was
error, on the record in this case, for the trial court to grant summary judgment on the basis that Asplundh
satisfied any such duty. That issue should have been left to the jury.
The record contains a number of items relevant to this appeal: (1) copies of witness statements to the police from
John King, Dennis Aldrich and Nicholas Bishop, the Asplundh work crew at the scene of the accident on
November 29, 2001; (2) written statements that King and Aldrich prepared after the accident; (3) excerpts of
King’s deposition; (4) excerpts from Carol White’s deposition; (5) an affidavit of Dr. White; (6) excerpts from
Dr. White’s deposition; (7) portions of Asplundh’s Foreman’s Manual (manual); and (8) portions of the
American National Standard for Aboricultural Operations – Pruning, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing
Trees, and Cutting Brush – Safety Requirements (ANS).
During her deposition, Mrs. White stated that she and her husband left their home at approximately 9:40 on the
morning of the accident to visit their daughter. After they returned around noon, Dr. White remained inside for
approximately thirty minutes. According to John King, however, he observed Dr. White walking in Asplundh’s
work area at approximately 10:30 on the morning of the accident and instructed him to leave. King reported that
thirty minutes later he observed Dr. White in the work area once again, and approximately twenty minutes after
that, saw Dr. White in the work area yet a third time, when the accident occurred.
In both his affidavit and deposition, Dr. White said that he had no memory of the events that occurred on the
afternoon of November 29 after he worked on his computer and left his home, up to the point when he regained
consciousness after the accident. Dr. White did not specify what time he left his house after returning home from
his morning visit with his daughter. However, during his deposition, he denied approaching Asplundh’s work
area on the day of the accident and being told, several times, that he had to leave.
The Asplundh manual, which is part of the record, requires that audible warnings be given before a crew starts
an undercut or notch, before it begins a back cut or finish cut, and just prior to the time a tree starts to fall.
Similarly, the ANS provides, in relevant part:
Before commencing the back cut, there shall be a command such as "stand clear" from the
arborist operating the chain saw and a response such as "all clear" from the workers
supporting the removal operation. Pre-arranged, two-way hand signals may also be used.
Aldrich, who cut the tree that struck Dr. White, did not report in his statements that he gave audible warnings or
that he used pre-arranged, two-way hand signals before making cuts in the tree. Indeed, Aldrich stated only that
after making his first two cuts in the tree, he "walked up the bank to see if it was all clear" and, after ascertaining
that it was, began making the back cut.
In its brief, Asplundh asserts that both Aldrich and King testified at their depositions that they exchanged two-
way hand signals. Even assuming King and Aldrich testified at deposition as Asplundh describes, however,
Aldrich’s deposition was not part of the record before the trial court when it granted Asplundh’s motion for
summary judgment, and the excerpts of King’s deposition that were part of the record do not contain any
discussion of two-way hand signals.
The parties also contest the location of signs and cones Asplundh used on the day of the accident. Specifically,
Asplundh states that its crew placed signs and cones "around [the] work area," but the plaintiffs argue that the
signs and cones were placed on Route 103 around Asplundh’s truck, for traffic purposes, and were not placed in
or around the area where Asplundh was trimming and felling trees.
Finally, on the record before the trial court, it is uncertain where Dr. White was the last time any of the Asplundh
employees saw him prior to the accident and who among the Asplundh employees on the site last saw Dr. White
before he was injured. In addition, it is not clear exactly what the Asplundh employees did to check or clear the
area before felling the tree that hit Dr. White or how certain they were that Dr. White was not in their work area
when Aldrich made the back cut.
Asplundh argues that the record in this case supports its contention that no reasonable person could find it liable
for the plaintiffs’ injuries. We disagree. Whatever the strength of the plaintiffs’ claims against Asplundh, they
present issues of material fact, which must be resolved by a jury.
Therefore, we hold that on this record, where the facts were not stipulated, the question of whether a duty of care
was breached is for the jury to decide. Indeed, most, if not all, matters relating to the issue of breach are disputed
or unresolved. Accordingly, the trial court erred in granting Asplundh’s motion for summary judgment on the
basis that Asplundh satisfied any duty of care it owed to Dr. White.
The trial court did not rule on the issue of whether Asplundh is immune from liability under RSA 212:34
because it found insufficient evidence upon which to do so. We agree, and therefore need not further address that
issue on appeal.
Reversed and remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.