THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2004-397
DHB, INC.
v.
TOWN OF PEMBROKE & a.
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 14, 2005
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gregory E. Michael on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of North Conway (Robert Upton, II on the brief
and orally), for defendant Town of Pembroke.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, DHB, Inc., appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Lewis, J.) affirming defendant Town of Pembroke Planning Board’s
denial of its subdivision application. We affirm.
The record and trial court order reflect the following facts. The plaintiff is
the owner or option holder of an approximately 128-acre tract of land in
Pembroke. The plaintiff engaged an engineering firm, Sublime Civil
Consultants, Inc. (Sublime), to help prepare a subdivision plan to develop its
land. On June 23, 2003, after several preliminary meetings and interactions,
the plaintiff submitted a formal application for acceptance to the Town of
Pembroke Planning Board (Board) for a subdivision to be known as Pembroke
Meadows. According to the plan, the subdivision would consist of 120 single-
family building lots.
The plaintiff’s application included a subdivision checklist containing
twenty-five items, which each applicant was required to complete. On July 15,
2003, while the application was pending, Sublime met with Kerrie Diers, the
Town of Pembroke’s Director of Planning and Development, to discuss whether
the application was complete. Diers opined that the application was
incomplete because it failed to meet all of the requirements of the checklist.
The plaintiff thereafter requested that the Board postpone consideration of the
application until its August 26, 2003 meeting. The plaintiff did utilize the
Board’s July 22 meeting, however, to engage in a “conceptual discussion” of the
project and obtained some specific feedback from the Board.
On August 25, 2003, the plaintiff submitted a new application and on
August 26, 2003, withdrew its old application. The new application added a
forty-eight unit condominium for the elderly, in addition to the 120 single-
family building lots. It was scheduled to be reviewed at the Board’s September
23, 2003 meeting.
On September 9, 2003, Town counsel informed the Board that a growth
management ordinance (GMO) would be posted on November 10, 2003. Any
plan accepted prior to the posting of the GMO would be exempt from its
requirements.
On September 18, Walter Norris, the Town’s Director of Public Works,
who had recently assumed engineering review responsibilities, wrote a four-
page memorandum to Diers commenting upon deficiencies in the plaintiff’s
new application. On September 22, 2003, Sublime met with Diers and Norris,
at which time Diers indicated that because of the addition of the housing for
the elderly, the plaintiff would have to meet the requirements of the site plan
checklist in addition to the requirements of the subdivision checklist. Diers
advised the plaintiff that the application was incomplete because it failed to
meet all of the requirements of the subdivision checklist and failed to meet the
requirements of the site plan checklist. As a result of the meeting, the plaintiff
requested that the Board continue review of its application acceptance from the
September 23, 2003 meeting until the October 28, 2003 meeting, the last
meeting scheduled prior to the posting of the GMO.
On October 7, 2003, the plaintiff submitted a third set of plans for 120
single-family lots, forty-eight units of housing for the elderly, the consolidation
of two parcels with abutting property, and four parcels left for future
development. On October 22, 2003, Norris wrote Diers another four-page
2
memorandum detailing deficiencies in the plaintiff’s application. Norris noted
that the “memo is almost identical to my September 18, 2003 review of this
project.” On October 22, 2003, Sublime met again with Diers and Norris to
discuss whether the new application met the requirements of a completed
application. Both Diers and Norris expressed the view that the application was
still incomplete because it failed to meet the requirements of the checklists.
During the October 28, 2003 meeting, the Board reviewed the
recommendations of Diers and Norris not to accept the application, and it
discussed the application with Diers. Although the Board had in the past
permitted applicants to speak, the Board declined to permit the plaintiff to
speak at the meeting. One Board member commented that in his seven years
on the Board he could “not recall a time when the applicant had been denied
the opportunity to speak.” Another member stated that allowing the plaintiff to
speak would be “a waste of time.” The plaintiff’s counsel characterized the
Board’s position as a “bad faith” move to rid itself of the plaintiff’s subdivision
plan, improperly influenced by the upcoming expected posting of the GMO,
because the plaintiff’s plan would likely not be feasible under the GMO.
Nonetheless, the Board voted 6-0 not to accept the plaintiff’s application
for review because the plaintiff’s plan “[did] not conform to the Subdivision
Checklist Requirements and Site Plan Checklist Requirements . . . .
[p]articularly as discussed by Kerrie Diers and Walter Norris.” The GMO was
posted on November 10, 2003, and was adopted in March 2004.
The plaintiff appealed the Board’s determination to the trial court
pursuant to RSA 677:15 (Supp. 2004). The trial court upheld the Board’s
determination. This appeal followed.
The plaintiff argues that the Board: (1) improperly refused to allow it an
opportunity to speak in support of its application at the October 28, 2003
meeting; (2) incorrectly determined that its application was incomplete; (3)
improperly designated the duty of determining the information required for a
complete application; and (4) acted in bad faith in refusing to accept its
application. Defendant Town of Pembroke (Town) argues that it is unnecessary
to reach the merits of the plaintiff’s arguments because the trial court lacked
subject matter jurisdiction to hear the case.
We first address the Town’s argument that the trial court lacked subject
matter jurisdiction to hear the plaintiff’s case under RSA 677:15. We are the
final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
as a whole. We ascribe to statutory words and phrases their usual and
common meaning, unless the statute itself suggests otherwise. In the Matter of
Angley-Cook & Cook, 151 N.H. 257, 258 (2004).
3
RSA 677:15, I, provides: “Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
planning board concerning a plat or subdivision may present to the superior
court a petition . . . . Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30
days after the date upon which the board voted to approve or disapprove the
application.” (Emphasis added.) The Town argues that the Board’s vote not to
accept the plaintiff’s application is statutorily defined in RSA 676:4, I(c)(1)
(Supp. 2004) as a “determination,” and not a “decision.” Thus, the Town
contends that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to hear an appeal of a
“determination.” The plaintiff responds that the two terms are equivalent, and
that the trial court had jurisdiction under RSA 677:15.
We need not decide whether “determination” and “decision” are
equivalent because the plain language of RSA 677:15, I, demonstrates that the
plaintiff’s petition is not governed by the statute. Both parties fail to notice the
second sentence of RSA 677:15, I, which states that a petition “shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the date upon which the board
voted to approve or disapprove the application.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, RSA
677:15, I, requires that a petition be presented only after the planning board
has considered whether to approve an application.
A planning board cannot consider whether to approve an application
before it accepts that application as complete. RSA 676:4, I(c)(1) (“Upon
determination by the board that a submitted application is complete according
to the board’s regulations, the board shall begin formal consideration and shall
act to approve, conditionally approve . . . or disapprove . . . .”). In the present
case, the plaintiff did not petition the trial court to review a decision of the
board to approve or disapprove its application, as the application never reached
that stage; rather, the plaintiff is appealing the Board’s determination that the
application is not complete. Thus, the plaintiff had no statutory right to
petition the trial court under RSA 677:15.
Nonetheless, the trial court had jurisdiction to hear the case because,
although RSA 677:15 provides no means for judicial review of the Board’s
determination, the court had jurisdiction to consider a petition for writ of
certiorari. The superior court possesses concurrent original jurisdiction with
the supreme court to grant writs of certiorari. Bothwick v. State, 119 N.H. 583,
590 (1979). Though the plaintiff’s petition did not seek a writ of certiorari,
courts are not limited by the “technical accuracy or designation of legal forms
of action,” id., and a writ of certiorari could apply even though the plaintiff has
mistaken its remedy, Petition of Ann Crane, 132 N.H. 293, 298 (1989).
On a sufficient petition, the question is less the form of the petition than
whether there is an error correctible by the court. Bothwick, 119 N.H. at 590.
In the present case, were the Board to have erred in determining not to accept
the plaintiff’s application, review in the form of a petition for writ of certiorari
4
must apply; otherwise, an applicant could be kept in “legal limbo,” as a
planning board could exercise an unchallengeable veto over even the most
meticulous, meritorious and undeniably complete application by simply
refusing to accept it.
The Town cites Totty v. Grantham Planning Board, 120 N.H. 388 (1980),
overruled in part on other grounds by Winslow v. Holderness Planning Board,
125 N.H. 262, 268-69 (2004), to support its proposition that the Board’s
determination not to accept the plaintiff’s application was not a final decision
appealable to a court of law. In Totty, we held that intervening parties who
owned land adjoining that of an applicant could not appeal a board’s grant of
conditional approval of an applicant’s proposal because such decision did not
constitute a final approval. Totty, 120 N.H. at 388-89. The Town argues that if
a conditional approval, after an application had been accepted, could not be
appealed as a final decision, then surely a determination not to accept an
application cannot be appealed as a final decision. The Town misapprehends
the context of our holding. We stated in Totty that an applicant could appeal if
a conditional approval was denied, as that would foreclose further proceedings
before the board. Id. at 389. Similarly, the plaintiff in this case is entitled to
review because the Board’s determination not to accept its application
foreclosed further proceedings. Thus, the trial court had jurisdiction to hear
the plaintiff’s case.
We note that the standards of review for a petition for writ of certiorari
and a petition under RSA 677:15 differ; however, neither party argues that the
trial court applied the wrong standard of review, or that a different standard of
review would have affected the outcome of this case, and thus we need not
address the issue. Compare RSA 677:15 (reviewing court may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision when there is an error of
law or when the court is persuaded by the balance of the probabilities, on the
evidence before it, that said decision is unreasonable) with Appeal of McKerley
Health Facilities, 145 N.H. 164, 166 (2000) (reviewing court may reverse where
administrative body has exceeded its jurisdiction or authority, otherwise acted
illegally, exercised an unsustainable level of discretion, or acted arbitrarily,
unreasonably, or capriciously); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)
(explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
We now turn to the merits of this case. As discussed above, at its
October 28, 2003 meeting, the Board voted not to accept the plaintiff’s
application because it determined that it was incomplete. During the meeting
and prior to the Board’s vote, the Board reviewed written recommendations
provided by Diers and Norris in their official capacities, and Diers commented
publicly about the application’s deficiencies. After Diers spoke, the plaintiff
requested the opportunity to address the Board regarding the deficiencies,
which request the Board denied.
5
The plaintiff appealed the Board’s October 28 determination not to accept
its application, arguing that RSA 676:4, I, provides an applicant with the right
to be heard when the Board determines whether that applicant’s application is
complete and ready for submission. The trial court disagreed and upheld the
Board’s decision not to allow the plaintiff to speak.
When a trial court’s review of a planning board decision is appealed, we
will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is not supported by the evidence
or is legally erroneous. When determining whether a decision is supported by
the evidence, we look to whether a reasonable person could have reached the
same decision as the trial court based upon the evidence before it. Cherry v.
Town of Hampton Falls, 150 N.H. 720, 723 (2004).
RSA 676:4, I (Supp. 2004), provides, in pertinent part:
(b) The planning board shall specify by regulation what
constitutes a completed application sufficient to invoke jurisdiction
to obtain approval. A completed application means that sufficient
information is included or submitted to allow the board to proceed
with consideration and to make an informed decision. A completed
application . . . shall be submitted to and accepted by the board
only at a public meeting of the board . . . .
(c) (1) The board shall, at the next regular meeting or within 30
days following the delivery of the application . . . determine if a
submitted application is complete according to the board’s
regulation and shall vote upon its acceptance. Upon determination
by the board that a submitted application is incomplete according
to the board’s regulations, the board shall notify the applicant of
the determination . . . . Upon determination by the board that a
submitted application is complete according to the board’s
regulations, the board shall begin formal consideration and shall
act to approve, conditionally approve . . . or disapprove . . . .
. . . .
(e) Except as provided in this section, no application may be
denied or approved without a public hearing on the application. At
the hearing, any applicant . . . may testify in person or in writing.
(Emphasis added.)
As we have noted above, a board considers whether to approve or deny
an application only after the board has voted to accept that application as
6
complete. RSA 676:4, I(c)(1). As set out under RSA 676:4, I(e), a “public
hearing” is required when a board is considering an application on the merits;
i.e., when a board is determining whether to deny or approve an already
accepted application. With regard to the process required when a board
determines whether an application is complete, RSA 676:4, I(b) merely provides
that such determination shall be made at a “public meeting.”
The plaintiff argues that although the legislature used the term “public
meeting,” an applicant still has a right to be heard when the Board is
considering whether an application is complete and ready for submission. We
disagree.
RSA 676:4, I, does not define the terms “public hearing” or “public
meeting.” When statutory terms are undefined, we ascribe to them their plain
and ordinary meanings. In the Matter of Blanchflower & Blanchflower, 150
N.H. 226, 227 (2003). The definition of “meeting” is “an act or process of
coming together,” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1404
(unabridged ed. 2002), whereas the definition of “hearing” is an “opportunity to
be heard, or to present one’s side of a case,” id. at 1044. The plain meaning of
meeting, unlike the plain meaning of hearing, does not include an opportunity
to be heard.
Nowhere in RSA 676:4 does the legislature indicate that an applicant has
a right to be heard at a public meeting regarding the completeness of that
applicant’s application. Nor do the Board’s rules of procedure support the
plaintiff; under the section dealing with public hearings, the rules merely
require that public hearings be held in accordance with RSA 676:4. Pembroke
Planning Board Rules of Procedure § VI(A)(6). We conclude that the trial court
correctly found that the Board did not err in denying the plaintiff the
opportunity to speak at the October 28, 2003 meeting.
The plaintiff next argues that it should have been allowed to speak at the
meeting because the Board’s past practice of allowing applicants to speak at
meetings regarding the completeness of an application cast an “administrative
gloss” over the issue. We disagree.
The doctrine of administrative gloss is a rule of statutory construction.
An “administrative gloss” is placed upon an ambiguous clause when those
responsible for its implementation interpret the clause in a consistent manner
and apply it to similarly situated applicants over a period of years without
legislative interference. If an “administrative gloss” is found to have been
placed upon a clause, the municipality may not change its de facto policy, in
the absence of legislative action, because to do so would, presumably, violate
legislative intent. Nash Family Inv. Prop. v. Town of Hudson, 139 N.H. 595,
7
602 (1995). Since there is no ambiguity in the statute or the Board’s
procedural rules, the doctrine of “administrative gloss” does not apply.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in upholding the
Board’s determination that its application was incomplete. We disagree.
The “Town of Pembroke Application for Planning Board Action,” as
adopted on August 22, 2000, includes a “Subdivision Review Checklist” that
contains twenty-five items of “Required Information.” Regarding the
subdivision of land, the Town of Pembroke Code states: “A completed
application is one which shall . . . contain all the information required on said
forms” and “[b]e accompanied by all plans and documents required in these
regulations . . . .” Subdivision of Land, Town of Pembroke Code § 205-14, A(1),
(4) (October 15, 1999) (emphasis added). Further, the code states: “Failure on
the part of the applicant to complete any portion of the application form . . .
shall constitute an incomplete application.” Id. § 205-14, B (emphasis added).
When the plaintiff submitted its original application on June 23, 2003,
the subdivision checklist review, prepared by the Town, shows that
approximately half of the twenty-five required items were incomplete. When
the plaintiff submitted its second application on August 25, 2003, the review
shows that approximately half of the twenty-five required items were
incomplete. When the plaintiff submitted its third and final application on
October 7, 2003, the review shows that seven of the twenty-five required items
were incomplete. The plaintiff offers no explanation as to why the items were
not completed other than to say that they merely involved “minor
administrative matters.” This reason is not persuasive because the regulations
require that all items be completed, administrative or otherwise.
The plaintiff argues that it did not need to complete all of the required
information because the Board had “sufficient information to enable [it] to
make an informed decision.” The plaintiff refers us to our decision in Rallis v.
Town of Hampton Planning Bd., 146 N.H. 18 (2001). Not only does the plaintiff
misconstrue our holding in Rallis, it misinterprets the statutorily provided
standards for a completed application. In Rallis, we stated that an application
was sufficiently complete where the record indicated that both the planner and
board chair considered the application sufficiently complete and the
application included “detailed subdivision plans and the other items required
by the subdivision regulations.” Rallis, 146 N.H. at 21. In the present case,
neither the planner nor the board chair nor any member of the board
considered the application sufficiently complete, nor has the plaintiff provided
the items required by the subdivision regulations. Rallis does not support the
plaintiff’s position.
8
Nor does the statutory scheme support the plaintiff’s position. As
referenced above, RSA 676:4, I(b) provides: “The planning board shall specify
by regulation what constitutes a completed application sufficient to invoke
jurisdiction to obtain approval. A completed application means that sufficient
information is included or submitted to allow the board to proceed with
consideration and to make an informed decision.” (Emphasis added.) The first
sentence provides that a planning board in its regulations determines whether
or not an application is sufficient to invoke jurisdiction. The second sentence,
defining a completed application, merely provides guidance for the planning
board in constructing its regulations. As the plaintiff has not presented any
proof that it satisfied the requirements for a completed application as set out in
the subdivision regulations, the plaintiff did not submit sufficient information
to enable the board to make an informed decision.
The plaintiff argues that it did not have sufficient time to respond to the
“voluminous list” of comments from the Town’s engineer, and that it needed the
Board’s input so that it could resolve differences between its engineer and the
Town’s engineer. The record reflects that the plaintiff did not receive the
Town’s engineer’s final set of comments until October 22, 2003, only six days
before the October 28, 2003 meeting. At the Board’s October 28, 2003
meeting, the Board Chair stated that the plaintiff should have “provided a
written reply to the engineering comments 10 days prior to the meeting date so
that the Planning Board members could review it.” Obviously, this would have
been impossible, given that the plaintiff had received the comments only six
days prior to the meeting. To the extent that the plaintiff argues that it had an
inadequate amount of time to address certain items in its third application, we
note that the plaintiff had received almost identical comments from the Town’s
engineer on September 18, 2003, in response to its second application, and
took no steps between September 18, 2003, and October 22, 2003, to respond
to those comments, and made no attempt to file a written reply to the October
22, 2003 comments. To the extent that the plaintiff argues that the Board
erroneously determined not to allow the plaintiff an opportunity to speak at the
meeting because it did not file a written reply to the engineering comments ten
days prior to the meeting, we note, as discussed above, that the plaintiff had no
right to speak at the meeting regardless of whether it had filed a written reply.
To the extent that the plaintiff argues that the Board erroneously determined to
reject the plaintiff’s application because it had not filed a written reply ten days
prior to the meeting, we note that the record presented demonstrates that the
Board had adequate grounds to reject the plaintiff’s application because it did
not complete the subdivision checklist requirements. Thus, the plaintiff’s
argument is without merit.
The plaintiff argues that the requirement of a site plan review for its
housing units for the elderly was improperly added to the requirements for its
subdivision application. We need not reach the merits of the plaintiff’s
9
argument, because, even without the requirement of a site plan review, the
plaintiff’s application was incomplete, as it had failed to complete all the
requirements of the subdivision checklist.
We conclude that, based upon the evidence before it, the trial court
reasonably decided to uphold the Board’s determination that the plaintiff’s
application was incomplete.
The plaintiff argues that the Board improperly delegated its responsibility
for the “completeness determination” to the Town’s planner and engineer. The
record reflects that the public officials, Diers and Norris, reviewed the
application for completeness and made written recommendations to the Board.
Diers and Norris also met with the plaintiff on two occasions. The Board made
its determination at a public meeting, at which Diers and Norris discussed the
application’s deficiencies. There is no evidence that the Board delegated the
determination to Diers and Norris. Rather, acting in their professional
capacities, Diers and Norris provided recommendations to the Board that, in
this case, it chose to accept.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the Board improperly allowed Diers and
Norris to amend the Town’s cluster development ordinances. The plaintiff
presents no evidence of such action. The twenty-third required item of the
subdivision checklist states: “Applications for cluster development must
supply the information required by . . . the Town of Pembroke Zoning
Ordinance.” The record reflects that, as with the subdivision application, Diers
and Norris evaluated the plaintiff’s application in light of the zoning ordinance
and merely made recommendations to the board as to whether the plaintiff’s
application met those requirements. Further, even if the Board erred in some
respect with regard to its administration of the cluster development
requirements, the plaintiff still failed, in its October 7 application, to complete
six other items required by the subdivision checklist.
We note that, in the fact section of its brief, the plaintiff discusses the
Board’s approval and acceptance of a subdivision and site plan application for
a development called Chickering Meadows, which occurred around the time of
the plaintiff’s application. The plaintiff alleges that the Town’s engineer had
listed numerous deficiencies in the Chickering Meadows application and
recommended that the application not be accepted prior to the resolution of
these deficiencies, yet the Board still accepted the Chickering Meadows
application. The plaintiff, however, provides no meaningful discussion and
cites no legal principles that would relate this occurrence to the present case.
We therefore decline to address this allegation.
Though the plaintiff makes other arguments on appeal, such as the
Board’s alleged bad faith, we need not address them because they were either
10
not properly preserved for appeal, or they lack merit and warrant no further
discussion. Motion Motors v. Berwick, 150 N.H. 771, 781 (2004); see also
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
11