THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-315
SNCR CORPORATION d/b/a SUNCOR CORPORATION
v.
STEVEN L. GREENE
Argued: January 19, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 20, 2005
Cleveland, Waters and Bass, P.A., of Concord (David W. Rayment and
Mark S. Derby on the brief, and Mr. Rayment orally), for the plaintiff.
James M. McNamee, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Wynn E. Arnold, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the State, as amicus curiae.
NADEAU, J. The petitioner, SNCR Corporation d/b/a Suncor
Corporation (Suncor), appeals an order of the Superior Court (Hampsey, J.)
affirming a wage claim decision by the New Hampshire Department of Labor
(DOL). We affirm.
The respondent, Steven Greene, brought a wage claim against his former
employer, Suncor. After a hearing, the DOL awarded the respondent the
compensation set forth in the employment letter. At no time during the DOL
hearing did Suncor argue that it was entitled to a jury trial. Suncor appealed
and the superior court affirmed the hearing officer’s decision. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, Suncor argues that: (1) the provisions of RSA chapter 275
and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto deprived it of its
constitutional right to a jury trial; and (2) its failure to request a jury trial at
the administrative hearing level did not waive its right to raise that
constitutional issue in the superior court.
Part 1, Article 20 of the State Constitution provides:
In all controversies concerning property, and in all suits
between 2 or more persons except those in which another practice
is and has been customary and except those in which the value in
controversy does not exceed $1,500 and no title to real estate is
involved, the parties have a right to a trial by jury. This method of
procedure shall be held sacred unless, in cases arising on the high
seas and in cases relating to mariners’ wages, the legislature shall
think it necessary to alter it.
This constitutional provision extends the right to trial by jury to all cases
for which the right existed when the constitution was adopted in 1784, but not
to special statutory or summary proceedings unknown to the common law.
Opinion of the Justices (SLAPP Suit Procedure), 138 N.H. 445, 450 (1994).
We need not address Suncor’s claim that it was entitled to a jury trial
because the record reveals that it failed to properly preserve the issue. At no
time in the administrative hearing did Suncor assert the claim that it was
entitled to a jury trial and seek appropriate relief. “[I]ssues must be raised at
the earliest possible time, because trial forums should have a full opportunity
to come to sound conclusions and to correct claimed errors in the first
instance.” Appeal of Bosselait, 130 N.H. 604, 607 (1988), cert. denied, 488
U.S. 1011 (1989) (quotations and brackets omitted). In addition, “conduct or
acquiescence inconsistent with an intention to insist on a jury trial may
constitute a waiver thereof.” Elkins v. Showcase, Inc., 704 P.2d 977, 985 (Kan.
1985). In this case, the preservation requirement ensures that an employer
will not be able to delay resolution of the claim, increase the employee’s cost of
pursuing it, or gain an advantage by trying the case before the DOL and, if
unsatisfied with the result, asserting the right to a jury trial for the first time in
superior court. We will not review on appeal constitutional issues not
presented below. Hansel v. City of Keene, 138 N.H. 99, 105 (1993).
In ICS Communications v. Fitch, 145 N.H. 433 (2000), prior to the DOL
hearing, the petitioner moved to dismiss, claiming that it was entitled to a jury
2
trial under the New Hampshire Constitution. See ICS Communications, 145
N.H. at 434. After the hearing, the petitioner appealed to the superior court,
claiming again the right to a jury trial. In this case, however, the petitioner
failed to file a motion to dismiss the wage claim based upon a constitutional
right to a jury trial. Regardless of whether the petitioner argued at the hearing
that this was a contract claim, Suncor never asserted its right to a jury trial.
In addition, Suncor never asserted the right in any of the pleadings or
documents submitted to the DOL. Thus, because the jury trial issue was not
preserved for appeal, we decline to review it.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
3