THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2004-343
BRIAN D. LAMY
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 11, 2005
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Maria M. Proulx and William L. Chapman
on the brief, and Mr. Chapman orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), and Donald M. Kreis, staff attorney
for the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission, on the brief, for the
respondent.
NADEAU, J. The respondent, the New Hampshire Public Utilities
Commission (PUC), appeals the decision of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.)
granting the request of the petitioner, Brian D. Lamy, for an order compelling
the PUC to disclose the names and street addresses of certain customers and
awarding the petitioner costs under RSA 91-A:8 (Supp. 2004). We affirm in
part and reverse in part.
The record supports the following facts. The petitioner is a Bedford
resident. In May 2003, the PUC hired a consultant to investigate the quality of
electrical service that the Public Service Company of New Hampshire (PSNH)
provided in Bedford. The PUC published the consultant’s report in August
2003.
On or about August 1, 2003, the petitioner, pursuant to the New
Hampshire Right-to-Know-Law, requested that the PUC provide him with
copies of “E-1” reports submitted to the PUC by PSNH between July 1, 1999,
and August 1, 2003. See RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp. 2004); see also N.H.
Admin. Rules, Puc 308.01. Public utilities are required to submit E-1 reports
to the PUC quarterly. N.H. Admin. Rules, Puc 304.03, 308.01. E-1 reports
contain information relating to a utility’s follow-up testing upon receipt of a
customer’s voltage complaint, such as: (1) the nominal voltage and length of
test; (2) minutes below or above nominal voltage; (3) the voltage recorded; (4)
the present regulation in percent; and (4) the name and full address of the
complaining customer. N.H. Admin. Rules, Puc 308.01.
The PUC made the E-1 reports available to the petitioner but redacted
the names and street addresses of both residential and business customers.
As redacted, the E-1 reports showed the town of each complaining customer.
The petitioner sought a court order compelling the PUC to make the
unredacted E-1 reports available to him. Following a hearing, the trial court
granted the petitioner’s request, and ordered the PUC to disclose the names
and addresses of the PSNH customers whose voltage complaints were
contained in the E-1 reports. The court ruled that the names and addresses
were not exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:5, IV (Supp. 2004) as their
disclosure did not constitute an invasion of privacy. As the petitioner
represented himself, the court did not award him attorney’s fees, but did award
costs. The court found that it was necessary for the petitioner to bring his
lawsuit to obtain the unredacted E-1 reports. On appeal, the PUC does not
challenge the trial court’s award of costs. Because the trial court did not
award attorney’s fees and the petitioner has not yet sought attorney’s fees on
appeal, we do not address the parties’ arguments about whether he was or is
entitled to such fees.
On appeal, the PUC argues that the trial court erroneously weighed the
competing interests involved in disclosing the unredacted E-1 reports under
the Right-to-Know Law. The interpretation of a statute is ultimately decided by
this court. Union Leader Corp. v. City of Nashua, 141 N.H. 473, 475 (1996).
The ordinary rules of statutory construction apply to our review of the Right-to-
Know Law. Id. We begin by examining the plain meaning of the words used in
the statute. Id. We consider legislative history only if the statutory language is
2
ambiguous. Goode v. N.H. Legislative Budget Assistant, 148 N.H. 551, 554
(2002). “To advance the purposes of the Right-to-Know Law, we construe
provisions favoring disclosure broadly and exemptions narrowly.” City of
Nashua, 141 N.H. at 475. By so doing, we “best effectuate the statutory and
constitutional objective of facilitating access to all public documents.” Union
Leader Corp. v. N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. 540, 546 (1997). Because
exemptions under the Right-to-Know Law are similar to those under the federal
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), we often look to federal decisions
construing the FOIA for guidance. See Mans v. Lebanon School Bd., 112 N.H.
160, 162-63 (1972); see also N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. at 554.
The Right-to-Know Law specifically exempts from disclosure “files whose
disclosure would constitute invasion of privacy.” RSA 91-A:5, IV. This section
of the Right-to-Know Law “means that financial information and personnel files
and other information necessary to an individual’s privacy need not be
disclosed.” Mans, 112 N.H. at 162.
We engage in a three-step analysis when considering whether disclosure
of public records constitutes an invasion of privacy under RSA 91-A:5, IV. N.H.
Civil Liberties Union v. City of Manchester, 149 N.H. 437, 440 (2003). First, we
evaluate whether there is a privacy interest at stake that would be invaded by
the disclosure. Id. If no privacy interest is at stake, the Right-to-Know Law
mandates disclosure. Id.
Next, we assess the public’s interest in disclosure. Id. Disclosure of the
requested information should inform the public about the conduct and
activities of their government. Id. Finally, we balance the public interest in
disclosure against the government interest in nondisclosure and the
individual’s privacy interest in nondisclosure. Id.
When, as in this appeal, the facts are undisputed, “we review the trial
court’s balancing of the public’s interest in disclosure and the interests in
nondisclosure de novo.” City of Nashua, 141 N.H. at 476. The party resisting
disclosure bears a heavy burden to shift the balance towards nondisclosure.
N.H. Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 440. We hold that the PUC has met this
heavy burden with respect to residential customers, but not with respect to
business customers.
We begin by analyzing whether PSNH’s business customers have a
privacy interest in the nondisclosure of their names and addresses. In its brief,
the PUC admits that “the privacy interest of a business customer is not
necessarily coextensive with that of a residential customer.” The PUC contends
that PSNH’s business customers have a privacy interest in not disclosing their
names and addresses because they “would likely be unaware that [their]
3
communications with [their] utility provider in the course of a private
relationship would be disclosed as public records.” Whether information is
exempt from disclosure because it is private is judged by an objective standard
and not by a party’s subjective expectations, however. Cf. Goode, 148 N.H. at
554 (exemption claimed on confidentiality grounds, not privacy grounds).
The PUC makes no further argument concerning PSNH’s business
customers. Accordingly, we hold that it has failed to establish that these
customers have a privacy interest at stake. Absent a privacy interest, the
Right-to-Know Law mandates disclosure of their names and addresses. See
N.H. Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 440. We thus affirm this aspect of the
trial court’s decision.
We next address the nature of the privacy interest of PSNH’s residential
customers. As the petitioner concedes, these customers have a privacy interest
in the disclosure of their names and home addresses. See Brent v. Paquette,
132 N.H. 415, 427-28 (1989). As we recognized in Brent, disclosing a person’s
name and address implicates that person’s privacy rights “because [the
disclosure] serves as a conduit into the sanctuary of the home.” Id. at 428
(quotation omitted).
We are cognizant that the privacy interest of residential customers in this
case is weaker than in cases where names and addresses are associated with
other private information, such as financial information. See Sheet Metal
Workers Local No. 9 v. U.S. Air Force, 63 F.3d 994, 997 (10th Cir. 1995). There
is only a “modest privacy interest” assigned to an individual’s “bare name[ ] and
home address[ ].” FLRA v. U.S. Dept. of Navy, Naval Com. Unit, 941 F.2d 49,
55 (1st Cir. 1991).
We are cognizant, as well, that individual names and home addresses are
often publicly available. Department of Defense v. FLRA, 510 U.S. 487, 500
(1994). We believe, however, that a “discernable interest exists in the ability to
retreat to the seclusion of one’s home and to avoid enforced disclosure of one’s
[name and] address.” U.S. Dept. of Navy, 941 F.2d at 55-56. The United
States Supreme Court has recognized that individuals have “some nontrivial
privacy interest” in avoiding the influx of unwanted, unsolicited mail or the
telephone calls and visits that could follow from disclosure of their names and
home addresses. FLRA, 510 U.S. at 501.
The privacy interest at stake concerns the individual’s control of
information about his or her person. Id. at 500. “In our society, individuals
generally have a large measure of control over the disclosure of their own
identities and whereabouts.” National Ass’n of Retired Federal Emp. v. Horner,
879 F.2d 873, 875 (D.C. Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 494 U.S. 1078 (1990). This
4
“is evidenced by unlisted telephone numbers, by which subscribers may avoid
publication of an address in the public directory, and postal boxes, which
permit the receipt of mail without disclosing the location of one’s residence.”
Id. (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
“[W]hen we consider that other parties, such as commercial advertisers
and solicitors, must have the same access” under the Right-to-Know Law as
the petitioner, it becomes “clear that the individual privacy interest that would
be protected by nondisclosure is far from insignificant.” FLRA, 510 U.S. at
501. The Right-to-Know Law “gives any member of the public as much right to
disclosure as one with a special interest in a particular document.” City of
Nashua, 141 N.H. at 476 (quotation and brackets omitted). This is why “the
motivations of any member of the public are irrelevant to the question of
access.” Id. (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted). Information that is
subject to disclosure under the Right-to-Know Law “belongs to citizens to do
with as they choose. . . . As a general rule, if the information is subject to
disclosure, it belongs to all.” National Archives and Records v. Favish, 124 S.
Ct. 1570, 1580 (2004).
Having determined that the residential customers have a privacy interest
at stake, we next consider the public interest in disclosing their names and
home addresses. The public interest that the Right-to-Know Law was intended
to serve concerns “informing the citizenry about the activities of their
government.” City of Nashua, 141 N.H. at 477 (quotation omitted). The
purpose of the law is “to provide the utmost information to the public about
what its government is up to.” Id. at 476 (quotation omitted). If disclosing the
information does not serve this purpose, “disclosure will not be warranted even
though the public may nonetheless prefer, albeit for other reasons, that the
information be released.” Id. at 477 (quotation omitted).
Here, disclosure of the names and addresses will not tell the public
anything directly about what the PUC “is up to.” The E-1 reports themselves
describe actions taken by utility companies, not the PUC. The names and
addresses of residential complainants will enable the public to know who
submitted a voltage complaint to PSNH and where the voltage issue occurred.
The addition of names and addresses to the E-1 reports will not enable the
public to know whether or how the PUC investigated PSNH’s response to
voltage complaints, or whether the PUC took any action against PSNH because
of its response to voltage complaints. The names and addresses will reveal
nothing about the PUC’s own conduct. See N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H.
at 554.
The asserted public interest in disclosing these names and addresses
“stems not from the disclosure of the redacted information itself, but rather
5
from the hope that [the petitioner], or others, may be able to use that
information to obtain additional information outside the [PUC’s] files.”
Department of State v. Ray, 502 U.S. 164, 178 (1991). The public has an
interest in the disclosure of the names and addresses solely because of how
they can be used by the petitioner, or others, to discover additional information
about the PUC. For instance, the petitioner, or others, could use the names
and addresses to contact PSNH customers to inquire further about their
voltage complaints and the PUC’s investigation of PSNH’s response to them.
This kind of public interest has been termed a “derivative use.” Id. at 178
(quotation omitted).
We have not directly addressed whether the derivative use of information,
alone, can ever justify release of information about private individuals under
the Right-to-Know Law. In Goode, we permitted public access to interviews
conducted by the State Legislative Budget Assistant because disclosure helped
“to ensure accuracy in the audit process by providing the public with an
opportunity to evaluate the information collected and verify that it is consistent
with the LBA’s final audit report.” Goode, 148 N.H. at 555.
This derivative use of the information, however, was not the sole public
interest in disclosure of the interviews. The LBA conducted many of the
interviews to obtain information about the effectiveness of the State’s Property
and Casualty Loss Program. Id. The content of the interviews themselves thus
shed light directly upon the State Property and Casualty Loss Program and
upon how the LBA conducted its audit. Id. Disclosing the interviews thus fell
squarely within the core purpose of the Right-to-Know Law. See City of
Nashua, 141 N.H. at 477. Here, by contrast, the sole public purpose served by
disclosing the names and home addresses of PSNH customers who filed voltage
complaints is the derivative use to which this information could be put.
Federal circuit courts of appeal construing the FOIA disagree as to
whether the derivative use of information is a cognizable public interest.
Compare Painting And Drywall Work Preservation Fund v. HUD, 936 F.2d
1300, 1303 (D.C. Cir. 1991) (derivative use is cognizable under FOIA) with U.S
Dept. of Navy v. Federal Labor Rel. Auth., 975 F.2d 348, 355 n.3 (7th Cir. 1992)
(to find public interest in disclosure because of derivative use of information
would dismantle privacy protections). The United States Supreme Court in Ray
expressly declined to address the issue. Ray, 502 U.S. at 179.
Even those courts that recognize that the derivative use of disclosed
information may serve the public interest in being informed about what the
government is up to acknowledge that this interest carries little weight. See
HUD, 936 F.2d at 1303. That names and addresses “might provide leads for
an investigative reporter seeking to ferret out what government is up to . . .
6
do[es] little more than raise the public interest in disclosure above . . .
nothing.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted).
Consistent with Goode, we avoid any “categorical rule” that would
exclude the derivative use of requested information from consideration. Ray,
502 U.S. at 178. We agree, however, with the courts that have held that when
the derivative use of information is the only public interest in its disclosure, it
has little weight. Although there might be some public interest in knowing the
names and addresses of residential customers who filed voltage complaints
with PSNH, the central purpose of the Right-to-Know Law “is to ensure that the
Government’s activities be opened to the sharp eye of public scrutiny, not that
information about private citizens that happens to be in the warehouse of the
Government be so disclosed.” U.S. Dept. of Justice v. Reporters Committee,
489 U.S. 749, 774 (1989). When the sole public interest in disclosing the
information is only tangentially related to the central purpose of the Right-to-
Know Law, we decline to accord it great weight. See City of Nashua, 141 N.H.
at 473.
Against this “virtually nonexistent [Right-to-Know Law]-related public
interest in disclosure,” we weigh the interests of PSNH’s residential customers
in nondisclosure of their names and home addresses. FLRA, 510 U.S. at 500.
The public interest in disclosing customer names and addresses so that they
may be contacted at home does not outweigh their privacy interest in not being
disturbed at home. See U.S. Dept. of Navy, 941 F.2d at 58. The petitioner and
others have less intrusive means by which to procure the information they
seek, including advertising an investigation into voltage complaints made to
PSNH and soliciting assistance from town residents. See Heights Community
Congress v. Veterans Administration, 732 F.2d 526, 530 (6th Cir.), cert. denied,
469 U.S. 1034 (1984). Moreover, the petitioner has failed to demonstrate how
disclosing these names and addresses will contribute to assessing the PUC’s
investigations of utility response to voltage complaints. See Ray, 502 U.S. at
178.
We hold, therefore, that the petitioner’s hypothetical assessment of the
PUC’s performance is mere speculation, and that this public interest in
disclosure is outweighed by the privacy interests implicated in this case. See
id. at 179; see also Favish, 124 S. Ct. at 1581 (if information is sought to show
that agency acted negligently, requester must put forth “evidence that would
warrant a belief by a reasonable person that the alleged Government
impropriety might have occurred”).
Affirmed in part and reversed in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7