THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2004-634
MICHAEL S. SHERMAN, M.D.
v.
JOSEPH M. GRACIANO, M.D. & a.
Argued: March 23, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 11, 2005
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris and Cathryn E. Vaughn on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the
plaintiff.
James H. Schulte, of Dover, on the brief and orally, for the defendants.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Michael S. Sherman, M.D., appeals an order
of the Superior Court (Mohl, J.) upholding an arbitrator’s decision that the
language of the contract between the parties was ambiguous. We reverse and
remand.
The record supports the following facts. In December 1995, defendant
Dover Internal Medicine, P.A. (Corporation) entered into an employment
agreement with the plaintiff. The employment agreement provided that the
plaintiff would be an employee for eighteen months and would thereafter join
defendants Joseph M. Graciano, M.D., and Paul T. Berry, M.D., as a
shareholder in the Corporation, according to a buy-in formula. After the
plaintiff completed his installment payments, he acquired a one-third interest
in the assets of the Corporation.
In April 1999, the Corporation’s shareholders executed a stock
redemption agreement (Agreement). It included a formula for establishing the
value of a departing shareholder’s stock which the Corporation would purchase
upon the termination of employment. Graciano and Berry signed the
Agreement; the plaintiff did not.
In October 2002, the plaintiff notified the defendants that he was
withdrawing as a partner from their medical practice. Because the parties
could not agree on the amount the plaintiff was to be paid upon his departure,
he filed suit. At the parties’ request, the superior court sent the case to
binding arbitration pursuant to RSA 542:3-a (1997). In a February 2004
decision, the arbitrator determined that: (1) the plaintiff “is a party to the
[Agreement] in accordance with RSA 293-A:7.32” and, therefore, that it
governed the buy-out of his interest from the practice upon his departure; (2)
the Agreement provision describing the amount owed to a departing
shareholder was “ambiguous”; (3) there was not “any factual or legal basis to
various offsets urged by [the Corporation]”; and (4) the plaintiff was entitled to
$99,652, plus interest.
All parties moved for the superior court to modify the arbitrator’s
decision. See RSA 542:8 (1997). The plaintiff argued that the arbitrator
committed plain mistake in determining that the Agreement’s buy-out clause
was ambiguous. The trial court disagreed, and the plaintiff appealed. See RSA
542:10 (1997).
An arbitration decision may be corrected or modified upon a showing
that the arbitrator committed “plain mistake.” RSA 542:8; John A. Cookson
Co. v. N.H. Ball Bearings, 147 N.H. 352, 356 (2001). An award may be vacated
for plain mistake when it is determined that an arbitrator misapplied the law to
the facts. See Turcotte v. Griffin, 120 N.H. 292, 293 (1980).
At issue here is article II, section c in the Agreement, which describes the
amount owed to a departing shareholder. Specifically, it provides that the
departing shareholder will be paid:
[a]n amount equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the actual
collections received by the Corporation for medical services
provided to patients of the Corporation for the twelve (12) month
period ending at the end of the fiscal quarter which next preceded
the date of the event that caused the termination of the ownership
interest in the Corporation.
2
In addressing the plaintiff’s claims regarding article II, section c, the
arbitrator stated:
[T]he calculation of the buy-out is ambiguous, and based upon all
of the surrounding circumstances, is properly interpreted as
applying to the collections of the departing physician during the
prior year, rather than the practice as a whole. A contrary
interpretation would lead to an unreasonable and unfair result.
Upon review, the superior court stated that since the parties disagreed as to
the interpretation of the pertinent clause, and both interpretations were
“reasonable,” the arbitrator correctly considered parol evidence regarding the
Corporation’s finances and the parties’ intentions. See MacLeod v. Chalet
Susse Int’l, Inc., 119 N.H. 238, 243 (1979) (stating that where parties draft an
agreement that leaves uncertain their mutual intent, relevant extrinsic
evidence should not be excluded). Because the court determined that the
arbitrator could have found the defendants’ interpretation to be correct, it
found no plain mistake in the arbitrator’s interpretation of the Agreement.
The plaintiff argues that the superior court erred in finding that the
arbitrator did not commit plain mistake when it ruled that the buy-out
provision clause in the Agreement was ambiguous. Specifically, the plaintiff
submits that, “where the terms ‘Corporation’ and ‘Stockholder’ were defined by
contract, and where the parties distinguished throughout their contract
between ‘Stockholder’ and ‘Corporation,’ the arbitrator and the trial court erred
when they found that reasonable minds could differ on the meaning of the
questioned clause.”
The defendants argue that the arbitrator did not commit plain mistake.
They contend that article II, section c is ambiguous because it does not specify
whether the “medical services” are those provided by the departing shareholder
or those provided by all of the employees of the Corporation. The defendants
would read the disputed provision to say, “twenty-five percent (25%) of the
actual collections received by the Corporation for medical services provided by
the shareholder.” In support of their argument, the defendants rely upon Dr.
Graciano’s testimony that the provision of the agreement “could be interpreted
either way,” and that the interpretation urged by the plaintiff’s counsel was not
what he and Dr. Berry intended.
Because the Agreement is a contract, we apply the general rules of
contract interpretation in our review. See Robbins v. Salem Radiology, 145
N.H. 415, 417 (2000) (applying general rules of contract interpretation to a
partnership agreement). The interpretation of a contract, including whether a
contract term is ambiguous, is ultimately a question of law for this court to
decide. Duke/Fluor Daniel v. Hawkeye Funding, 150 N.H. 581, 582 (2004).
3
Accordingly, we review the trial court’s interpretation of the contract de novo.
Id. A clause is ambiguous when the contracting parties reasonably differ as to
its meaning. Appeal of Town of Durham, 149 N.H. 486, 487 (2003). Absent
fraud, duress, mutual mistake, or ambiguity, we must restrict our search for
the parties’ intent to the words of the contract. Id. Accordingly, we will reverse
the determination of the fact finder where, although the terms of the agreement
are unambiguous, the fact finder has improperly relied upon extrinsic evidence
in reaching a determination contrary to the unambiguous language of the
agreement. Id.
We conclude that article II, section c is not ambiguous, and that it clearly
provides that a departing physician is entitled to receive twenty-five percent of
the collections received by the entire Corporation. Language exists in the
Agreement to support this conclusion. “Corporation” is specified as Dover
Internal Medicine, P.A., and “Stockholders” are listed as Drs. Graciano and
Berry. Accordingly, it is clear that collections received by the “Corporation”
refers to the collections received by the medical practice as a whole, and that
medical services provided by the “Corporation” means services provided to
patients of the medical practice as a whole. Further, the accountant for the
Corporation testified as to the amount of actual collections received by the
Corporation—an amount which reflected collections of the entire medical
practice.
Moreover, Graciano’s testimony supports the lack of ambiguity in section
c. When asked about his understanding of the section, he testified as follows:
Q: And you understand actual collections received by the
corporation as . . . referring to what?
A: Well, I don’t know. It sounds like it could be interpreted either
way. It could be actual collections by the whole corporation or I’d
like to think it referred to actual collections by . . . the person who
generated the collections.
Q: Of course, that’s not what it says though?
A: Correct. Correct.
. . . .
Q: But when you entered into the shareholder agreement, that’s
not the way you were going to have somebody bought out, correct,
based strictly upon what patient belonged to which doctor?
A: No. No. No.
4
Q: And, in fact, you . . . can read this . . . language. You don’t
have any problems understanding that this says that “collections
received by the corporation” and understanding that that means
collections received by the corporation, right?
A: Correct.
Q: You just would have rather it say something different, correct?
A: Yes.
According to this testimony, Graciano did not say that the Agreement was
ambiguous, only that he wished the words said something different. He also
made it clear that, at the time he signed the Agreement, he did not understand
that the parties would be bought out based strictly upon which patients
belonged to which doctor.
We thus hold that a reasonable person, considering the plain language of
the contract, would conclude that the language of article II, section c is not
ambiguous. Therefore, any difference in the parties’ interpretation of the
agreement was not reasonable, see Appeal of Town of Durham, 149 N.H. at
487, and thus the arbitrator misapplied the law to the facts. See Turcotte, 120
N.H. at 295. Accordingly, the arbitrator should have restricted his search for
the parties’ intent to the words of the contract and should not have considered
extrinsic evidence in interpreting the Agreement. See Appeal of Town of
Durham, 149 N.H. at 487. Because the arbitrator calculated the plaintiff’s
share of the assets based upon an error of law, we conclude that the superior
court erred by finding that the arbitrator did not commit plain mistake in
interpreting the Agreement. Therefore, we remand to the superior court with
instructions to remand to the arbitrator to determine what amount the plaintiff
should be granted upon departing from the Corporation. See Cookson, 147
N.H. at 362 (remanding to superior court, after arbitrator denied plaintiff
interest based upon an error of law, with instructions to remand to arbitrator
to determine whether interest should be awarded).
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ.,
concurred.
5