THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2004-808
JENNY THOMPSON
v.
C&C RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT LLC, & a.
Argued: February 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 27, 2006
Burns, Bryant, Cox, Rockefeller & Durkin, P.A., of Dover (Paul R. Cox on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
D'Amante Couser Steiner Pellerin, P.A., of Concord (R. James Steiner
and Gayle M. Braley on the brief, and Mr. Steiner orally), for defendants C&C
Research and Development, LLC, Estate of Ralph Cutillo, Total Body Wellness
Franchising, LLC, and Health-Style, USA, Inc.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Jenny Thompson, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) concluding: (1) that no legally enforceable merger
or asset purchase agreement occurred between the defendants; (2) that the
record was devoid of evidence of any misappropriation of Thompson’s name
and likeness; and (3) that defendant Pure Distributors, Inc. (Pure) is exclusively
responsible for the judgment in this case. We affirm.
The trial court found the following relevant facts. In 1998, Thompson, a
former Olympic gold medal swimmer, and Matthew Freese, President and CEO
of Pure, entered into an endorsement contract, whereby Pure agreed to pay
Thompson scheduled sums in return for her endorsement of Pure’s nutritional
products and services. Under the terms of the contract, Thompson allowed
Pure to use her image on its web site and promotional materials.
Subsequently, Pure began to experience financial difficulties. In an effort to
recover, Freese met with Ralph Cutillo, owner and operator of defendants C&C
Research and Development, LLC, Total Body Wellness Franchising, LLC, and
Health-Style, USA, Inc. (the Cutillo defendants). Cutillo expressed interest in
purchasing Pure’s assets through C&C Research and Development LLC (C&C
Research) with the understanding that any such purchase would not include
the assumption of Pure’s liabilities.
During the ensuing negotiations, much of Pure’s equipment, inventory
and office supplies were delivered to C&C Research’s facilities in Laconia. By
December 2000, Pure’s office was closed and by January 2001, most, if not all,
of Pure’s tangible assets were located at C&C Research’s facilities. On January
9, 2001, Freese authorized Pure’s product manufacturer to produce nutritional
bars and other products for C&C Research. In March 2001, Pure officially
transferred its account for facilitating web site purchases to C&C Research.
Despite these transfers during the early months of 2001, the parties had not
yet reached a final agreement.
Negotiations continued over several months. In an attempt to reach a
final agreement, Freese met with Cutillo and Cutillo’s attorney, John Giere, in
March 2001. Attorney Giere, who subsequently drafted an asset purchase
agreement for the parties’ review, was unaware of Thompson’s endorsement
agreement with Pure. Neither party mentioned it during the meeting.
Although products continued to be sold, Freese made no payments to
Thompson. Thompson wrote to Freese on March 30, 2001, seeking payments
that she had not received since June 2000. Freese responded in an April 10,
2001 letter, assuring Thompson that Pure was solely responsible for the
payments owed and that a newly formed distribution company, which Freese
did not identify, was not responsible for any of Pure’s liabilities, including
Thompson’s contract.
Between March and June 2001, negotiations between Pure and the
Cutillo defendants deteriorated. In a June 14, 2001 letter to Freese, Attorney
Giere stated that Cutillo had rejected “any final agreement” proposal, but was
leaving the door open for an asset purchase agreement. On June 27, 2001,
Cutillo sent a letter informing Freese that he had rejected all proposals for
either an asset purchase or a licensing agreement, and requested that Freese
2
remove all of Pure’s assets from the premises of Cutillo’s company and prepare
to reimburse Cutillo for sums already paid.
On August 28, 2002, Thompson filed suit in superior court against
Freese, Pure, and Total Body Wellness Franchising, Inc. (TBW). Her original
writ claimed that: (1) Pure breached the endorsement contract; (2) TBW was
liable for this breach because it had acquired “the assets and debts” of Pure;
and, alternatively, (3) if TBW did not acquire “the assets and debts” of Pure,
then TBW and Cutillo were liable for invasion of privacy for the misappropriation
of her name and likeness by using them on TBW’s web site. On November 1,
2002, just two days after Thompson filed a voluntary nonsuit against Freese
individually, she obtained a confession of judgment from Pure.
On March 31, 2004, Thompson amended her writ to name C&C Research
and Health-Style USA, Inc. (Health-Style) as defendants. Thompson alleged
that Pure’s assets and debts had been acquired by TBW as of January 2001,
and that the two new defendants participated in, or were responsible for, “the
acquisition of [Pure and] the breach of contract and misappropriation of [her]
name and likeness without authorization.” Following a consolidated bench
trial, the trial court entered judgment in favor of Thompson for $265,000
against Pure, but judgment in favor of the remaining defendants on all claims.
On appeal, Thompson argues that the trial court erred by: (1) finding
that the Cutillo defendants were not liable for the misappropriation of her
image; (2) failing to consider her alternative claims of quantum meruit, quasi-
contract, and unjust enrichment; (3) ruling that Pure’s acceptance of sole
responsibility precluded her from seeking damages for the misappropriation of
her image from the Cutillo defendants; and (4) ruling that no de facto merger
occurred between Pure and the Cutillo defendants.
We will not disturb the findings of the trial court unless they lack
evidentiary support or are erroneous as a matter of law. Miller v. Slania
Enters., 150 N.H. 655, 659 (2004). Legal conclusions, as well as the
application of law to fact, are reviewed independently for plain error. Id.
Accordingly, our inquiry is to determine whether the evidence presented to the
trial court reasonably supports its findings, and then whether the court’s
decision is consonant with applicable law. Id. Finally, we review questions of
law de novo. Id.
I. Misappropriation
Thompson first contends that the trial court erred by finding that there
was no evidence that the Cutillo defendants misappropriated her image. She
3
asserts that the Cutillo defendants either assumed her endorsement contract
or misappropriated her image. We disagree.
In its final order, the trial court stated:
At the time Freese began to transfer assets to C and C Research,
Pure operated a web site which contained the plaintiff’s
endorsement and photograph. Cheryl Sivewright, web designer for
Pure, testified that at no time did the web site contain a
photograph of the plaintiff while it was controlled by C and C.
While the plaintiff was justifiably concerned that her likeness
appeared on the web site after she learned that C and C Research
was attempting to acquire Pure, there is no evidence that C and C
Research misappropriated her likeness at a time when it
controlled the web site or related domains.
The trial court also granted requests for findings of fact that essentially confirm
that neither Cutillo individually, nor any of the Cutillo defendants, ever
maintained or used a website containing the likeness of Thompson.
“[A]s the trier of fact, the trial court is in the best position to assess and
weigh the evidence before it because it has the benefit of observing the parties
and their witnesses.” In re Adam M., 148 N.H. 83, 84 (2002). Cheryl
Sivewright testified that at no time did a company controlled by Cutillo ever
control or operate a website with Thompson’s photograph or likeness on it. On
the contrary, she testified that Pure had exclusive control of such website. As
such, we conclude that a reasonable fact finder could have found as the trial
court did.
Thompson also argues that the Cutillo defendants misappropriated her
image by distributing catalog pamphlets that contained her image and
endorsement. The record suggests that the Cutillo defendants did in fact
distribute these pamphlets, but such use did not constitute misappropriation.
The trial court found that any use of the pamphlets containing the
likeness of Thompson by the Cutillo defendants was pursuant to an initial
licensing agreement between Pure and the Cutillo defendants that was
consistent with Thompson’s endorsement contract. Specifically, the trial court
found that Pure and C&C Research entered into an initial licensing agreement,
the terms of which required payments by C&C Research and a percentage of
profits in exchange for permission to use “inventory, equipment, customer lists,
sales and marketing materials” of Pure, and that C&C Research paid $82,500
to Pure towards satisfaction of this initial licensing agreement.
4
Thompson argues that the findings of the trial court concerning an initial
licensing agreement are inconsistent with its finding in the final order that
“there was no meeting of the minds.” Although the trial court’s order does
suggest that what occurred between Freese and Cutillo between November
2000 and June 2001 amounted to continued negotiations, we conclude that
the parties’ course of conduct supports the trial court’s finding of an initial
licensing agreement.
In Remsburg v. Docusearch, 149 N.H. 148, 157 (2003), we adopted the
tort of invasion of privacy by the appropriation of an individual’s name or
likeness. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652C comment a at 381 (1977).
Under our decision in Remsburg, liability under this theory occurs when one
“appropriates to [their] own use or benefit the name or likeness of another.”
Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 157 (citation omitted). In Remsburg, we also
recognized that such an appropriation “occurs most often when the person’s
name or likeness is used to advertise the defendant’s product.” Id. at 158
(citations omitted).
An individual has an interest in controlling the use of his or her own
name or likeness insofar as a benefit may be derived from its use, but when the
individual authorizes another and its licensee to use his or her name or
likeness under the terms of a contract, such authorization precludes a finding
that either the contractual party or its licensee is liable for misappropriation.
See Neal v. Electronic Arts, Inc., 374 F. Supp. 2d 574, 579 (W.D. Mich. 2005)
(granting summary judgment in favor of licensee in a misappropriation action
by a National Football League player because player’s contract allowed for
assignment of player’s name and likeness to licensees of the contracting entity).
The endorsement contract between Thompson and Pure expressly authorized
Pure or its licensees to use Thompson’s endorsement for the products
designated in the agreement. The conduct of Cutillo and Freese created such a
licensing agreement under which the parties operated while continuing to
negotiate terms of a potential asset purchase or final licensing agreement. See
Harrison v. Watson, 116 N.H. 510, 511 (1976) (stating that contracts may be
established by spoken or written words or by acts or conduct); see also
Tsiatsios v. Tsiatsios, 140 N.H. 173, 178 (1995) (noting that contractual offers
may be accepted by performance).
Accordingly, the conduct of Freese and Cutillo supports the trial court’s
finding that Pure and the Cutillo defendants entered into an initial licensing
agreement. We hold that the trial court did not err in its finding that any use
by the Cutillo defendants of the pamphlets containing Thompson’s likeness
occurred pursuant to the initial licensing agreement.
5
II. Quantum Meruit, Quasi–contract, and Unjust Enrichment
Thompson argues that the trial court erred by failing to address her
restitutionary claims of unjust enrichment, quasi-contract, and quantum
meruit. Thompson alleges that this error was brought to the trial court’s
attention in her motion for reconsideration of the verdict. Specifically, she
states that her post-trial motion “pointed out that the Court’s final order failed
to address the issue of unjust enrichment of the defendants by allowing them
to benefit from the endorsement contract, while denying [her] compensation for
the use of her image and endorsement.” For the following reasons, we rule that
the trial court did not err in failing to address these claims.
The theories of quantum meruit and quasi-contract first appeared in the
brief that Thompson filed in this appeal. It cannot be said that the trial court
committed an error in failing to consider theories of relief that Thompson failed
to raise until the appellate stage of the process. McGrath v. Town of Canaan,
147 N.H. 623, 626 (2002) (refusing to consider claim made for the first time on
appeal). As for unjust enrichment, the first articulation of this theory appears
in the written closing arguments submitted after the trial. As such, the Cutillo
defendants were not put on timely notice that relief was being sought on a
theory of unjust enrichment. We conclude that the trial court did not err by
failing to consider a theory of relief that was not timely pled. See Perron v.
Aranosian, 128 N.H. 92, 95 (1986) (court did not err in refusing to consider
theory of unjust enrichment not properly raised before trial).
III. Pure’s Acceptance Of Sole Responsibility
Thompson next argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law to the
extent that it ruled that Freese’s representations as to Pure’s sole responsibility
under the endorsement contract precluded her from seeking damages against
the Cutillo defendants for the wrongful use of her image. Upon review of the
record, we find no support for the claim that the trial court so ruled. The trial
court did not explicitly or implicitly rule that Freese’s representations
precluded Thompson from pursing claims for damages against the Cutillo
defendants for the misappropriation, or wrongful use, of her image.
IV. De facto Merger
Finally, Thompson argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law in
ruling that the Cutillo defendants were not liable for the assumption of her
endorsement contract under a theory of de facto merger.
6
The standard for successor liability starts with the general rule that “a
corporation purchasing the assets of another corporation is not liable for the
seller’s debts.” Bielagus v. EMRE of N.H., 149 N.H. 635, 640 (2003).
One exception to the general rule applies when an asset transfer
amounts to a de facto merger of the two entities. Id. In addressing whether
the Cutillo defendants were obligated to pay Thompson under the theory that
they effectively merged with Pure and thus acquired the endorsement contract,
the trial court properly considered the non-exclusive factors set forth in
Bielagus, which ask whether:
(1) There is a continuation of the enterprise of the seller
corporation, so that there is continuity of management, personnel,
physical location, assets, and general business operations.
(2) There is a continuity of shareholders which results from the
purchasing corporation paying for the acquired assets with shares
of its own stock, this stock ultimately coming to be held by the
shareholders of the seller corporation so that they become a
constituent part of the purchasing corporation.
(3) The seller corporation ceases its ordinary business operations,
liquidates, and dissolves as soon as legally and practically
possible.
(4) The purchasing corporation assumes those obligations of the
seller ordinarily necessary for the uninterrupted continuation of
normal business operations of the seller corporation.
Id. at 642.
In applying the above factors, the trial court found the following:
First, the physical location of the two businesses remained
separate. Second, C and C Research continued with the same
management or personnel. Third, there was no evidence to
suggest that C and C Research paid for any of Pure’s assets with
shares of its own stock. Finally, there was no evidence that Pure
ceased to exist upon transfer of its assets to C and C Research.
Contrary to the arguments advanced by Thompson, the trial court’s
findings with respect to the first three factors under Bielagus are amply
supported by the evidence. While the trial court made no explicit finding
regarding the fourth factor, it had no need to do so. The evidence under the
first three factors supports the trial court’s ruling that no de facto merger
7
occurred regardless of whether C&C Research assumed the obligations of Pure
ordinarily necessary for the uninterrupted continuation of normal business
operations.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8