THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2004-719
IN RE ESTATE OF CATHERINE FISCHER
Argued: September 14, 2005
Opinion Issued: October 19, 2005
Schrepfer & Paradis, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (John J. A. Schrepfer on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Ansell, Barradale, Newkirk, Anderson & Dwyer, P.A., of Bedford (Pamela
J. Newkirk on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, Kathleen LaForge, appeals an order of the
Hillsborough County Probate Court (Cloutier, J.) ruling that the statutory
requisites for executing the will of the testatrix, Catherine Fisher, were
followed. We reverse and remand.
The testatrix’s will named the petitioner, Francesca Pettengill, one of her
daughters, as her executrix and bequeathed her real property to the petitioner
and the petitioner’s husband. The respondent, another of the testatrix’s
daughters, and Kimberly LaForge, the testatrix’s granddaughter, objected to
the probate of the will and moved for it to be reexamined and proved in solemn
form. See RSA 552:7 (1997). Following a hearing on the merits, the probate
court ruled that the will was properly executed. See RSA 551:2, III, IV (1997).
“The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-
A:4 (1997). “Consequently, we will not disturb the probate court’s decree
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of
law.” In re Estate of Treloar, 151 N.H. 460, 462 (2004) (quotation omitted).
RSA 551:2 (1997) provides, in pertinent part:
Requirements. To be valid, a will or codicil to a will shall:
I. Be made by a testator qualifying under RSA 551:1; and
II. Be in writing; and
III. Be signed by the testator, or by some person at his or her
express direction in his or her presence; and
IV. Be signed by 2 or more credible witnesses, who shall, at the
request of the testator and in the testator’s presence, attest to the
testator’s signature.
“In probate of a will in solemn form, the proponent of the will has the
burden of proving its due execution.” In re Estate of Washburn, 141 N.H. 658,
663 (1997) (citation omitted); see RSA 552:7. A will that is not duly executed
pursuant to the requirements of RSA 551:2 is invalid. See In re Wilson Estate,
119 N.H. 425, 426 (1979).
The respondent argues that the testatrix’s will is invalid because,
although two witnesses signed it at the testatrix’s request, they did not sign it
in her presence. See RSA 551:2, IV. Because we agree with this argument, we
need not address the respondent's alternative assertion that the will was
invalid because, while the petitioner executed it at the testatrix's direction, she
likewise did not sign it in the testatrix's presence. See RSA 551:2, III.
In Healey v. Bartlett, 73 N.H. 110, 111 (1904), we explained that
witnesses are in the testator’s presence “whenever they are so near him that he
is conscious of where they are and of what they are doing, through any of his
senses, and are where he can readily see them if he is so disposed.” The
testator need not “actually see the witnesses for them to be in his presence.”
Healey, 73 N.H. at 111. It is sufficient that “he has knowledge of their
presence, and can, if he is so disposed, readily see them write their names, . . .
even if he does not see them do it and could not without some slight physical
exertion.” Id.
“The test to determine whether the will of a person who has the use of
all his faculties is attested in his presence, is to inquire whether he understood
what the witnesses were doing when they affixed their names to his will, and
could, if he had been so disposed, readily have seen them do it.” Id. at 112.
When a testator does not have all of his faculties solely because of physical
2
infirmities, “the test to determine whether his will is attested to in his presence
is to inquire whether he was conscious of the presence of the witnesses and
understood what they were doing when they wrote their names, and could also,
if it had not been for his physical infirmities, readily have seen and heard what
they were doing, if he had been so disposed.” Id.
Having reviewed the record, we hold that the evidence does not support
the trial court’s finding that the witnesses signed the will in the testatrix’s
presence; this finding is plainly erroneous. See RSA 567-A:4.
The record shows that on November 10, 2002, when the will was
executed, the testatrix was dying of cancer and was bedridden. She was
unable to go to the bathroom unassisted, prepare meals or dispense her own
medications. The record shows that, on that day, the testatrix’s attorney came
to the testatrix’s home to oversee the signing of her will. The attorney testified
that she reviewed the will with the testatrix before it was signed. Later, in the
presence of the witnesses, the attorney asked the testatrix, among other things,
if she had read the will, if she understood the will, if it disposed of her property
in the manner she wished, if she wanted the will to be signed that day and if
she wanted the witnesses to act as witnesses.
The record demonstrates, however, that the witnesses did not sign the
will in the room in which the testatrix lay in bed; rather, they signed the will on
the porch. As one of the witnesses testified:
Q. And do you recall that day where the will signing took place, in
what specific room?
A. On the porch.
Q. It was on the porch?
A. Yeah.
Q. Where is the porch? Now, that’s in the front, back?
A. When you’re facing the house, it’s on the right-hand side. I
guess it’s a porch, I don’t really know what they call it.
Q. And was [the testatrix], was she, how, where -- where was she,
where was she; was she standing, was she sitting?
A. No, she was laying in her bed like she always was when I saw
her. Um, she was in, I don’t know -- it was off the kitchen, I’m not
3
sure if that was a living room or, it wasn’t, it was like two rooms,
I’m not sure what part of the house that was.
The other witness confirmed that the will was signed on the porch and not in
the living room area where the testatrix was. The record does not indicate the
distance between the porch and the living room. Nor does it indicate whether
there were any barriers between the living room and the porch. The record
does not indicate, for instance, whether the living room was on one end of the
house and the porch on the other, or whether the porch and living room were
adjoining.
The petitioner bore the burden of proving that the witnesses signed the
will in the testatrix’s presence. Yet there was no evidence in the record that,
but for the testatrix’s physical infirmities, she could have “readily . . . seen and
heard” what the witnesses were doing, had she been so disposed. Healey, 73
N.H. at 112. Nor was there evidence that the witnesses were “so near” to the
testatrix that she was conscious of where they were and what they were doing
when they signed the will. Id. at 111. On this record, we are unable to defer to
the probate court’s finding that the witnesses signed the will in the testatrix’s
presence. See RSA 567-A:4.
Absent citation to any binding authority, the petitioner argues that RSA
551:2, IV was met because the witnesses signed the will in the testatrix’s
attorney’s presence. Such a construction contravenes the plain language of the
statute. RSA 551:2, IV requires that the witnesses sign in the presence of the
“testator,” not the testator’s attorney. We interpret the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature could have said or add words to the
statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. Woodview Dev. Corp. v.
Town of Pelham, 152 N.H. 114, 118 (2005).
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ.,
concurred.
4