THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2004-815
TERRY W. KENISON AND DIANA L. KENISON, CO-ADMINSTRATORS OF THE
ESTATE OF BRODY J. KENISON
v.
ANDRE DUBOIS & a.
Argued: April 20, 2005
Opinion Issued: July 18, 2005
McDowell & Osburn, P.A., of Manchester (Joseph F. McDowell, III and
Mark D. Morrissette on the brief, and Mr. Morrissette orally), for the plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, Professional Association, of Manchester
(Robert C. Dewhirst and Donald L. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Smith orally),
for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiffs, Terry W. Kenison and Diana L. Kenison, co-
administrators of the Estate of Brody J. Kenison, appeal a ruling of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendants,
Andre Dubois and the Waumbek Methna Snowmobile Club (Waumbek). On
appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in ruling that the
defendants are immune from liability under RSA 508:14, I (1997), RSA 212:34,
I (2000) (amended 2003) and RSA 215-A:34, II (2000). We reverse and remand.
The record reflects the following facts. On the morning of February 26,
2001, the decedent, Brody Kenison, was riding his snowmobile on the “Corridor
5” snowmobile trail in Jefferson, when he collided with a snow-trail grooming
machine (snow groomer) owned by Waumbek and operated by Dubois,
resulting in his death. “Corridor 5” is a recreational trail open year-round to
the public for multiple uses, including use by snowmobiles. It runs from
Portland, Maine, through New Hampshire, to Montreal, Quebec, and is owned
by Portland Pipeline. Waumbek is a nonprofit snowmobile club that, for over
twenty years, has voluntarily maintained, groomed and developed the portion
of the “Corridor 5” trail where the collision took place. Waumbek receives
compensation to recover its trail-grooming expenses through a grant-in-aid
program sponsored by the State of New Hampshire.
After the plaintiffs brought suit, the defendants moved for summary
judgment, arguing that they are immune from liability under the recreational
use statutes, RSA 508:14, I, RSA 212:34, I, and RSA 215-A:34, II. The trial
court granted the defendants’ motion. This appeal followed.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Estate of Joshua T. v.
State, 150 N.H. 405, 407 (2003). If our review of the evidence does not reveal
any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiffs first argue that the defendants are not immune
from liability because they do not qualify as owners, lessees or occupants of
land. Because we agree, we need not address the plaintiffs’ other arguments
on appeal.
RSA 508:14, I, provides:
An owner, occupant, or lessee of land, including the state or any
political subdivision, who without charge permits any person to
use land for recreational purposes or as a spectator of recreational
activity, shall not be liable for personal injury or property damage
in the absence of intentionally caused injury or damage.
RSA 212:34 provides, in pertinent part:
I. An owner, lessee or occupant of premises owes no duty of
care to keep such premises safe for entry or use by others for
hunting, fishing, trapping, camping, water sports, winter sports or
OHRVs as defined in RSA 215-A, hiking, sightseeing, or removal of
fuelwood, or to give any warning of hazardous conditions, uses of,
2
structures, or activities on such premises to persons entering for
such purposes, except as provided in paragraph III hereof.
II. An owner, lessee or occupant of premises who gives
permission to another to hunt, fish, trap, camp, hike, use OHRVs
as defined in RSA 215-A, sightsee upon, or remove fuelwood from,
such premises . . . does not thereby:
(a) Extend any assurance that the premises are safe for such
purpose, or
(b) Constitute the person to whom permission has been
granted the legal status of an invitee to whom a duty of care is
owed, or
(c) Assume responsibility for or incur liability for an injury to
person or property caused by any act of such person to whom
permission has been granted except as provided in paragraph III
hereof.
RSA 215-A:34, II provides, in pertinent part:
It is recognized that OHRV operation may be hazardous.
Therefore, each person who drives or rides an OHRV accepts, as a
matter of law, the dangers inherent in the sport, and shall not
maintain an action against an owner, occupant, or lessee of land
for any injuries which result from such inherent risks, dangers, or
hazards.
The issue before us presents questions of statutory interpretation. We
are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole. In the Matter of Jacobson & Tierney, 150
N.H. 513, 515 (2004). We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo. Remington Invs.
v. Howard, 150 N.H. 653, 654 (2004).
For the purposes of the above statutes, the parties agree that a
snowmobile qualifies as an off-highway recreational vehicle (OHRV), see RSA
215-A:1, VI (2000). Under RSA 508:14, I, RSA 212:34, and RSA 215-A:34, II,
immunity from liability is provided to a party who is an owner, lessee or
occupant of the land where the accident occurred. The parties agree that the
defendants were not owners or lessees of the land. Thus, for the defendants to
be entitled to immunity under any of the three recreational use statutes, they
must have been occupants of the land.
3
None of the recreational use statutes provides a definition of “occupant.”
When statutory terms are undefined, we ascribe to them their plain and
ordinary meaning. In the Matter of Blanchflower & Blanchflower, 150 N.H.
226, 227 (2003). Webster’s dictionary defines “occupant” in several different
ways, including: (1) “one who takes the first possession of something that has
no owner and thereby acquires title by occupancy”; (2) “one who takes
possession under title, lease or tenancy at will”; (3) “one who occupies a
particular place or premises”; and (4) “one who has actual use or possession of
something.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1560 (2d
unabridged ed. 2002). Black’s Law Dictionary defines “occupant” as either
“[o]ne who has possessory rights in, or control over, certain property or
premises” or “[o]ne who acquires title by occupancy.” Black’s Law Dictionary
1106 (7th ed. 1999). These varying definitions demonstrate that the term
“occupant” has the potential to encompass either a broad or a narrow class of
persons depending upon the context in which the term is used. An “occupant”
could be someone who is on the premises, someone who is using the premises,
someone who has control of the premises, someone who has a possessory
interest in the premises, or someone who has title to the premises.
The defendants refer us to Smith v. Sno Eagles Snowmobile Club, Inc.,
823 F.2d 1193, 1197-98 (7th Cir. 1987) (construction approved by Wisconsin
intermediate appellate court in Hall v. Turtle Lake Lions Club, 531 N.W.2d 636
(1988)), in which the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals, interpreting a similar
Wisconsin statute, determined that a snowmobile club qualified as an occupant
because it made actual use of the property with a degree of permanence. But
see Ward v. State, 890 P.2d 1144, 1147-48 (Ariz. 1995) (rejecting Seventh
Circuit’s interpretation and concluding that “occupant” must have ability to
exclude persons from land or grant persons access to land). The defendants
argue that we should interpret the New Hampshire recreational use statutes
using this definition of “occupant.” But, in arguing that we follow Smith, the
defendants overlook a key difference between our policy of interpreting
recreational use statutes and the policy employed by Wisconsin courts. We
follow the policy of strictly interpreting statutes that are in derogation of the
common law, Sweeney v. Ragged Mt. Ski Area, 151 N.H. 239, 241 (2004);
Wisconsin courts do not. See Leu v. Price County Snowmobile Trails
Association, Inc., 695 N.W.2d 889, 893 n.6 (Wis. Ct. App. 2005) (noting that
Wisconsin courts construe recreational use statutes granting immunity
liberally).
Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting
them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme. State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467 (2003). When we interpret
statutes that deal with the same subject matter, we consider all of the statutes
when interpreting any one of them. See Berksdale v. Town of Epsom, 136 N.H.
4
511, 515-16 (1992). Although we look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the
statutory language to determine legislative intent, we will not read words or
phrases in isolation; we read them in the context of the entire statute.
Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 509 (2004).
RSA 508:14, I, expressly states that immunity shall apply to “[an] owner,
occupant, or lessee of land . . . who without charge permits any person to use
land for recreational purposes . . . .” (Emphasis added.) RSA 212:34, I,
provides that an owner, lessee or occupant of premises owes no duty of care,
while RSA 212:34, II makes it clear that if that owner, lessee or occupant gives
permission to another to use the land, that permission shall not, under certain
circumstances, create a duty of care under RSA 212:34, I. Thus, by
implication, an owner, occupant or lessee is one who has the ability or
authority to grant permission to use land. Though RSA 215-A:34, II contains
no language specifically referencing permission, it uses the same terms as RSA
212:34 or RSA 508:14; i.e., owner, occupant or lessee of land. Further, no
different purpose is apparent from the statute; rather, it simply gives more
detail about an owner’s, occupant’s, or lessee’s potential immunity regarding
OHRVs. As we noted in a different context in Estate of Gordon-Couture v.
Brown, the model recreational use statute (drafted by the Committee of State
Officials on Suggested State Legislation of the Council of State Governments),
which shares much in common with the New Hampshire recreational use
statutes, “expressed a basic quid pro quo in its declaration of policy, namely,
permission to the general public to use private land for recreational purposes
in exchange for immunity from liability for resulting injuries.” Estate of
Gordon-Couture v. Brown, 152 N.H. ___, ___ (decided May 23, 2005) (quotation
omitted; emphasis added).
By suggesting that we adopt an interpretation of “occupant” that
includes persons who do not have the ability or authority to permit access to
land, the defendants overlook the statutory language and our policy of strictly
interpreting statutes in derogation of the common law. For these reasons, we
hold that an occupant of land must, at least, have the ability or authority to
give persons permission to enter or use land.
The defendants also rely upon Kantner v. Combustion Engineering, 701
F. Supp. 943 (D.N.H. 1988). While Kantner may have ruled that defendants
without the apparent ability or authority to permit access to land were entitled
to immunity, Kantner did not specifically address whether permission is a
required element of the New Hampshire recreational use statutes. More
importantly, Kantner relied upon the broad definition of “occupant” set forth in
Smith. Kantner, 701 F. Supp. at 947. As we rejected that definition above, we
do not find Kantner persuasive.
5
The defendants also refer to our memorandum decision in Fanny v. Pike
Industries, Inc., 119 N.H. 108 (1979), in which we upheld the grant of
immunity to a general contractor who was an occupant of land. The
defendants point out that our opinion in Fanny contains little factual detail
and includes no discussion of the general contractor’s ability or authority to
permit a person’s entry onto the land. Fanny, 119 N.H. at 108-09. Further,
neither party in Fanny appears to have argued that the general contractor’s
ability or authority, or lack thereof, to permit persons access to the land was a
factor to be considered when interpreting the term “occupant.” Id. Thus, we
do not find Fanny helpful to this case. To the extent that it can be read to hold
that an “occupant” need not have the ability or authority to give persons
permission to enter or use land, it is hereby overruled.
The defendants further argue that interpreting the term “occupant” to
require the ability or authority to permit access to land would make the term
“occupant” “virtually indistinguishable from the term ‘owner,’ and, thus, render
the legislature’s use of the term ‘occupant’ meaningless.” We disagree.
The language of RSA 508:14, I, demonstrates that the legislature
contemplated that there will be occupants who have the ability or authority to
permit persons onto land. As discussed above, RSA 508:14, I, applies to: “An
owner, occupant, or lessee of land, including the state or any political
subdivision, who without charge permits any person to use land for
recreational purposes.” (Emphasis added.) The legislature must have
contemplated at least some occupants, other than owners or lessees, who have
the ability or authority to permit persons onto land. Such occupants might
include a contractor who has responsibility for access to land and maintenance
of a project site or an organization that manages a city-owned swimming pool
and has the ability to permit or deny access to the land, see Ward, 890 P.2d at
1148, or a spouse who resides on land but does not hold title to that land.
Thus, we do not find the defendants’ argument persuasive.
The defendants also argue that interpreting the statute so as not to
include snow groomers would be inconsistent with the purpose of the statute
— to make more land available for recreational uses. The defendants argue
that without snow groomers, the “snowmobile trails would not be available for
public use” because, presumably, such land, though accessible, would not be
usable by snowmobiles. We disagree with the defendants’ argument that our
interpretation is inconsistent with the purpose of the statute.
While a statute may abolish a common law right, there is a presumption
that the legislature has no such purpose. Sweeney, 151 N.H. at 241. If such a
right is to be taken away, it must be expressed clearly by the legislature. Id.
As stated above, these immunity provisions are strictly construed. Id. The
only purpose clearly expressed in the statutes is the purpose to encourage
6
persons to permit people to enter their land for recreational uses. That
purpose is fully served by our holding in this case. The activities of snow
groomers may facilitate the use of land for certain recreational uses such as
snowmobiling, but the statutes, strictly construed, are intended to immunize
those who permit access to land, not those who simply facilitate its use after
permission has been granted.
Because we conclude that, in order to qualify for immunity under the
recreational use statutes, one must at least have the ability or authority to
permit persons to use or enter the land, the defendants are not occupants for
the purposes of the recreational use statutes. The defendants had neither the
ability nor the authority to make land available for recreational purposes in the
manner contemplated by the legislature; rather, they merely had the ability
and authority to make that land more easily usable than it might otherwise be
for recreational purposes.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7