THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-025
MARK DEWYNGAERDT D/B/A SUPERIOR TREE SERVICE & a.
v.
BEAN INSURANCE AGENCY, INC.
Argued: July 15, 2004
Opinion Issued: September 2, 2004
Engel & Associates, P.A., of Exeter (David C. Engel on the brief and orally), for the intervenor, Peter Engel.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and Donald L. Smith on the brief, and Mr.
Dunn orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Mark DeWyngaerdt d/b/a Superior Tree Service (Superior Tree), initiated this
action against the defendant, Bean Insurance Agency, Inc. (Bean), asserting that Bean was negligent in failing to
advise him that his insurance policy excluded coverage for "wrongful cutting." Peter Engel, whose tree was cut
down, intervened and appeals the Trial Court’s (T. Nadeau, J.) order granting Bean’s motion to dismiss. We
affirm.
Bean assisted Superior Tree in procuring an insurance policy. Superior Tree informed Bean that its business
consisted of cutting trees and limbs on the property of third parties, and requested a policy that would provide
"full coverage." Bean recommended a bodily injury and property liability insurance policy issued by Nautilus
Insurance Company (Nautilus), and Superior Tree purchased the policy.
On October 2, 2000, Superior Tree wrongfully felled a tree on Engel’s property. Superior Tree filed a notice of
claim with Nautilus for the wrongful cutting. Nautilus denied Superior Tree’s claim because the policy contained
a clause excluding coverage for "wrongful cutting." Engel filed suit against Superior Tree; in turn, Superior Tree
filed suit against Bean, asserting that Bean was negligent in failing to advise Superior Tree of the exclusion in
the policy.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, we assume the
truth of all facts alleged by the plaintiff and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to him.
Graves v. Estabrook, 149 N.H. 202, 203 (2003). If the facts do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we will
uphold the granting of the motion to dismiss. Id.
To recover for negligence, a plaintiff must demonstrate that there exists a duty, that the defendant breached that
duty, and that the breach proximately caused injury to the plaintiff. Dupont v. Aavid Thermal Technologies, 147
N.H. 706, 709 (2002). Thus, for liability to exist in this case, Engel must first show that Bean had an affirmative
duty to provide advice regarding the adequacy of Superior Tree’s particular insurance coverage.
Engel argues that Bean was negligent when it recommended this insurance policy based upon Superior Tree’s
request for "full coverage," but failed to inform Superior Tree about the exclusion for "wrongful cutting." Engel
asserts that Superior Tree’s request for "full coverage" coupled with its explanation that the business "involves
the cutting and removal of trees from the properties of third parties," created a duty that Bean inform Superior
Tree that the insurance policy contained an exclusion for "wrongful cutting."
Bean argues that there is no basis for legal relief because, under Sintros v. Hamon, an insurance agent does not
have an affirmative duty to inform or to advise an insured regarding the availability or sufficiency of insurance
coverage unless a special relationship exists between the agent and the policyholder. See Sintros v. Hamon, 148
N.H. 478, 480 (2002). Additionally, Bean contends that Superior Tree’s request for "full coverage" was too
vague and ambiguous to impose a duty upon Bean to procure an insurance policy that included coverage for
"wrongful cutting" or to advise Superior Tree that the policy did not include such coverage.
We held in Sintros that an insurance agent owes clients a duty of reasonable care and diligence, but absent a
special relationship, that duty does not include an affirmative, continuing obligation to inform or to advise an
insured regarding the availability or sufficiency of insurance coverage. Id. at 482. Engel argues that Bean owed
Superior Tree a duty to inform it of the exclusion for "wrongful cutting." We have previously affirmed by order
dated June 9, 2004, however, that the trial court properly ruled without a hearing that Superior Tree did not
allege the recognized exception to the rule in Sintros. Because the writ of summons did not allege a special
relationship between Bean and Superior Tree, we affirmed that Bean did not owe Superior Tree any duty beyond
that of reasonable care and diligence. See id.
In Sintros we recognized that because an insurance agent owes an insured a duty of reasonable care, he could be
liable for negligent misrepresentations or a failure to provide agreed-upon coverage. Id. at 483. Engel asserts that
Bean negligently failed to provide agreed-upon coverage because Superior Tree requested "full coverage" and
received an inadequate policy. We disagree.
We have held that where a specific request is made for a particular type of insurance coverage, an insurance
agent owes a duty to the insured to procure such coverage. See Trefethen v. N.H. Ins. Group, 138 N.H. 710, 715
(1994) (a specific expectation of liquor liability coverage arose from the insured’s request for coverage on every
saleable item in the store coupled with the agent’s knowledge that alcohol was one of those items); Tyler
Advertising Co. v. Lamprey, 107 N.H. 138, 143-44 (1966) (an insurance agent is not negligent in failing to
procure a particular type of coverage where insured did not specifically request such coverage). Superior Tree’s
request for "full coverage," however, was too broad and too vague to constitute a specific request for the
particular coverage of "wrongful cutting."
"A request for ‘full coverage,’ ‘the best policy,’ or similar expressions does not place an insurance agent under a
duty to determine the insured’s full insurance needs, to advise the insured about coverage, or to use his
discretion and expertise to determine what coverage the insured should purchase." Trotter v. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins. Co., 377 S.E.2d 343, 347 (S.C. Ct. App. 1988); cf. Boston Camp. Distrib. Co. v. Lumbermens Mut.
Cas. Co., 282 N.E.2d 374, 376 (Mass. 1972) (insured’s request for "insurance coverage from A to Z, second to
none," did not make insurance agent liable when policy excluded a particular type of coverage); Banes v. Martin,
965 S.W.2d 383, 385 (Mo. Ct. App. 1998) (insurance agent had no duty to advise insured of a particular type of
coverage, despite insured’s request for "full coverage"). Imposing a duty to inform or to advise an insured
regarding the sufficiency of insurance coverage based upon the general request for "full coverage" would violate
the policy concerns we expressed in Sintros. See Sintros, 148 N.H. at 481. Any potential insured would be able
to make one broad request for "full coverage" and convert agents into risk managers with guarantor status;
creating a duty to advise simply based upon the general request for "full coverage" could afford insureds the
opportunity to insure after the loss by merely asserting that they would have purchased the additional coverage
had it been offered. See id. Additionally, holding an insurance agent negligent for failing to advise an insured
about every possible detail and exclusion in a policy whenever the general request for "full coverage" is made
would remove any burden from the insured to read and to determine the adequacy of his or her own insurance
coverage. See id. at 484.
Furthermore, although the factual circumstances surrounding the request for coverage are relevant, see
Trefethen, 138 N.H. at 715, Bean’s knowledge concerning the basic operations of Superior Tree’s business is
insufficient to convert the general request for "full coverage" into a specific request for particular coverage for
"wrongful cutting." See Godbout v. Lloyd’s Ins. Syndicates, 150 N.H. 103 (2003).
An insured must make a specific request for a particular type of insurance coverage in order to impose a duty
upon an agent to procure that particular coverage or to inform the insured that such coverage is excluded. We
decline to impose a duty on insurance agents to know all an insured’s needs, to procure suitable coverage, and to
inform an insured of every facet of the coverage based only upon an insured’s broad, general request for "full
coverage." Cf. Trefethen, 138 N.H. at 715. Because Superior Tree did not allege sufficient facts to demonstrate
that Bean had a duty to inform or to advise Superior Tree regarding the exclusion of coverage for "wrongful
cutting," the trial court properly granted Bean’s motion to dismiss.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, J., concurred.