THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2004-160
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ROBERT B. COWLES
Argued: April 20, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 21, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karen E. Huntress, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant appeals his conviction of operating after
having been certified a habitual offender, see RSA 262:23 (2004) (amended
2001, 2003), contending that his confession should have been suppressed
because it was tainted by his earlier illegal arrest. We affirm.
The Trial Court’s (Burling, J.) order on the defendant’s motion to
suppress recites the following facts. On October 1, 2001, Canaan Police
Sergeant Samuel Frank saw the defendant operating an all-terrain vehicle
(ATV) on Jerusalem Road in Canaan. Because Sergeant Frank knew the
defendant to be a certified habitual offender, he gave pursuit, but lost the
defendant when he left the road and proceeded onto a trail. Sergeant Frank
then went to the defendant’s house and informed someone there that he would
get a warrant and return to arrest the defendant.
As Sergeant Frank was leaving the defendant’s residence, however, he
again saw the defendant operating an ATV. Sergeant Frank unsuccessfully
pursued him again and tried once more to intercept him at his home. This
time, when Sergeant Frank arrived at the defendant’s house, he saw the
defendant in the mudroom talking on the telephone. Sergeant Frank informed
the defendant he was under arrest, entered the mudroom and handcuffed him.
The defendant was taken to the police station, unhandcuffed and
booked. After being read his Miranda rights, the defendant made incriminating
statements. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
The defendant moved to suppress his statements, arguing that Sergeant
Frank’s warrantless entry into his home violated Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution, and that his statements were fruits of that unlawful arrest. The
trial court agreed that the defendant’s arrest was invalid, but did not suppress
his subsequent statements. The defendant appeals.
“Our review of the superior court’s order on a motion to suppress is de
novo, except as to any controlling facts determined at the superior court level
in the first instance.” State v. Szczerbiak, 148 N.H. 352, 354 (2002) (quotation
omitted). We have applied the following test under our State Constitution to
claims that a confession has been tainted by a prior unlawful arrest:
For the defendant’s statements to be admissible, we must
determine whether the act of giving the statement was sufficiently a
product of the defendant’s free will so as to break the causal connection
between the illegality and the confession. In making this determination,
we consider the following four factors: (1) whether Miranda warnings
were given; (2) the temporal proximity of the arrest and the confession;
(3) the presence of intervening circumstances; and (4) the purpose and
flagrancy of the official misconduct.
State v. Gotsch, 143 N.H. 88, 90 (1998) (quotation and citation omitted), cert.
denied, 525 U.S. 1164 (1999). The defendant contends that the trial court
erred in analyzing these factors.
Before reaching the defendant’s contentions, we pause to address the
State’s implied invitation to adopt the rule of New York v. Harris, 495 U.S. 14
(1990). In Harris, the United States Supreme Court held that under the Fourth
Amendment to the United States Constitution, “where the police have probable
cause to arrest a suspect, the exclusionary rule does not bar the State’s use of
a statement made by the defendant outside of his home, even though the
2
statement is taken after an [unconstitutional] arrest made in the home.”
Harris, 495 U.S. at 21. Employing the reasoning of Harris, the State argues
that because the defendant’s arrest was supported by probable cause, even
though it “may have been unlawfully effectuated on the doorstep to his house,”
his later statements at the police station are admissible.
We need not decide whether to adopt the Harris reasoning under our
State Constitution because we conclude that even under the attenuation test of
Gotsch, the defendant’s statements are admissible. Thus, we turn now to the
Gotsch factors.
The defendant concedes that he was read his Miranda rights, but, as he
correctly points out, “Miranda warnings per se do not remove the taint of the
illegal arrest.” State v. Palamia, 124 N.H. 333, 337 (1983). Nevertheless, the
administration of Miranda warnings “clearly favors admissibility of the
defendant’s statements.” State v. Belton, 150 N.H. 741, 748, cert. denied, 125
S. Ct. 674 (2004).
The defendant contends that the second and third factors, temporal
proximity and intervening circumstances, weigh in his favor. He estimates that
“ten minutes, at most, elapsed between the time of the illegal arrest and
[Sergeant] Frank’s review of the Miranda form at the police station.” The
defendant does not, however, indicate how much time elapsed between his
arrest and his confession. According to Sergeant Frank’s testimony, the
defendant underwent a booking process after being advised of his Miranda
rights and before being questioned about operating an ATV that day. We note
that although there was no testimony about how long the booking process
took, the defendant’s trial counsel surmised that the entire elapsed time,
including that taken for booking, “couldn’t be any more than 45 minutes.”
Generally, the longer the time between the unlawful arrest and the
confession, the more likely the taint has been attenuated, because the passage
of “a significant period of time . . . reduces the possibility that the defendant’s
statements were the product of the arrest as opposed to his own free will.”
Gotsch, 143 N.H. at 91 (quotation omitted). In some cases, however, a lengthy
delay may be found to have exacerbated the taint because “[i]f there are no
relevant intervening circumstances, a prolonged detention may well be a more
serious exploitation of an illegal arrest than a short one.” Palamia, 124 N.H. at
337 (quotation omitted). Thus, as our case law indicates, the span of time, by
itself, is not determinative of admissibility. Compare State v. White, 119 N.H.
567, 571 (1979) (State failed to establish admissibility of confession made one
hour after illegal seizure of defendant) with Szczerbiak, 148 N.H. at 356
(unlawful detention did not taint consent to search despite complete temporal
proximity). In this case, we conclude that the temporal proximity between the
illegal arrest and the confession is essentially a neutral factor in the analysis.
3
With respect to the third factor, the defendant contends that there were
no intervening circumstances, and, as the State does not identify any, we
accept the defendant’s contention. We note that while the trial court
characterized the administration of Miranda warnings as an intervening
circumstance, we have already considered it as a separate factor and need not
address it here.
Finally, we consider the “purpose and flagrancy of the official
misconduct,” Gotsch, 143 N.H. at 90. Sergeant Frank testified that after
unsuccessfully attempting to chase the defendant, he heard the defendant
head back toward his house on the ATV. Sergeant Frank went to the
defendant’s house, walked onto an open porch and, from there, could see the
defendant through a screen door. He then told the defendant he was under
arrest and the defendant, according to Sergeant Frank’s testimony, “put his
hands up and turned around for me.” It was at that point that Sergeant Frank
opened the door, stepped into the mudroom and handcuffed the defendant.
On these facts, we conclude that the police misconduct was not flagrant.
Cf. Szczerbiak, 148 N.H. at 357. Sergeant Frank was in hot pursuit of the
defendant while he was committing a felony. See RSA 262:23; cf. State v. Ricci,
144 N.H. 241, 245 (1999). The unlawful intrusion into the defendant’s home
was minimal: Sergeant Frank saw the defendant through a screen door from
an open porch and merely “stepped into the mudroom” after the defendant
signaled his acquiescence to being arrested. In addition, Sergeant Frank had
probable cause to arrest the defendant, and his conduct had a legitimate
purpose.
The defendant nevertheless argues that the trial court failed to give
adequate consideration to the fact that the unlawful arrest took place inside
his home, an area afforded special constitutional protection. Because our
review is de novo, we need not decide whether the trial court gave adequate
consideration to this fact. We conclude, as explained above, that Sergeant
Frank’s minimal intrusion inside the defendant’s home was for a legitimate
purpose and does not constitute flagrant misconduct.
This is a close case, but we conclude that after balancing the Gotsch
factors, those favoring admissibility outweigh those favoring exclusion.
Although only a short time elapsed between the unlawful arrest and the
defendant’s confession, and no intervening circumstances were present,
Miranda warnings were given and the police misconduct was not flagrant.
Accordingly, we conclude that the taint of the unlawful arrest was purged.
Affirmed.
4
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5