THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2004-849
WEARE LAND USE ASSOCIATION
v.
TOWN OF WEARE & a.
Argued: March 16, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 18, 2006
Sumner F. Kalman, Attorney at Law, P.C., of Plaistow (Thea S. Valvanis
and Sumner F. Kalman on the brief, and Mr. Kalman orally), for the plaintiff.
Boutin & Associates, P.L.L.C., of Londonderry (Brenda E. Keith on the
brief and orally), for the defendants.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Weare Land Use Association (Association),
appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Mangones, J.) upholding the validity
of an interim growth management ordinance adopted by defendant Town of
Weare (town). We affirm and remand.
The trial court found the following relevant facts. On March 9, 2004, the
town adopted an interim growth management ordinance (ordinance), which for
a one-year period beginning on March 9, 2004, prohibited defendant Town of
Weare Planning Board (board) or Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) from
formally accepting or acting upon “any site plan applications for single family
housing, multi-family housing, mobile home parks or condominiums proposed
. . . or any other major subdivision applications creating a total of more than 3
lots.” (Quotation omitted.) The ordinance applied to applications formally
accepted after March 9, 2004, but not to those that were formally accepted
prior to that date. The ordinance also limited to sixty the number of building
permits that the town could issue for new dwellings during the one-year period.
In response to the adoption of the ordinance, the Association brought a
petition for declaratory judgment, bill in equity, and request for a preliminary
and permanent injunction, alleging that the ordinance was illegal,
unconstitutional and void both facially and as applied. The Association moved
for summary judgment, while the town filed a motion to dismiss. After a
hearing, the trial court issued an order denying both the town’s motion to
dismiss and the Association’s motion for summary judgment as to its facial
challenge. The court deferred without prejudice the Association’s as-applied
challenges, and declined to address its substantive due process claims.
Subsequently, the trial court issued an order stating that the “Association
withdraws any ‘as applied’ claims” concerning the ordinance and that the
previous order was the court’s “concluding determination” on “the other issues
as addressed in that order.”
On appeal, the Association argues that the trial court erred by failing to
void the ordinance as an “ultra vires” enactment that exceeded the statutory
authority included in RSA 674:23 (Supp. 2005). The Association argues that
the ordinance violated rights conferred by “RSA 676:4 I(c)(1) which gives land
owners the unequivocal right to have a completed application ‘accepted’ by
formal vote protecting the application/plan from subsequently posted zoning
ordinance changes pursuant to RSA 676:12 VI.” The Association also argues
that the ordinance is unconstitutional under the substantive due process
rational basis test “in that the extent of the restriction beyond the building
permit limitation bears no reasonable relationship to the legitimate limited
objective of an ‘interim regulation’ controlling growth due to ‘unusual
circumstances’ and unduly restricts fundamental rights.”
I. Validity Of The Ordinance
The Association argues that the ordinance is invalid because RSA 674:23
does not authorize the town “to suspend the legal protection and effect of RSA
676:4 and 676:12 nor deny access to the Board of Adjustment.” Specifically,
the Association urges that the ordinance is an ultra vires enactment in
derogation of the putatively superseding “rights” prescribed in RSA 676:4 and
RSA 676:12.
2
We are the final arbiter of the meaning of a statute as expressed by the
words of the statute itself. Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H. 283, 285 (2001). We
look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the words used in the statute and
will not examine legislative history unless the statutory language is ambiguous,
consider what the legislature might have said, or add words not included in the
statute. Monahan-Fortin Properties v. Town of Hudson, 148 N.H. 769, 771
(2002). We interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result and review a
particular provision, not in isolation, but together with all associated sections.
Fillmore, 147 N.H. at 285. The legislature will not be presumed to pass an act
leading to an absurd result and nullifying, to an appreciable extent, the
purpose of the statute. State v. Kay, 115 N.H. 696, 698 (1975). We review the
trial court’s interpretation of the statute de novo. Monahan-Fortin Properties,
148 N.H. at 771.
After defining what constitutes a completed application in section I(b),
RSA 676:4, I(c)(1) (Supp. 2005) states, in pertinent part, that “[t]he board shall,
at the next regular meeting or within 30 days following the delivery of the
application, . . . determine if a submitted application is complete according to
the board’s regulation and shall vote upon its acceptance.” RSA 676:12, VI
(Supp. 2005) states, in pertinent part, that “[n]o proposed subdivision or site
plan review or zoning ordinance or amendment thereto shall affect a plat or
application formally accepted by the planning board pursuant to RSA 676:4,
I(b) so long as said plat or application was accepted prior to the first legal
notice of said change or amendment.”
The ordinance in question was adopted under RSA 674:23, I, which
provides that a town “may adopt an ordinance imposing interim regulations
upon development” where “unusual circumstances requiring prompt attention”
exist. The Association claims that the ordinance exceeds the authority of RSA
674:23 in that it prevents applications from being accepted under RSA 676:4,
thereby denying them the protections afforded by RSA 676:12.
In rejecting the Association’s argument, the trial court stated:
The purpose of the interim growth management ordinance, RSA
674:23, as previously codified at RSA 31:62-b, is to provide “a town
[with] reasonable time to develop [or alter] a master or
comprehensive plan and to provide for phasing in growth.” Conway
[v. Town of Stratham, 120 N.H. 257, 258-59 (1980)]; RSA 674:23, I
(Supp. 2003). This purpose would likely be defeated if RSA 676:4,
I(c)(1), and RSA 676:12, VI – both of which concern plats or
applications that have been formally accepted by the Planning
Board – were interpreted in the manner suggested by the
Association. Moreover, interpreting RSA 676:4, I(c)(1), and RSA
676:12, VI, in that fashion would have the effect of rendering RSA
3
674:23 rather meaningless. The Court “will not interpret the
statute to produce such an illogical result.” Appeal of Soucy, 139
N.H. 110, 116 (1994) (quotation omitted).
We agree with the trial court’s statutory interpretation.
The Association argues that it is improper to rely upon Conway v. Town
of Stratham because it “is dead letter.” Specifically, the Association contends
that the instant case turns on RSA 676:4, which was enacted in 1983, three
years after Conway was decided. In Conway, we upheld the validity of a slow-
growth ordinance enacted pursuant to RSA 31:62-b, which was the
predecessor to RSA 674:23. Conway, 120 N.H. at 259. The enactment of RSA
676:4 has no effect upon our holding in Conway. On the contrary, the
ordinance enacted by the Town complies with principles enumerated in
Conway. Id. (upholding the validity of a slow growth ordinance as a temporary
measure, when it lasts for no more than one year towards the purpose of
developing a comprehensive plan).
Nowhere in RSA 674:23 does the legislature restrict which types of
regulations may be used to carry out the above-stated purpose of the statute.
Furthermore, the trial court correctly concluded that the Association’s
interpretation of RSA 676:4, I(c)(1) and RSA 676:12, VI “would have the effect of
rendering RSA 674:23 rather meaningless.” We therefore hold that the
ordinance, enacted pursuant to RSA 674:23 and in accordance with our
decision in Conway, is valid, and not ultra vires. We continue to recognize that
interim growth ordinances are appropriate “temporary measure[s]” to control
growth. Conway, 120 N.H. at 259.
II. Substantive Due Process
The Association makes a substantive due process argument, contending
that the ordinance is unconstitutional in that “the extent of the restriction
beyond the building permit limitation bears no reasonable relationship to the
legitimate limited objective of an ‘interim regulation’ controlling growth due to
‘unusual circumstances’ and unduly restricts fundamental rights.” The trial
court declined to address this claim because it could not “evaluate the
Association’s as applied challenges without more specific information about the
nature and scope of the rights and/or titles that have allegedly been affected by
the [interim growth management ordinance].” See Dow v. Town of Effingham,
148 N.H. 121, 124 (2002) (a substantive due process challenge to an ordinance
questions the fundamental fairness of an ordinance both generally and in the
relationship of the particular ordinance to a particular property under
particular conditions existing at the time of litigation). Since all “as applied”
claims were withdrawn, and the trial court never addressed the Association’s
4
substantive due process challenge, we decline to address it in the first
instance. Because it is unclear from the record before us whether this claim
was withdrawn or deferred below, we remand to the trial court for such further
action, if any, as it deems appropriate.
Affirmed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5