THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2004-331
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ALFRED J. GERO
Argued: May 5, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 23, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen G. LaBonte, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
Sheldon, Davis & Wells, P.C., of Keene (James Romeyn Davis on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Alfred J. Gero, pled guilty to one
charge of criminal threatening, see RSA 631:4 (Supp. 2004). On appeal, he
argues that the Superior Court (Sullivan, J.) erred in granting the State’s post-
plea motion to destroy seized property. We vacate in part and remand.
The following facts are not in dispute. The defendant, who was a police
officer at the time, was arrested for allegedly threatening his former girlfriend.
In connection with his arrest, State Police seized from the defendant over
twenty firearms, plus ammunition.
The State originally indicted the defendant on one count of felony
criminal threatening, alleging that he:
did threaten to commit a crime against the person of another by
means of a deadly weapon, with a purpose to terrorize [the victim]
and/or her family members, to wit: [He] took a pistol out of his
gun cabinet and said he would “blow them away . . . .”
The threat was alleged to have occurred at the defendant’s residence in
Winchester. Subsequently, the State amended the charge to a class A
misdemeanor. The amended indictment alleged that the defendant:
did threaten to commit a crime against the person of another
with a purpose to terrorize [the victim] and/or her family
members, to wit: [He] said he would “blow them away . . . .”
The defendant pled guilty to the amended charge. Thereafter, the State
moved to destroy the seized property. Following a hearing on the State’s
motion, the trial court issued a written order releasing four guns to the
defendant’s brother and two guns to the defendant’s son, and ordering the
remaining items destroyed.
The trial court found that although two of the four guns released to the
defendant’s brother were in the defendant’s possession at the time of his arrest,
they belonged to his brother. The other two guns released to the defendant’s
brother had belonged to the defendant’s father and grandfather. The court’s
ruling as to those firearms was “based in part on the defendant’s
representation that he [would] possess no guns in the future and his brother’s
representations that if he [were] awarded the guns, he [would] keep [them] and
not allow the defendant any access to [them].” The trial court found that two
guns, although in the defendant’s possession at the time of his arrest, belonged
to the defendant’s son. As for the remaining property, the trial court, with no
discussion, ruled that “the public interest requires destruction of the remaining
articles seized.” This appeal followed.
The defendant does not challenge the release of four firearms to his
brother and two to his son. Instead, he argues that destruction of the
remaining items was neither in the public interest nor consistent with due
process because: (1) the items were not contraband and were not used in the
commission of the crime; and (2) he did not seek return of the items, but rather
their release to his brother. The State asserts that the trial court’s order
should be upheld because: (1) the defendant can no longer legally possess any
firearms, thus rendering any infringement upon his property rights minimal;
(2) the hearing on the State’s motion afforded the defendant sufficient due
2
process; and (3) the weapons were related to the defendant’s threat, and
therefore the public has a strong interest in having them destroyed.
We review a trial court’s ruling on the disposition of property under RSA
595-A:6 for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Hebert, 122 N.H.
1089, 1090 (1982); cf. State v. Lambert 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). “To show that the trial court’s
decision is not sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.”
Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296 (quotation omitted).
RSA 595-A:6 (2001) provides, in relevant part:
If an officer in the execution of a search warrant, or by some other
authorized method, finds property or articles he is empowered to
take, he shall seize and safely keep them under the direction of the
court or justice so long as necessary to permit them to be produced
or used as evidence in any trial. Upon application by a prosecutor,
defendant, or civil claimants, the court, prior to trial or upon an
appeal after trial, shall, upon notice to a defendant and hearing,
and except for good cause shown, order returned to the rightful
owners any stolen, embezzled or fraudulently obtained property, or
any other property of evidential value, not constituting contraband.
. . . All other property seized in execution of a search warrant or
otherwise coming into the hands of the police shall be returned to
the owner of the property, or shall be disposed of as the court or
justice orders, which may include forfeiture and either sale or
destruction as the public interest requires, in the discretion of the
court or justice, and in accordance with due process of law.
In this case, the trial court ruled that the public interest required
destruction of the remaining property, and the parties’ arguments on appeal
focus upon the application of the public interest requirement to the facts of this
case. Because the parties do not contest the trial court’s treatment of this case
under the “[a]ll other property” clause of the statute, we conduct our analysis
accordingly.
The State titled its motion, “State’s Motion to Destroy Seized Property
Pursuant to RSA 595-A:6,” and requested the trial court to “[o]rder that the
firearms and ammunition seized, be destroyed by the New Hampshire State
Police.” RSA 595-A:6 provides, however, that certain items seized by the police
shall be disposed of “as the court or justice orders, which may include
forfeiture and either sale or destruction as the public interest requires.”
(Emphasis added.) A plain reading of this provision reveals that a court may
order that property be sold or destroyed pursuant to RSA 595-A:6 only if it first
3
orders that the property be forfeited. Forfeiture, which is not defined in RSA
595-A:6, is commonly defined as follows:
1 a : the divesting of the ownership of a particular property of a
person on account of the breach of a legal duty and without any
compensation to him : the loss of property or money on account of
one’s breach of the terms of an agreement, bond, or other legal
obligation b : loss of some right, privilege, estate, honor, office, or
effects in consequence of a crime, offense, breach of condition, or
other act.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 891 (unabridged ed. 2002); see
RSA 21:1, :2 (2000) (in interpreting statute, words shall be construed according
to common and approved usage). Thus, before a court orders that property be
sold or destroyed pursuant to RSA 595-A:6, it must first divest an individual of
his or her ownership in the property by ordering forfeiture.
The defendant asserts that the trial court erred in ordering the property
destroyed rather than releasing it to his brother. At the hearing on the State’s
motion, the defendant, through counsel, stated:
And given the family reference to [the firearms], we are asking that
they, in fact – and the defendant has given his brother a bill of sale
in regard to all of these firearms, and we’re asking that they be
transferred to his brother to be kept within the family, and
certainly to secure the monetary value.
The defendant appears to be arguing that because he sold the items to his
brother the court should, therefore, have ordered them to be released to his
brother and not forfeited and destroyed. In so arguing, the defendant
misconstrues RSA 595-A:6.
The statute provides that once property is seized by the police pursuant
to a search warrant or “some other authorized method,” the police are to “safely
keep [the property] under the direction of the court or justice so long as
necessary to permit them to be produced or used as evidence in any trial.”
RSA 595-A:6. Then, property with evidential value is to be returned to its
rightful owners, except for good cause shown, and “[a]ll other property . . . shall
be returned to the owner of the property, or shall be disposed of as the court or
justice orders, which may include forfeiture and either sale or destruction as
the public interest requires.” Id.
Thus, the statute authorizes police to maintain custody of seized
property, pending disposition by a court or justice. The seizure and continued
possession of property by the police do not divest individuals of their ownership
4
of the property such that forfeiture has occurred; otherwise, the statute’s
express authorization that courts may dispose of seized property by “forfeiture
and either sale or destruction” would be redundant. See Marcotte v.
Timberlane/Hampstead School Dist., 143 N.H. 331, 339 (1999) (legislature not
presumed to waste words or enact redundant provisions). Rather, the seizure
and continued possession of property by the police render the property
unavailable to the owner of the property in the sense that he or she may not
dispose of the property by selling it or otherwise; the plain language of the
statute delegates the disposition of seized property to a court or justice.
Accordingly, the defendant did not have the power to sell the seized property to
his brother and the court, therefore, was under no obligation to order the
property transferred to the defendant’s brother based upon the bill of sale.
To determine whether the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in ordering the property destroyed, we first consider whether it was
correct in ruling that the property be forfeited. See Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’
Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004) (we assume trial courts make
subsidiary findings necessary to support general findings). The issue of when
property should be forfeited under RSA 595-A:6 is one of first impression.
The defendant advances several arguments in support of his contention
that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in ordering the
remaining firearms and ammunition forfeited and destroyed. For example, he
contends that: (1) “existing forfeiture case law does not support the taking of
property which is not contraband and was not used in the commission of a
crime;” (2) “the [trial court’s] Order deprives [him] of his constitutionally
protected, private property rights;” and (3) “the ‘public policy’ of this State, and
in fact this nation, evidences a bedrock principal [sic] of protecting private
property rights absent significant, countervailing public need.” Further, he
argues that RSA 595-A:6 protects his “substantive due process rights,” which
he characterizes as State and federal constitutional “private property rights.”
Additionally, he challenges the trial court’s order on the basis that he was not
seeking possession of the property, but wanted the items released to his
brother.
We construe these arguments as addressing whether the trial court erred
in ordering that the property be forfeited, and not whether, once forfeited, the
property should be ordered destroyed. In other words, the essence of the
defendant’s contentions is that the trial court erred in severing his property
rights in the remaining items such that he could not transfer title or possession
to his brother. Thus, we need not determine the separate issue, assuming one
exists, of whether, once the trial court ordered forfeiture, it correctly ordered
that the property be destroyed.
5
In Beldotti v. Commonwealth, the Massachusetts Court of Appeals
squarely addressed the issue of when the public interest requires forfeiture of
property seized by the police, and in doing so, interpreted the term “public
interest” for purposes of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 276, § 3 (2005). Beldotti v.
Commonwealth, 669 N.E.2d 222 (Mass. App. Ct.), review denied, 672 N.E.2d
538 (Mass. 1996), cert. denied, 520 U.S. 1173 (1997). The relevant portion of
chapter 276 § 3 provides:
If an officer in the execution of a search warrant finds
property or articles therein described, he shall seize and safely
keep them, under the direction of the court or justice, so long as
necessary to permit them to be produced or used as evidence in
any trial. As soon as may be, thereafter, all property seized under
clause First of section one shall be restored to the owners thereof;
and all other property seized in execution of a search warrant shall
be disposed of as the court or justice orders and may be forfeited
and either sold or destroyed, as the public interest requires, in the
discretion of the court or justice . . . .
In Beldotti, the defendant had been convicted of first-degree murder, a
crime which the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court referred to as a “brutal
sex crime” in affirming his conviction, and sentenced to life without the
possibility of parole. Beldotti, 669 N.E.2d at 223. Several years after his
conviction, the defendant contacted the district attorney’s office that had
prosecuted his case, seeking the return of property seized from his home in
connection with the murder investigation. The district attorney’s office
returned camera equipment, business records and other similar items to the
defendant’s father and sister, but retained trial exhibits and child pornography.
Id.
The defendant then filed a motion in the superior court, seeking return of
the remainder of his property. The superior court ultimately ordered that all
property except the contents of the victim’s pocketbook and an envelope
bearing the victim’s address be returned to the defendant. Id. The court
explained that in light of the defendant’s life term of imprisonment without the
possibility of parole, there was no compelling public interest justifying
forfeiture. The court further reasoned that whether the defendant was allowed
to possess the items in prison was for correctional officials to decide. Id. at
223-24.
The Commonwealth appealed, and the court of appeals vacated the
superior court’s order and directed it to issue an order denying the defendant’s
motion. Id. at 224, 225. The court of appeals explained the basis for its
decision, in relevant part, as follows:
6
Massachusetts case law has never defined “public interest”
as it is used in G.L. c. 276, § 3. However, all crimes, regardless
whether a person is directly harmed, are considered to be offenses
against the public interest and common welfare, and thus Federal
and State laws have been enacted to deter criminal activity. A
forfeiture proceeding has the dual purpose of preventing further
illicit activity and of imposing a penalty. Forfeiture is punitive
because it results in total loss of the property. In some cases, it is
therefore within the public interest to punish the offender for the
criminal act by refusing to return the property to the offender.
This is such a case.
Although property may not be forfeited simply because it is
offensive or repugnant, we see a connection between the property
that [the defendant] seeks to have returned to him and the crime
he committed. The murder for which [the defendant] is serving his
life-term was particularly gruesome . . . . The items that [the
defendant] seeks to have returned to him can be seen as being
directly related to those acts, as having influenced his behavior, or
as being relevant to an understanding of the psychological or
physical circumstances under which the crime was committed.
. . . .
In these circumstances, to return the property would be so
offensive to basic concepts of decency treasured in a civilized
society, that it would undermine the confidence that the public has
a right to expect in the criminal justice system.
Id. at 225 (quotation, citations and brackets omitted; emphasis in original).
We agree with the court’s conclusion in Beldotti that property, which is
not contraband, may not be forfeited simply because it is offensive or
repugnant. Indeed, we are persuaded by the notion that forfeiture of property
in the public interest, other than contraband, should occur when: (1) the
property involved directly relates to the acts underlying the committed crime in
that it either influenced a defendant’s behavior in relation to the crime, or is
relevant to an understanding of the psychological or physical circumstances
under which the crime was committed; or (2) returning the property to the
defendant “would be so offensive to basic concepts of decency treasured in a
civilized society,” or “would justifiably spark outrage, disgust, and incredulity
on the part of the general public” that it would “undermine public confidence in
the criminal justice system.” Id. Both determinations require consideration of
the totality of the circumstances, including, among other things, the nature of
the crime, the circumstances surrounding the crime and the particular
relationship the property has to the crime.
7
The public has an interest in punishing those who commit crimes and in
deterring future criminal conduct. Additional punishment in the form of
forfeiture of property that is not contraband should occur when the property
satisfies one or both of the considerations outlined above; otherwise, property
could be ordered forfeited even when it has no appreciable relationship to a
defendant’s crime. In the absence of such a relationship, the forfeiture of
property would not comport with appropriate punishment or have a meaningful
deterrent effect. Moreover, requiring courts to consider the totality of the
circumstances in determining whether to return property to a defendant bears
directly on the issue of maintaining public confidence in our criminal justice
system. Finally, RSA 595-A:6 contains an express requirement that the
disposition of property under the statute comport with due process of law.
This requirement is satisfied when property falls within the scope of our newly
announced test.
Here, after releasing several pieces of property to the defendant’s brother
and son, the trial court ordered that the remaining items be destroyed. In
doing so, the court made a threshold determination that the public interest
required forfeiture of the property. See Nordic Inn, 151 N.H. at 586. However,
in making that determination, the court did not have the benefit of the test we
announce today for determining when forfeiture is in the public interest, and
did not engage in any discussion regarding its conclusion that the public
interest required forfeiture and destruction of the property. Therefore, we are
unable to determine what reasoning the court used to reach its conclusion.
Accordingly, we vacate the portion of the trial court’s order that relates to the
items ordered to be forfeited and destroyed, and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated in part and remanded.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
8