THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2004-896
IN THE MATTER OF VETA ROSSINO (GAGLIARDI) AND JOSEPH A. ROSSINO
Argued: November 16, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 21, 2006
Gawryl & MacAllister, of Nashua (Janine Gawryl on the brief and orally),
for the petitioner.
Veta Gagliardi, by brief and orally, pro se.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, Joseph A. Rossino, appeals an order of the
Marital Master (Nancy J. Geiger, Esq.), as approved by the Superior Court
(Barry, J.), denying his petition for modification of child support and granting
respondent Veta Gagliardi’s motion for contempt. We vacate and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The parties were married in
1987 and have one son, born in 1990. They divorced on January 17, 1992,
based upon irreconcilable differences. The respondent was granted primary
physical custody of their son, and the petitioner was ordered to pay child
support in the amount of $110 per week.
In March 2003, the petitioner involuntarily resigned from his
employment as a police officer in the Hudson Police Department following
allegations that he had sexual relations with another woman while on duty
during the previous year. The petitioner had been employed as a police officer
for over seventeen years, since 1986. He earned an annual income of
approximately $60,000, which included significant overtime. Though the
petitioner denied having sexual relations while on duty, he did not deny that he
had sexual relations with another woman in 2002. Despite initiating a
grievance and an arbitration procedure, the petitioner was unable to return to
work as a Hudson police officer.
After involuntarily resigning from the Hudson Police Department, the
petitioner was unable to obtain employment in a law enforcement related field.
He was intermittently employed as an electrician’s apprentice with two
companies at an annual income averaging approximately $36,000. After
March 2003, the petitioner alleged that he was unable to make regular child
support payments to the respondent.
In April 2004, the respondent sought payment of child support, and the
State began garnishing the petitioner’s wages in the amount of $132 per week,
which reflected the weekly child support payment plus a portion of the
arrearages. In June 2004, the petitioner filed for modification of child support
based upon his loss of employment with the Hudson Police Department. The
respondent countered by filing a motion for contempt for failure to make child
support payments in accordance with the permanent stipulation. On
November 17, 2004, the court conducted a hearing by offers of proof and
considered all pending motions. However, on October 27, 2004, while
employed as an electrician’s apprentice, the petitioner was “electrocuted.”
Consequently, at the time of the hearing and the subsequent filing of this
appeal, the petitioner was unemployed and receiving workers’ compensation.
At the November 2004 hearing, the petitioner sought a reduction in his
child support obligation based upon his reduced annual income and his
inability to work after the October 27, 2004 accident.
In its December 2, 2004 ruling, the court in this case took judicial notice
that the marital master found, in the related divorce case between the
petitioner and Lucille Rossino, see In the Matter of Rossino & Rossino, 153
N.H. ___ (decided February 24, 2006), that “the [Noddin] case applies since it
was a result of Joseph A. Rossino’s own inappropriate conduct and voluntary
actions that brought about his loss of employment with the Hudson Police
Department.” See Noddin v. Noddin, 123 N.H. 73 (1983). The court also
reviewed the evidence, specifically noting its consideration of the petitioner’s
“lengthy disciplinary index,” his resignation from the Hudson Police
Department, and the arbitrator’s decision. The trial court ruled that Noddin
applied in this case and attributed the higher earnings from the Hudson Police
Department to the petitioner.
2
On appeal, the petitioner argues the trial court erred in applying Noddin
to the instant case, asserting that: (1) his improper conduct was not criminal
and, therefore, did not rise to the level of fault; (2) he has no valuable assets;
and (3) he is physically incapacitated as a result of the October 2004 work
injury, and, therefore, RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) precludes imputing the higher
income to him.
The respondent counters that the trial court correctly determined that
Noddin applies because the petitioner’s termination of employment was based
upon his own actions and his retirement benefit from the Hudson Police
Department constitutes a valuable asset as contemplated by Noddin. The
respondent also asserts that the petitioner’s injury does not rise to the level of
physical incapacitation pursuant to RSA 458-C:2, IV(a).
“Trial courts have broad discretion in reviewing and modifying child
support orders.” In the Matter of Forcier & Mueller, 152 N.H. 463, 464 (2005)
(quotation and citation omitted). We will overturn a child support modification
order “only if it clearly appears that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.” Id.
Noddin was decided prior to the enactment of RSA chapter 458-C. In
Noddin we held that in the context of a post-divorce request for modification of
an existing child support order, the child support obligation should not be
reduced where the petitioner’s wrongdoing has resulted in a loss of high-
earning employment and the petitioner owns an asset which could be applied
to meet his or her obligations. Noddin, 123 N.H. at 76; Rossino, 153 N.H. at
___. However, in 1988, the legislature enacted RSA chapter 458-C (2004 &
Supp. 2005), which sets forth guidelines to, among other things, “establish a
uniform system to be used in the determination of the amount of child
support.” RSA 458-C:1 (Supp. 2005).
RSA 458-C:2, IV (2004) defines “gross income” and grants the court
discretionary authority to “consider as gross income the difference between the
amount a parent is earning and the amount a parent has earned in cases
where the parent voluntarily becomes unemployed or underemployed, unless
the parent is physically or mentally incapacitated.” RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)
(emphasis added). Thus, for the purposes of calculating child support under
this section, the trial court must first determine that the parent who is alleged
to be voluntarily unemployed or underemployed is neither physically nor
mentally incapacitated before considering whether, under the terms of the
statute, that parent voluntarily became “unemployed or underemployed.” If the
court determines that a parent is unemployed or underemployed within the
meaning of the statute, RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) sets forth the method the court
may, in its discretion, use when calculating the amount of gross income to be
imputed to that parent; namely, “the difference between the amount [that]
3
parent is earning and the amount [that] parent has earned.” RSA 458-C:2,
IV(a); see In the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. ___ (decided April 11,
2006) (holding that trial court has discretion to impute less than the total
difference between the amount the parent is earning and the amount the
parent has earned).
In Rossino, we did not reach the issue of whether, or how, Noddin
applies in the context of a post-divorce petition for modification of child support
arising after the enactment of RSA 458-C:2, IV(a). Accordingly, we now hold
that RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) supersedes Noddin. To conclude otherwise would
circumvent the stated purpose of RSA chapter 458-C to establish uniformity in
child support determinations and modifications. See RSA 458-C:1. Thus, the
trial court erred when it failed to consider the petitioner’s request for child
support modification under RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) and, instead, ruled that Noddin
applied and imputed the petitioner’s higher earnings as a police officer to him.
Here, the petitioner raised the issue of his physical incapacity at the
November 2004 hearing. Furthermore, during the hearing, the respondent
conceded that she was not contesting the legitimacy of the petitioner’s claim
that he had been “electrocuted” and was unable to work full time. Therefore,
the trial court committed an unsustainable exercise of discretion when it failed
to make a determination regarding the petitioner’s alleged physical incapacity
under RSA 458-C:2, IV(a). Only if it determined that the petitioner was not
physically or mentally incapacitated would the trial court proceed to determine
whether, under the terms of that statute, the petitioner voluntarily became
“unemployed or underemployed” for the purposes of imputing income to him.
Accordingly, we remand this case to the superior court for a determination
consistent with RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) and this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
4