THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2004-612
GARRY K. HARRINGTON
v.
CONCORD GENERAL MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: March 21, 2005
Hall Stewart, P.A., of Manchester (Francis G. Murphy on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Garry K. Harrington, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Arnold, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendant,
Concord General Mutual Insurance Company (Concord General). We affirm.
The parties stipulated to the following facts. On or about December 20,
2000, the plaintiff was involved in an accident with Edward Laborio. Laborio
was driving a car; the plaintiff was on foot. Laborio was, at the time, employed
as a delivery person by Cheshire Village Pizza, and was delivering pizza when
the accident occurred. The plaintiff sued Cheshire Village Pizza and Laborio,
seeking damages for injuries sustained in the accident.
Cheshire Village Pizza had an automobile liability insurance policy with
Empire Insurance Company. The applicable limit of this policy was $750,000.
It provided coverage for Cheshire Village Pizza with respect to the accident, but
did not provide coverage for Laborio individually. At the time of the accident,
Laborio did not have personal automobile liability insurance. The plaintiff had
an automobile insurance policy with Concord General.
Without the knowledge or consent of Concord General, the plaintiff
settled his claim against Cheshire Village Pizza for $40,000 on December 6,
2002. After receiving an affidavit of non-insurance from Laborio, the plaintiff
filed a motion for voluntary non-suit without prejudice of his claim against
Laborio, which was granted on January 8, 2003. On or about January 8,
2003, the plaintiff’s attorney mailed Laborio’s affidavit of non-insurance to
Concord General, and made a demand for uninsured motorist benefits.
The plaintiff’s insurance policy with Concord General provides uninsured
motorist coverage of up to $100,000 per person and $300,000 per occurrence.
On or about April 14, 2003, the plaintiff’s attorney informed Concord General
of the settlement with Cheshire Village Pizza and the voluntary non-suit. On or
about May 1, 2003, Concord General informed the plaintiff’s attorney that it
was denying his claim for uninsured motorist benefits.
The plaintiff filed suit in superior court, seeking a declaratory judgment
that Concord General was required to provide uninsured motorist coverage for
injuries sustained by the plaintiff in the accident. On cross-motions for
summary judgment, the trial court found as a matter of law that Concord
General was not required to provide uninsured motorist benefits to the
plaintiff.
The plaintiff makes two arguments on appeal. First, he argues that RSA
259:61, I (2004) requires Concord General to provide at least $25,000 worth of
insurance coverage, and any attempt to escape this obligation is voided by the
Financial Responsibility Act, RSA chapter 264. The plaintiff next argues that
four provisions of the policy upon which Concord General relied to deny him
coverage are not applicable to his claim.
RSA 259:61, I, defines a “motor vehicle liability policy” as a policy of
liability insurance which provides indemnity or protection for the insured in an
amount of at least $25,000 for an accident in which one person is injured. The
plaintiff reads this definition in tandem with RSA 264:15, I, which requires an
insurance company to provide uninsured motorist coverage in an amount
equivalent to that of liability insurance coverage purchased by an insured.
RSA 264:15, I (2004). The plaintiff argues that Concord General cannot avoid
the responsibility imposed by these two statutes to provide uninsured motorist
coverage of at least $25,000. He insists that Concord General is required to
provide this minimum coverage, even if the provisions it relies upon in its
policy to deny him coverage are valid. We disagree.
2
We are the final arbiters of the intent of the legislature as expressed in
the words of a statute considered as a whole. Wegner v. Prudential Prop. &
Cas. Ins. Co., 148 N.H. 107, 108 (2002). RSA 264:15, I, is intended to allow
policy holders to protect themselves against injury from an uninsured motorist
to the same extent that they protect themselves against liability. Turner v. St.
Paul Prop. & Liab. Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 27, 29 (1996). We have recognized that
the parties to an insurance contract may not by agreement limit the required
coverage in contravention of the Financial Responsibility Act. We have,
however, also held that we are not at liberty to find uninsured motorist
coverage when it is not required by the statute. Wegner, 148 N.H. at 109.
RSA 264:15, I, requires only that uninsured motorist coverage be
provided to policy holders in the same amount as liability coverage. This
requirement was met in this case, as the plaintiff had uninsured motorist
coverage in an amount equal to his liability coverage.
It is well settled that absent statutory provisions or public policy to the
contrary, insurers have a right to limit their liability by exclusions written in
terms that convey their meaning and effect to a reasonable person in the
position of the insured. Id. Concord General remains free to limit its liability
through clear and unambiguous policy language. See Turner, 141 N.H. at 30.
Therefore, if we find that the policy contains a clear and unambiguous
exception to uninsured motorist coverage, we can conclude that Concord
General’s refusal to provide coverage to the plaintiff is not in contravention of
the law.
The plaintiff raises objections to four of the provisions in the insurance
policy that would seem to deny him coverage. The first provision is what the
plaintiff terms a “consent to settle” clause, in endorsement PP 04 45 06 94,
under the heading “Insuring Agreement,” which relates to settlements with
insurers of underinsured motor vehicles. The second provision, under the
heading “Exclusions” is Exclusion B.1, found in the same endorsement. The
third provision, also in the same endorsement, is found under the “Additional
Duty” section, and describes additional duties of insureds seeking
underinsured motorist coverage. The fourth provision is found in the main
body of the policy, in Part F – General Provisions, under the heading “Our Right
to Recover Payment,” and provides that Concord General is entitled to the
proceeds of any payment the insured is entitled to, or collects, if Concord
General has made a payment under the policy.
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for
this court to decide. Raudonis v. Ins. Co. of North America, 137 N.H. 57, 59
(1993). If one of these provisions effectively denies coverage to the plaintiff,
then we see no need to examine the rest. The plaintiff argues that the first and
third provisions do not apply as he is not seeking underinsured motorist
benefits, but uninsured motorist benefits. He argues that the fourth provision
3
does not apply because Concord General never made a payment under the
policy. We need not decide these issues, because we find that the second
provision, Exclusion B.1 is applicable, and effectively denies coverage to the
plaintiff.
Part C of the insurance policy, as amended by endorsement PP 04 45 06
94, is titled “Uninsured Motorists Coverage – New Hampshire.” Under the
section heading “Exclusions,” the policy states “B. We do not provide
Uninsured Motorists Coverage for ‘property damage’ or ‘bodily injury’ sustained
by any ‘insured’: 1. If that ‘insured’ or the legal representative settles the ‘bodily
injury’ or ‘property damage’ claim without our consent.”
The plaintiff argues that this exclusion has no bearing on his claim for
coverage, because he did not settle his claim against Laborio, the uninsured
motorist. The plaintiff further argues that his claim against Cheshire Village
Pizza was not an uninsured motorist claim, and therefore the provisions of Part
C of the policy do not apply, and impose no obligation on him regarding his
“entirely separate claim . . . against an uninsured motorist.”
The plaintiff, however, admits he is seeking uninsured motorist coverage
from Concord General. Therefore, Part C of the policy applies. In addition,
Exclusion B.1 does not require that the plaintiff settle a bodily injury claim
with an uninsured motorist. It merely states that Concord General will not
provide coverage if the insured, in this case the plaintiff, settles the bodily
injury claim without its consent. We hold, therefore, that this exclusion clearly
and unambiguously requires the plaintiff to obtain Concord General’s consent
before he settles any bodily injury or property damage claim in order to receive
uninsured motorist benefits related to that claim. See Stevens v. Merchants
Mut. Ins. Co., 135 N.H. 26, 28-29 (1991) (upholding exclusion of coverage
based upon consent to settle clause where insured settled with parties without
insurer’s prior consent.)
We disagree that the claim against Laborio is “entirely separate” from the
claim against Cheshire Village Pizza. The plaintiff admitted at oral argument
that the basis of his claim against Cheshire Village Pizza was vicarious liability
for Laborio’s conduct and its duty to supervise Laborio. These claims were
predicated upon Cheshire Village Pizza’s responsibility for its employee’s
conduct in connection with the accident at issue, and sought damages for the
same injuries that resulted from the accident with Laborio. Therefore, these
were “bodily injury” claims under Exclusion B.1 and could not be settled
without Concord General’s consent.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
4