THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2004-313
APPEAL OF NEW HAMPSHIRE YOUTH DEVELOPMENT CENTER
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: January 12, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2005
Devine & Nyquist, P.A., of Manchester (Lee C. Nyquist on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (James E. Owers and Chantalle
Forgues on the brief, and Mr. Owers orally), for the State.
GALWAY, J. The New Hampshire Youth Development Center (State)
appeals a decision of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (Board)
allowing the petitioner, Stephen Searles, to continue to receive the benefit of
past adjustments to his weekly compensation rate, while also receiving social
security disability benefits. See RSA 281-A:29 (1999). We reverse and remand.
The record reflects the following facts. The petitioner injured his right
shoulder while working for the State on December 29, 1993, and began
receiving workers’ compensation benefits at a weekly rate of $316.60. See RSA
281-A:28 (1999). Although the petitioner applied for social security disability
benefits in 1996, his application was denied. In December 1996, he received a
cost-of-living adjustment to his weekly rate. See RSA 281-A:29. He continued
to receive annual cost-of-living adjustments, see RSA 281-A:29, IV, and by July
2001, his adjusted weekly rate had increased to $443.34.
The petitioner reapplied for social security disability benefits, and, on
August 21, 2001, the Social Security Administration notified him that he
qualified for benefits. As a result of his qualification for social security
disability benefits, the petitioner’s workers’ compensation benefits were
reduced to his unadjusted weekly rate of $316.60.
While receiving social security benefits, the petitioner requested that the
New Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL) order reinstatement of his adjusted
weekly rate of $443.34. The DOL denied the petitioner’s request. The
petitioner appealed to the Board, which determined that he was entitled to
continue to receive the adjusted weekly rate of $443.34, but that he was not
entitled to any future cost-of-living adjustments under RSA 281-A:29. The
State appealed.
When reviewing the Board’s decision, we will not disturb that decision
absent an error of law, or unless, by a clear preponderance of the evidence, we
find it to be unjust or unreasonable. Appeal of Hiscoe, 147 N.H. 223, 227
(2001). As the facts of this case are undisputed, we examine the Board’s
decision only for errors of law.
The State argues that because the petitioner is now receiving social
security disability benefits, the plain language of RSA 281-A:29 provides that
he is not entitled to continue to receive the adjusted weekly rate afforded by the
statute. We agree.
We are the final arbiter of the meaning of the workers’ compensation
statute, and the nature and extent of compensation to the injured employee is
governed by the express statutory language and that which can be fairly
implied therefrom. Appeal of Hiscoe, 147 N.H. at 230. When construing the
meaning of a statute, we first examine the language found in the statute and,
where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written, and do not consider
what the legislature might have said or add words to the statute that the
legislature did not include. In the Matter of Arabian & Squillante, 151 N.H.
109, 111 (2004).
RSA 281-A:29 provides:
For all compensable injuries occurring on or after July 1, 1963, for
which total disability continues, except those injuries for which the
employee is entitled to benefits under the federal Social Security
Act, as amended, the injured employee shall be entitled to an
adjustment in the weekly compensation rate . . . based upon the
following formula:
. . . .
2
IV. The injured employee shall be entitled to an adjustment in the
weekly compensation rate at one year intervals on July 1 in each
year with the initial review occurring on or after the third
anniversary of the injury.
(Emphasis added.)
There is no dispute that the petitioner was entitled to receive an adjusted
weekly rate prior to his entitlement to social security benefits. The only issue
now in dispute is whether, once the petitioner became entitled to social
security benefits, the entitlement to receive an adjustment to the weekly rate
ceased to exist.
“[B]ecause the right to compensation is statutory in its origin, injured
workers’ rights can be no greater than what the legislature has provided.” P. L.
Salafia, New Hampshire Workers’ Compensation Manual § 1.05, at 1-5 (3d ed.
2004). Though the dissent argues that the statute is ambiguous, we see no
ambiguity. RSA 281-A:29 does not provide that an injured worker who is
entitled to social security benefits shall not be entitled to any future
adjustments; rather, RSA 281-A:29 plainly states that an “injured employee
shall be entitled to an adjustment in the weekly compensation rate” except for
“those injuries for which the employee is entitled to benefits under the federal
Social Security Act.” (Emphasis added.) We interpret this language as
providing that if an injured worker is entitled to social security benefits, there
is no statutory right to any entitlement under RSA 281-A:29.
Injured workers who receive social security disability benefits are kept
up-to-date with respect to the value of their earnings, even though they do not
receive cost-of-living adjustments to their workers’ compensation benefits,
because social security disability benefits, themselves, contain cost-of-living
adjustments. 42 U.S.C. § 415(i) (2000); see, e.g., Engelbrecht v. Hartford Acc.
& Indem., 680 P.2d 231, 232 n.1 (Colo. 1984). It is only when an injured
worker is not entitled to social security disability benefits that the need for RSA
281-A:29 becomes apparent. That is because, without the cost-of-living
adjustments provided by RSA 281-A:29, an injured worker’s benefits will fail to
adjust to modern prices, as that worker will receive no cost-of-living
adjustments whatsoever.
RSA 281-A:29 demonstrates a statutorily drawn balance between the
welfare of the employees of this State and the interests of the employers of this
State. Where an employee does not receive social security benefits, the
legislature has chosen to require an employer to pay cost-of-living adjustments
to the employee for the above stated reasons. However, where an employee
does receive social security benefits, the legislature has chosen to relieve the
employer of that burden and allow the employee to rely upon the Social
Security Administration for cost-of-living adjustments.
3
Thus, our interpretation merely reflects the statutory allocation of the
financial responsibility, as between the employers of this State and the Social
Security Administration, for the payment of an injured worker’s adjustments.
To award an employee both cost-of-living adjustments for workers’
compensation and cost-of-living adjustments for social security would
unnecessarily broaden a statute that was enacted for a narrow set of workers,
and provide a benefit that would burden the employer beyond that which is
authorized by the statute. In this case, now that the petitioner is entitled to
social security benefits, he will receive cost-of-living adjustments through those
benefits and be protected, to the extent deemed necessary by the legislature,
from the future decline in the value of the benefits that would otherwise occur.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, J., concurred; DALIANIS, J., with
whom DUGGAN, J., joined, dissented.
DALIANIS, J., dissenting. I disagree with the majority’s holding that an
injured worker who has been granted past adjustments loses his entitlement to
those adjustments if he later becomes entitled to social security benefits. For
the following reasons, I would hold that the statute should be interpreted as
prohibiting an employee from receiving future adjustments to his benefits
without forfeiting adjustments that had been previously granted.
Although the majority holds that RSA 281-A:29 may be interpreted on its
face, I believe that, with respect to the issue before us, the statute is
ambiguous. I first note that the plain language of the statute does indicate
that the legislature intended to provide cost-of-living adjustments to a worker
who receives workers’ compensation benefits for three years and does not, by
the end of those three years, become entitled to social security benefits. RSA
281-A:29. And, I note that the plain language does indicate that the legislature
intended to prohibit a worker from receiving cost-of-living adjustments if that
worker becomes entitled to social security benefits during the first three years,
and, of course, does not later lose his entitlement to social security benefits.
RSA 281-A:29.
Noticeably absent from RSA 281-A:29, however, is any indication of
whether a worker who has previously been granted adjustments under the
statute should lose his or her entitlement to those adjustments. The majority
professes that a worker’s right to benefits is limited to only those benefits
authorized by the statute. With that I agree. However, the majority’s holding
rests upon the interpretation of a provision that does not exist, i.e., one that
requires an employee to forfeit his entitlement to adjustments previously
granted. The statute is silent with respect to this issue.
4
Absent plain language in the statute, we look to legislative history for
guidance. The State cites Senator Bergeron, who stated that the statute
“provid[es] an adjusted total disability benefit to take care of the people who are
not entitled to any social security benefits and are completely disabled.” N.H.S.
Jour. 583 (1975). However, this statement merely repeats the statutory
language and provides no new insight into the issue before us. Thus, the
legislative history is barren; it seems clear that the legislature did not
contemplate the issue at hand.
We have long followed the principle that where the legislature has failed
to indicate, either in the plain language of the Workers’ Compensation Law or
the legislative history, the result that it would choose if faced with a particular
situation, “[t]he remedial nature of workmen’s compensation laws dictates they
be liberally construed and that all reasonable doubts be resolved in favor of the
injured employee.” Petition of Correia, 128 N.H. 717, 721 (1986) (quotation
omitted). Though it may be reasonable to interpret the statute as proscribing
the petitioner from continuing to receive the benefit of previous adjustments to
his weekly rate, I believe that it is equally reasonable to interpret the statute as
merely proscribing the petitioner from receiving future adjustments to his
weekly rate, while allowing him to retain the benefit of adjustments already
granted. Following the principle of liberal construction, I would hold that,
given the choice between allowing the injured worker to retain his entitlement
to benefits previously granted or forcing the injured worker to forfeit his
entitlement to those benefits, the policy of favoring the injured worker dictates
that he remain entitled to those adjustments.
Resolving this matter in favor of the injured worker does not upset the
policy of RSA 281-A:29 as outlined by the majority. The majority concludes
that allowing the petitioner to retain benefits previously granted would
unnecessarily broaden the statute because it would allow the petitioner to,
essentially, receive two cost-of-living adjustments – one for workers’
compensation benefits and one for social security benefits. I disagree for two
reasons. First, although the petitioner would still receive the benefit of past
adjustments to his weekly rate, he would not be receiving any further
adjustments to his rate. The only future adjustments he would receive would
be those to his social security benefits.
Secondly, the petitioner took the independent step of reapplying for
social security benefits. And it is this step that has fortuitously saved the
employer from future cost-of-living adjustments, thus providing a benefit to the
employer. Far from it being unnecessary to allow the petitioner to retain the
benefit of past adjustments, it is unnecessary, now that the petitioner has
taken the responsible step of applying for social security benefits, to take those
adjustments away. Further, though the petitioner would receive a benefit from
the adjusted weekly rate, in order to gain his adjusted weekly rate, the
petitioner had to forgo the receipt of social security benefits for a number of
5
years. The petitioner has, in a sense, paid a price for his higher adjusted
weekly rate.
The determinations of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board
and the Federal Social Security Administration are independent
determinations, and neither determination can be controlled by the injured
worker. There are instances in which the Board determines that an injured
worker qualifies for total disability benefits, while the Social Security
Administration determines that the injured worker does not qualify for social
security benefits. There are also instances, perhaps due to the physical
degeneration of the worker, or simply a reevaluation of a claim, in which the
Social Security Administration determines long after the injury that the injured
worker qualifies for social security benefits. Such a determination takes place,
however, in the present, not in the past. I see no reason, absent clear
legislative intent to the contrary, to force an injured worker to forfeit his or her
entitlement to adjustments that were previously granted.
For the above reasons, I respectfully dissent.
DUGGAN, J., joins in the dissent.
6