THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-607
WOODVIEW DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
v.
TOWN OF PELHAM
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 11, 2005
Beaumont & Campbell, P.A., of Salem (Bernard H. Campbell on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward & Loughman, of Wolfeboro (Barbara F.
Loughman on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.A., of Concord (Donald E. Gartrell on
the brief), for the Home Builders and Remodelers Association of New
Hampshire, as amicus curiae.
Paul G. Sanderson, staff attorney, of Concord, by brief, for the New
Hampshire Municipal Association, as amicus curiae.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Anne M. Edwards, associate attorney
general, and Stephen G. LaBonte, attorney, on the brief), for the State, as
amicus curiae.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, Town of Pelham (Town), appeals the order
of the Superior Court (Groff, J.) reversing the town’s denial of the request of the
petitioner, Woodview Development Corporation, for an abatement of land use
change taxes (LUCT). See RSA 79-A:7 (2003). We reverse.
The parties do not dispute the following facts. The petitioner owns two
tracts of land in Pelham, which had been in current use. In April 2002, the
petitioner received approval to subdivide the tracts into twenty-seven building
lots. When the Town valued the lots for the assessment of the LUCT, the
valuations reflected the enhanced value to the lots from betterments, such as a
road and utilities that served them. The petitioner applied for an abatement,
which the Town denied. The petitioner appealed this denial to the superior
court.
The superior court bifurcated the case to rule on the legal question of
whether, in valuing the lots, the Town could include the enhanced value of the
lots due to the existence of the betterments. The petitioner conceded below
that if including the enhanced value from the betterments was permissible,
then its appeal could be dismissed as it did not contest the accuracy of the
Town’s valuations.
The superior court ruled that including the enhanced value from the
betterments violated RSA 79-A:7. As the court stated, “The comprehensive
scheme of RSA 79-A:7 is that at the time the land use is changed, the land use
change tax is due. There is no improvement or betterment on the land at that
time. Even if there were, it is the bare land which is subject to assessment, not
land with improvements or betterments.” Accordingly, the court reversed the
Town’s denial of the petitioner’s abatement request and ordered it to value the
lots without the enhanced value from the betterments.
The trial court also ruled that to the extent that New Hampshire
Administrative Rules, Cub 308.01, permitted the Town to enhance the value of
the lots to reflect the added value associated with betterments to the lots, the
regulation was ultra vires. The court ruled that the regulation exceeded the
rule-making authority of the State Current Use Board (board) because it did
not merely implement the statute, but modified it and added to it.
On appeal, the Town first argues that RSA 79-A:7 permits it to include
the enhanced value from the betterments that serve the property. We agree.
2
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Adams v. Woodlands of Nashua, 151 N.H. ___, ___, 864 A.2d 322, 323
(2005). We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. Blackthorne Group v. Pines of
Newmarket, 150 N.H. 804, 806 (2004). We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the
words used. Id. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we
need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id.
The purpose of the current use statute is to “encourage the preservation
of open space,” by reducing property taxes on land that the taxpayer enrolls as
open space land in current use. RSA 79-A:1, :2 (2003). When land is enrolled
in current use, it is taxed at its current use value, and not at its fair market
value. RSA 79-A:2; see also Tyler Road Dev. Corp. v. Town of Londonderry,
145 N.H. 615, 616 (2000). When a change occurs to the land that disqualifies
it for current use, the LUCT is assessed. RSA 79-A:7, I, II. The LUCT is
intended to permit a town to “recapture some of the taxes it would have
received had the land not been in the lower open space tax category.” Opinion
of the Justices, 137 N.H. 270, 275 (1993). Pursuant to RSA 79-A:7, I, the
LUCT is assessed “at the rate of 10 percent of the full and true value
determined without regard to the current use value of the land which is subject
to a non-qualifying use.”
The petitioner argues that the “full and true value” to which RSA 79-A:7,
I, refers applies to the land itself, and not to any enhanced value from
betterments that serve it. We rejected a similar argument in Appeal of Town of
Hollis, 126 N.H. 230, 233-34 (1985).
The facts of that case are instructive. The taxpayers had applied to
subdivide their land. Appeal of Town of Hollis, 126 N.H. at 231. While their
application was pending, they began to construct a road to serve the
anticipated subdivision. Id. Two weeks later, on November 15, 1982, the
planning board approved their subdivision. Id. The town assessed the LUCT
as of December 10, 1982. Id. The town calculated the full and true value as
“the total anticipated sales prices of the subdivided lots.” Id. Thus, in
calculating the value, the town considered the subdivision approval, the value
of improvements made between the date of the subdivision application and
December 10, 1982, and increases in value attributable to all other steps that
would be necessary to market the lots. Id.
Consistent with the relevant statute at the time, we held that the change
in use occurred when the taxpayers submitted their application for subdivision
approval and that the town should have assessed the full and true value of the
3
property as of that date. Id. at 232. We held, however, that the full and true
value of the property must include the enhanced value attributable to the fact
of the application for subdivision approval. Id. at 234. We held that while a
town “may not simply include the full value of improvements that had not yet
been made or the commercial value attributable to the local subdivision
approval that had not yet been granted,” it “need not, and should not, ignore
the potential for development” when assessing the LUCT. Id. at 233-34.
In this case, the petitioner does not assert that the Town assessed the
full and true value of its property on the wrong date. Moreover, the relevant
statute regarding the timing of the LUCT assessment has been amended since
we decided Appeal of Town of Hollis. Now, pursuant to RSA 79-A:7, V:
[I]f any physical changes are made to the land prior to the issuance
of any required local, state or federal permit or approval, . . . the
local assessing officials may delay the assessment of the land use
change tax until any and all required permits or approvals have
been secured, . . . and may base the land use change tax assessed
under RSA 79-A:7 upon the land’s full and true value at that later
time.
Thus, under RSA 79-A:7, V, when a town assesses the LUCT, the property
owner not only may have applied for subdivision approval, but may have
received it. Improvements to the land not only may have been planned, but
also may have been completed.
Nor does the petitioner contend that the Town incorrectly valued the
betterments. Rather, the petitioner asserts that the Town erred by enhancing
the land’s value as a result of the betterments serving it. On this issue, Appeal
of Town of Hollis is dispositive. As we held in that case, the Town need not “be
blind to the economic reality of the land’s best and highest use when it
determines full and true value under RSA 79-A:7, I.” Id. at 234 (quotations
omitted). By enhancing the land’s value because of the betterments that
served it, when calculating the full and true value of the petitioner’s property,
the Town complied with RSA 79-A:7, I, and our decision in Appeal of Town of
Hollis.
The petitioner contends that enhancing the property’s value because of
the betterments is unfair because it permits the Town to tax “substantial
development expenditures.” As the petitioner’s reply brief explains: “By
attempting to assess a LUCT based on the enhanced value of a lot, when the
enhanced value is a result of the landowner’s (or developer’s) own
expenditures, then what ends up being taxed is not the land, but a taxation of
the expenditures.” To the contrary, that the land was once in current use does
not entitle the landowner or developer to a reduced assessment of the full and
4
true value of the land once it is no longer in current use. As we held in Appeal
of Town of Hollis, when assessing the LUCT, “the town should consider the
potential for development as it would with any piece of comparable land that is
not subject to current use.” Id.
At oral argument, the petitioner posited that the LUCT should be levied
upon the value of the land plus any enhancement attributable to the
betterments less the landowner’s or developer’s costs for installing the
betterments. This is not the statutory scheme, however. We will only interpret
RSA 79-A:7 as written. Blackthorne Group, 150 N.H. at 806. We will not
consider what the legislature could have said or add words to the statute that
the legislature did not see fit to include. Id.
Because we conclude that RSA 79-A:7 required the Town to enhance the
property’s value with the betterments, we also conclude that the board did not
exceed its grant of authority by amending its regulations to conform to the
statute. That the board’s prior regulations did not conform to the statute did
not preclude the board from bringing them into compliance. Nor was the
board’s action barred by our decision in Appeal of Estate of Van Lunen, 145
N.H. 82, 88-89 (2000). In that case, we addressed only whether the board
properly applied its prior regulations; the parties did not argue and thus we did
not consider whether those regulations conformed to the statutory requirement
that the LUCT be assessed upon the land’s “full and true value.” RSA 79-A:7,
I; see Appeal of Estate of Van Lunen, 145 N.H. at 88.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and DALIANIS, JJ., concurred.
5