THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Environmental Services
No. 2004-601
APPEAL OF THE TOWN OF NOTTINGHAM
APPEAL OF THE TOWN OF BARRINGTON
APPEAL OF SAVE OUR GROUNDWATER
(New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services)
Argued: September 15, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 19, 2006
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (E. Tupper
Kinder and Richard C. Bell on the brief, and Mr. Kinder orally), for petitioner
Town of Nottingham.
Pierce Atwood LLP, of Portsmouth (Mark E. Beliveau on the brief and
orally), for petitioner Town of Barrington.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief), for petitioner Save Our Groundwater.
Soltani/Mosca P.L.L.C., of Epsom (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the respondent, USA Springs, Inc.
Steven B. Conklin, by brief, pro se.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jennifer J. Patterson, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the State, as amicus curiae.
Jenkins Legal Services, of Eaton Center (Linda A. Jenkins on the brief),
for the New Hampshire Program of the American Friends Service Committee, as
amicus curiae.
Duddy Law Offices, P.L.L.C., of Bedford (Roy A. Duddy on the
memorandum), for Public Citizen, as amicus curiae.
Gordon R. Blakeney, Jr., of Concord, on the memorandum, and Sack
Goldblatt Mitchell, of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (Steven Shrybman on the
memorandum), for Maude Barlow and the Blue Planet Project, as amici curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, Town of Nottingham, Town of Barrington
and Save Our Groundwater (SOG), appeal the issuance by the New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services (DES) of a large groundwater
withdrawal permit to the respondent, USA Springs, Inc. We affirm.
The following facts were found by DES or appear on the record before us.
On May 24, 2001, USA Springs applied to DES for a large groundwater
withdrawal permit, see RSA 485-C:21 (2001) (amended 2005), proposing to
withdraw up to 439,200 gallons of water per day from a spring and three
bedrock wells for the purpose of bottling water. Following completion of
hydrogeologic testing at the site, USA Springs submitted the results of its
testing and analysis in a Final Report dated February 3, 2003.
DES denied the application on August 12, 2003, based upon failure to
meet regulatory requirements with respect to both water quantity and water
quality. At USA Springs’ request, DES granted a rehearing, but again denied
the application. The second denial was based only upon issues relating to
water quality.
On December 29, 2003, MyKro Waters, Inc. (MyKro Waters), on behalf of
USA Springs, sent DES a letter which stated that it was “being submitted as [a]
Preliminary Application for a Large Groundwater Withdrawal Permit for a
proposed bottling plant.” The letter stated that in accordance with prior
communications with DES, “the required information as specified in [New
2
Hampshire Administrative Rules,] Env-Ws 388.10 is already on file with the
Department in the February 3, 2003 [Final Report] . . . and subsequent
submissions pertaining to DES comments.”
On March 10, 2004, MyKro Waters, on behalf of USA Springs, wrote to
DES to “document completion” of its final application for a large groundwater
permit. DES approved the application and issued a large groundwater
withdrawal permit on July 1, 2004. The petitioners appeal.
At the time this appeal was filed, RSA 485-C:21, VI provided that appeals
from a DES decision would be in accordance with RSA chapter 541. RSA 485-
C:21, VI. Thus, our standard of review is provided by RSA 541:13 (1997):
Upon the hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the party
seeking to set aside any order or decision of [DES] to show that the
same is clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of [DES]
upon all questions of fact properly before it shall be deemed to be
prima facie lawful and reasonable; and the order or decision
appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated except for errors of
law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.
This case involves the application of and interplay among various State
statutes, as well as claims under administrative rules, the common law and the
Federal and State Constitutions. RSA chapter 485-C, the Groundwater
Protection Act, clearly applies to the large groundwater withdrawal permit at
issue. In particular, RSA 485-C:4, XII (2001) directs the commissioner of DES
to adopt rules in relation to, among other things, “[a]ll new groundwater
withdrawals of 57,600 gallons or more in any 24-hour period.” The petitioners
claim a number of violations of RSA chapter 485-C and the administrative
rules promulgated thereunder. In addition, Nottingham and SOG assert that
the statement of policy in RSA chapter 481, entitled “State Dams, Reservoirs
and Other Water Conservation Projects,” requires DES to consider public trust
issues in its evaluation of groundwater withdrawal permit applications.
Nottingham and Barrington also contend that USA Springs’ proposed project is
subject to RSA chapter 482-A, entitled “Fill and Dredge in Wetlands.”
Nottingham raises an additional claim of error under the Administrative
Procedure Act, RSA chapter 541-A, and both it and SOG assert the
applicability of RSA chapter 21-O.
We will first clarify the law applicable to this case by addressing the
petitioners’ claims under RSA chapter 481 and RSA chapter 482-A. We will
then address SOG’s constitutional takings claim and the issues raised under
RSA chapter 541-A and RSA chapter 21-O. Finally, we will turn to the
petitioners’ claims under RSA chapter 485-C and the rules promulgated
thereunder.
3
I. RSA 481:1 and the Public Trust Doctrine
Nottingham and SOG raise a number of issues dealing with RSA 481:1
and the public trust doctrine. Nottingham argues that the policy expressed in
RSA 481:1 applies to large groundwater withdrawals governed by RSA chapter
485-C, and that DES erred in “conclud[ing] that it has no obligation or
authority to consider the public trust mandate to manage the groundwater
resource to the maximum public benefit.”
Section one of RSA chapter 481, State Dams, Reservoirs and Other Water
Conservation Projects, sets forth the following declaration of policy:
The general court finds that an adequate supply of water is
indispensable to the health, welfare and safety of the people of the
state and is essential to the balance of the natural environment of
the state. Further, the water resources of the state are subject to
an ever-increasing demand for new and competing uses. The
general court declares and determines that the water of New
Hampshire whether located above or below ground constitutes a
limited and, therefore, precious and invaluable public resource
which should be protected, conserved and managed in the interest
of present and future generations. The state as trustee of this
resource for the public benefit declares that it has the authority
and responsibility to provide careful stewardship over all the
waters lying within its boundaries. The maximum public benefit
shall be sought, including the assurance of health and safety, the
enhancement of ecological and aesthetic values, and the overall
economic, recreational and social well-being of the people of the
state. All levels of government within the state, all departments,
agencies, boards and commissions, and all other entities, public or
private, having authority over the use, disposition or diversion of
water resources, or over the use of the land overlying, or adjacent
to, the water resources of the state, shall comply with this policy
and with the state’s comprehensive plan and program for water
resources management and protection.
RSA 481:1 (2001). Nottingham asserts that this statute directs DES, “in
administering RSA 485-C, . . . to consider ‘the interest of present and future
generations’ and the ‘maximum public benefit’ in assessing any application to
withdraw groundwater.” SOG also appears to contend that RSA 481:1 imposes
a public trust obligation upon DES.
USA Springs, on the other hand, argues that RSA 481:1 is “the statement
of purpose [for] an entirely different Chapter” and is therefore inapplicable to
4
RSA chapter 485-C. In addition, the State, as amicus curiae, contends that
“[w]hile the language of RSA 481:1 sets ambitious general public policy goals
for the state as a whole, it does not impose a duty on DES to engage in any
particular analysis or make any specific finding prior to issuing an individual
groundwater withdrawal permit.” Rather, the State argues, the more specific
provisions of RSA chapter 485-C control over RSA 481:1, the more general
statute. See State v. Rix, 150 N.H. 131, 133 (2003) (“A specific law is deemed
to control a specific case over a general law.”).
We agree with USA Springs and the State that RSA chapter 485-C
provides the criteria that DES must follow in issuing groundwater withdrawal
permits and that RSA 481:1 imposes no specific additional test that DES must
apply. RSA chapter 485-C, the Groundwater Protection Act, contains its own
statement of purpose, which references the State’s “general responsibility for
groundwater management in the public trust and interest.” RSA 485-C:1, II
(2001). It does not incorporate RSA 481:1 by reference. As previously noted,
RSA 485-C:4, XII directs DES to adopt rules relating to large groundwater
withdrawals, and it specifically instructs that these rules shall include:
(a) Criteria and procedures for requiring persons to identify and
address impacts of withdrawals on surface waters, subsurface
waters, water-related natural resources, and public, private,
residential, and farm wells within the anticipated zone of
contribution to the withdrawal.
(b) Requirements relative to conservation management plans
which demonstrate the need for the proposed withdrawals, to be
submitted by the persons seeking approval for a withdrawal.
(c) Procedures by which the department may deny permission
for withdrawals or order the applicant to provide a response policy,
as provided by department rules, for provision of alternative water
supply at no initial capital cost to persons whose wells are
adversely affected by the proposed withdrawal or order reduced
withdrawals if hydrogeologic data indicate that water-related
resources are being adversely affected by the withdrawals.
RSA 485-C:4, XII. We conclude that the scope of DES’ consideration in
reviewing a groundwater application is circumscribed by RSA chapter 485-C
and valid rules promulgated thereunder. We therefore reject Nottingham’s
contention that “[c]ompliance with the rules is the bare minimum which the
applicant must prove and DES must demand.”
SOG asserts that a public trust in groundwater is also established by
common law. It first acknowledges that the common law concepts to which it
refers have “generally been developed . . . through tort law.” It then argues that
5
“[t]he standards which have evolved for private disputes can apply equally well
here;” or “[s]aid differently, New Hampshire’s reasonable use rule provides
guidelines for application of the public trust doctrine.”
We decline SOG’s invitation to engraft common law tort principles onto
the statutory and regulatory scheme governing groundwater withdrawals. SOG
is not asking us to interpret the statutory and regulatory provisions; it is
asking us to add to them. “It is not the function of this court to add provisions
to the statute that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Appeal of
Richards, 134 N.H. 148, 162, cert. denied, 502 U.S. 899 (1991).
Nottingham also argues that “DES’ decision will allow USA Springs to
lower the water table over a broad area thus impacting both natural resources
and the operations of private wells. . . . DES has not explained how this is
consistent with its public trust obligations.” In light of our holding that RSA
chapter 485-C and the regulations promulgated thereunder provide the sole
criteria that DES must follow in issuing groundwater withdrawal permits, and
that no additional public trust test must be applied, we reject this argument.
II. RSA chapter 482-A and Barrington Prime Wetland #40
Nottingham and Barrington argue that DES erred in not applying RSA
chapter 482-A, entitled “Fill and Dredge in Wetlands,” to USA Springs’
proposed groundwater withdrawal. In particular, they contend that DES
should have required USA Springs to apply for a dredge and fill permit under
RSA 482-A:3, I (Supp. 2005) (amended 2003, eff. July 1, 2006) and should
have held a prime wetlands hearing pursuant to RSA 482-A:11, IV (2001).
RSA 482-A:3, I, provides, in part, that “[n]o person shall excavate,
remove, fill, dredge or construct any structures in or on any bank, flat, marsh,
or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state without a permit from the
department.” Nottingham and Barrington argue that the drawdown of water
from Barrington Prime Wetland #40 constitutes a removal of that water for
purposes of RSA 482-A:3, I. This interpretation, however, adds a word to the
statute that is not there; namely, “water.” “The starting point in any statutory
interpretation case is the language of the statute. We will not consider what
the legislature might have said or add words that the legislature did not
include.” In re Juvenile 2003-604-A, 151 N.H. 719, 720 (2005) (citation
omitted).
We find RSA 482-A:3, I, to be ambiguous in that the word “remove” has
no obvious direct object. Two interpretations are possible. Under the first, the
direct object is “structures”: “No person shall . . . remove . . . any structures
in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the
state . . . .” Under the second interpretation, the direct object is the phrase
6
“any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp”: “No person shall . . . remove . . . any bank,
flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state without a
permit from the department.” This interpretation finds some support in the
similar wording of RSA 482-A:21, I (2001), which provides: “No person shall
excavate, remove, or dredge any bank, flat, marsh, swamp, or lake bed that lies
below the natural mean high water level of any public waters of this state,
except as provided in this subdivision.”
We need not determine which interpretation is correct, as neither
supports Nottingham and Barrington’s position. This conclusion does not
imply, however, as Barrington argues, “that other means of achieving the same
destructive result [as filling or dredging wetlands] amount to unregulated (i.e.,
permitted) activity;” it merely means that the activity is not regulated under
RSA 482-A:3, I.
We note, for instance, that RSA 485-C:4, XII(a) directs DES to adopt rules
that include “[c]riteria and procedures for requiring persons to identify and
address impacts of withdrawals on surface waters, subsurface waters, water-
related natural resources, and public, private, residential, and farm wells within
the anticipated zone of contribution to the withdrawal.” DES has adopted rules
that define adverse impacts for a major withdrawal to include “[a] net loss of
values for submerged lands under tidal and fresh waters and its wetlands as set
forth in RSA 482-A,” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.18(c)(7), and that provide
criteria for wetlands monitoring and reporting, id. 388.20(c).
Because we conclude that USA Springs’ proposed groundwater
withdrawal is not subject to the permitting requirements of RSA 482-A:3, I, we
also reject Nottingham and Barrington’s argument that DES erred in not
holding a public hearing under RSA 482-A:11, IV.
III. Taking
SOG contends that granting a large groundwater withdrawal permit to
USA Springs is an unconstitutional taking of property in violation of the State
and Federal Constitutions. It argues:
[T]he hydro-geological reality is that the mining of water by USA
Springs, Inc. will (and during pump testing already did) decrease
the level of water in homeowners’ wells, require deepening of wells
or new wells to maintain water availability, decrease well pressure,
cause early wear on homeowner’s pumping equipment, and result
in contamination of water in their wells.
SOG then asserts that USA Springs’ permit must be revoked because “there
has been no finding of a public purpose [for the taking], and no compensation.”
7
USA Springs first contends that SOG lacks standing to bring a takings
claim and that it has not preserved the issue because it failed to properly raise
it in its motion for rehearing. We will assume without deciding, however, that
SOG has standing and has preserved the issue, and we will address the merits
of the claim.
USA Springs also challenges SOG’s claim for failure to show a property
interest in what is allegedly being taken. “In the absence of a property right, no
taking for purposes of part I, article 12 of the State Constitution has occurred .
. . .” Adams v. Bradshaw, 135 N.H. 7, 14 (1991), cert. denied, 503 U.S. 960
(1992)); see also Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co., 467 U.S. 986, 1000 (1984) (first
inquiring, in a federal taking claim, whether Monsanto had a property interest
protected under the United States Constitution’s Fifth Amendment). SOG
asserts that “[p]ollution or diminution of one’s drinking water is an
unconstitutional taking . . . because landowners have a property right in
subterranean water flows.” (Citations omitted.) The case SOG cites for its
assertion of a property right, however, actually rejects the view that “each land-
owner has the entire and unqualified ownership of all water found in his soil,
not gathered into natural water-courses.” Bassett v. Company, 43 N.H. 569,
577 (1862). Rather, Bassett adopted the doctrine of reasonable use: “The
maxim, ‘Sic utere,’ &c., therefore applies, and, as in many other cases, restricts
each [land-owner] to a reasonable exercise of his own right, a reasonable use of
his own property, in view of the similar rights of others.” Id. Therefore, instead
of absolute ownership of the groundwater beneath one’s land, “the right of each
is only to a reasonable user or management.” Id.
We find this distinction fatal to SOG’s takings claim. As stated by the
Florida Supreme Court:
The right to use water does not carry with it ownership of the water
lying under the land. . . . This “right of user” may be protected by
injunction, or regulated by law, but the right of user is not
considered “private property” requiring condemnation proceedings
unless the property has been rendered useless for certain purposes.
Village of Tequesta v. Jupiter Inlet Corp., 371 So. 2d 663, 668 (Fla.) (citations
omitted), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 965 (1979). Similarly, the court in Smith v.
Summit County, 721 N.E.2d 482, 488 (Ohio Ct. App. 1998), held: “The loss of
the use of ground water is not a loss of the use or enjoyment of the overlying
land. In this case, plaintiffs’ complaint, alleging only a deprivation of the flow
of groundwater, did not state a claim for compensation.”
SOG has cited case law from other jurisdictions in support of its takings
argument. We note, however, that while property interests are protected under
the Federal, as well as the State, Constitutions, they “are not created by the
8
Constitution. Rather, they are created and their dimensions are defined by
existing rules or understandings that stem from an independent source such
as state law.” Ruckelshaus, 467 U.S. at 1001 (quotations omitted). Thus, we
do not find persuasive cases from jurisdictions in which the law of water rights
differs materially from our own, see, e.g., Hansen v. United States, 65 Fed. Cl.
76, 123 (Fed. Cl. 2005), and conclude that SOG has not shown a protected
property interest under New Hampshire law.
IV. Adjudicative Hearing
Nottingham and SOG argue that DES erred in failing to hold an
adjudicative hearing, which they requested in July 2004. Nottingham argues
that such a hearing was required under RSA 541-A:31 and DES’ own rules.
Specifically, Nottingham argues that DES should have held an adjudicative
hearing because “consideration of the application had become a contested
case.” RSA 541-A:31, I (1997) provides in relevant part that “[a]n agency shall
commence an adjudicative proceeding if a matter has reached a stage at which
it is considered a contested case.” “Contested case,” in turn, is defined as “a
proceeding in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of a party are required
by law to be determined by an agency after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing.” RSA 541-A:1, IV (1997).
Nottingham’s argument appears to be based upon the assertion that it
was a party to the USA Springs proceeding. It states that it “contested the
applicant’s proposal relative to the rights of the municipality and participated
in the permit proceeding as a party.” “Party” is statutorily defined as “each
person or agency named or admitted as a party, or properly seeking and
entitled as a right to be admitted as a party.” RSA 541-A:1, XII (1997).
Nottingham has failed, however, to point us to any evidence that it was
admitted to the proceeding as a party. See Sup. Ct. R. 13(2) (“The moving party
shall be responsible for ensuring that all or such portions of the record relevant
and necessary for the court to decide the questions of law presented by the
case are in fact provided to the supreme court.”); Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(d) (moving
party’s brief shall contain statement of facts material to consideration of
questions presented “with appropriate references to the appendix or to the
record”).
Our review of the record reveals that in May 2003, Nottingham moved to
intervene in the USA Springs proceeding. DES’ decision on this motion,
however, does not appear to be included in the portion of the record provided to
us. Cf. Cook v. CIGNA Ins. Co., 139 N.H. 486, 488 (1995) (refusing to consider,
in support of contention that plaintiff was not a real party in interest, a
purported motion to substitute or add a party, where neither the motion nor
the trial court’s action thereon were contained in the record before this court).
We also note that in its motion for adjudicative hearing, filed on July 20, 2004,
9
Nottingham did not refer to itself as a party or an intervenor, but rather argued
that certain “language [in RSA 485-C:21] provides affected municipalities with
a status equivalent to that of a party entitled to notice and opportunity to be
heard.” (Emphasis added.)
Nottingham makes a similar argument on appeal, contending that the
definition of contested case is met because it was entitled to notice and an
opportunity to be heard under RSA 485-C:21. RSA 485-C:21, II (2001)
provides, in part, that copies of an application for approval of a groundwater
withdrawal of 57,600 gallons or more “shall be forwarded by certified mail by
the applicant to the governing bodies of each municipality and each supplier of
water within the anticipated zone of contribution to the well.” The statute also
provides for the holding of a public hearing on the application upon the timely
request of the governing body of any municipality within the anticipated zone of
contribution, and for the submission by such municipality to DES of comments
regarding the proposed withdrawal. RSA 485-C:21, III, V (2001).
We have noted, however, that the ability to call a public hearing on an
issue before an administrative agency does not make one a party to the
proceeding. See Appeal of Toczko, 136 N.H. 480, 486 (1992). Nor, we now
hold, does the entitlement to notice of the proceedings and the opportunity to
submit comments to the agency make one a party. Because Nottingham has
failed to refer us to evidence in the record of its purported party status, we
reject its argument that it is entitled to an adjudicative hearing based upon its
contention that this is a contested case.
For similar reasons, we reject Nottingham’s argument that it is entitled to
a hearing under Rule 388.23(f), which provides that DES “shall provide the
applicant with an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with RSA 541-A:31 if
the permit is denied.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.23(f). Nottingham
argues that “[a]lthough the regulation is silent as to the right of the
municipality to an adjudicative hearing if the permit is granted, the regulation
would violate principles of due process and equal protection unless it is
interpreted to also allow access to an adjudicative proceeding to a municipality
which was a party to the permit proceeding and is aggrieved by the grant of a
permit.” (Emphasis added.) As we have previously noted that Nottingham has
failed to demonstrate that it was a party to the USA Springs proceeding, we
need not address this argument further.
SOG contends that its federal and State constitutional rights require an
adjudicative hearing. Specifically, it asserts the right to an adjudicative
hearing based upon due process, the right of cross-examination and the
presence of significant social issues. It first argues, quoting Society for the
Protection of New Hampshire Forests v. Site Evaluation Committee, 115 N.H.
163, 168 (1975), that “[w]here issues of fact are presented for resolution by an
administrative agency due process requires a meaningful opportunity to be
10
heard.” That case held, however, that the statute in question, “[i]n requiring
‘public hearings’ on applications for site and facility, . . . provided an
opportunity to be heard.” Id. We similarly conclude that an opportunity to be
heard was provided by the public hearings on USA Springs’ permit application.
SOG also argues that because “a constitutional takings issue” is
presented in this case, due process requires a hearing on public use, loss to
landowners and compensation. Having rejected SOG’s takings claim, we need
not address this argument.
SOG next claims an entitlement to a hearing based upon an alleged right
of cross-examination.” Read broadly, SOG’s brief appears to cite due process
under the State Constitution as a basis for this alleged right. To determine
whether “due process requires meaningful cross-examination,” we would
examine the following three factors:
(1) the private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of
an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures
used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including
the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens
that the additional or substitute procedural requirements would
entail.
In re Eduardo L., 136 N.H. 678, 686 (1993) (quotations omitted); see Petition of
Bagley, 128 N.H. 275, 285 (1986).
SOG neither cites nor discusses the foregoing three-factor analysis, and
makes no developed argument as to why it has a right to cross-examination in
this proceeding. Accordingly, we conclude that this issue was not adequately
briefed and, therefore, decline to address it. See Appeal of AlphaDirections,
152 N.H. 477, 483-84 (2005).
Finally, SOG contends that “[w]ith the prodding of this court [another
agency] stopped behaving as a mere permitting agency and recognized that it
was a forum in which substantial public rights are decided.” It then urges us
to similarly “prod” DES. We find no support for SOG’s premise in the cases it
cites, and we note that it is not this court’s function to “prod” administrative
agencies to engage in activities not authorized by their governing statute. If
any action is to be taken regarding SOG’s underlying contention that a formal
hearing should be required “for the DES to adjudicate the removal of millions of
gallons of the public’s groundwater,” it for the legislature to determine.
11
V. Appeal under RSA chapter 21-O
Nottingham and SOG argue that they should have been afforded
intermediate appellate review before the water council pursuant to RSA 21-O:7,
IV (2000) (amended 2003, 2004), which provides, in part, that “[t]he water
council shall hear and decide all appeals from [DES] decisions relative to the
functions and responsibilities of the division of water other than [DES]
decisions made under RSA 482-A relative to wetlands, in accordance with RSA
21-O:14.” USA Springs contends that RSA 21-O:7 conflicts with RSA 485-
C:21, VI, which directs that “[r]ehearings and appeals from a decision of [DES]
under this section shall be in accordance with RSA 541.” It then argues that
RSA 485-C:21, VI, as the more specific statute, should control. See Rix, 150
N.H. at 133. Nottingham and SOG, on the other hand, attempt to reconcile the
statutes, arguing that because RSA chapter 541 is “procedural, it does not by
its terms, exclude any step in the appeal process, such as an intermediate
review by the Water Council.”
We agree with USA Springs that the two statutes conflict: in providing
an explicit procedure for appeals, RSA 485-C:21, VI excludes any other, and,
as the more specific statute, it controls over RSA 21-O:7. We note that the
legislature amended RSA 485-C:21, VI in 2005 to provide that “[d]ecisions of
[DES] may be appealed in accordance with RSA 21-O:7, IV,” RSA 485-C:21, VI
(Supp. 2005), an action that would have been unnecessary under Nottingham
and SOG’s interpretation of the statutes.
VI. RSA chapter 485-C and DES Rules
A. Need
The petitioners argue that USA Springs failed to make the showing of
need, as required by statute and DES’ rules, for its proposed withdrawal. RSA
485-C:4, XII directs DES to adopt rules relating to “new groundwater
withdrawals of 57,600 gallons or more in any 24-hour period,” including
“[r]equirements relative to conservation management plans which demonstrate
the need for the proposed withdrawals,” RSA 485-C:4, XII(b) (2001). Rule
388.05, in turn, provides in part, that “[t]he applicant shall prepare a water
conservation management plan and description of need to demonstrate the
efficient use of, and need for, the proposed withdrawal in the permit application
. . . .” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.05(a).
DES stated, in its denial of motions for rehearing filed by the petitioners
and others, that “[n]eed in the context of a large groundwater withdrawal
permit is a term of art used to describe efficiency or conservation.”
Nottingham, on the other hand, argues that “[t]aken in context, the clear intent
of both the statutory language and DES’ regulations is that ‘need’ and ‘efficient
12
use’ are two different concepts, both of which must be satisfied by an
applicant.”
Even if we were to accept Nottingham’s contention that “need” means
something different from “efficient use,” however, we would still have to
determine what “need” means. Nottingham argues that “DES’ interpretation
that allows it to simply approve any amount requested by an applicant is
patently unreasonable.” We disagree, at least in part.
The legislature has failed to define “need” in RSA chapter 485-C. “When
statutory terms are undefined, we ascribe to them their plain and ordinary
meaning.” Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). The most relevant
definition of “need” in Webster’s dictionary is “a want of something requisite,
desirable, or useful.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1512
(unabridged ed. 2002). Thus, RSA 485-C:4, XII(b) and Rule 388.05 require
DES to determine whether the proposed withdrawal is “requisite, desirable, or
useful.” Id.
The description of need in USA Springs’ February 3, 2003 Final Report
cites both “data [that] clearly indicate that there is a strong existing public
demand for bottled drinking water in the United States” and “research [that]
indicates that the growth rate for consumer demand for bottled water sales will
be nearly 12% annually in the years ahead.” It also states that the “proposed
project will produce for consumers in the general public, healthy drinking
water for which there is increasing consumer demand.” The Report then
proposes the withdrawal of a specified amount of groundwater “[t]o meet the[se]
needs and demands.” We conclude that DES could reasonably have found that
this proposed withdrawal was “desirable[] or useful,” id., and therefore could
reasonably have concluded that USA Springs’ description of need complied
with RSA 485-C:4, XII(b) and Rule 388.05.
We note that we are not persuaded by any of the definitions of need
proffered by the petitioners. For instance, in arguing that DES failed to
conduct an analysis of need, Nottingham asserts: “For example, it did not
require a demonstration by the applicant that the extraction level was required
by its business plan.” We can find no statutory or regulatory basis for such a
requirement. Similarly, Barrington argues that “in order to demonstrate ‘need’
for withdrawals in excess of 57,600 gallons per day one must first establish
that its proposed withdrawal is both reasonable in terms of the ability of the
environment to tolerate and sustain the withdrawal and, that the proposed use
of the extracted groundwater is not contrary to the public interest, as declared
in RSA 481:1.” Again, we can find no statutory or regulatory basis to import
concepts of sustainability and public interest into the term need, particularly
where sustainability is dealt with in other parts of the statutory and regulatory
scheme, see, e.g., RSA 485-C:4, XII(a); N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.18, and
13
we have already determined that RSA 481:1 imposes no specific additional test
for groundwater withdrawal applications.
Finally, Barrington and SOG cite Amoskeag Trust Co. v. Wentworth, 99
N.H. 346, 348 (1955) (citation omitted), for the following definition: “[T]he
words ‘necessities and needs’ . . . are rather relative terms having no fixed or
rigid meaning. However, they do not cover that which is merely desirable and
not reasonably essential.” Not only is this a definition of a compound term
different from the statutory term before us, we agree with USA Springs that our
interpretation should be guided by the statutory context in which the term
appears. In particular, “[o]ur goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467
(2003) (quotation omitted). We therefore decline to import into an
interpretation of the Groundwater Protection Act a purported definition of need
arising in the interpretation of a will, which itself was guided by “[w]hat the
testatrix intended.” Amoskeag Trust Co., 99 N.H. at 347.
B. DES’ Failure to Follow its Own Rules
Nottingham and Barrington argue that DES also failed to follow its own
rules in assessing USA Springs’ application. “The law of this State is well
settled that an administrative agency must follow its own rules and
regulations.” Attitash Mt. Service Co. v. Schuck, 135 N.H. 427, 429 (1992). An
agency “must also comply with the governing statute, in both letter and spirit,”
Appeal of Morin, 140 N.H. 515, 519 (1995), and “agency regulations which
contradict the terms of a governing statute exceed the agency’s authority.”
Appeal of Gallant, 125 N.H. 832, 834 (1984).
When interpreting agency rules, “where possible, we ascribe the plain
and ordinary meanings to words used.” Appeal of Flynn, 145 N.H. 422, 423
(2000) (quotation omitted). We also look at the rule we are construing as a
whole rather than in segments. Appeal of Alley, 137 N.H. 40, 42 (1993).
Finally, while we accord deference to an agency’s interpretation of its own
regulations, “that deference is not total. We still must examine the agency’s
interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the language of the
regulation and with the purpose which the regulation is intended to serve.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
We note that neither Nottingham nor Barrington appears to challenge the
validity of DES’ regulations themselves. Nottingham makes a passing comment
in its brief that “DES should have developed a stringent set of permitting
standards or regulations for an applicant to meet.” Even if we took this to be
an argument, however, we would consider it waived due to Nottingham’s failure
to adequately brief it. See State v. Hermsdorf, 135 N.H. 360, 365 (1992).
14
Thus, as we read Nottingham’s and Barrington’s briefs, they argue that DES
erred in interpreting its rules. We address each claim of error in turn.
1. Conceptual hydrologic model
Nottingham argues that DES erred in accepting a conceptual hydrologic
model from USA Springs that “contained direct contradictions.” Specifically,
the model posited “simultaneously that the bedrock and overburden aquifers
were isolated from each other and that they were closely connected.”
In its decisions and findings related to the issuance of the permit, DES
acknowledged that the hydrologic model in USA Springs’ first application
“presented two conflicting conceptual models” and that USA Springs had used
this hydrologic model “as the basis for concluding that very limited
environmental monitoring, reporting and mitigation would be required to
address impacts to water users and water resources.” DES then noted:
USA Springs never fully reconciled the contradictions in the
conceptual [hydrologic] model put forth in its February 2003 Final
Report. However, it did substantially revise its application in
submittals it made in August 12, 2003 and September 11, 2003 in
response to the Department’s comments and acknowledged that
contradictions exist in how data from the withdrawal test can be
interpreted. USA Springs also proposed an environmental
monitoring, reporting, and mitigation program to address
uncertainties associated with its withdrawal test and potential
impacts based upon a conservative “worst case” interpretation of
data contained in its application. This approach ensures that no
unmitigated adverse impacts occur as required by Env-Ws 388.
DES regulations provide that one of the requirements for obtaining a
major withdrawal permit is that the applicant “[d]evelop a conceptual
hydrologic model of the withdrawal in accordance with Env-Ws 388.06.” N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.04 (c)(2). Rule 388.06 itself contemplates that gaps
in the available data may exist and that the model may later need to be refined:
(f) Where data gaps are identified during the development of
the conceptual hydrologic model, the model shall:
(1) Identify the data gaps and their significance to
understanding the impacts of the proposed withdrawal; and
(2) Estimate the reasonably suspected hydrologic scenario(s)
associated with the withdrawal that could occur given the
known and unknown model parameters.
15
(g) The conceptual hydrologic model shall identify data needed
to refine the model to complete the report required in Env-Ws
388:17.
Id. 388.06. In addition, Rule 388.08(f) provides that “[t]he applicant shall
describe limitations to the estimate of the withdrawal effects identified in Env-
Ws 388.06(f) as a result of the data gaps or complexity of the geology.” Id.
388.06(f).
Data gaps are also contemplated in the rules for withdrawal testing and
for impact monitoring, reporting and/or mitigation. Pursuant to Rule
388.09(c), a withdrawal testing program “shall be designed to address critical
data gaps, limitations, or insufficiencies identified in Env-Ws 388.06 and Env-
Ws 388.08 that are necessary to complete impact assessments required by
these rules.” Id. 388.09(c). Rule 388.20 provides in part:
(a) A permittee shall conduct impact monitoring and reporting
program when:
(1) Available information, including work completed in
accordance with these rules, is not sufficient to verify that
adverse impacts from the large withdrawal will not occur,
provided the available information does not suggest that an
impact is:
a. Irreversible; or
b. Will occur immediately; and
(2) It is necessary to ensure that impact mitigation identified
in Env-Ws 388.21 is effective in preventing adverse impacts
from the withdrawal.
Id. 388.20. In addition, the regulations contemplate situations in which an
“impact monitoring and reporting program [is made] a condition of the
withdrawal permit,” id. 388.20(i), and “[a] withdrawal permit requires
mitigation from the start of operation to prevent adverse impacts anticipated
during the permit application process,” id. 388.21(a)(1).
Looking at the applicable regulatory scheme as a whole, cf. Appeal of
Alley, 137 N.H. at 42, we conclude that it anticipates situations in which the
available data will be insufficient to develop a completely accurate conceptual
hydrologic model. The rules then provide mechanisms for dealing with these
situations, including impact monitoring, reporting and/or mitigation programs.
Accordingly, in light of USA Springs’ proposed implementation of impact
monitoring, reporting and mitigation programs, we cannot say that DES’
16
acceptance of USA Springs’ ambiguous conceptual hydrologic model
constituted either a failure to follow its own rules or an erroneous
interpretation of those rules.
2. Poor testing conditions
Nottingham argues that DES erred in accepting a report based upon
“testing under very poor conditions, which adversely impacted the quality of
the data[,] [i]nstead of requiring another test or supplemental data . . . .” DES’
findings indicate, however, that USA Springs did submit supplemental
analysis:
In February 2003, USA Springs provided a conceptual model that
it claimed reflected conditions of 180 days of no net recharge from
precipitation to groundwater as required by Env-Ws 388.06(h),
Env-Ws 388.14, and Env-Ws 388.16, but the analysis did not
actually adjust field data to this no recharge condition. The
analyses initially completed by USA Springs used data collected
during the withdrawal test that included the effects of precipitation
before and during the test. The Department described this
deficiency to USA Springs in a letter dated April 11, 2003 . . . and
in its Final Decision dated August 12, 2003. USA Springs then
revised its analyses and submitted an addendum to its application
on August 12, 2003, several hours after the Department issued its
decision. The addendum provided by USA Springs corrected the
analyses for the effects of precipitation and met the 180 day no net
recharge condition required by Env-Ws 388.06(h), Env-Ws 388.14,
and Env-Ws 388.16.
Pursuant to Rule 388.09(a), “[a] withdrawal testing program shall be
designed to estimate the effect of the withdrawal under conceptual hydrologic
model withdrawal conditions, that is, 180-days of continuous operation at
maximum rates without recharge from rainfall or snowmelt.” N.H. Admin.
Rules, Env-Ws 388.09(a) (emphases added). We conclude that the regulations
do not require testing under ideal conditions, but testing designed to estimate
effects under specified conditions. We cannot say that DES’ acceptance of data
obtained under poor testing conditions, but adjusted to meet the specified
conditions, constituted either a failure to follow its own rules or an erroneous
interpretation of those rules.
3. Stabilization of wells during testing
Nottingham argues that although DES stated prior to USA Springs’
testing that “[i]f the test is designed properly, water levels should come into a
state of dynamic equilibrium that promotes a conclusion that the proposed rate
of withdrawal is sustainable,” it accepted a pumping test during which the
17
wells did not stabilize prior to termination of the test. Nottingham further
asserts: “DES concedes that the proposal will partially dewater both bedrock
and overburden aquifers but does not know the extent. Instead of requiring
the applicant to satisfy its burden of proof, DES again carved out an exception
which allowed a deficient application to be approved by substituting conditions
for monitoring instead of requiring accurate data.”
In its December 11, 2003 findings and decision on motion for rehearing,
DES stated: “The withdrawal test for USA Springs demonstrated that the
proposed withdrawal will partially dewater bedrock and overburden aquifers
necessitating the development of an acceptable monitoring, reporting and
mitigation plan.” DES found that the monitoring and reporting program put
forward by USA Springs “could proactively prevent adverse water quantity or
water level impacts from occurring.” It then found that the final proposal by
USA Springs “adequately address[ed] the probable impacts of the proposed
large withdrawal” except for impacts associated with contaminated
groundwater, an issue later addressed in a condition in the approved permit.
DES’ rules anticipate that adverse impacts due to the proposed
withdrawal may occur and, moreover, that there may be uncertainty as to
whether such impacts will occur. For instance, Rule 388.20(a) contemplates
that the available information may not be “sufficient to verify that adverse
impacts from the large withdrawal will not occur,” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws
388.20(a), and Rule 388.16 refers to adverse impacts that “might occur,” id.
388.16(e)(3), and that “potentially might occur,” id. 388.16(e)(2).
Nevertheless, the rules do not mandate denial of the application, but
rather require the implementation of measures such as monitoring, reporting
and mitigation. Id. 388.20, 388.21. In fact, Rule 388.23(b) directs that DES
“shall issue or renew a major withdrawal permit described pursuant to Env-Ws
388.23,” id. 388.23(b) (emphasis added), when, among other things, “[t]he
information in the report produced in accordance with Env-Ws 17
demonstrates that the withdrawal will:
b. Result in impacts that can and will be mitigated, provided:
1. There is sufficient information to verify that any adverse
impacts that occur as a result of the withdrawal will not be:
(i) An adverse impact that may occur immediately;
and
(ii) An irreversible impact; and
2. A monitoring and reporting program is implemented in
accordance with Env-Ws 388.20.
18
Id. 388.23(b)(2), b. Furthermore, the governing statute expressly authorizes
DES to adopt procedures by which it “may deny permission for withdrawals or
order the applicant to provide a response policy.” RSA 485-C:4, XII(c).
Accordingly, we cannot say that DES’ approval of a permit imposing
monitoring, reporting and mitigation conditions constituted either a failure to
follow its own rules or an erroneous interpretation of those rules.
4. Adoption of a “wait and see” approach
Nottingham contends that “DES substituted the requirement of a
showing [of] protection of the public trust with a ‘wait and see’ approach which
exposes the public resource to risk.” Specifically, Nottingham argues that
“DES has accepted the illusory protection of the Impact Monitoring and
Reporting Program referenced in Env-Ws 388.20,” and that even if the
regulations could be interpreted to allow DES’ “wait and see” approach, “such
an interpretation would be unreasonable.”
As indicated above, however, DES’ rules expressly contemplate a
conditional approach. For instance, Rule 388.04(c)(14) provides that “[w]hen
observations under operating conditions are necessary to validate test results
and verify that adverse impacts will not occur, the applicant shall develop and
obtain approval of an impact monitoring and reporting program in accordance
with Env-Ws 388.20.” Id. 388.04(c)(14). Nottingham has not seriously
contended that the rules themselves are invalid and we cannot say that DES’
interpretation of its rules in accordance with the “plain and ordinary meanings
[of the] words used,” Appeal of Flynn, 145 N.H. at 423 (quotation omitted), is
erroneous.
5. Imposition of a condition less stringent than regulatory standard
Nottingham argues:
In its regulations, DES uses a conservative standard of modeling
water levels assuming 180 days of pumping without recharge.
Nevertheless, DES adopted a permit condition which requires
implementation of the [Stage I management procedure], (calling for
a reduction to 75% of permitted capacity), only when the
groundwater is drawn down to a level 15 feet below the
groundwater levels projected for 180 day[s] with no recharge. The
permit condition is unreasonable because it is less stringent than
the standard.
DES found, however, that “USA Springs’ plan and permit conditions
require . . . [it to] provide mitigation on a schedule more stringent than that
required by the rule (Env-Ws 388.21).” (Emphasis added.) The source of the
19
disagreement appears to be in Nottingham’s characterization of the 180-day
no-recharge projection. As USA Springs points out, that is not a “standard” in
the sense urged by Nottingham; rather, it is an assumed state or condition: (1)
upon which the conceptual hydrologic model is based, see N.H. Admin. Rules,
Env-Ws 388.06(h); (2) under which the withdrawal testing program is designed
to estimate effects, see id. 388.09(a); and (3) by the use of which, impacts are
defined, see id. 388.16(c).
DES’ view, as stated in its July 1, 2004 decisions and findings, is that
“State law and the large groundwater withdrawal permitting requirements
(Env-Ws 388.18) protect private wells based upon minimum yield requirements
(up to 10 gallon[s] per minute for private residential wells) and not a threshold
for drawdown in a private well.” (Emphasis added.) The “plain and ordinary
meanings [of the] words used,” Appeal of Flynn, 145 N.H. at 423 (quotation
omitted), in Rule 388.18 supports DES’ position, as private wells are protected
according to withdrawal capacity measured in gallons per minute. See N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.18(c)(1); see also id. 388.18(d) (“A private residential
well with a capacity greater than 10 gallons per minute for 4 hours after the
withdrawal will not be considered adversely impacted.”). As we do not agree
that the 180-day no-recharge projection is a standard in the sense asserted by
Nottingham, we reject its argument that the Stage I management procedure is
less stringent than that standard.
6. Extraction at greater than the natural recharge rate
Nottingham argues that the permit condition prohibiting groundwater
extraction at a rate greater than the natural recharge rate “is unreasonable
because DES did not require the applicant to prove what the recharge rate is.”
In its July 1, 2004 decisions and findings, DES acknowledged that “[n]o
attempt was made [by USA Springs] to determine how quick[ly] and how much
water from each separate precipitation event recharges the bedrock aquifer.” It
found, however, that “[d]etermining this value for a bedrock aquifer is” not only
impractical and “inconsistent with industry practices,” but also “[n]ot
specifically necessary for the Department to issue a permit in accordance with
Env-Ws 388.” It elaborated as follows:
The Department is not aware of any instance in New England
where the analysis of the exact timing of recharge associated with
separate precipitation events is a regulatory requirement when a
water supply is developed. In fact it is standard industry practice
to derive estimates of recharge rates for almost any aquifer from:
1) Published research relevant to a particular geologic setting;
and/or 2) Monitoring data collected during the long-term operation
of the withdrawal. The Department finds USA Springs estimate of
recharge to the bedrock aquifer to be of the same magnitude as
20
recharge rates generally estimated based on standard industry
practice for similar environments.
We cannot say that DES’ failure to require USA Springs to prove the
actual recharge rate constituted either a failure to follow its own rules or an
erroneous interpretation of those rules. We see nothing in DES’ rules requiring
a calculation of actual recharge rates. Rather, descriptions of certain recharge-
related occurrences are required as part of the conceptual hydrologic model.
For instance, Rule 388.06(l) requires preparation of “[a] description of the
hydrologic cycle and a water budget calculation for the study area” describing:
(1) The amounts and timing of precipitation, runoff, storage,
recharge, and discharge;
(2) The distribution and availability of water necessary to maintain
natural resources, existing water uses, and the proposed
withdrawal; and
(3) The location and amounts of natural and artificial loss of
water, consumption, discharge, and recharge of water to and from
the study area.
N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.06(l). Rule 388.06(m) requires preparation of
“[a] comprehensive description of the groundwater flow regime that describes
hydraulic boundaries, recharge patterns, and the interaction of water bodies
associated with the withdrawal.” Id. 388.06(m)
Rule 388.06(c), however, provides: “The conceptual hydrologic model
shall be based on information including but not limited to:
(1) A summary of the results from any hydrogeologic investigations
conducted on site to date;
(2) Historic water level data;
(3) Department records for existing water users and resources
including testing and production reports;
(4) Published reports;
(5) National resource conservation service maps; and
(6) United States geological survey geologic, bedrock lineament,
and stratified-drift aquifer maps.
21
Id. 388.06(c) (emphases added). Accordingly, we conclude that DES’
acceptance of USA Springs’ recharge estimate based upon a United States
Geological Survey source is not contrary to a reasonable interpretation of DES’
regulations.
7. Complete and Correct Data/Conditional Permit
Barrington argues that by issuing a large groundwater withdrawal permit
to USA Springs, DES violated Rule 388 by: (1) failing to require USA Springs
“to submit ‘complete and correct’ information about its withdrawal”; and (2)
attempting to circumvent the requirement of complete and correct information
“by imposing a set of ‘conditions subsequent’ to the grant of the application.”
Rule 388.23 (b) provides, in part, that DES “shall issue or renew a major
withdrawal permit described pursuant to Env-Ws 388.23 . . . [w]hen the
information in the report produced in accordance with Env-Ws 388.17 is
complete and correct.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 388.23 (b)(1). In its August
12, 2003 findings and decisions related to the denial of USA Springs’ first
application, DES stated that it could not approve the application because it
“does not contain all of the information required by Env-Ws 388.17 and
consequently is not complete and correct.” In its July 1, 2004 decisions and
findings approving the permit, however, DES noted that “USA Springs
subsequently complied with the requirements of Env-Ws 388 by submitting
supplemental information after [DES’] August 12, 2003 decision. USA Springs
then supplemented its original information by [submissions] on August 12,
2003 and then again on September 11, 2003 as part of its request for
rehearing.”
Barrington nevertheless argues that DES issued the permit “while finding
that information submitted by USA Springs was still not complete or correct.”
Specifically, Barrington notes that in DES’ December 11, 2003 decisions and
findings on USA Springs’ motion for rehearing (i.e., after the supplemental
submissions cited by DES in its July 1, 2004 decisions and findings), it found
that “USA Springs has not amended its application to correct the
contradictions” in its conceptual hydrologic model.
Taken out of context, that specific December 11, 2003 finding appears to
support Barrington’s argument and undercut DES’ later position that USA
Springs had adequately amended its application. Later in the same section of
those findings and decisions, however, DES stated that “[t]he withdrawal test
for USA Springs demonstrated that the proposed withdrawal will partially
dewater bedrock and overburden aquifers necessitating the development of an
acceptable monitoring, reporting and mitigation plan.” (Emphasis added.)
DES then noted:
In submittals dated September 11, 2003, USA Springs proposed a
monitoring and reporting program that could proactively prevent
22
adverse water quantity or water level impacts from occurring. The
Department finds USA Springs’ final proposal to adequately
address the probable impacts of the proposed large withdrawal
(except for impacts associated with the alteration of the flow of
contaminated groundwater).
Thus, the December 11, 2003 “failure to amend” finding is not inconsistent
with DES’ July 1, 2004 position that while USA Springs “never reconciled
contradictions in its conceptual [hydrologic] model[,] . . . [t]o account for this,
USA Springs then proposed an environmental monitoring, reporting, and
mitigation program to address all impacts that could occur.”
We concluded above that the regulatory scheme contemplates cases in
which a completely accurate conceptual hydrologic model cannot be developed
due to insufficiencies in the available data. We also concluded that the rules
contemplate using impact monitoring, reporting and/or mitigation programs to
deal with such situations. Accordingly, we reject Barrington’s argument that
DES failed to require USA Springs “to submit ‘complete and correct’
information about its withdrawal,” and find no error in DES’ determination that
USA Springs’ final application was “adequate because it correctly assesses
withdrawal testing data by stating accurately that there is uncertainty, and by
comprehensively addressing this uncertainty in accordance with the
requirements of [the applicable regulations].” For similar reasons, we reject
Barrington’s argument that a monitoring and reporting program cannot
substitute for complete and correct information.
8. Resubmission of Same Application
Barrington argues that DES either violated its own rules by accepting
“informal and incomplete letters” as an application, or violated New Hampshire
law by approving a resubmitted, previously-denied application absent a change
in circumstances. Barrington notes that USA Springs’ initial application was
denied on August 12, 2003, and again, on rehearing, on December 11, 2003.
On December 29, 2003, MyKro Waters submitted a letter that purported to be
a preliminary application and relied upon information already on file with DES.
By letter dated February 24, 2004, MyKro Waters submitted a supplement to
its preliminary application, and stated that a “[f]inal permit application will be
submitted after completion of the tasks described in this letter, per Env-Ws
388.” Finally, on March 10, 2004, MyKro Waters wrote to DES to “document
completion” of USA Springs’ final application.
Barrington argues that to the extent DES treated these letters as a new
application, it acted contrary to Rule 388.10, which requires an applicant to
submit a “major withdrawal permit application” and specifies what that
application must include.
23
Barrington’s argument assumes that an applicant cannot incorporate
previously-submitted information into a new application. As USA Springs
points out, however, Rule 388.10 does not expressly preclude such a practice
and DES, by its actions, implicitly interpreted the regulation to allow it. DES’
interpretation of its own regulation is entitled to “great deference,” although
“[w]e still must examine the agency’s interpretation to determine if it is
consistent with the language of the regulation and with the purpose which the
regulation is intended to serve.” Petition of Pelletier, 125 N.H. 565, 569 (1984)
(quotation omitted).
Rule 388.10, as noted above, is silent on this issue, and we see nothing
in the stated purpose of the regulations that would conflict with allowing
incorporation of previously-submitted information. Indeed, such a practice
merely promotes efficiency and obviates the need for duplication and
resubmission of potentially voluminous records. Accordingly, we find no error.
Barrington further argues, however, that to the extent DES considered
“Mykro Waters’ letters to be a resubmission of the already denied application,
based on no change in events,” its approval of the application was contrary to
Fisher v. City of Dover, 120 N.H. 187 (1980). USA Springs first argues that
Barrington’s Fisher argument was not preserved because it was not properly
raised below. Although Barrington did not specifically cite Fisher in its motion
for rehearing, it did argue the general principle that for a board or agency to
“consider a second proposal for the same project that has been previously
denied, . . . [t]he second proposal must be materially different.” We therefore
consider the argument preserved.
Fisher was a zoning case challenging the granting of a second application
for a variance that the applicant “conceded was substantially the same as the
variance previously requested and ultimately denied by the [zoning] board.” Id.
at 188. We held:
[T]he board committed an error of law when it approved
defendant’s second application for a variance without first finding
either that a material change of circumstances affecting the merits
of the application had occurred or that the second application was
for a use that materially differed in nature and degree from the use
previously applied for and denied by the board.
Id. at 191.
USA Springs questions whether Fisher – a zoning case – should even
apply to an RSA chapter 485-C case, and argues that even if it were applicable,
it is distinguishable because this case is more like Morgenstern v. Town of Rye,
147 N.H. 558 (2002). Assuming without deciding that Fisher’s reasoning could
be extended to this case, we agree with USA Springs that Morgenstern is more
24
factually analogous. In Morgenstern, we vacated the upholding of a zoning
board’s refusal to consider a second variance application on the authority of
Fisher. Morgenstern, 147 N.H. at 565, 567. We noted that “[u]nlike the
defendant in Fisher v. Dover, the plaintiff did not merely resubmit substantially
the same application for a variance, but, at the town’s invitation, submitted a
new proposal in an effort to meet the town’s concerns.” Id. at 566. Similarly,
in this case, USA Springs’ new application supplemented its prior one in
response to comments made by DES in denying the prior application. It was
therefore not “substantially the same application.” Id.
VII. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm DES’ issuance of a large
groundwater withdrawal permit to USA Springs. We note that our decision is
based upon the statutory language in force at the time of DES’ decision; to the
extent that the statutory language upon which we rely remains in force, the
legislature is free to amend it if it disagrees with our construction.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
25