THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Utilities Commission
No. 2004-785
APPEAL OF VERIZON NEW ENGLAND, INC. d/b/a VERIZON NEW
HAMPSHIRE
(New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission)
Argued: September 14, 2005
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2005
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Concord (Steven V.
Camerino and Sarah B. Knowlton on the brief, and Mr. Camerino orally), and
Bruce P. Beausejour and Victor D. Del Vecchio, of Boston, Massachusetts, on
the brief, for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Wynn E. Arnold, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), and Edward N. Damon, of Concord,
on the brief, for the State.
F. Anne Ross, consumer advocate (Ms. Ross and Rorie E.P. Hollenberg,
staff attorney, on the brief, and Ms. Ross orally), for the Office of Consumer
Advocate, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, J. Verizon New England, Inc. d/b/a Verizon New Hampshire
(Telephone Company) appeals an order of the New Hampshire Public Utilities
Commission (PUC) requiring the imputation of at least $23.3 million earned by
the Telephone Company’s unregulated affiliate, Verizon Yellow Pages Company
(Directory Company), for ratemaking purposes. We affirm.
The publication of telephone directories has been an integral part of the
telecommunications business for over a century. Traditionally, telephone
directories have been comprised of “White Pages,” an alphabetical listing of
subscribers and their telephone numbers, and “Yellow Pages,” a section
devoted to advertisements sold by the publisher. Prior to 1984, AT&T, through
a regulated regional operating company, compiled, published and distributed
telephone directories for New Hampshire “in house,” and Yellow Pages
operations and revenues belonged entirely to the regional operating company.
The Yellow Pages business earned the company “supra-competitive” profits.
United States v. American Tel. and Tel. Co., 552 F. Supp. 131, 193 (D.C. 1982),
aff’d, 460 U.S. 1001 (1983). All revenues, expenses and assets associated with
directory operations were included in the regulated books of the regional
operating company.
In 1984, pursuant to a consent decree arising from major anti-trust
litigation, AT&T divested itself of twenty-two regional operating companies,
including the Telephone Company. See id. at 141, 222-25. The divested
operating companies were permitted to retain their Yellow Pages print
businesses. Id. at 194. At divestiture, the Telephone Company elected to
transfer assets associated with directory operations to the Directory Company,
a non-regulated affiliate.
Although the Telephone Company no longer published a telephone
directory, it was still required to provide a compilation of subscriber listings –
the “White Pages” – to all of its customers. N.H. Admin. Rules, PUC 405.04.
The Telephone Company, therefore, entered into a directory publishing
agreement with the Directory Company (1984 DPA). Under the 1984 DPA, the
Telephone Company granted the Directory Company the exclusive right during
the term of the agreement to contact the Telephone Company’s subscribers for
the purposes of soliciting and obtaining directory advertising for publication in
telephone directories. The Directory Company agreed to compile, print and
publish telephone directories for distribution to the Telephone Company’s
subscribers, and further agreed to pay annual publishing fees to the Telephone
Company. The agreement was to remain in force for five years, after which it
would be automatically renewed on a yearly basis, subject to termination by
either party on one year’s the Supreme Court of Utah reached an
instructively similar conclusion. See U.S. West v. Public Service Com’n of
Utah, 998 P.2d 247 (Utah 2000). Prior to the 1984 divestiture, AT&T’s Utah
operating company included directory publishing expenses with its other utility
operating expenses and applied ratepayer funds without distinction to support
both telecommunications services and directory publishing operations. Id. at
251. Moreover, directory publishing assets were part of the Utah operating
company’s rate base. Id. Thus, the court found no error in the Utah Public
Service Commission’s conclusion that directory publishing operations
transferred from the post-divestiture telephone company to its directory
publishing affiliate were “utility operations.” Id.
Even if we were to assume that the Telephone Company attempted or
intended to permanently transfer its directory publishing assets and operations
to the Directory Company, such transfer would be invalid under RSA 374:30.
We conclude, therefore, that the PUC was not unjust or unreasonable in
finding that the 1984 DPA was neither in form nor in effect a sale or permanent
disposition of the directory publishing business.
Given the deference we accord the PUC in matters such as the one now
before us, we affirm its determination that the 2000 DPA was unjust and
unreasonable as it pertains to the Telephone Company and its customers.
II. Imputation of Revenues
Having determined that the PUC acted in a lawful, just and reasonable
manner when it determined that the 2000 DPA was unjust and unreasonable,
we now turn to the issue of revenue imputation as a remedy. As we noted at
the outset of our analysis, we accord the PUC’s policy choices considerable
deference, including agency orders which seek to balance competing economic
interests. See Appeal of Campaign for Ratepayers Rights, 145 N.H. at 675.
12
The Telephone Company contends that the PUC failed to identify any
articulated legal or factual standard when it imputed revenues earned by the
unregulated Directory Company to the regulated Telephone Company, and that
it misinterpreted the intent of RSA chapter 366 in doing so. Specifically, the
Telephone Company asserts that RSA chapter 366 cannot be construed to
authorize the PUC to impute revenues to a regulated utility from an
unregulated affiliate, because it contemplates only the disallowance of
payments between such entities.
This court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed
in the words of a statute considered as a whole. DeLucca v. DeLucca, 152 N.H.
100, 103 (2005). In interpreting a statute, we first look to the language of the
statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. Id. Unless we find that the statutory language is
ambiguous, we need not look to legislative intent. Id. Furthermore, we
interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id.
RSA 366:5, which vests in the PUC the full power and authority to
investigate affiliate contracts and agreements filed pursuant to RSA 366:3,
states, in relevant part:
[I]f the [PUC] after notice and hearing shall find any
such contract, arrangement, purchase, or sale to be
unjust or unreasonable, the [PUC] may make such
reasonable order relating thereto as the public good
requires. . . . If the public utility and affiliate fail to
satisfy the [PUC] of the reasonableness of any such
contract, agreement, purchase, or sale, the [PUC] may
disapprove the same and disallow payments
thereunder or such part of any such payment as the
commission shall find to be unjust or unreasonable.
The Telephone Company also points to RSA 366:4 and RSA 366:7, which
similarly reference the PUC’s authority to disallow payments between a public
utility and its affiliate, as evidence that RSA chapter 366 contemplates only the
disallowance of payments by the PUC.
If we were to concur with the Telephone Company’s reading of RSA
366:5, we would, in effect, hold that the PUC’s only remedy upon finding that a
contract, agreement, purchase, or sale between a public utility and its affiliate
is unjust or unreasonable is to disallow payments called for by the
arrangement. The PUC would be left powerless to fashion a remedy in
instances such as the one now before us, in which it determines that a
contract or agreement is unjust and unreasonable because of the absence of
13
payment or compensation. Nothing in the plain language of RSA 366:5
suggests that the legislature intended to so limit the remedial authority of the
PUC.
The PUC was established to provide comprehensive provisions for the
establishment and control of public utilities in the State. Appeal of Public Serv.
Co. of N.H., 141 N.H. 13, 22 (1996). As such, we recognize that the PUC has
broad statutory powers, Appeal of Easton, 125 N.H. 205, 210 (1984), including
its broad authority, upon finding that an affiliate contract or agreement is
unjust or unreasonable, to “make such reasonable order relating thereto as the
public good requires.” RSA 366:5. That the legislature permitted additional
specific remedies under the statute does not obviate its grant of broad remedial
power. We, therefore, disagree with the Telephone Company’s contention that
the PUC is limited to the disallowance of payments as a remedy under RSA
366:5.
RSA chapter 366 does not specifically prescribe the imputation of
revenues as a remedy. We note, however, that the PUC is legislatively
empowered to be the arbiter between the interests of the customer and the
interests of the regulated utilities. See RSA 363:17-a (1995); see also Appeal of
Pinetree Power, 152 N.H. at 100. The PUC must not only perform duties
statutorily created, but also exercise those powers inherent within its broad
grant of power. Appeal of Granite State Elec. Co., 120 N.H. 536, 539 (1980).
RSA 366:5 grants the PUC the power to make any reasonable order required for
the public good when it determines that an affiliate contract or agreement is
unjust or unreasonable. See RSA 366:5.
Upon concluding that the 2000 DPA was unjust and unreasonable, the
PUC determined that imputation was a narrowly tailored remedy that avoided
potential disruptions to the Telephone Company and the policies of other
States from the potential extra-territorial effect of an order disapproving the
2000 DPA in its entirety. Moreover, the PUC selected imputation as a
reasonable means of making the Telephone Company’s ratepayers whole, and
found that it was consistent with the public good.
The imputation to telephone companies of Yellow Pages revenues earned
by directory publishing affiliates is recognized by other jurisdictions. In its
order, the PUC specifically considered U.S. West because of factual and
substantive regulatory similarities to the circumstances attendant to the 2000
DPA. U.S. West, 998 P.2d at 247. In U.S. West, the Supreme Court of Utah
affirmed an order of the Utah Public Service Commission denying a
telecommunications services provider’s request that it discontinue its practice
of imputing profits earned by the carrier’s directory publishing affiliate. Id. at
253. The factual underpinnings of the case are similar to those of the case now
before us. Prior to the 1984 divestiture, AT&T’s Utah operating company
14
provided telephone directories to subscribers in conjunction with its
telecommunications services, and did so without competition for many decades
as a result of AT&T’s monopoly position. Id. at 250-51. The Utah operating
company included its directory publishing expenses with its other utility
operation expenses. Id. at 251. Following divestiture, the Utah operating
company transferred its directory publishing operations to an affiliate
company. Id.
The Supreme Court of Utah concluded that, in light of the historical
relationship between the telecommunications and directory publishing
services, the directory operations transferred to the affiliate company were
utility operations in which ratepayers had a compensable interest. Id. at 250-
51. The court proceeded to uphold the Utah Public Service Commission’s
“regulatory remedy” of imputation. Id. at 252-53; accord U.S. West
Communications, Inc. v. Utilities & Transp. Com’n, 949 P.2d 1337, 1351-52
(Wash. 1997); Matter of Minn. Public Utilities Com’n, 417 N.W.2d 274, 285-86
(Minn. Ct. App. 1987); see also Matter of Rates and Charges of U.S. West, 909
P.2d 716, 721-22 (N.M. 1995); cf. Rochester Tel. Corp. v. Public Serv. Com’n,
660 N.E.2d 1112, 1117 (N.Y. 1995) (imputation of royalty properly
compensated ratepayers for telephone corporation’s improper cost-shifting and
uncompensated transfer of its intangible assets to an unregulated affiliate).
Because we conclude that the PUC acted within its broad authority
under RSA 366:5 in ordering the imputation of revenues to remedy the defects
found in the 2000 DPA, we need not address the question of whether the PUC
also had such authority pursuant to RSA 378:7 (1995). Also, we decline to
address the Telephone Company’s argument that the PUC order will result in a
taking of its property without compensation because the Telephone Company
has not developed the argument sufficiently to warrant appellate review. See
State v. Fernandez, 152 N.H. 233, 239 (2005); see also State v. Chick, 141 N.H.
503, 504 (1996) (passing reference to a constitutional principle is not a
substitute for a valid constitutional argument and is therefore waived).
III. The $1,000 Civil Penalty
Finally, we address the Telephone Company’s assertion that the PUC
unsustainably exercised its discretion by imposing a $1,000 civil penalty for its
failure to file the 1999 amendment in the manner required by RSA 366:3. It
argues that its failure to file the 1999 amendment with the PUC was
inadvertent, and that its subsequently filed financial reports reflected a
consequent change in revenues of which the PUC should have been aware.
RSA 365:41 (1995) permits the PUC to assess a civil penalty of up to
$25,000 against any public utility that violates any provision of Title 34 of the
15
New Hampshire Revised Statutes Annotated, including RSA 366:3. The
Telephone Company violated RSA 366:3 by failing to file the 1999 amendment
with the PUC. Even assuming that the Telephone Company’s failure to file was
inadvertent and that it constructively put the PUC on notice of the 1999
amendment in subsequent financial filings, the PUC was still authorized by
statute to assess a civil penalty against the Telephone Company, and did so in
a reasonable amount. We, therefore, affirm the imposition of the $1,000 civil
penalty against the Telephone Company.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
16