THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2004-869
C. EDWARD BROOM & a.
v.
CONTINENTAL CASUALTY CO. & a.
C. EDWARD BROOM & a.
v.
STEADFAST INSURANCE CO.
Argued: September 29, 2005
Opinion Issued: November 16, 2005
Sheehan Phinney Bass & Green, P.A. of Manchester (James Q. Shirley
and James P. Harris on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the appellants.
Devine & Nyquist, P.A. of Manchester (Lee C. Nyquist on the brief), and
Caron, Constants & Wilson, of Rutherford, New Jersey (Alfred C. Constants, III
on the brief and orally), for appellee Interstate Fire & Casualty Co.
DALIANIS, J. The appellants, C. Edward Broom, Thomas P. Broom,
Christopher J. Broom and Nicholas Brunet, appeal orders of the Superior
Court (McGuire, J.) granting summary judgment to appellee Interstate Fire and
Casualty Company (Interstate), and denying their motion for reimbursement of
defense costs. The appellants contend that the trial court improperly ruled
that Interstate did not have a duty to defend them in an underlying lawsuit.
We reverse the order granting summary judgment, vacate the order denying
reimbursement of defense costs, and remand.
The underlying litigation involves a host of issues, only one of which we
address here. We, therefore, recount only the facts that are relevant to the
issue now before us.
The appellants were named in a lawsuit filed on October 9, 2001, in the
United States District Court for the District of Oregon (the underlying suit).
They were sued in their capacities as principals in Strategic Timbers Trust, Inc.
(STT), a Georgia corporation.
The underlying suit arose from a failed business transaction between
STT and certain plaintiffs. The plaintiffs alleged, among other things, that once
the business venture collapsed, the appellants engaged in a campaign to
slander them to lenders and other parties to the transaction. The underlying
complaint stated, in support of the slander count:
Once it became apparent that the deal had collapsed,
and commencing at a time unknown to plaintiffs, the
Broom Defendants . . . and Nicholas Brunet embarked
upon a campaign to disparage plaintiffs to lenders and
other parties in the transaction who suffered losses as
a result of the failed IPO, with the ultimate goal of
attempting to place blame for such losses on Plaintiffs,
and deflect any such blame away from the Broom
Defendants [and] Brunet . . . . As part of the plan to
disparage Plaintiffs, Brunet began a campaign of memo
writing, which included false statements and
representations regarding the Plaintiffs, claiming
without any factual basis that Plaintiffs had paid to
land consultants . . . a “kickback” of $500,000, when
no such event ever occurred. These statements were
false and defendants knew they were false when they
made them.
An amended complaint filed by the plaintiffs on October 31, 2001, and a
demand for arbitration submitted to the American Arbitration Association on
July 19, 2002, employed almost identical language. None of these pleadings
identified any specific date or time period with regard to the alleged campaign
of disparagement.
2
The allegedly defamatory memoranda were authored during 1998 and
1999. The first dissemination outside of STT was on or about September 28,
1999, when appellant Brunet sent a memorandum to a representative of one of
the lender banks. A second distribution of allegedly defamatory material
outside of STT occurred on or about April 27, 2000, when Brunet faxed several
of the memoranda to another bank representative. On May 4, 2000, a
memorandum from June 1999 was hand-delivered to the same recipient.
Strategic Timber Partners, LP (STP), of which STT was a general partner,
had purchased business liability insurance coverage from Interstate for the
period from April 27, 1998, to April 27, 1999. The policy contained coverage
for “those sums that the insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages
because of ‘personal injury.’” It further states that Interstate “will have the
right and duty to defend the insured against any ‘suit’ seeking those damages.”
“Personal injury” was defined in the policy to include injury arising out of
“[o]ral or written publication of material that slanders or libels a person or
organization or disparages a person’s or organization’s goods, products or
services.” The appellants allege that they requested a defense from Interstate
by letter dated December 6, 2001, and that Interstate denied coverage on
January 4, 2002.
On April 5, 2002, the appellants filed a petition for declaratory judgment
in superior court against insurance carriers Continental Casualty Company
(Continental), Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company (Nationwide), Travelers
Property Casualty Company (Travelers), and Interstate, seeking a defense and
indemnity with respect to the underlying lawsuit.
On December 20, 2002, the underlying plaintiffs amended their demand
for arbitration, and for the first time identified September 28, 1999, and April
27, 2000, as the dates upon which the memoranda were allegedly distributed
outside of STT.
On December 2, 2003, the trial court ruled on competing motions for
summary judgment among Continental, Travelers, Nationwide, and the
appellants. It concluded that Continental and Travelers owed no duty to
defend or indemnify the appellants and granted their motions for summary
judgment. The trial court denied Nationwide’s motion for summary judgment,
however, finding that the alleged defamation occurred within the boundaries of
its policy coverage. Accordingly, the trial court granted the appellants’ cross-
motion for summary judgment against Nationwide. The December 2, 2003
order contained no rulings as to Interstate.
On June 11, 2004, the trial court ruled on competing motions for
summary judgment between Interstate and the appellants. The trial court
determined that the first publication of any defamatory memorandum occurred
3
on or about September 28, 1999, and, therefore, fell outside of the Interstate
policy period. Ruling that Interstate owed no coverage to the appellants, it
granted Interstate’s motion for summary judgment.
The appellants filed a motion for reconsideration and clarification of the
June 11, 2004 order, as well as a motion for reimbursement of defense costs
from Interstate. The trial court denied the motions. Because the first date of
publication did not fall within the coverage period of Interstate’s policy, the trial
court denied the appellants’ motions for reconsideration and clarification and
for reimbursement of defense costs.
On appeal, the appellants assert that the trial court improperly
determined that Interstate had no duty to defend them in the underlying suit.
The appellants take the position that, because the underlying pleadings did not
identify dates of external distribution until December 20, 2002, and the trial
court did not resolve the issue of coverage until June 11, 2004, they had a
“potentially covered claim” triggering Interstate’s duty to defend them. We
agree.
A motion for reconsideration allows a party to present points of law or
fact that a court has overlooked or misapprehended. Webster v. Town of
Candia, 146 N.H. 430, 444 (2001). We will uphold a trial court’s decision on a
motion for reconsideration absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See
id.; cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard). In reviewing the trial court’s initial grant of
summary judgment, we consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all
inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. Marikar v. Peerless Insurance Co., 151 N.H. 395, 397 (2004)
(citing Peerless Ins. v. Vermont Mutual Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 71, 72 (2004)). If
there is no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary judgment is proper.
Marikar, 151 N.H. at 397. We review the trial court’s application of the law to
the facts de novo. Id.
It is well-settled law in New Hampshire that an insurer’s obligation to
defend its insured is determined by whether the cause of action against the
insured alleges sufficient facts in the pleadings to bring it within the express
terms of the policy. Martin v. Me. Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 145 N.H. 498, 500 (2000).
In determining whether a duty to defend exists based upon the sufficiency of
the pleadings, we consider the reasonable expectations of the insured as to its
rights under the policy. U.S. Fidelity & Guaranty Co., Inc. v. Johnson Shoes,
Inc., 123 N.H. 148, 152 (1983).
Our analysis must begin with an examination of the policy language.
See Marikar, 151 N.H. at 397. The interpretation of insurance policy language
4
is ultimately an issue of law for this court to decide. Progressive N. Ins. Co. v.
Concord Gen. Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 649, 653 (2005); see also Panciocco v.
Lawyers Title Ins. Corp., 147 N.H. 610, 614 (2002) (“[T]he determination of
whether the underlying litigation falls outside the bounds of coverage is an
issue of law for the court to decide.”). In interpreting policy language, we look
to the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in context. Marikar,
151 N.H. at 397. We construe the terms of the policy as would a reasonable
person in the position of the insured based upon more than a casual reading of
the policy as a whole. Preferred Nat’l Ins. Co. v. Docusearch, 149 N.H. 759,
763 (2003); see also Progressive N. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. at 654.
The Interstate policy in question, purchased by STP for the coverage
period April 27, 1998, to April 27, 1999, states that Interstate “will have the
right and duty to defend the insured against any ‘suit’ seeking those damages”
that result from “personal injury.” “Personal injury” is defined in the policy to
include injury arising out of “[o]ral or written publication of material that
slanders or libels a person or organization or disparages a person’s or
organization’s goods, products or services.” “Suit” is defined in the policy as a
“civil proceeding in which damages because of . . . ‘personal injury’ . . . to
which [the policy] applies are alleged.” Construing these terms objectively, and
in the context of the policy as a whole, we conclude that a reasonable person in
the position of the insured would understand the policy to obligate Interstate to
defend against a lawsuit seeking damages resulting from a “personal injury” as
defined above.
Turning to whether Interstate had an obligation to defend the appellants
in the underlying litigation, we must determine whether the cause of action
against the appellants alleged sufficient facts in the pleadings to bring it within
the express terms of the policy. The initial underlying complaint, filed October
9, 2001, alleged that “commencing at a time unknown,” the appellants
“embarked upon a campaign to disparage [the] plaintiffs” and that as part of
the alleged plan Brunet “began a campaign of memo writing, which included
false statements and representations regarding the Plaintiffs.” The complaint
asserted no specific dates of publication in connection with the claimed
campaign of disparagement, stating only that it “commenc[ed] at a time
unknown” to the plaintiffs in the underlying action. The plaintiffs did not
identify any such dates until they amended their demand for arbitration on
December 20, 2002, more than a year after the appellants requested a defense
from Interstate.
The publication dates identified by the plaintiffs in their December 20,
2002 amended demand for arbitration fell outside of Interstate’s policy
coverage period. Prior to that date, however, the publication dates were not
identified. Moreover, it was not until June 11, 2004, that the trial court
foreclosed the possibility that the dissemination of allegedly defamatory
5
memoranda within STT during the policy coverage period could be considered
“publication” for the purposes of the declaratory judgment action. Thus, when
the appellants made their December 6, 2001 request for a defense from
Interstate, there existed a reasonable possibility that the underlying claim fell
within the policy’s coverage.
We have said that “[an] insurer’s obligation is not merely to defend in
cases of perfect declarations, but also in cases where by any reasonable
intendment of the pleadings liability of the insured can be inferred, and neither
ambiguity [nor] inconsistency . . . in the underlying plaintiff’s complaint . . .
can justify escape of the insurer from its obligation to defend.” Green Mt. Ins.
Co. v. Foreman, 138 N.H. 440, 443 (1994) (quotation omitted). In a case of
doubt as to whether the complaint against the insured alleges a liability of the
insurer under the policy, the doubt must be resolved in the insured’s favor. Id.
Because a reasonable intendment of the initial complaint alleged injuries
potentially within the scope of Interstate’s policy coverage, we conclude that
Interstate owed the appellants a defense at the time it was requested, and
breached that duty by denying coverage on January 4, 2002.
In light of our conclusion, we hold that the trial court’s grant of summary
judgment to Interstate in its June 11, 2004 order was in error. We, therefore,
also hold that the trial court’s order of August 23, 2004, denying the
appellants’ motion for reconsideration amounted to an unsustainable exercise
of discretion.
As to the appellants’ motion for reimbursement of defense costs, when an
insurer breaches its duty to defend, it must reimburse the insured for the costs
incurred in defending the claim. Concord Hosp. v. N.H. Medical Malpractice
Joint Underwriting Assoc., 142 N.H. 59, 61 (1997); see also A.B.C. Builders v.
American Mut. Ins. Co., 139 N.H. 745, 751 (1995). Interstate asserts that it
owes the appellants no reimbursement for defense costs because the
appellants received, in whole or in part, a defense from Continental,
Nationwide, and another carrier, Steadfast Insurance Company, and because
they hired their own private attorney instead of relying upon counsel retained
by the carriers. By the time of the trial court’s December 2, 2003 order,
Continental had already expended approximately $495,000 in defending the
appellants. The issue of reimbursement of defense costs, if any, is not a matter
for this court to decide in the first instance. Accordingly, we vacate the trial
court’s order denying the appellants’ motion for reimbursement of defense
costs and remand for further proceedings.
At oral argument, Interstate introduced the alternative theory that it
owes no duty to the appellants because they are not insureds under the policy
6
in question. Because Interstate failed to raise this issue before the trial court,
we need not address it. See Marikar, 151 N.H. at 397.
Reversed in part; vacated in part; and
remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7