THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2004-859
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID LIVINGSTON
Argued: January 12, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 25, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Peter C.L. Roth, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Barry S. Weinstein, of Manchester, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, David Livingston, was convicted of
possession of a controlled drug, RSA 318-B:2, I (2004); RSA 318-B:26, II(a)
(Supp. 2005), and misdemeanor possession of drugs, RSA 265:80 (2004). On
appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) erred in denying his
motion to suppress evidence seized during a search of his motor vehicle. We
affirm.
After an evidentiary hearing, the trial court found the following facts. On
October 20, 2003, the defendant was driving a dual-axle truck, bearing
Massachusetts Commercial License plates, on Route 302 in Center Conway.
Officer Nathan Boothby of the New Hampshire Bureau of Highway Patrol
Enforcement stopped the defendant’s truck to perform a routine commercial
vehicle inspection pursuant to RSA 266:72-a, I (2004) and 49 C.F.R. § 390
(2005). Boothby approached the truck to question the defendant to determine
whether the truck constituted a commercial vehicle under the federal motor
carrier safety regulations.
As Boothby approached the vehicle, he smelled a strong odor of burnt
marijuana coming from inside it. He also observed that the defendant’s eyes
were bloodshot and he appeared to be nervous. Boothby initially asked the
defendant routine questions to determine whether the defendant’s vehicle came
within the scope of the federal motor carrier safety regulations. After
determining that it did not, Boothby told the defendant that he smelled burnt
marijuana, and asked him whether he had any marijuana in the truck or on
his person. The defendant responded, “No.” Boothby asked him to consent to
a search of the vehicle. The defendant refused, stating that he did not feel that
he had any options.
Boothby explained to the defendant that he could refuse to consent to a
search, in which case Boothby would have a trained dog perform a canine sniff
search of the exterior of the vehicle; if the dog indicated the presence of
narcotics, Boothby would seize the vehicle and apply for a search warrant. The
defendant asked if the search could be conducted by looking into the vehicle
from the outside. Boothby indicated that he was not requesting the
defendant’s consent to perform that kind of search.
At some point, Boothby asked the defendant to get out of the truck. The
officer then gave the defendant a written consent form. Boothby explained the
consent form and watched as the defendant appeared to read it. At the
hearing, the defendant testified that he verbally limited the scope of his consent
to a “reasonable search” lasting “two or three minutes.” Boothby, however,
testified that the defendant never indicated that he wanted to limit the scope of
the search of the vehicle. The defendant signed the consent form without any
conditions or limitations.
Boothby conducted a canine search of the interior and exterior of the
vehicle and found a burnt marijuana cigarette in the driver’s side door.
Boothby then placed the defendant under arrest. During a subsequent search
incident to the arrest, Boothby discovered a baggie containing cocaine in the
defendant’s pocket.
The defendant moved to suppress the burnt marijuana cigarette and the
cocaine. After conducting an evidentiary hearing at which the defendant and
Boothby testified, the trial court found that Boothby had the authority to
conduct a routine inspection of the defendant’s vehicle pursuant to RSA
266:72-a and 49 C.F.R. § 396.9(a). Concluding that Boothby “testified
2
credibly,” the trial court also found that the defendant signed a valid consent to
search form, which was not the product of coercion. The court denied the
motion to suppress the marijuana cigarette and cocaine.
On appeal, the defendant argues: (1) the stop of his vehicle was
unconstitutional because it did not fall within the administrative search
exception to the warrant requirement and was pretextual in nature; (2) the
search of his vehicle was made without his voluntary consent; and (3) to the
extent he gave limited consent to search his vehicle, Boothby exceeded the
scope of that consent. The defendant invoked the protections of Part I, Article
19 of the State Constitution and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to
the United States Constitution.
“Our review of the superior court’s order is de novo, except as to any
controlling facts determined at the superior court level in the first instance. We
defer to the trial court’s determinations of credibility unless no reasonable
person could have come to the same conclusion after weighing the testimony.”
State v. Hammell, 147 N.H. 313, 317 (2001) (quotations and citations omitted).
We first address the issues under the State Constitution and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
I. Legality of the Stop
A warrantless search is per se unreasonable and invalid unless it comes
within one of the recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement. State v.
Seavey, 147 N.H. 304, 306 (2001). One such exception is the administrative
search exception. State v. Plante, 134 N.H. 585, 588 (1991). A warrantless
administrative search is reasonable if: (1) there is a “substantial government
interest that informs the regulatory scheme pursuant to which the inspection
is made”; (2) the warrantless inspection is necessary to further the regulatory
scheme; and (3) the implementation of the statutory inspection program
provides a constitutionally adequate substitute for a warrant. State v.
Turmelle, 132 N.H. 148, 153 (1989) (citations and quotations omitted); see New
York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691, 702-03 (1987).
RSA 266:72-a, I (2004) grants the commissioner of safety authority to
adopt “the current version of the federal motor carrier safety regulations
promulgated by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, Bureau of Motor Carrier Safety, contained in 49 C.F.R. 107,
382, 385-397.” The federal motor carrier safety regulations authorize agents to
perform routine inspections of commercial motor vehicles. See 49 C.F.R.
§ 396.9(a). These regulations define a “commercial motor vehicle” as, in
pertinent part:
3
any self-propelled or towed motor vehicle used on a
highway in interstate commerce to transport
passengers or property when the vehicle
(1) Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross
combination weight rating, or gross vehicle
weight or gross combination weight, of 4,536
kg (10,001 pounds) or more, whichever is
greater . . . .
49 C.F.R. § 390.5 (2005).
Here, the defendant does not dispute that a routine commercial motor
vehicle inspection, if properly conducted pursuant to the applicable federal
motor carrier safety regulations, constitutes a reasonable administrative
search. Nor does he dispute that Boothby had the authority to conduct a
routine commercial motor vehicle inspection pursuant to the federal motor
carrier safety regulations. Rather, the defendant argues that when Boothby
stopped the defendant’s vehicle, he exceeded his authority because the vehicle
was under the minimum weight requirement, and, therefore, was not a
commercial motor vehicle. In addition, the defendant contends that Boothby
exceeded his authority by continuing to detain and question the defendant
after learning that his vehicle was not a commercial motor vehicle. We
disagree.
Boothby testified that when he stopped the defendant’s vehicle, he
reasonably believed that it was a commercial motor vehicle for the purposes of
the federal motor carrier safety regulations. He also testified that: (1) the
defendant was driving a truck bearing Massachusetts license plates
designating it as a commercial vehicle; and (2) he estimated the vehicle’s weight
as being “in the ballpark of” the minimum weight requirement of 10,001
pounds. In addition, Boothby observed that the defendant’s vehicle was a
“heavier” dump truck, with a large wooden structure, which is primarily used
for commercial wood chipping, over the bed of the truck. The trial court found
Boothby’s testimony to be credible. Based upon the trial court’s findings, we
conclude that Boothby’s stop of the vehicle was reasonable and fell within the
scope of the administrative search exception.
There is no reasonable way for an officer, who is stopping a suspected
commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of conducting a routine inspection, to
know the exact weight of that vehicle prior to obtaining that information from
either the driver or the vehicle registration. Thus, when an officer, based upon
observations and circumstances, reasonably believes that a vehicle falls within
the weight requirements of the federal motor carrier safety regulations, a stop
of the vehicle is valid to determine whether it qualifies as a commercial motor
4
vehicle under the pertinent regulations. In this context, the defendant urges
us to narrowly construe RSA 266:72-a, I, and 49 C.F.R. § 390 and rule that
any stop of a motor vehicle under the minimum weight requirement is
unreasonable as a matter of law. We decline to do so. Such a conclusion
would undermine the underlying purpose of the federal motor carrier safety
regulations, which is to promote motor carrier safety.
Having concluded that the initial stop of the defendant’s vehicle was valid
under the administrative search exception to the warrant requirement, we next
consider whether Boothby exceeded the scope of his authority when he
questioned the defendant after learning the vehicle was not a commercial motor
vehicle. The defendant argues that as soon as Boothby ascertained that his
vehicle did not qualify as a commercial motor vehicle, Boothby lacked authority
to further question him under the administrative search exception. A
temporary detention is lawful, however, “if the police have an articulable
suspicion that the person detained has committed or is about to commit a
crime.” State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. 19, 22 (2004) (quotations and
citations omitted); see Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21 (1968). Reasonable
articulable suspicion refers to suspicion based upon specific, articulable facts
taken together with rational inferences from those facts. State v. Hight, 146
N.H. 746, 748 (2001). To be constitutional, a Terry stop must be carefully
tailored to its underlying justification and must be temporary, lasting no longer
than is necessary. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. at 23.
In this case, as Boothby approached the defendant’s vehicle, he smelled
a strong odor of burnt marijuana coming from inside it. Boothby also observed
that the defendant appeared to be nervous and had bloodshot eyes. Given the
trial court’s finding that Boothby’s testimony was credible, we hold that he had
reasonable articulable suspicion that the defendant had been, or was about to
be, engaged in criminal activity when Boothby initially approached the vehicle
and began conversing with the defendant. See Hight, 146 N.H. at 748
(explaining reasonable articulable suspicion). While Boothby’s authority to
detain the defendant under the administrative search exception ended when he
looked at the vehicle registration and ascertained that the vehicle was not a
commercial vehicle, we conclude that Boothby had reasonable suspicion to
detain the defendant and question him regarding the presence of marijuana in
his vehicle.
Because the Federal Constitution affords no greater protection than the
State Constitution in these areas, see State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 382
(2003); Terry, 392 U.S. at 20-21, we reach the same result under the Federal
Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
5
II. Voluntariness of the Consent
The defendant next argues that the search of his vehicle was made
without his voluntary consent. He asserts he was intimidated by Boothby’s
questions and actions, and confused as to the nature of Boothby’s request for a
search.
“A voluntary consent free of duress and coercion is a recognized
exception to the need for both a warrant and probable cause.” State v. Watson,
151 N.H. 537, 540 (2004). The State bears the burden of proving, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the consent was free, knowing and
voluntary. Id. The voluntariness of the consent is a question of fact
determined by examining the totality of the circumstances. Id.; State v.
Johnston, 150 N.H. 448, 453 (2004). We will disturb the trial court’s factual
findings only if they are unsupported by the record or are clearly erroneous.
McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. at 22. Our review of the trial court’s legal
conclusions, however, is de novo. Id.
In State v. Prevost, 141 N.H. 647 (1997), we addressed the voluntariness
of a driver’s consent to search her vehicle in circumstances similar to the
instant case. In that case, a police officer stopped the vehicle and instructed
the driver to get out of the car. Id. at 649. Once outside of the vehicle, the
driver initially consented to a search of her vehicle but subsequently
interrupted the police officer as he read the consent to search form and
requested an attorney. Id. The officer then informed her that the police were
going to tow the vehicle and apply for a search warrant. Id. After being told
that she could not leave because they were going to have her car towed, the
driver signed a written consent to search her vehicle. Id.
We recognized that the trial court reasonably found that the police
officer’s testimony supported the conclusion that “[the driver] appeared neither
scared, upset, nor intimidated during the police stop.” Id. at 650. We
concluded that the police officer’s statement regarding having the vehicle towed
was “explanatory rather than coercive in nature” and the trial court reasonably
found that the driver’s questions and reservations were satisfactorily resolved,
resulting in a voluntarily signed consent form. Id.
Similarly, in State v. Patch, 142 N.H. 453 (1997), the defendant initially
refused to consent to a search of his vehicle. Patch, 142 N.H. at 454. However,
after the police officers “informed the defendant that they knew what was in the
trunk,” the defendant opened the trunk, removed a bag of marijuana, gave it to
the police officers, and then consented to a search of the rest of the vehicle. Id.
at 458. The police officers then asked the defendant if he would accompany
them to recover marijuana that was stored at another residence. Id. at 454.
The defendant asked what would occur if he did not comply and the police
6
officer told him that they would contact the homeowner at work and obtain a
search warrant. Id. at 454-55.
We affirmed the trial court’s determination that the defendant voluntarily
consented to both the search of his vehicle and the search of the other
residence. Id. at 458-59. Informing a defendant of viable alternatives to a
consent search “does not necessarily vitiate consent.” Id. at 459. Additionally,
“prior refusal does not necessarily invalidate a subsequent consent as
involuntary.” Id. (citation omitted). Thus, based upon the totality of the
circumstances, we affirmed the trial court’s finding that there was no
suggestion of intimidation, coercion, or other unlawful police action. Id. at
458. We noted that: (1) it was the extent of the officer’s knowledge that caused
the defendant to change his position regarding the search of the trunk of the
vehicle; and (2) the police officer’s explanation that they would contact the
homeowner at work and obtain a search warrant for the residence was a
“realistic alternative available to [the police].” Id. at 459.
Here, the trial court found that the State met its burden of proving that
the defendant’s consent was free, knowing, and voluntary. At the hearing,
Boothby testified that after the defendant denied having any marijuana in the
truck or upon his person, he asked the defendant for consent to search the
vehicle. Boothby testified that the defendant “said no, that he (the defendant)
didn’t feel that he had any options.” When asked what he did next, Boothby
stated:
I explained that he (the defendant) did have options,
that he could refuse the search and I had a drug
detection odor canine dog with me in my cruiser. If I
ran the dog, meaning conducting a search of the
exterior of his vehicle with the dog, and he responded
to the odor of narcotic as he had been trained, then I
would be seizing the vehicle and applying for a search
warrant.
Boothby then testified that the defendant moved some items that were located
inside the vehicle and asked Boothby whether he could “just look from where
[Boothby] was standing.” Boothby declined, asked the defendant to exit the
vehicle, and the defendant then gave him a written consent. The trial court
found that Boothby testified credibly. It also relied upon the fact that Boothby
“gave the defendant a consent form, and watched the defendant’s eyes follow
the form as if he were reading it.” The defendant signed the consent form as
presented, without limitations or conditions. While recognizing that Boothby
did not recall whether the defendant was wearing glasses at the time he was
presented with the consent form, the trial court found that “it is undisputed
7
that the defendant did not indicate he did not understand the form or that he
was having difficulty reading it.”
In the instant case, the record supports the trial court’s determination,
based upon the totality of the circumstances, that the defendant’s consent was
voluntary. The defendant’s initial refusal was accompanied by a statement
indicating that he thought that he had no other options available to him.
Boothby’s response both informed the defendant that he could continue to
refuse to consent to a search of the vehicle as well as explained the alternative
procedures that would ensue should the defendant choose to do so. Therefore,
in response to his own inquiry, the defendant was informed that his refusal to
consent to a search of his vehicle would result in a canine sniff search of the
vehicle’s exterior, which, if positive, would lead to Boothby applying for a
warrant to search the vehicle. Thus, similar to Prevost, the trial court
concluded that Boothby’s response was explanatory rather than coercive. See
Prevost, 141 N.H. at 650; Patch, 142 N.H. at 459.
Furthermore, similar to the driver in Prevost, the defendant was asked to
exit the vehicle before the written consent to search form was reviewed and
before signed consent to search the vehicle was given. As in Prevost, we cannot
conclude that either the defendant’s exit from the vehicle or his prior refusal
invalidated his subsequent consent as involuntary. Prevost, 141 N.H. at 649;
see Patch, 142 N.H. at 459. Moreover, like the trial court in Patch, the trial
court in this case found the police officer’s testimony to be more credible than
the defendant’s testimony. See Patch, 142 N.H. at 458. We defer to the trial
court’s determination on credibility unless no reasonable person could have
come to the same conclusion after weighing the testimony. Here, the record
supports the trial court’s finding. See Hammell, 147 N.H. at 317.
Thus, we conclude that the record supports the trial court’s finding that
the defendant’s consent was freely, knowingly, and voluntarily given based
upon the totality of the circumstances. See McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. at
22. Because the Federal Constitution affords no greater protection than the
State Constitution in these areas, see Prevost, 141 N.H. at 650; Schneckloth v.
Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 227 (1973) (holding that consent must be freely
and voluntarily given), we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution
as we do under the State Constitution.
III. The Scope of the Consent
The defendant argues that his consent to search the vehicle was subject
to specific limitations, and that the search was invalid because it exceeded the
scope of his consent. We disagree.
8
Boothby testified that the defendant did not place any limitations or
conditions, either verbally or in writing, on his consent to search the vehicle.
No such limitations appear in the written consent form that was signed by the
defendant. While the defendant testified to the contrary, we defer to the trial
court’s determination of credibility. Because a reasonable person could have
come to the same conclusion as did the trial court after weighing the
testimony, Hammell, 147 N.H. at 317, we will not disturb the trial court’s
finding that the defendant did not limit the scope of the search of his vehicle.
To determine whether a search has exceeded the scope of the permission
granted, we ask whether under the circumstances surrounding the search, it
was objectively reasonable for the officers conducting the search to believe that
the defendant had consented to it. State v. Szczerbiak, 148 N.H. 352, 357
(2002). Where the trial court found that the defendant did not limit the scope
of the search, we hold that a reasonable person would determine that Boothby
did not exceed the scope of the consent granted by the defendant.
Because the Federal Constitution offers no greater protection than does
the State Constitution with respect to the scope of a consent search, see id.;
Florida v. Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248, 251 (1991), we reach the same result under
the Federal Constitution.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred; DUGGAN, J.,
dissented.
DUGGAN, J., dissenting. I agree that we should affirm the trial court’s
ruling that the stop of the truck was justified and that the defendant did not
limit the scope of the consensual search. However, I would reverse the trial
court’s ruling that the defendant’s consent was voluntary.
Officer Boothby testified at the suppression hearing that as he
approached the truck, the defendant put his window down and Officer Boothby
“could smell a strong odor of burnt marijuana coming from inside of the
vehicle.” He observed that the defendant “was nervous and his eyes were
bloodshot.” Officer Boothby first asked the defendant questions to determine
whether the vehicle was within the federal motor carrier safety regulations. He
also asked the defendant who he was working for and whether he was being
compensated. The defendant answered that he was working for his family at
his camp in Brownfield constructing a concrete slab.
Officer Boothby then told the defendant that he smelled marijuana, and
asked him if he had any marijuana in the truck or on his person. The
defendant responded at first with “a blank stare” and then said, “[N]o.” Officer
9
Boothby asked for consent to search the vehicle. The defendant said, “[N]o,”
but indicated “that he didn’t feel that he had any options.”
Officer Boothby “explained that he did have options, that he could refuse
the search.” Officer Boothby explained that, if the defendant refused the
search, the officer “had a drug detection odor canine dog with [him] in [his]
cruiser. If [he] ran the dog, meaning conducting a search of the exterior of [the]
vehicle with the dog, and he responded to the odor of narcotic as he had been
trained, then [Officer Boothby] would be seizing the vehicle and applying for a
search warrant.”
As Officer Boothby explained this canine search procedure, the
defendant appeared “very anxious” and seemed to want the search to be brief.
The defendant then “moved some jackets and other things that were inside the
vehicle and asked [Officer Boothby] if [he] could just look from where [he] was
standing.” Officer Boothby stated that was not “acceptable to [him].”
At some point, Officer Boothby asked the defendant to get out of the
truck. Outside, behind the truck and in front of the cruiser, Officer Boothby
gave the defendant a consent form. Officer Boothby explained the form “[f]rom
top to bottom,” including “what [he was] asking to search” and “that [the
defendant] [did] not have to give [him] consent.” The defendant, appearing
“nervous,” read the form and signed it.
Officer Boothby then called for another officer to assist him. After the
other officer arrived, Officer Boothby searched the truck, found the marijuana
and arrested the defendant for transporting drugs. In the defendant’s pocket,
he found a baggie containing cocaine.
A voluntary consent is a recognized exception to the requirement for
either a warrant or probable cause. State v. Watson, 151 N.H. 537, 540 (2004).
Whether the consent was in fact voluntary or was, rather, the product of
coercion, express or implied, is a question of fact to be determined from the
totality of the circumstances. State v. McGann, 124 N.H. 101, 105-06 (1983).
The burden is on the State to prove voluntariness by a preponderance of the
evidence. Watson, 151 N.H. at 540. “Moreover, submission to a search does
not constitute consent.” State v. Pinder, 126 N.H. 220, 224 (1985). We will
disturb the trial court’s finding of consent if it is not supported by the record.
Watson, 151 N.H. at 540.
In State v. Patch, 142 N.H. 453, 459 (1997), the defendant “asked the
officers what they would do if he refused to cooperate, [and the officers] told
him that they would apply for a search warrant.” We said that “[i]nforming the
defendant of viable alternatives . . . does not necessarily vitiate consent.” Id. at
459. Thus, Patch did not hold that “[i]nforming the defendant of viable
10
alternatives” is an acceptable police practice, but rather held that the practice
“does not necessarily vitiate consent.” Id.
Other courts have recognized that telling the defendant that his refusal
to consent to a search will result in a canine search of the car is a critical
factor in considering whether any subsequent consent is involuntary. In State
v. Woolfolk, 3 S.W.3d 823, 832 (Mo. Ct. App. 1999), where the defendant
“repeatedly indicated he did not want the trooper to search [his] car, [the
trooper] required [the defendant] to get out of his car and told him he had two
. . . options: he could either allow the search, or he could wait for the canine
unit to search.” The court held that his “alleged consent to search his car was
merely a submission to lawful authority.” Id. Similarly, in Rouse v. State, 643
So. 2d 696, 698 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1994), the court acknowledged that “it
[could not] be said that [the defendant] voluntarily consented to be searched
under circumstances in which the consent only occurred after the defendant
was advised that the K-9 unit would be called to conduct a sniff check.” See
also Monroe v. State, 578 So. 2d 847, 848-49 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1991)
(defendant’s written consent was not voluntary where the police “threatened to
call a canine unit and stated that they would stay there until they were able to
search the trunk”); State v. Lanxon, 393 So. 2d 1194, 1194-95 (Fla. Dist. Ct.
App. 1981) (defendant’s consent was not voluntary where officer approached
defendant at an airport and, when defendant refused to consent to a search of
her luggage, told her he would “contact a Narcotics Unit at [her] destination
and request that a narcotics detection dog sniff [her] luggage” (quotation
omitted)).
This case is thus not governed solely by Patch. Here, the defendant
submitted to a search only after the officer indicated that a search would be
conducted regardless of the defendant’s refusal to consent. The officer
effectively told the defendant that he had the authority, without the defendant’s
consent, to conduct a canine sniff and then seize the truck and search it
pursuant to a warrant. The officer went beyond merely providing information
to making clear that the defendant’s refusal to consent would not be honored.
Submission to a search in the face of such an assertion does not constitute
voluntary consent.
Moreover, by the time the defendant signed the consent form, the officer
had asked the defendant to get out of the truck. In Watson, 151 N.H. at 540-
41, we recognized “that, in some situations, the fact that [a] defendant is in
custody may weigh heavily against a finding of valid consent.” In this
particular situation, getting the defendant out of the truck communicated a
clear message to the defendant – that the detention would continue as long as
necessary for a search to be conducted. See Monroe, 578 So. 2d at 848. On
these facts, therefore, the detention of the defendant weighs heavily against a
finding of voluntary consent.
11
Finally, while the defendant’s initial refusal to consent to the search does
not, standing alone, invalidate his subsequent consent, see State v. Green, 133
N.H. 249, 259 (1990), it should carry more weight in the analysis of the
voluntariness of his consent than a mere passing reference. At least one court
has recognized that “an initial refusal is an important factor in assessing
whether a subsequent consent is voluntary.” People v. Cardenas, 604 N.E.2d
953, 956 (Ill. App. Ct. 1992). Making an initial refusal “important” is
consistent with the settled law regarding custodial interrogation. There, if a
person in custody “exercises his option to cut off questioning, the police must
scrupulously honor the suspect’s desire to remain silent,” State v. Laurie, 135
N.H. 438, 442 (1992), and, “[i]f the individual states that he wants an attorney,
the interrogation must cease until an attorney is present.” State v. Plch, 149
N.H. 608, 613 (2003) (quotation omitted). Similarly, here, the defendant’s
initial refusal to consent to the search should be given significant weight in
assessing the voluntariness of his subsequent consent.
While it is true that the officer here advised the defendant of his right to
refuse to consent and the defendant signed a consent form, these facts are
insufficient to overcome the coercion implicit in the circumstances. “[T]he fact
that a written consent form was signed is not dispositive when circumstances
show that the signature was obtained by coercion.” Cardenas, 604 N.E.2d at
956. By the time the form was signed, the defendant could only conclude that
not signing was not a viable alternative. The inevitability of the search was
obvious and thus, given the totality of the circumstances, the consent was not
voluntary.
The majority relies upon State v. Prevost, 141 N.H. 647 (1997). There,
after the defendant was involved in a physical confrontation with his former
probation/parole officer and then pursued by local police, the defendant was
placed in custody and the police sought to search the vehicle in which he had
been a passenger. Id. at 648-49. However, prior to obtaining the driver’s
consent to search the vehicle, the police “explained to [the driver] that [they]
were going to tow her vehicle and apply for a search warrant.” Id. at 649.
Without any discussion or analysis, we affirmed the trial court’s conclusion
that the police officer’s “statement about having the car towed was explanatory
rather than coercive in nature.” Id. at 650.
Moreover, although Prevost shares some facts similar to those present in
this case, there exist additional facts in each case that distinguish the two. In
Prevost, the officers testified that the driver “appeared neither scared, upset,
nor intimidated during the police stop” and “did not hesitate” in signing the
consent form “shortly” after “her questions and reservations [had been]
satisfactorily resolved” by the officer’s explanation of the alternative to a
consent search. Id. at 649, 650. Here, however, the officer testified that, when
12
he approached the defendant’s vehicle, the defendant appeared “nervous.” He
also testified that the defendant appeared “very anxious” during the course of
the encounter and was “nervous” when given the consent form. Furthermore,
the officer’s testimony was that throughout the encounter, and even after he
fully explained to the defendant the alternative to a consent search, the
defendant hesitated in giving his consent. When Officer Boothby inquired
about the presence of marijuana, the defendant responded with “a blank
stare.” After Officer Boothby told the defendant that his refusal to consent to a
search would result in a canine search of the car, the defendant asked if the
search could be conducted by simply looking in from the outside of the vehicle,
after which some time elapsed and the officer asked the defendant to exit the
vehicle, and then, only after exiting the vehicle, the defendant considered giving
his consent. These distinctions are significant in considering the totality of the
circumstances in this case as demonstrating that the defendant’s consent was
not voluntary.
Of course, given the strong odor of burnt marijuana, it is completely
understandable that Officer Boothby persisted in seeking consent to search the
truck. The odor of marijuana, while irrelevant to the issue of consent, gave
Officer Boothby sufficient justification to detain and probably arrest the
defendant. See generally Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10, 13 (1948);
State v. Whiting, 127 N.H. 110, 111-12 (1985). The State, however, has not
argued the applicability of any exceptions to the warrant requirement, other
than consent, or any exceptions to the exclusionary rule, to justify the
admissibility of the evidence.
13