THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-686
CONTINENTAL BIOMASS INDUSTRIES, INC.
v.
ENVIRONMENTAL MACHINERY COMPANY & a.
Argued: March 23, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 14, 2005
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and Alec
L. McEachern on the brief, and Mr. McEachern orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Charles R. Powell, III
and Elizabeth J. Baker on the brief, and Mr. Powell orally), for defendant
FirstMerit Bank, N.A.
DUGGAN, J. Defendant FirstMerit Bank, N.A. (FirstMerit) appeals an
order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) denying its motion to dismiss for lack
of personal jurisdiction and improper service. We reverse.
In considering FirstMerit’s motion to dismiss, the trial court found the
following facts. The plaintiff, Continental Biomass Industries, Inc. (CBI), is a
New Hampshire corporation engaged in the business of manufacturing, selling
and servicing heavy equipment used for grinding and reducing construction
debris and other materials. Defendant Environmental Machinery Company
(EMC) is a corporation doing business in Columbus, Ohio. In June 2001, CBI
sold a 2001 wood hog grinder to EMC for $439,600. EMC financed the
purchase by obtaining a loan from FirstMerit, a bank doing business in
Columbus, Ohio, and organized under the laws of Ohio. Upon receipt of EMC’s
payment in full, CBI shipped the grinder to EMC in Ohio.
FirstMerit filed a UCC financing statement with the Ohio Secretary of
State in January 2002 to secure its interest in the grinder. Prior to the filing of
FirstMerit’s UCC statement, defendant Bank One, N.A. had filed three separate
UCC financing statements with the Ohio Secretary of State that granted Bank
One a security interest in all of EMC’s after-acquired equipment.
In late 2002 or early 2003, the grinder was damaged in a fire in Ohio. As
a result, EMC delivered the grinder to CBI in New Hampshire for repair in
March 2003. CBI completed the repairs in November 2003 and issued a repair
invoice to EMC totaling $252,120.46. In the interim, FirstMerit received the
insurance proceeds resulting from the fire damage and held them on EMC’s
behalf for future payment of the repair costs.
On January 13, 2004, CBI obtained a post-judgment attachment on the
grinder in New Hampshire to secure its judgment against EMC in an unrelated
civil claim that CBI had initiated in September 2002 in New Hampshire. CBI
also filed a bulky article attachment on the grinder with the New Hampshire
Secretary of State. See RSA 511:23 (Supp. 2004). Two days later, CBI received
full payment for the repairs it had made to the grinder. CBI then sent a
demand for an account to FirstMerit pursuant to RSA 511:27 (1997) to
determine the amount of the security interest that FirstMerit retained in the
grinder. When FirstMerit received the demand for an account, it contacted CBI
to inquire about it and was informed that CBI had attached the grinder to
enforce its judgment against EMC in the unrelated case. FirstMerit responded
to CBI’s demand for an account on February 11, 2004. CBI, however,
construed this response as late and filed an action to compel the sheriff of
Rockingham County to levy on the grinder free and clear of FirstMerit’s security
interest.
FirstMerit appeared specially and moved to dismiss upon the bases that
CBI failed to effectuate proper service of process and that New Hampshire
courts cannot exercise personal jurisdiction over it in this case. The trial court
found that FirstMerit was properly served and had sufficient contacts with New
Hampshire to support jurisdiction. FirstMerit appeals, arguing that CBI failed
to allege and prove facts sufficient to meet the requirements for personal
jurisdiction.
The plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating facts sufficient to
establish personal jurisdiction. Lyme Timber Co. v. DSF Investors, 150 N.H.
557, 559 (2004). The plaintiff need make only a prima facie showing of
2
jurisdictional facts to defeat a defendant’s motion to dismiss. Metcalf v.
Lawson, 148 N.H. 35, 37 (2002). Where a prima facie evidence standard is
employed, we review a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss for lack of
personal jurisdiction de novo. Lyme Timber, 150 N.H. at 559.
First, we address the type of personal jurisdiction at issue in this case.
FirstMerit argues that the trial court erred in finding that it had in rem
jurisdiction over the grinder, and instead should have evaluated whether it had
quasi in rem jurisdiction over the bank as a defendant.
The difference between in rem and quasi in rem jurisdiction is significant
because the effect of the judgment varies depending upon the type of action.
See 4A C. Wright & A. Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure: Civil § 1070, at
285 (3d ed. 2002).
The essential function of an action in rem is the determination
of title to or the status of property located – physically or legally –
within the court’s jurisdiction. Conceptually, in rem jurisdiction
operates directly on the property and the court’s judgment is
effective against all persons who have an interest in the property.
Id. at 286; see Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 199 & n.17 (1977). An action
in rem “has the practical effect of establishing unassailable title in the [res or]
thing because no one, whether named as a party or not, can later attack the
judgment on the ground that the court lacked personal jurisdiction.” 1 R.
Casad & W. Richman, Jurisdiction in Civil Actions § 2-6, at 180 (3d ed. 1998).
Examples include actions to quiet title, partition actions, eminent domain
proceedings and forfeiture. Id.; Wright & Miller, supra § 1070, at 286.
In contrast, “[a] judgment quasi in rem affects the interests of particular
persons in designated property.” Shaffer, 433 U.S. at 199 n.17 (quotation
omitted). Courts have recognized two types of quasi in rem jurisdiction:
In one the plaintiff is seeking to secure a pre-existing claim in the
subject property and to extinguish or establish the nonexistence of
similar interests of particular persons. In the other the plaintiff
seeks to apply what he concedes to be the property of the
defendant to the satisfaction of a claim against him.
Id. (quotation omitted). The first type of quasi in rem jurisdiction is similar to
in rem jurisdiction in that the dispute between the parties is over the property
itself. Casad & Richman, supra § 2-6, at 187. An example of this type of
action is the modern mortgage foreclosure. Id. § 1-1, at 9. In quasi in rem
actions of the second type, the plaintiff’s cause of action against the defendant
is personal and not related to a proprietary interest in specific property. Id. In
3
such a case, the court’s jurisdiction over the defendant’s property is invoked
through attachment, garnishment or a similar procedure. Id.; see, e.g.,
Altshuler Genealogical Service v. Farris, 128 N.H. 98, 101 (1986) (holding that
court lacked quasi in rem jurisdiction where plaintiff brought suit for breach of
contract against non-resident defendant and attached the defendant’s interest
in a New Hampshire estate to satisfy the debt).
Here, the plaintiff’s cause of action centers on the respective parties’
proprietary interests in the disputed property (the grinder). CBI sought a
declaration that FirstMerit’s security interest in the grinder was discharged by
operation of law based upon FirstMerit’s failure to respond to the demand for
an account within fifteen days. See RSA 511:28 (1997). CBI also sought an
injunction ordering the sheriff to levy on the grinder free and clear of any
interest claimed by FirstMerit or Bank One based upon the banks’ failure to re-
perfect their security interests after the grinder was moved to New Hampshire.
See RSA 528:8 (1997). Thus, we conclude that because CBI is seeking to
secure a pre-existing claim in the grinder and to “extinguish or establish the
nonexistence of similar interests” of the defendants, the trial court should have
evaluated whether it had quasi in rem jurisdiction rather than in rem
jurisdiction in this case. See Shaffer, 433 U.S. at 199 n.17.
We next address FirstMerit’s argument that the trial court lacked quasi
in rem jurisdiction. In determining whether a court has quasi in rem
jurisdiction, we consider “(1) whether the exercise of jurisdiction is reasonable
in light of New Hampshire’s interest in the litigation, and (2) whether the
defendant has sufficient minimum contacts with New Hampshire so that, in
the circumstances, the exercise of jurisdiction is consistent with the principles
of fair play and substantial justice.” Pono v. Brock, 119 N.H. 814, 816 (1979);
see also Shaffer, 433 U.S. at 212 (holding that all assertions of state-court
jurisdiction must meet the minimum contacts test set forth in International
Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945)).
CBI argues that FirstMerit has sufficient contacts with New Hampshire
based upon: (1) FirstMerit’s response to the demand for an account of its
security interest; and (2) FirstMerit’s disbursement of the fire insurance
proceeds on EMC’s behalf to pay CBI for repair of the grinder. FirstMerit
counters that these contacts are insufficient to satisfy due process because it
was not foreseeable that they would result in defense of a lawsuit in New
Hampshire.
“It is ‘the relationship among the defendant, the forum, and the litigation’
that controls whether a State can assert jurisdiction over a nonresident.” Hall
v. Koch, 119 N.H. 639, 645 (1979) (quoting Shaffer, 433 U.S. at 204). We must
determine whether a defendant has sufficient minimum contacts with the State
“such that the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of
4
fair play and substantial justice.” Internat. Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S.
at 316 (quotation omitted). Specifically, we examine whether: (1) the
defendant’s contacts with New Hampshire relate to the cause of action; (2) the
defendant has purposefully availed itself of the protections of New Hampshire
law; and (3) it would be fair and reasonable to require the defendant to defend
the suit in New Hampshire. McNair v. McNair, 151 N.H. 343, 349-50 (2004).
In the past, we have looked at whether the defendant has ever “set foot” in the
State, invoked the benefits and protections of the State or committed an act
that has foreseeable consequences to a State resident. See Pono, 119 N.H. at
817.
The trial court found that it had jurisdiction in this case based upon the
fact that the grinder is currently located in New Hampshire and is subject to a
valid attachment under State law. The trial court’s conclusion was based, in
part, upon the fact that the grinder was located in New Hampshire when
FirstMerit responded to CBI’s demand for an account, and thus “there was a
reasonable expectation that the Grinder would be levied and the proceeds from
the sale disposed of through the Sheriff’s Department and/or the New
Hampshire court system.” Although we recognize that “the presence of
property in a State may bear on the existence of jurisdiction by providing
contacts among the forum State, the defendant, and the litigation,” Shaffer,
433 U.S. at 207, we agree with FirstMerit that the grinder’s current location in
New Hampshire is fortuitous. Despite its security interest, FirstMerit does not
own the grinder and was not responsible for its removal to New Hampshire for
repairs. FirstMerit did not voluntarily seek the State’s protection of its
interests, see id. at 208, but rather responded to CBI’s demand for an account
in order to avoid extinguishment of its proprietary interest in the grinder.
Furthermore, there is no evidence in the record to show that FirstMerit
has had any other contacts with New Hampshire, has ever done business here
or has a contract with any New Hampshire entity. On these facts, we cannot
conclude that FirstMerit took any voluntary action to purposefully avail itself of
the protections of New Hampshire law. See McNair, 151 N.H. at 349. Thus, we
hold that FirstMerit does not have sufficient contacts with the State such that
it would be fair and reasonable to require it to defend this suit here.
Reversed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5