THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-422
DEREK O'DONNELL & a.
v.
HCA HEALTH SERVICES OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, INC.
d/b/a PARKLAND MEDICAL CENTER & a.
Argued: June 15, 2005
Opinion Issued: September 8, 2005
Maggiotto & Belobrow, PLLC, of Concord (Paul A. Maggiotto on the brief),
and Troubh Heisler of Portland, Maine (John P. Flynn on the brief and orally),
for the plaintiffs.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Marc R. Scheer and
Todd Hathaway on the brief, and Mr. Scheer orally), for the defendants.
NADEAU, J. This appeal follows a jury trial awarding the plaintiffs,
Derek and Melissa O’Donnell, individually and as parents and next friend of
Ashley O’Donnell, a minor, damages for medical malpractice, negligence, and
negligent infliction of emotional distress, stemming from labor and the delivery
of Ashley in January 1999. We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part,
and remand.
On appeal, the defendants, HCA Health Services of New Hampshire, Inc.
d/b/a Parkland Medical Center, Parkland Physician Services, Inc., Dr. Monelle
Bisson, and Dr. Patricia Chaudhuri, argue that the Trial Court (McHugh, J.)
erred by: (1) failing to set aside the plaintiffs’ verdicts for bystander emotional
distress damages; (2) allowing plaintiffs’ expert to provide unreliable causation
testimony; (3) failing to set aside the verdicts for failure of the jury to find
comparative fault on the part of Melissa O’Donnell; (4) referring to potential
liability insurance in its jury instructions; (5) failing to non-suit portions of the
plaintiffs’ case after the opening statement; and (6) failing to grant a mistrial
after the plaintiffs’ expert referred to Melissa O’Donnell’s cesarean section when
she later had another child.
The jury could have found the following relevant facts: Ashley O’Donnell,
the plaintiffs’ second child, was born in January 1999. Complications arose
during the delivery as a result of which Ashley suffered a severed brachial
plexus nerve injury. Both plaintiffs witnessed the birth, including the
obstetrical emergency resulting in the nerve injury.
The delivery of plaintiffs’ first child was performed by Patricia Miller,
M.D., in 1991. During that delivery, complications arose as a result of
shoulder dystocia, a complication in which the baby’s shoulder contacts the
pubic bone, preventing delivery. Shoulder dystocia is a serious obstetrical
condition that could result in profound injury or death if the baby is not
delivered quickly. In the post-delivery medical records, Dr. Miller noted the
presence of severe shoulder dystocia, and recommended against future vaginal
deliveries by Melissa O’Donnell.
For her second pregnancy in 1997, which ended in miscarriage, Melissa
established obstetric care with the defendant, Parkland Physician Services, Inc.
At that time, she advised her treating physician at Parkland of general
complications during her first pregnancy and signed a medical release
authorization allowing them to obtain the medical records of her prior delivery.
However, Parkland Physician Services never obtained the records. Nor, during
Melissa’s third pregnancy, did they seek to obtain the records even though
Melissa suffered from early-stage preeclampsia and pre-natal tests indicated
that Ashley would be larger than the plaintiffs’ first child.
On January 13, 1999, Melissa was admitted to the Parkland Medical
Center for a planned induction of labor and delivery. During delivery, shoulder
dystocia again arose as a complication. As the labor progressed, Melissa
requested a cesarean section delivery due to the difficulties she was
experiencing. Melissa’s mother, Jane Sawyer, also present in the delivery
room, spoke with the delivery doctor and expressed concern for the extensive
clotting her daughter was experiencing, and advised the doctor of Melissa’s
previous difficulties. The doctor attempted several maneuvers to deliver
Ashley, none of which were successful. After these attempts failed, the doctor
2
performed a fourth degree episiotomy and delivered Ashley. The episiotomy
required protracted reparative surgery for Melissa. Later pediatric records and
neurological testing revealed Ashley suffered a near avulsion, or complete tear,
of her brachial plexus, a bundle of nerves running from the lower cervical spine
into the shoulder and down the arm.
During the jury trial, the plaintiffs’ expert, Joseph Finkelstein, M.D., who
is board-certified in obstetrics and gynecology and who specializes in high-risk
obstetrics, infertility and laparoscopic surgery, testified that the defendants
were negligent and that their negligence was the proximate cause of Ashley’s
injury. Derek and Melissa O’Donnell also testified as to the events surrounding
the delivery as well as to the severe emotional shock they have endured as a
result of Ashley’s injuries. They testified that their emotional distress has
caused sleeping problems and heightened stress in their relationship.
In a special verdict form, the jury found that the defendant’s failure to
obtain the prior delivery records constituted negligence and found that Melissa
O’Donnell was not negligent to any degree. The jury awarded two million
dollars for damages suffered by Ashley. The jurors found that Melissa
O’Donnell suffered extreme emotional distress as a result of the defendants’
negligence and awarded her two hundred thousand dollars for all of her
claimed damages including lost wages. The jury also found that Derek
O’Donnell suffered extreme emotional distress and awarded him one hundred
thousand dollars. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendants first argue that the damages awarded to
Melissa and Derek O’Donnell for their emotional distress as bystanders should
have been set aside. Among other things, they argue that there was no
evidence at trial, expert or otherwise, that the O’Donnells suffered delivery-
related physical manifestations of emotional distress. We agree.
Establishing the boundaries of liability for negligent infliction of
emotional distress to bystanders has proven to be a vexing issue for courts.
Since 1979, we have relied upon the traditional tort concepts of foreseeability
and causation when confronted with this issue. Corso v. Merrill, 119 N.H. 647,
651, 656 (1979). Under Corso, a claim for negligent infliction of emotional
distress to bystanders must satisfy three prongs: (1) causal negligence of the
defendant; (2) foreseeability; and (3) serious mental and emotional harm
accompanied by objective physical symptoms. Id. at 659. At issue here is the
third prong of Corso.
To recover for emotional distress under a traditional negligence theory,
we have consistently required plaintiffs to demonstrate physical symptoms of
their distress regardless of physical impact. Palmer v. Nan King Restaurant,
147 N.H. 681, 683-84 (2002); Thorpe v. State, 133 N.H. 299, 304 (1990).
Because pain experienced upon the death, illness or injury of a loved one is an
3
emotional cost borne by everyone living in society, “[t]he law intervenes only
when the plaintiff bears an unusual or aggravated burden.” Nutter v. Frisbie
Mem. Hosp., 124 N.H. 791, 796 (1984) (quotation omitted). Consequently, we
have held that the emotional harm must be a significant, painful mental
experience with lasting effects. Palmer, 147 N.H. at 684. To ensure that the
emotional injury is sufficiently serious to be afforded legal protection as well as
to establish causation, we have repeatedly held that “expert testimony is
required to prove physical symptoms suffered from alleged negligent infliction
of emotional distress.” Silva v. Warden, N.H. State Prison, 150 N.H. 372, 374
(2003).
At trial, the plaintiffs did not provide an expert witness to testify
regarding their physical manifestations of their distress or their cause. The
defendants moved for a directed verdict on this issue and later moved to set
aside the verdicts after trial. These motions were denied when the trial court
ruled that “no expert is required in order for the plaintiffs to make their
emotional distress claims.” Though the plaintiffs claim great suffering, we have
held that expert testimony is required to recover damages for negligent
infliction of emotional distress. Accordingly, the trial court erred when it ruled
otherwise.
The plaintiffs maintain that the defendants failed to preserve this issue
at trial. We disagree. At the close of the plaintiffs’ evidence, the defendants
moved for a directed verdict as to the claims of negligent infliction of emotional
distress. The trial court reserved argument until after the verdict, at which
time the defendants filed a motion to set aside the verdicts for Derek and
Melissa O’Donnell. The defendants’ motion clearly objected to the lack of
expert testimony establishing the physical manifestations of the distress.
Further, the trial court specifically rejected the plaintiffs’ contention that the
issue was not preserved at trial.
The plaintiffs point to three recent cases in which we allowed recovery for
emotional damages without requiring expert testimony. See In the Matter of
Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150 N.H. 551, 554 (2004) (wife not required to offer
expert testimony of emotional distress resulting from physical and mental
abuse); Silva, 150 N.H. at 374-75 (prisoner not required to offer expert
testimony of emotional distress after alleged assault during a strip search);
Fischer v. Hooper, 143 N.H. 585, 592-93 (1999) (plaintiff not required to offer
expert testimony to prove emotional distress from invasion of privacy caused by
improper wiretapping of conversations). These cases are distinguishable. They
arose from direct physical injury and/or intentional torts where “it is within the
ken of average lay people what mental and emotional harm might result.”
Silva, 150 N.H. at 375. We decline the invitation to expand this exception to
the negligent infliction of emotional distress to bystanders under the facts of
this case.
4
Melissa O’Donnell’s suit also included a claim for lost wages. That claim
is not disturbed by our ruling barring her claim for negligent infliction of
emotional distress. Accordingly, we reverse the jury’s award of damages to
Derek O’Donnell, and vacate the award of damages to Melissa O’Donnell. We
remand for a new trial on the issue of damages due Melissa O’Donnell not
related to the emotional distress claim.
We construe the defendants’ next argument to be that the trial court
erred in allowing the plaintiffs’ expert, obstetrician-gynecologist Joseph
Finkelstein, M.D., to testify as to the cause of Ashley’s nerve injury.
Specifically, they argue that the reasoning or methodology employed by Dr.
Finkelstein was not sufficiently reliable and should have been excluded. The
defendants argue that because Dr. Finkelstein is not a specialist in nerve
injuries, “he would not know how to quantify the forces exerted on the brachial
plexus during delivery.” New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702 states that an
expert may be qualified on the basis of “knowledge, skill, experience, training
or education.” N.H. R. Ev. 702. We will not reverse a trial court’s
determination of expert qualification unless we find it to be an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-Rand, 148 N.H. 609,
612 (2002).
The record establishes that Dr. Finkelstein is board-certified in obstetrics
and gynecology and specializes in high-risk obstetrics, infertility and
laparoscopic surgery. In addition, he has been a clinical instructor in
obstetrics at the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center, and maintained a
private practice in high-risk obstetrics since 1978. An individual witness’s
qualifications must be determined on a case-by-case basis, not by application
of a per se rule of exclusion or inclusion. Mankoski v. Briley, 137 N.H. 308, 313
(1993). In Briley we held that the lack of specialization in a particular medical
field does not automatically disqualify a doctor from testifying as an expert in
that field. Id.
Dr. Finklestein testified that his expert opinion regarding the cause of
Ashley’s injury was derived from his personal experience, attendance at
numerous obstetric seminars, and review of journals and treatises over the
course of the last twenty-five years. Furthermore, the reasoning or
methodology employed by Dr. Finkelstein was subject to cross-examination at
trial and went to the weight and credibility of Dr. Finkelstein’s testimony. Cf.
Baker Valley Lumber, 148 N.H. at 613. Accordingly, we find the trial judge’s
decision to allow Dr. Finkelstein to testify as to the cause of Ashley’s injury was
a sustainable exercise of discretion.
Next, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in failing to set aside
the verdict for the failure of the jury to find any comparative fault on the part of
Melissa O’Donnell. The defendants argue that Melissa O’Donnell failed to
advise them of the complications with her first delivery. We will uphold the
5
trial court’s decision on a motion to set aside the verdict unless the decision
was made without evidence or the court committed an unsustainable exercise
of discretion. Mullin v. Joy, 145 N.H. 96, 96-97 (2000). “We will set aside a
jury verdict if it is conclusively against the weight of the evidence or if it is the
result of mistake, partiality, or corruption.” Quinn Bros. v. Whitehouse, 144
N.H. 186, 190 (1999) (quotations omitted). A verdict is conclusively against the
weight of the evidence only if no reasonable jury could have reached it. Mullin,
145 N.H. at 96, 97.
There was evidence that Melissa signed a medical release form
authorizing the defendants to obtain her medical records. The defendants
failed to obtain the records, which reported the complications that took place
during her first pregnancy. In light of this evidence, a reasonable jury could
have found no comparative fault on the part of Melissa O’Donnell. We
conclude that the trial court properly denied the defendants’ motion to set
aside the verdict.
The defendants next argue that the trial court erred by referring to
potential liability insurance in its jury instructions. The trial court gave the
jury the following instruction:
In determining damages, ladies and gentlemen, you may not
consider or speculate whether the defendant is - - or any of these
defendants are insured or have the ability to pay any awards. Your
responsibility is to determine damages in accordance with the law
without regard to the defendants’ financial circumstances.
Likewise, you may not consider or speculate whether the plaintiff
has received benefits from other sources in connection with the
injuries claimed. This includes, for example, health insurance
coverage or any other type of insurance benefits. The law does not
permit you to make any deduction from the plaintiffs’ damages to
reflect benefits which may have been received from other sources.
This is so because the plaintiffs may be required to repay such
other sources from any award made in this case. Your duty to
determine damages is based only upon the evidence presented at
trial and the legal instructions which I have just given to you.
The purpose of jury instructions is to identify issues of material fact, and
to inform the jury of the appropriate standards of law by which it is to resolve
them. Transmedia Restaurant Co. v. Devereaux, 149 N.H. 454, 457 (2003).
We review jury instructions in context and will not reverse the trial court
unless the charge, taken in its entirety, fails adequately to explain the law
applicable to the case in such a way that the jury is misled. Id.
In determining whether an erroneous jury instruction requires reversal
we apply a two-part test. See Francoeur v. Piper, 146 N.H. 525, 531 (2001).
“First the [defendants] must show that it was a substantial error such that it
6
could have misled the jury regarding the applicable law. . . . [If there is
substantial error, the court] will reverse the jury verdict unless the [plaintiffs]
show that the error did not affect the outcome below.” Id. at 531-32.
We fail to see how the jury could have been misled by the instructions.
The instructions explained what the jury could and could not consider when
determining damages, and referred to insurance only in that context. After
reviewing the trial court’s jury instructions in their entirety, we conclude that
there was no error.
Next, the defendants argue that portions of the plaintiffs’ case should
have been nonsuited because plaintiffs’ counsel did not articulate in his
opening statement that the failure to obtain prior medical records constituted
negligence. The defendants argue that as a result of that omission, the
plaintiffs failed to describe evidence sufficient to meet their burden of proof.
We disagree.
On appeal, we review the grant of a motion for nonsuit after an opening
statement to determine whether upon that evidence there is a case for
submission. Cusson v. Beauregard, 143 N.H. 410, 411 (1999). In passing
upon defendant’s motion for nonsuit, the Court must consider the evidence as
true and consider all the evidence most favorably to the plaintiff. Id.
After reviewing the plaintiffs’ opening statement, we reject the
defendants’ argument that it failed to identify evidence necessary to sustain
their claims against defendants Bisson and Parkland Physician Services. We
agree with the trial judge’s finding that the opening statement did adequately
familiarize the jury with the nature of the claims being presented. Specifically,
the plaintiffs discussed the issue of negligence, various elements of Bisson’s
and Parkland Physician Services’ negligence, and their burden of proof. From
the record, it is clear that the plaintiffs’ opening statement adequately
identified for the jury the plaintiffs’ claim against Bisson and Parkland
Physician Services and that the jury understood those claims. Accordingly, we
reject the defendants’ argument that the trial court erred in denying their
motion for nonsuit.
Finally, the defendants argue that the trial court should have granted a
mistrial after the plaintiffs’ expert referred to Melissa’s cesarean section when
she had her third child. The defendants argue that they were unduly
prejudiced because the jury might improperly have compared the two
deliveries. We disagree.
We will not overturn a trial court’s decision on a motion for mistrial
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Murray v. Developmental
Servs. of Sullivan County, 149 N.H. 264, 268 (2003). A motion for mistrial
should be granted only if the trial court determines that justice may not be
done if the trial continues to verdict. Id. To show an unsustainable exercise of
7
discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. State v. Lambert, 147
N.H. 295, 296 (2001).
During the trial, the plaintiffs’ expert, Dr. Finkelstein, was directed to the
records of the birth of Melissa O’Donnell’s first child in 1991 and asked what
the standard of care called for after a prior incidence of shoulder dystocia. Dr.
Finkelstein gave a long answer that concluded,
[one should have] explained everything to the patient so that they
have the right choice to do a cesarean section, which in fact would
be the choice by many physicians and recommendations by many
physicians to do, as was in fact the choice in a subsequent
pregnancy when she had her third child.
This reference was not elicited by counsel’s question. Nor was it a major theme
of the doctor’s testimony.
The defendants had previously moved in limine to exclude all references
to Melissa’s subsequent delivery by cesarean section. The court had taken the
matter under advisement based upon the belief that the defendants might
argue that brachial plexus injuries occur in cesarean section deliveries as well.
Following Dr. Finkelstein’s remark, the defense requested a mistrial and that
motion was denied. To justify a mistrial, remarks must be more than merely
inadmissible or inappropriate; they must constitute an irreparable injustice
that cannot be cured by jury instructions. Murray, 149 N.H. at 268. The trial
court offered to give a limiting instruction, but that offer was declined by
defense counsel. We conclude that any prejudice that might have resulted
from Dr. Finkelstein’s unsolicited remark could have been cured by a jury
instruction. Accordingly, the trial court acted within its discretion by denying
the motion for mistrial.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
vacated in part; and remanded for a new
trial on damages for Melissa O’Donnell.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8