THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-711
FRANK CAPARCO & a.
v.
TOWN OF DANVILLE
NORMA DROWNE & a.
v.
TOWN OF SANDOWN
Argued: June 22, 2005
Opinion Issued: November 15, 2005
Sumner F. Kalman, Attorney at Law, P.C., of Plaistow (Thea S. Valvanis
and Sumner F. Kalman on the brief, and Mr. Kalman orally), for the
petitioners.
Peter J. Loughlin, of Portsmouth, and Robert G. Eaton, of Rye (Mr.
Loughlin and Mr. Eaton on the brief, and Mr. Loughlin orally), for the
respondents.
Nolan T. Koon, of Concord, by brief, for the New Hampshire Municipal
Association, as amicus curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners appeal a decision of the Superior
Court (Morrill, J.) upholding the impact fee ordinances adopted by the
respondent towns that grant authority to the local planning boards to adjust
the amount of impact fees charged. We affirm.
The relevant facts are as follows. The petitioners are individuals,
businesses and a trust; namely, Frank Caparco, Homeplate II, Inc., MDR
Corporation, Mahogany Realty Enterprises, Inc., Home Builders and
Remodelers of New Hampshire, Norma Drowne, Richard Drowne, Dorothy
Drowne, Gary Barnes & Sons, LLC, and Patricia Villella, Trustee, Montana
Realty Trust. They own property in the respondent towns of Sandown and
Danville, on which they seek to construct numerous single family homes. In
1998, both towns enacted impact fee ordinances, which imposed fees upon new
development to reflect the costs that would be incurred by the towns in
building or improving public facilities, such as schools, to accommodate the
proposed development. See RSA 674:21, I, V (Supp. 2004); Town of Danville
Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV(A); Town of Sandown Zoning Ordinance, art.
VIII(2)(C). For example, under the Danville ordinance, the petitioners are
required to pay a public school facility impact fee of $2,900 for each “single
family detached” residence constructed. See Town of Danville Zoning
Ordinance, art. XIV, app. A (Impact Fee Schedule).
The petitioners filed separate equitable actions, which were later
consolidated, seeking relief from the impact fee ordinances, arguing that they
unlawfully delegated to the local planning boards the authority to periodically
adjust impact fees. The trial court ruled in favor of the respondent towns, and
this appeal followed.
The petitioners argue that the ordinances usurp legislative authority
because they permit planning boards to adjust impact fees periodically in
violation of the innovative land use controls statute, RSA 674:21 (Supp. 2004).
They also argue that allowing planning boards to adjust impact fees violates
Part I, Article 28 of the New Hampshire Constitution. Before addressing the
merits of the petitioners’ arguments, we first review the relevant statutes and
ordinances involved.
“For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, or the general welfare of
the community,” the legislature authorized towns to adopt innovative land use
control methods, including impact fees. RSA 674:16 (Supp. 2004); RSA
674:21. Impact fees are defined as
a fee or assessment imposed upon development, including
subdivision, building construction or other land use change, in
order to help meet the needs occasioned by that development for
the construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or
2
operated by the municipality, including . . . public school
facilities.
RSA 674:21, V. Should a town adopt an impact fee ordinance, the statute
provides that it “may provide for [its] administration . . . by the planning
board,” RSA 674:21, II, and that the ordinance “shall contain within it the
standards which shall guide the . . . board which administers the ordinance,”
id. The imposition of impact fees, however, is restricted by statute. See, e.g.,
RSA 674:21, V(a)-(e). For example, the amount of the impact fee must “be a
proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs which is reasonably
related to the capital needs created by the development, and to the benefits
accruing to the development from the capital improvements financed by the
fee.” RSA 674:21, V(a).
The respondent towns adopted impact fee ordinances at town meeting.
Both towns are part of the Timberlane Regional School District, which
commissioned a planning consultant, Bruce C. Mayberry, to prepare a
methodology to calculate impact fee schedules for public schools within the
district. Mayberry issued a report providing a methodology that purports to
identify and evaluate numerous factors for calculating an impact fee to ensure
that it represents “a proportional share of municipal capital improvement costs
which is reasonably related to the capital needs created by [new] development,
and to the benefits accruing to the development from the capital improvements
financed by the fee” as required under RSA 674:21, V(a) (hereinafter referred to
as “Mayberry report” or “Mayberry methodology”). The parties do not dispute
that the respondents adopted the Mayberry methodology when promulgating
their respective impact fee schedules.
Respondent Danville’s ordinance states that the Mayberry methodology
“represents a reasonable, rational and proportional method for the assessment
of growth-related school facility costs to new residential development that will
provide for partial funding of the capital costs of the [Timberlane School]
District.” Town of Danville Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV(B)(5). It requires that
“[t]he amount of each impact fee shall be as set forth in the Impact Fee
Schedules prepared and updated in accordance with [the Mayberry report].”
Town of Danville Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV(E)(1). Respondent Sandown’s
ordinance requires
new development to contribute its proportionate share of funds
necessary to accommodate its impact on public facilities having a
rational nexus to the proposed development, and for which the
need is attributable to the proposed development.
3
Town of Sandown Zoning Ordinance, art. VIII(2)(C). The ordinance’s impact fee
schedule references the Mayberry methodology as the means by which the fee
is to be calculated. Town of Sandown Zoning Ordinance, art. VIII(VII)(B).
Both ordinances also contain provisions authorizing the local planning
boards to periodically adjust the amount of the impact fee. The provisions are
similar but not identical. The Danville ordinance provides:
The Impact Fee Assessment Schedule shall be reviewed annually
by the Planning Board, according to the methodologies established
within the [Mayberry report]. Such review may result in
recommended adjustments in one or more of the fees based on the
most recent data as may be available including current
construction cost information. No change in the methodology or
in the impact fee schedules shall become effective until it shall
have been the subject of a public hearing before the Planning
Board noticed in accordance with RSA 675:7, and approved by the
Board of Selectmen. The methodology and the impact fee
schedule shall not be modified more frequently than annually.
Town of Danville Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV(L). The Sandown ordinance
provides, in part, that “[t]he amount of the fee charged shall be calculated and
reviewed annually by the Planning Board and adjusted as deemed necessary,”
and that the fee calculation shall be based upon:
1. Anticipated expenditures for improvements to Public Capital
Facilities under Section XII for the next fiscal year(s), not to
exceed ten years. Such anticipated expenditures to be
reasonable and prudent.
2. Projected increase of dwellings and excess bedrooms subject
to such fees, as in paragraphs A, B and C of this section for
the next fiscal year(s), not to exceed six years. Such
projections to be reasonable and prudent.
Town of Sandown Zoning Ordinance, art. VIII(VII)(D), (E).
We turn now to the petitioners’ statutory argument. They argue that
“[t]here are no sections of [RSA 674:21] that allow planning boards to adjust
the amount of . . . impact fees.” They further contend that the ordinances
contain no standards to guide the planning boards in their administration of
the ordinances as required by RSA 674:21, II, but give the boards “carte
blanche to literally establish the amount of the ‘charges.’” According to the
petitioners, the Mayberry methodology does not comply with RSA 674:21, II,
because it incorporates a subjective standard of reasonableness and does not
constitute a “mathematical ‘formula’ where substituting different numerical
4
quantities that reflect some change necessarily leads to a conclusion consistent
with the application of the methodology.”
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the
words of the statute itself. Sweeney v. Ragged Mt. Ski Area, 151 N.H. 239, 241
(2004). “We first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.” Id. Because the
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, we review the trial court’s
decision de novo. See Crowley v. Frazier, 147 N.H. 387, 389 (2001).
The innovative land use controls statute expressly provides that an
impact fee ordinance “may provide for administration . . . by the planning
board.” RSA 674:21, II. Such an ordinance, however, must “contain within it
the standards which shall guide the person or board which administers the
ordinance.” Id. The terms “administration” and “administers” are not defined
in the statute. We look, therefore, to their common usage, using dictionary
definitions for guidance, to determine whether the statute allows a town to
delegate to a planning board the authority to adjust the amount of an impact
fee charge. See In re Juvenile 2003-187, 151 N.H. 14, 16 (2004).
Common definitions of the term “administration” include:
a furnishing or tendering according to a prescribed rite or
formula . . . a meting out . . . the total activity of a state in the
exercise of its political powers including the action of the
legislative, judicial and executive departments . . . the
management of public affairs as distinguished from the executive
or political function of policy making . . . the principles, practices,
and rationalized techniques employed in achieving the objectives
or aims of an organization.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 28 (unabridged ed. 2002). Under
another source, “administration” includes:
1. The management or performance of the executive duties
of a government, institution, or business. 2. In public law,
the practical management and direction of the executive
department and its agencies.
Black’s Law Dictionary 46 (8th ed. 2004). Further, the term “administer”
includes “to manage the affairs of . . . to direct or superintend the execution,
use, or conduct of . . . to mete out : DISPENSE.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary, supra at 27.
Notably, these common definitions do not restrict “administer” and
“administration” to purely ministerial acts, but incorporate the exercise of some
5
circumscribed discretion or judgment to effectuate identified goals. Contextual
language within RSA 674:21, II itself implies that the authority of an entity
charged with the administration of an innovative land use controls ordinance,
like a planning board, extends beyond purely ministerial acts such as inputting
numbers into a mathematical formula. In particular, the statute commands
that an ordinance “contain within it the standards which shall guide the
person or board which administers the ordinance.” RSA 674:21, II (emphasis
added). The term “guide” includes “to regulate and manage . . . direct or
supervise [especially] toward some desirable end, course, way, or development
. . . .” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 1009. Therefore,
the statute’s requirement that an ordinance provide standards to guide its
administration includes an expectation that the administering entity will
exercise some measure of sound judgment and discretion to implement the
terms of the ordinance within circumscribed parameters. Accordingly, we
conclude that so long as a town ordinance provides the planning board with
sufficient standards to guide its periodic adjustment of impact fees as required
by statute, its exercise of some discretionary authority in executing that task is
in accord with RSA 674:21.
To the extent the statute is ambiguous regarding the legislature’s intent,
the legislative history is instructive. See State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467
(2003) (when statute ambiguous, legislative history aids analysis). In a
dialogue between senators who were discussing the implementation of an
impact fee ordinance, the following exchange occurred:
SENATOR NELSON: [W]hat would happen would be this. The
municipality would adopt the impact fee ordinance, but would the
zoning board be responsible for setting the fees?
SENATOR SHAHEEN: That would be the planning board. The
zoning board, right now, is not responsible for the implement of
zoning ordinances. It is the planning boards that do that. I have
to say, by the way, that I happen to chair the zoning board in the
town of Madbury and I feel like boards at a local level are very
accountable to their local communities.
SENATOR NELSON: The municipality would vote to have an
impact ordinance but in fact the planning board would be the
ones who determine the fee. What recourse would an individual
have, if they did not feel that it was a reasonable fee under this
legislation.
SENATOR SHAHEEN: My assumption is the same recourse that
people have now, which would be an appeal process and if your
appeal was not granted, you would go to court.
6
N.H.S. Jour. 1504 (1991) (emphasis added). This exchange demonstrates the
legislature’s expectation that a planning board, as the entity administering the
ordinance, would determine the amount of the impact fee. Accordingly, we
conclude that pursuant to its authority to administer an impact fee ordinance,
a planning board may adjust the amount of the fee provided it does so in
accordance with sufficient standards identified within a town ordinance as
required by RSA 674:21.
We further conclude that the town ordinances provide the respective
planning boards with standards in accordance with RSA 674:21 to guide the
periodic adjustment of the amount of the impact fee charged. Both ordinances
establish impact fees to be charged for each housing unit type and refer to the
Mayberry methodology as the source for calculating those fees. Town of
Danville Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV, app. A; Town of Sandown Zoning
Ordinance, art. VII(B). The Mayberry methodology itself identifies eight specific
factual variables to be periodically updated, such as “school replacement costs
or construction costs per square foot.” Danville’s ordinance expressly compels
the planning board to follow the Mayberry methodology, and further limits the
board’s discretion by requiring that it conduct a public hearing and secure
approval of the board of selectmen before implementing any change in the
impact fee schedule. Town of Danville Zoning Ordinance, art. XIV(L). While
Sandown’s ordinance does not expressly state that the planning board must
utilize the Mayberry methodology, the petitioners accept that the ordinance
implicitly imposes this requirement. Further, Sandown’s ordinance requires
the planning board to base its fee adjustment calculation upon two key factors:
anticipated expenditures for improvements to public capital facilities and the
projected increase of dwellings and excess bedrooms. Town of Sandown Zoning
Ordinance, art. VIII(VII)(E). Neither town ordinance provides the planning
boards with unfettered discretion to adjust the amount of impact fees; rather,
they direct the boards to adjust the fees based upon certain factual variables,
requiring them to compile and assess the underlying data.
In short, the innovative land use controls statute empowers towns to
enact impact fee ordinances and provide for their administration by local
planning boards with guiding standards. The respondent towns enacted
ordinances that include methodology with circumscribed parameters to guide
their respective planning boards in the administration of the periodic
adjustment of the fees. Accordingly, the ordinances comport with the authority
granted to towns in the enactment of impact fee ordinances under RSA 674:21.
We next address the petitioners’ constitutional claim. They argue that
the impact fee ordinances of the respondent towns violate Part I, Article 28 of
the New Hampshire Constitution by permitting “charges” to be established by
the planning boards without the consent of the people or authority derived
7
from the legislature. Specifically, Part I, Article 28 of the New Hampshire
Constitution provides that: “No subsidy, charge, tax, impost, or duty, shall be
established, fixed, laid, or levied, under any pretext whatsoever, without the
consent of the people, or their representatives in the legislature, or authority
derived from that body.” We have already concluded that the legislature
authorized towns to delegate to planning boards the authority to exercise some
discretion, under proper standards, in adjusting impact fees in their
administration of impact fee ordinances. At town meeting, the residents of the
respondent towns voted both to accept the method for adjusting impact fees
outlined in the ordinances and for their respective planning boards to
implement such adjustments. Therefore, even assuming that impact fees
constitute “charges” under Part I, Article 28, the legislature and the residents
of the respondent towns have consented to the impact fees as adjusted by the
local planning boards. Accordingly, the petitioners’ constitutional argument
fails.
To the extent the petitioners advance some distinct argument that the
legislature improperly delegated to planning boards its power to enact laws, we
decline to address it as insufficiently developed for appellate review. See State
v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
8