THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2004-288
IN THE MATTER OF TATJANA A. DONOVAN
AND ROBERT F. DONOVAN, JR.
Argued: December 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: April 1, 2005
Bronwyn Asplund-Walsh, of Franklin, by brief and orally, for the
petitioner.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Tatjana A. Donovan (the mother), appeals
an order of the Superior Court (Barry, J.) reducing the amount of her former
spouse’s child support obligation based upon income imputed to her. The
respondent, Robert F. Donovan (the father), cross-appeals, arguing that the
trial court erred in refusing to modify the parties’ permanent stipulation in
their divorce decree. We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part and
remand.
The parties divorced in May 2000 and received joint legal custody of their
two minor children. The mother was awarded primary physical custody, while
the father obtained residual custodial rights. The parties’ permanent
stipulation incorporated a uniform support order that required the father to
pay $1,599 per month in child support to the mother, subject to annual
adjustment for inflation using the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The father was
required to pay an additional $150 per month for the children’s extracurricular
expenses. The parties also agreed to contribute to the children’s educational
expenses through college in an amount proportionate to their respective
incomes at such time.
On October 23, 2003, the father filed a petition to bring forward and
modify the divorce decree under the three-year review provision of RSA 458-C:7
(2004). He sought to reduce his child support obligation based upon his
diminished earnings and his former spouse’s ability to earn an income. He
also asked the trial court to strike portions of the parties’ permanent
stipulation relating to child support.
The father is employed as a certified public accountant (CPA) at Ellacoya
Networks in Merrimack. His monthly pay decreased by approximately $62
between 2000 and 2003. The mother home-schooled their children for four
years prior to the parties’ divorce and has continued to do so since, pursuant
to the parties’ agreement. Because of her home-schooling responsibilities, the
mother has not engaged in full-time employment.
The trial court granted the father’s request to modify his child support
obligation, thereby reducing his monthly payment to $1,590. The trial court
denied his requests to terminate his monthly payment of $150 for the
children’s extracurricular activities and to eliminate the parties’ obligation to
make proportionate contributions to their children’s college expenses. The
court also upheld the provision of the uniform support order that annually
adjusts the father’s child support obligation for inflation as reflected by the
CPI.
On appeal, the mother argues that the trial court erred by modifying the
father’s child support obligation based upon income imputed to her without
making a specific finding that she was voluntarily unemployed or
underemployed. See RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) (2004). In his cross-appeal, the father
argues that the trial court erred by ordering him to continue to pay for his
children’s extracurricular activities because these expenses are included in his
total support obligation under the child support guidelines. See In the Matter
of Coderre & Coderre, 148 N.H. 401, 406 (2002). He also argues that under
RSA 458:17, XI-a (2004), the trial court erred in upholding the parties’
stipulation that they would contribute to their children’s college expenses.
Finally, he argues that the court erred in refusing to strike the CPI provision
because that provision is contrary to the statutory formula for computing child
support. See RSA 458-C:3, II(a) (2004). We address each issue in turn.
2
I. Underemployment
The mother argues that the trial court erred by imputing income to her
without making an express finding that she was voluntarily unemployed or
underemployed under RSA 458-C:2, IV(a). Furthermore, she argues that even
if an express finding is not required, the evidence does not support an implied
finding of voluntary underemployment.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. In the Matter of Watterworth & Watterworth, 149 N.H. 442, 445 (2003).
We first examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written, and, therefore, we will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add words that the legislature did not include. Coderre,
148 N.H. at 403. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the context of the
overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Watterworth, 149 N.H. at 445.
RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) provides that “[t]he court, in its discretion, may
consider as gross income the difference between the amount a parent is
earning and the amount a parent has earned in cases where the parent
voluntarily becomes unemployed or underemployed, unless the parent is
physically or mentally incapacitated.”
The plain language of the statute does not mandate an express finding
that the parent is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed. In contrast,
other sections of RSA chapter 458-C explicitly require the trial court to make
an express written finding. For example, RSA 458-C:5 (2004) provides that the
trial court “shall make written findings” relative to the applicability of special
circumstances that warrant a deviation from the child support guidelines. See,
e.g., In the Matter of Barrett & Coyne, 150 N.H. 520, 524-25 (2004). When the
legislature has failed to include such provisions in a statute, we presume that
it did not intend the law to have that effect and will not judicially engraft those
terms. Appeal of Concord Natural Gas Corp., 121 N.H. 685, 691 (1981); see
also State v. Rothe, 142 N.H. 483, 485 (1997). Therefore, we hold that RSA
458-C:2, IV(a) does not require an express finding of voluntary unemployment
or underemployment.
Although an express finding is not required, we must determine whether
the evidence supports the trial court’s implied finding that the mother is
underemployed in this case. Whether a party is underemployed is a question
for the fact finder, whose decision will not be disturbed on appeal if supported
by evidence in the record. West v. Turchioe, 144 N.H. 509, 513 (1999). Trial
courts have broad discretion to review and modify child support awards.
Nicolazzi v. Nicolazzi, 131 N.H. 694, 696 (1989). They are in the best position
3
to determine the parties’ respective needs and their respective abilities to meet
them. See id. Accordingly, we will set aside a modification order only if it
clearly appears on the evidence that the court’s exercise of discretion was
unsustainable. In the Matter of Jerome & Jerome, 150 N.H. 626, 628 (2004).
In computing the father’s child support obligation, the trial court relied
upon his calculations on the child support guidelines worksheet. On the
worksheet, the father attributed $952.60 to the mother as monthly gross
income. The father based this figure on his belief that “although [the mother]
is not currently working as a CPA, she has the ability to do so if she were to
take the required courses to get up to speed.” The father acknowledged that
currently the mother is not certified to work as a CPA, but his attorney stated
that, “as a CPA himself[,] [he] believes his former wife could at least obtain a
job as a bookkeeper and earn at least $952 a month.” The trial court’s
adoption of this figure in computing the father’s child support obligation
implies a finding that the mother is voluntarily underemployed.
This finding is not supported by the evidence in the record. The father’s
claim that the mother could obtain employment as a bookkeeper is speculation
unsupported by any concrete evidence. Indeed, it is not clear from the father’s
allegations that the mother is currently qualified for such employment.
Moreover, pursuant to the parties’ agreement, the mother has been home-
schooling their children for at least eight years, which prevents her from
pursuing full-time employment. Furthermore, she “has been required to seek
part-time employment, simply to make ends meet,” and “has been working to
the extent of her ability around the home schooling [of] her children.” There is
no evidence in the record concerning whether the mother could continue to
home-school the children and earn the amount of income that the trial court
imputed to her. We therefore vacate that part of the trial court’s order
modifying the father’s monthly child support obligation based on income
imputed to the mother.
II. Extracurricular activities
Next, the father argues that the trial court erred by requiring him to
continue paying $150 per month for the children’s extracurricular activities
because such expenses are included in his child support obligation. See In the
Matter of Coderre & Coderre, 148 N.H. at 406. The mother argues that Coderre
should not apply because she is home-schooling the children and must incur
the cost of all of their extracurricular activities. Alternatively, she argues that
her significantly low income and ongoing educational expenses on behalf of the
children constitute special circumstances that warrant deviation from the
guidelines. See RSA 458-C:5. We agree with the father.
4
The father argues that the trial court should have applied our holding in
Coderre, 148 N.H. at 406, even though he agreed to pay $150 per month for
the children’s extracurricular activities in the parties’ permanent stipulation
and did not appeal this issue after the divorce decree was finalized. Under the
child support guidelines, either parent may apply to the trial court for
modification of the child support order every three years. RSA 458-C:7, I. At
that time, the trial court must use the formula provided under RSA 458-C:3 to
recalculate the parents’ total support obligation based upon their current
incomes.
In Coderre, we held that extracurricular activity expenses fall into the
same category of basic support as food, shelter and recreation, and as such are
included in the parties’ total support obligation under the guidelines. Coderre,
148 N.H. at 406; see also In the Matter of Arabian & Squillante, 151 N.H. 109,
111 (2004). Because extracurricular expenses are part of basic guidelines
support, they are included in the trial court’s recalculation of the child support
obligation at the three-year review. See RSA 458-C:3. Accordingly, the trial
court erred in not applying our holding in Coderre when it recalculated the
father’s support obligation under the guidelines and required him to continue
paying an additional $150 per month for extracurricular activities. See
Coderre, 148 N.H. at 406.
The mother argues that this case should be distinguished from Coderre
because she is home-schooling the children and the public school system does
not subsidize the cost of their extracurricular activities. Our holding in
Coderre, however, was not based upon the facts underlying the party’s request
for extracurricular expenses. See id. Rather, we examined the structure and
purpose of RSA chapter 458-C to determine what expenses are part of general
support under the guidelines. See id. at 403-06. Although extracurricular
activities are included in basic guidelines support, ongoing extraordinary
education expenses may constitute special circumstances that justify deviation
from the guidelines. Arabian, 151 N.H. at 112. We agree with the mother that,
on remand, the trial court may consider whether special circumstances exist in
this case in making adjustments to application of the guidelines. See RSA 458-
C:5.
Thus, we vacate the trial court’s decision requiring the father to continue
paying $150 per month for extracurricular activity expenses in addition to his
child support obligation under the guidelines. See Coderre, 148 N.H. at 406.
III. College expenses
Next, we address the father’s argument that the trial court erred in
refusing to strike the provision of the parties’ permanent stipulation that
requires them to contribute to their children’s college educations. As part of
5
the permanent stipulation, the parties agreed that each of them would
“contribute to the cost of the children’s education through college in proportion
to their respective income at that time.” At that time, the trial court had “broad
discretionary powers” to order divorced parents to contribute to their children’s
college expenses under RSA 458:17, I (Supp. 2003) and RSA 458:20 (1992).
LeClair v. LeClair, 137 N.H. 213, 217-18 (1993) (superseded by statute).
At the hearing on his petition to modify the divorce decree, the father
asked the trial court to strike the portion of the permanent stipulation related
to college expenses in light of the passage of House Bill 299, which amended
RSA 458:17 to provide: “No child support order shall require a parent to
contribute to an adult child’s college expenses or other educational expenses
beyond the completion of high school.” RSA 458:17, XI-a. The amendment
took effect on February 2, 2004, before the trial court’s hearing on the father’s
petition. The trial court denied the father’s request.
On appeal, the father argues that under the new statute, the trial court
erred in denying his request to remove the college education provision from the
prior court order. Thus, the issue before us is whether the new statute
requires the trial court to vacate a pre-existing order that requires the parents
to contribute to their children’s college education.
It is clear that, at a minimum, the legislature intended to preclude the
trial court from issuing a new court order on or after the effective date of the
statute that would require a parent to contribute to an adult child’s college
expenses. In the Matter of Goldman & Elliott, 151 N.H. ___, ___ (decided March
2, 2005). However, it is not clear on the face of the statute whether the
legislature intended it to apply retroactively to orders already in existence prior
to its enactment. The phrase “[n]o child support order shall require” may be
interpreted to mean that as of the effective date of the statute, no court may
order a parent to pay college expenses in future divorce decrees. See RSA
458:17, XI-a. Alternatively, the phrase may be interpreted to mean that all
past child support orders that include college expenses must be vacated. See
id.
“Where the statutory language is ambiguous or where more than one
reasonable interpretation exists, we review legislative history to aid in our
analysis.” Appeal of Ann Miles Builder, 150 N.H. 315, 318 (2003) (quotation
omitted). House Bill 299 was proposed following our decision in In the Matter
of Breault and Breault, which held that RSA 458:17, I, does not require that
child support terminate when a child reaches the age of majority or graduates
from high school. In the Matter of Breault & Breault, 149 N.H. 359, 362 (2003)
(superseded by statute). In Breault, we affirmed our prior holding that the trial
court may order parents to contribute to their adult children’s post-secondary
education. Id. at 363; see also LeClair, 137 N.H. at 220. This holding was
6
consistent with our recognition that “the State has the dual legitimate interests
of promoting higher education for its citizens, and of extending protections to
children of divorce to ensure that they are not deprived of opportunities they
otherwise would have received had their parents not divorced.” LeClair, 137
N.H. at 225. Numerous States similarly have recognized, by statute or judicial
opinion, the obligation of non-custodial parents to support their children’s
post-secondary educations. Goforth, The Case for Expanding Child Support
Obligations to Cover Post-Secondary Educational Expenses, 56 Ark. L. Rev. 93,
100 n.39 (2003).
The final version of House Bill 299 states that it is an act “removing
judicial discretion to order a divorced parent to contribute to an adult child’s
college expenses.” Laws 2004, ch. 1. In his report for the majority of the
House Committee on Children and Family Law, Representative Thomas I.
Arnold, Jr. stated that the bill “removes the court’s discretion to make orders
regarding the children’s post-secondary education at the time of their parent’s
[sic] divorce.” N.H.H.R. Jour. 161 (2003) (emphasis added). This report
suggests that the legislature intended the statute to apply to future divorce
decrees, but does not make clear whether the statute was intended to apply to
post-enactment modifications to decrees that were issued prior to the change
in legislation.
As a general rule, statutes are applied prospectively. Eldridge v.
Eldridge, 136 N.H. 611, 613 (1993); accord 3A N. Singer, Statutes and
Statutory Construction § 69:9, at 418-19 (6th ed. 2003) (“[Child] [s]upport
statutes are given prospective operation only, unless the legislature has clearly
indicated that retroactivity is intended.”). “Because every person is presumed
to know the law and, therefore, to organize his or her conduct and affairs
accordingly, notice or warning of a change in the law should be given in
advance of such change.” Eldridge, 136 N.H. at 613. When the legislature is
silent as to whether a statute should apply prospectively or retrospectively, our
interpretation turns on whether the statute affects the parties’ substantive or
procedural rights. Appeal of Wal-Mart Stores, 145 N.H. 635, 638 (2000). There
is a presumption of prospectivity when a statute affects substantive rights.
Eldridge, 136 N.H. at 613. “In the final analysis, however, the question of
retrospective application rest[s] on a determination of fundamental fairness,
because the underlying purpose of all legislation is to promote justice.” Appeal
of Wal-Mart Stores, 145 N.H. at 638 (quotation and brackets omitted).
We have held previously that statutory changes affecting parties’ rights
to post-divorce financial support would not be applied retroactively to pre-
existing divorce decrees. See, e.g., Henry v. Henry, 129 N.H. 159, 161 (1987)
(holding that amendments to alimony statute would apply only to orders based
upon divorce decrees entered on or after the effective date of the amendments).
Similarly, in Walker v. Walker, 116 N.H. 717, 718 (1976), we addressed the
7
effect of a statutory reduction in the age of majority from twenty-one to
eighteen years in determining the age of a child’s emancipation. Absent any
clear showing of the legislature’s intent that the statute was to have retroactive
effect, we held that the change in the age of majority would not affect
preexisting divorce decrees under which a parent’s support obligation would
continue until the child became emancipated or reached the age of twenty-one.
Id. Implicit in this holding was the recognition that the child’s right to receive
financial support is substantive in nature. See id. In contrast, we found that
RSA 458-C:7, which permits modification of a child support order three years
after the entry of the last order for support, is procedural in nature in that it
does not mandate a change in child support but “simply opens up a new
channel of inquiry into whether a modification is appropriate.” Eldridge, 136
N.H. at 615. We conclude that RSA 458:17, XI-a affects substantive rights and
thus the presumption of prospectivity must be applied. See Eldridge, 136 N.H.
at 613. Because we find that the new law applies prospectively to court orders
issued after February 2, 2004, we need not consider whether application of the
amendment to vacate a pre-existing court order would violate the prohibition in
Part I, Article 23 of the State Constitution against retrospective laws. Cf.
Goldman, 151 N.H. at ___.
In this case, the court order requiring the parents to contribute to their
children’s college education predated the effective date of RSA 458:17, XI-a.
Thus, we hold that RSA 458:17, XI-a does not mandate the trial court to vacate
the provision of the parties’ divorce decree that requires them to contribute to
their children’s college education in proportion to their incomes at the time that
the children attend college.
IV. Use of the Consumer Price Index
Finally, the father argues that under the guidelines’ child support
formula, the CPI may not be used to adjust his child support obligation
annually based on inflation because the CPI does not reflect actual changes in
the parties’ total net income. See RSA 458-C:3, II(a). The trial court upheld
the CPI provision because “[t]he defendant was represented by counsel at the
time of the divorce and this was a provision to which he agreed.” We agree
with the father and thus vacate this provision.
The child support guidelines generally instruct the trial court to set
prospective support based upon current income figures. See West, 144 N.H. at
513. Under the statutory child support formula, the parents’ total net income
is multiplied by a percentage based upon the number of children, then the
resulting total support obligation is divided between the parents in proportion
to their respective incomes. RSA 458-C:3, I, II(a), (b). “Net income” is defined
as “the parents’ combined adjusted gross income less standard deductions
published on an annual basis by the department of health and human
8
services.” RSA 458-C:2, VI. “This formula is known as the income-shares
model and is based on the number of supported children and standardized
deductions from the parents’ combined gross incomes.” In the Matter of
Plaisted & Plaisted, 149 N.H. 522, 524 (2003) (quotation omitted).
In Heinze v. Heinze, 122 N.H. 358, 361 (1982), we upheld an escalation
clause that automatically increased the obligor’s support payment at the time
of any wage increase based upon the percentage of his gross income that he
was then paying for child support. We noted that this escalation clause
“provides cost-of-living increases in support payments as the ability of the
supporting party to undertake the obligation increases” and that its use would
“reduce the need for parties to continually return to court to seek to modify
support decrees.” Id. In addition, we reminded triers of fact that they also
should consider increases in the custodial spouse’s income when drafting or
modifying support orders. Id.
Unlike the escalation clause in Heinze, the CPI provision is not tied to
changes in the parties’ total net income. See id. The CPI provision states that
the “[o]bligor’s child support obligation shall be reviewed annually and adjusted
for inflation in accordance with the Consumer Price Index.” The use of this
escalation clause is inconsistent with the child support guidelines because it
requires adjustments to the father’s support obligation that are independent of
actual changes in the parties’ incomes. See RSA 458-C:3, II.
In fact, the father’s income decreased during the four years following the
parties’ final divorce decree due to his employer’s company-wide salary
reduction. Despite this decrease in net income, the father’s support obligation
increased from $1599 per month to $1828 per month by using the CPI as an
automatic escalator. Thus, the father’s support obligation no longer reflected
the trial court’s original computation under the guidelines. Because this
escalation clause is not tied to changes in the parties’ incomes and thus is not
authorized under RSA chapter 458-C, we reverse the trial court’s order denying
the father’s request to strike the CPI provision.
In light of the foregoing, we conclude that: (1) although an express
finding of voluntary underemployment is not required, the trial court erred in
calculating the mother’s imputed monthly income; (2) the trial court erred in
ordering the father to continue to pay for his children’s extracurricular
activities; (3) the trial court was not required to vacate the parties’ original
agreement that they would pay for their children’s college expenses; and (4) the
automatic escalation provision that adjusts the father’s support obligation
based on the Consumer Price Index must be stricken.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
vacated in part; and remanded.
9
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU and GALWAY, JJ., concurred;
DALIANIS, J., concurred in part and dissented in part.
DALIANIS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. While I agree
with the majority on three of the issues on appeal, I disagree with its
application of RSA 458:17, XI-a (2004) to the existing order in this case
regarding payment of college expenses. Therefore, I respectfully dissent from
that portion of the majority opinion.
The majority frames this issue in terms of whether or not RSA 458:17,
XI-a requires trial courts to vacate all prior orders that provide for payment of
children’s college education. The majority concludes that, instead of requiring
all prior orders regarding payment of college expenses to be vacated, the
statute applies only prospectively to orders entered after the date of its
enactment.
I believe the issue before us, however, is not whether RSA 458:17, XI-a
requires courts to vacate all previous orders for payment of college expenses;
rather, the issue is whether the new statute requires courts to vacate orders
regarding payment of college expenses that are challenged after the effective
date of the statute either by a motion to modify or by nonpayment by the
obligor. I believe the new statute leaves courts with no choice but to relieve a
parent, no matter how wealthy he or she might be, from any legal obligation to
assist his or her adult child with college expenses.
A court’s power in custody, maintenance, and education of children in
divorce and separation cases is conferred entirely by statute. LeClair v.
LeClair, 137 N.H. 213, 217 (1993) (superseded by statute on other grounds).
Concerning child support, parties may move for modifications every three years
or when there is a substantial change in circumstances. RSA 458-C:7 (2004).
An order for contribution to college expenses is a support order, see In the
Matter of Gilmore & Gilmore, 148 N.H. 111, 113 (2002), and, as such, is
modifiable for a substantial change of circumstances, LeClair, 137 N.H. at 221,
including a change in the law.
Prior to the enactment of RSA 458:17, XI-a, any obligor who had
previously been ordered to pay college expenses could file a motion to modify
based upon a substantial change in circumstances, such as, for example,
becoming unemployed. The obligor could request the court to reconsider his or
her obligation and be entitled to relief from the order to contribute to college
expenses, if the circumstances so warranted. Likewise an obligee who had no
order for contribution toward college expenses could file a motion to modify
and obtain such an order if the circumstances so warranted.
10
As the majority points out, RSA 458:17, XI-a is intended to prevent
courts from issuing new orders with provisions requiring payment of college
expenses. In the Matter of Goldman & Elliott, 151 N.H. ___, ___ (decided March
2, 2005). When an existing support order is modified, however, a new child
support order is issued. It follows that the respondent’s motion to modify the
past award of college expenses resulted in the court issuing a new order.
Therefore, the statute applies, even under the majority’s analysis.
A child’s right to receive financial support may be substantive, as the
majority suggests, but it is not immutable. Because I believe the majority erred
in its analysis of this and because I believe that all child support orders,
including provisions for contribution to college expenses, are always
modifiable, I respectfully dissent.
11