THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2004-887
IN THE MATTER OF CAROLYN ARVENITIS AND CHARLES ARVENITIS
Argued: June 22, 2005
Opinion Issued: October 18, 2005
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and
Briana Coakley-Hoyt on the brief, and Mr. Shaines orally), for the plaintiff.
Patti Blanchette, P.A., of Portsmouth (Patti Blanchette on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
NADEAU, J. The defendant, Charles Arvenitis, appeals a decision of
the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.) denying his petition to terminate alimony
to the plaintiff, Carolyn Arvenitis. We vacate and remand.
The following facts appear on the record before us. The parties were
divorced pursuant to a stipulated decree dated March 10, 1992. At that
time, the plaintiff and defendant were fifty-one and fifty years old
respectively. The final stipulation provided that “[t]he defendant shall pay
to the plaintiff as alimony the sum of Five Hundred dollars ($500.00) per
week payable weekly, for her support.”
In April 2004, the defendant petitioned to modify the parties’ divorce
decree to, among other things, terminate his obligation to pay alimony. The
defendant alleged that he would be turning sixty-three years old that
August and was planning to retire.
The trial court denied the defendant’s petition, finding that he failed
to prove “that a substantial change in circumstances ha[d] arisen since the
initial award, making the current support amount either improper or
unfair.” Giles v. Giles, 136 N.H. 540, 546 (1992) (quotation omitted).
Specifically, the court found that the defendant could not “claim that he
was not aware[, at the time the stipulation was executed,] of the fact that
he would retire.”
In addition, the court’s order states:
The final stipulation contained the following original language:
The Defendant shall pay to the Plaintiff (as alimony)
$575.00 per week payable weekly for her support,
such order to be effective for a period of 3 years
without prejudice to its renewal or modification at
that time upon petition of the plaintiff.
During negotiation of the final language, the parties reduced
the alimony to $500.00 per week and crossed out all words after
support and placed a period there. The court construes this to
mean that petitioner gave up an increased amount of alimony as
well as her ability to seek an increase in return for alimony for life.
We review an order on a motion to modify a support obligation for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Laflamme v. Laflamme, 144 N.H.
524, 527 (1999); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). The defendant argues that
the trial court erred because it misread the crossed-out language -- the
modifications to the stipulation referred to by the trial court did not reduce
the amount of alimony from $575 to $500 per week, but rather increased it
from $375 to $500 per week. He then contends that the trial court’s “finding
that [the plaintiff] gave up an increased amount of alimony, as well as her
ability to seek an increase in alimony in return for alimony for life is simply
wrong.”
According to the record before us, the defendant is correct – the copy of
the stipulation provided to us plainly shows that the original language provided
for weekly payments of $375, not $575 as found by the trial court. The plaintiff
contends, however, that any error was harmless because the trial court
correctly ruled that the defendant’s voluntary retirement would not be a
2
substantial change in circumstances that would justify terminating his alimony
obligation.
RSA 458:14 (2004) provides that “[e]xcept as otherwise provided in RSA
458:19, I and VII, the court, upon proper application and notice to the adverse
party, may revise and modify any order made by it, may make such new orders
as may be necessary, and may award costs as justice may require.” This
provision grants the trial court the “power to modify orders concerning alimony
upon a proper showing of changed circumstances.” Norberg v. Norberg, 135
N.H. 620, 624 (1992). When making the determination whether an order
should be modified, “the trial court must take into account all of the
circumstances of the parties, including the terms of the stipulation.” Id. at 625.
In Laflamme, we clarified that the divorce decree and incorporated
stipulations “must be interpreted in light of the facts and circumstances known
to the parties and the court at the time the court issued the decree, along with
future facts or circumstances known or reasonably anticipated to occur in the
future.” Laflamme, 144 N.H. at 527. We further stated that “[c]hanges to a
party’s condition that are both anticipated and foreseeable at the time of the
decree cannot rise to the level of a substantial change in circumstances
sufficient to warrant modification of an alimony award.” Id. at 528-29.
The defendant asks us, in part, to “address the question of whether
voluntary retirement may ever be a factor to be considered in a request for
termination of alimony.” The trial court appears to have interpreted Laflamme
to mean that voluntary retirement can never constitute a substantial change in
circumstances justifying a termination of alimony because it can always be
“reasonably anticipated to occur in the future.” Laflamme, 144 N.H. at 527.
Laflamme should not be construed so broadly. There, we reversed the
modification of alimony where the trial court had found, and the obligor spouse
did not dispute on the record before us, “that he knew at the time of the divorce
that he would be retiring in a few years,” yet nevertheless “agreed to pay the
plaintiff alimony in exchange for his receipt of substantially more than half of
the marital assets.” Id. at 528. We noted that the post-divorce changes the
obligor spouse experienced “were foreseeable and actually anticipated.” Id.
(emphasis added).
The trial court’s order appears to be based on a premise that
foreseeability alone takes voluntary retirement out of the realm of changed
circumstances. The stipulation in this case, executed twelve years prior to the
petition to terminate alimony, was silent on the issue of retirement. The
defendant represents that his retirement “was not anticipated at the time of the
divorce,” and the trial court made no specific factual finding to the contrary. In
fact, the defendant represents, and the plaintiff does not dispute, that the trial
court refused to hear evidence regarding the parties’ circumstances.
3
Moreover, the trial court applied the concept of foreseeability more broadly
than we have under similar circumstances. In Gnirk v. Gnirk, 134 N.H. 199, 205
(1991), we held that where the parties divorced four years prior to the time their
oldest child would make the decision to attend college, college expenses were not
reasonably foreseeable at the time of divorce. We refused to extend Morrill v.
Millard (Morrill), 132 N.H. 685, 689 (1990), which held that increased expenses
that were “fully foreseeable” to the parties at the time they negotiated their
divorce stipulation did not constitute a substantial change in circumstances
justifying a modification of child support. Specifically, we stated that the
argument “that the potential for incurring college expenses for the parties’
children was ‘fully foreseeable’” at the time of the divorce “inappropriately extends
Morrill to cover events which are merely possibilities at the time a stipulation is
negotiated.” Gnirk, 134 N.H. at 205.
Finally, we note that our overarching concern in Laflamme was that the
master and the trial court had “overlooked the equities of the case.” Laflamme,
144 N.H at 528. We believe that the interpretation the trial court appears to have
placed on Laflamme could potentially overlook the equities of this and other
cases. We therefore reiterate that under Laflamme, a change in circumstances
that is “both anticipated and foreseeable at the time of the decree” does not
constitute a substantial change in circumstances warranting a change in
alimony. Id. at 528-29. A determination that a change in circumstances was
“actually anticipated,” id. at 528, is a factual finding that must be based on
evidence. If there is any genuine dispute as to the material facts, an evidentiary
hearing will normally be required. Because the trial court failed to hear evidence
and make a factual finding as to whether the defendant’s retirement was actually
anticipated at the time of the divorce, we vacate and remand for an evidentiary
hearing.
Should the trial court, on remand, find that the defendant’s retirement was
not both actually anticipated and foreseeable, it will have to determine whether
retirement, alone or in conjunction with other changes alleged by the defendant,
constitutes a substantial change in circumstances justifying a termination of
alimony. We agree with the Supreme Court of Florida that:
Although it would be a better practice to incorporate
consideration of retirement and what will happen in the event
of retirement in an agreement or final judgment, . . . silence
in that regard should not preclude consideration of a
reasonable retirement as part of the total circumstances
in determining if sufficient changed circumstances exist to
warrant a modification of alimony.
In determining whether a voluntary retirement is
reasonable, the court must consider the payor’s age, health,
4
and motivation for retirement, as well as the type of work the
payor performs and the age at which others engaged in that
line of work normally retire. . . . Based upon th[e]
widespread acceptance of sixty-five as the normal retirement
age, . . . one would have a significant burden to show that a
voluntary retirement before the age of sixty-five is reasonable.
Even at the age of sixty-five or later, a payor spouse should
not be permitted to unilaterally choose voluntary retirement
if this choice places the receiving spouse in peril of poverty.
Pimm v. Pimm, 601 So. 2d 534, 537 (Fla. 1992) (superseded by statute on other
grounds).
Having reached the above result, we need not address any of the
defendant’s remaining arguments.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5