THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2004-717
PENNICHUCK CORPORATION & a.
v.
CITY OF NASHUA
Argued: September 15, 2005
Opinion Issued: November 16, 2005
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas J.
Donovan and Sarah B. Knowlton on the brief, and Mr. Donovan orally), for the
plaintiffs.
Office of Corporation Counsel, of Nashua (David R. Connell on the brief
and orally), and Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of North Conway (Robert Upton, II on
the brief), for the defendant.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Edith L. Pacillo, attorney, on the brief),
for the State, as amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, Pennichuck Corporation, Pennichuck Water
Works, Inc., Pennichuck East Utility, Inc. and Pittsfield Aqueduct Company,
Inc. (Pennichuck), appeal an order by the Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) granting
summary judgment to the defendant, City of Nashua (City), and ruling that the
provisions of RSA chapter 38 (2000 & Supp. 2005) do not constitute a per se
inverse condemnation in violation of the New Hampshire Constitution. The
court also ruled that the City filed its petition with the New Hampshire Public
Utilities Commission (PUC) within a reasonable time and that it was not barred
by laches. We affirm.
The following summary of RSA chapter 38 procedures, taken primarily
from the well-reasoned superior court order, provides necessary context for the
facts of this case.
RSA chapter 38 empowers municipalities to take by eminent domain
privately owned electric, gas and water utilities in order to maintain and
operate them as publicly owned facilities. RSA 38:2, I, II (2000). In order to
initiate the process of acquiring a utility, there must first be an affirmative vote
by two-thirds of the members of the municipal governing body. This vote must
then be confirmed by a majority vote of the municipality’s qualified voters at a
regular election or special meeting called for this purpose. RSA 38:3 (2000). A
favorable confirming vote creates a rebuttable presumption that the acquisition
is in the public interest. Id. Within thirty days of the confirming vote, the
municipality must notify the utility and inquire if it is willing to sell the
identified plant and property located within the municipality, as well as “that
portion, if any, lying without the municipality which the public interest may
require, pursuant to RSA 38:11 as determined by the [PUC].” RSA 38:6 (2000).
The utility is given sixty days to respond. RSA 38:7 (2000).
The parties may then negotiate and reach a tentative agreement on the
assets to be sold and the sale price, subject to ratification by a vote of the
municipality to issue the necessary revenue bonds for the acquisition price.
RSA 38:8 (2000), :13 (2000). If no agreement is reached, either party may
petition the PUC to determine whether it is in the public interest for the
municipality to purchase some or all of the utility’s property located inside or
outside of the municipality. RSA 38:9, I (2000). The PUC also determines the
amount of “just compensation” or damages that the municipality must pay for
the assets in question. RSA 38:9, I, III (2000), :10 (2000). The statute contains
a “second-look provision,” which provides that after the PUC sets the
acquisition price, the municipality must decide whether or not to purchase the
assets for that price by a vote to issue revenue bonds pursuant to RSA 33-B:2
(Supp. 2005). RSA 38:13. If the vote is in the affirmative, the municipality
may proceed to acquire the assets at the price set by the PUC. Id. If the vote is
in the negative, no further proceedings under RSA chapter 38 can be
commenced for a period of two years. Id.
The trial court found the following facts. Pennichuck and its subsidiaries
operate public utilities providing water supply services to approximately 35,000
customers in New Hampshire. Most of these customers are in Nashua and
2
surrounding communities; however, Pennichuck’s services extend to
communities as far away as Pittsfield. Pennichuck’s headquarters are in
Nashua.
On April 29, 2002, Pennichuck entered into an “Agreement and Plan of
Merger” with Philadelphia Suburban Corporation (PSC) whereby Pennichuck
was to become a direct and wholly owned subsidiary of PSC. Pennichuck filed
a petition with the PUC seeking approval of the merger on June 14, 2002. The
City moved to intervene in the PUC proceedings and objected to the merger.
On November 26, 2002, Nashua’s board of aldermen voted fourteen to
one to adopt a resolution to acquire the plant and property of Pennichuck’s
water works system. By referendum held on January 14, 2003, the Nashua
electorate voted to pass a resolution authorizing the City to acquire all or a
portion of the water works system then serving the inhabitants of Nashua.
Following the referendum, PSC withdrew from merger talks with
Pennichuck. On February 5, 2003, the City sent written notification to each of
Pennichuck’s utilities, describing the assets it sought to acquire and inquiring
whether Pennichuck was willing to sell these assets to the City. On March 25,
2003, Pennichuck responded that it did not intend to sell any of its assets to
the City. The next day, the City informed Pennichuck that it intended to
petition the PUC to condemn the Pennichuck assets identified in its inquiry
letters.
Pennichuck then entered into negotiations with the City concerning
terms of a possible sale of some or all of Pennichuck’s assets. On November
30, 2003, the City made a formal offer to purchase Pennichuck’s assets for
$121 million. Pennichuck rejected this offer on December 15, 2003, and
terminated negotiations with the City on January 27, 2004.
Pennichuck filed suit in the superior court on February 4, 2004, seeking
a declaratory judgment to terminate or limit the City’s condemnation efforts.
On March 24, 2004, the City filed a condemnation petition with the PUC,
asking it to find the condemnation of Pennichuck’s assets in the public interest
and to determine damages the City must pay Pennichuck as a result of the
taking. The City then moved to dismiss Pennichuck’s claim for declaratory
judgment in superior court. Pennichuck objected and filed a motion for
summary judgment, which was supported by its verified petition. The City
objected and filed a cross-motion for summary judgment, which was supported
by the affidavits of Nashua’s mayor, Bernard Streeter, and alderman at large,
Brian McCarthy.
On August 31, 2004, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor
of the City. On appeal, Pennichuck argues that the superior court erred by: (1)
3
ruling that the procedures of RSA chapter 38 do not create a per se inverse
condemnation in violation of the New Hampshire Constitution; (2) ruling that
the City filed its petition within a reasonable time; and (3) ruling that the
petition was not barred by laches.
I. Inverse Condemnation
Pennichuck argues that RSA 38:1-:13 are facially unconstitutional and
result in inverse condemnation because they permit the City or any other
condemnor to initiate the taking process, but then walk away years later with
no liability for the costs imposed on the condemnee. Pennichuck argues:
The sequence of events, allowable under RSA [chapter] 38, has the
devastating effect of keeping a utility frozen and unable to operate its
business in a normal fashion [and] makes it a practical impossibility that
other businesses would consider acquiring or being acquired by the
condemned company while the cloud of threatened condemnation
persists. It is precisely this effect of depriving an individual or business
from the economic use of its property that New Hampshire inverse
condemnation law is designed to protect against.
We review the trial court’s determination of the constitutionality of the statute
de novo. Webster v. Town of Candia, 146 N.H. 430, 434 (2001).
“Inverse condemnation occurs when a governmental body takes property
in fact but does not formally exercise the power of eminent domain.” Sundell v.
Town of New London, 119 N.H. 839, 845 (1979) (citation omitted). Inverse
condemnation may be effected through either physical act or regulation.
Appeal of Public Service Co. of New Hampshire, 122 N.H. 1062, 1071 (1982).
We look to the individual circumstances of each case to determine whether
there is an unconstitutional taking. Burrows v. City of Keene, 121 N.H. 590,
598 (1981). We have found no greater right of the government to “take” merely
because a regulated utility is involved. Appeal of Public Service Co. of New
Hampshire, 122 N.H. at 1071.
To determine whether an inverse condemnation has occurred, we
consider whether “arbitrary or unreasonable restrictions which substantially
deprive the owner of the economically viable use of his [property] in order to
benefit the public in some way constitute a taking within the meaning of our
New Hampshire Constitution.” Burrows, 121 N.H. at 598 (quotations omitted).
Limitations on use create a taking if they are so restrictive as to be
economically impracticable, resulting in a substantial reduction in the value of
the property and preventing the private owner from enjoying worthwhile rights
or benefits in the property. Id. at 601.
4
Pennichuck asks us to find that RSA chapter 38 effects inverse
condemnation because it substantially interferes with Pennichuck’s
investment-backed expectations for operating a long-lasting and successful
utility. Pennichuck relies upon Appeal of Public Service Co. of New Hampshire,
in which we stated that the extent to which a regulation has interfered with
“distinct investment-backed expectations” is a particularly significant
consideration in determining whether a taking has occurred. Appeal of Public
Service Co. of New Hampshire, 122 N.H. at 1071. In Appeal of Public Service
Co. of New Hampshire, the utility was unable to operate a plant as a result of a
PUC order denying it the means to build the plant, the construction of which
had been approved by the legislature. Id. at 1070-72. Unlike the utility in
Appeal of Public Service Co. of New Hampshire, Pennichuck remains able to
operate while subject to RSA chapter 38 condemnation proceedings. While
Pennichuck ultimately may or may not be condemned pursuant to RSA chapter
38, Pennichuck has not been deprived of the economically viable use of its
property, nor will such a deprivation occur unless and until all necessary steps
to the condemnation process have been completed.
Pennichuck, however, argues that an inverse condemnation has already
occurred, alleging that it has suffered a loss of approximately eighty million
dollars in shareholder investments while subject to RSA chapter 38. The
United States Supreme Court has refused to find an inverse condemnation
when a decrease or fluctuation in value results from municipal condemnation
proceedings. Agins v. Tiburon, 447 U.S. 255, 263 n. 9 (1980), overruled on
other grounds by Lingle v. Chevron, 125 S. Ct. 1074 (2005). Similarly, any
alleged fluctuation in the value of Pennichuck’s assets which took place while
Pennichuck was subject to RSA chapter 38 condemnation proceedings did not
give rise to a taking.
We agree with the trial court’s finding that:
While Pennichuck’s business operations may have been affected by
uncertainty and the value of its stock may have fluctuated over the
period since the City first announced its intent to institute condemnation
proceedings, and while Pennichuck may have incurred legal and other
fees in fighting the City’s attempted taking, these are simply the inherent
risks of ownership in a system, such as ours, where all property is held
subject to the sovereign’s exercise of the power of eminent domain.
See Cayon v. City of Chicopee, 277 N.E.2d 116, 119 (Mass. 1971) (“The fact
that at some future time land might be taken under eminent domain, even
[where] the threatened taking is imminent, is but one of the conditions on
which an owner holds property.”). We thus conclude that no taking has
occurred.
5
II. Reasonable Time
Pennichuck argues that even if there was not an inverse condemnation,
the trial court erred in granting summary judgment to the City because the
City did not file its condemnation petition within a reasonable time.
In reviewing whether the trial court properly granted summary judgment,
we consider affidavits and other evidence as well as all inferences properly
drawn from them in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.
Stateline Steel Erectors v. Shields, 150 N.H. 332, 334 (2003). If our review of
that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and the moving party
is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment. N.E. Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of Franklin, 141 N.H. 449, 452 (1996).
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Stateline
Steel Erectors, 150 N.H. at 334.
In support of its argument that the City failed to submit its
condemnation petition within a reasonable time, Pennichuck contends, first,
that the trial court failed to consider time limitations in other condemnation
statutes, and, second, that the City’s actions were in fact unreasonable.
Pennichuck argues that “although there is no explicit statute of
limitations in RSA [chapter] 38, it does contain some time-limited triggers that
provide a basis for determining what constitutes a ‘reasonable time’ to file a
condemnation petition.”
“As in all cases underlining statutory construction, the starting point is
the language of the statute. We construe each statute as a whole, and if the
statute’s language is clear and unambiguous, we do not look beyond the
statute to discern legislative intent.” Hughes v. N.H. Div. of Aeronautics, 152
N.H. 30, 38 (2005). “The legislature is presumed to know the meaning of
words, and to have used the words of a statute advisedly.” Caswell v. BCI
Geonetics, Inc., 121 N.H. 1048, 1050 (1981) (quotation omitted). “The
legislative intent is to be found not in what the legislature might have said, but
rather in the meaning of what it did say.” Id.
Here, we presume that the legislature intended not to include a time
limitation for filing a condemnation petition in RSA chapter 38. We have,
however, held that where the legislature has provided a time limitation for what
constitutes a reasonable time in a substantively analogous situation, such a
time limitation “will prove a fair guideline as to what constitutes a reasonable
time.” Wilson v. Personnel Comm’n, 117 N.H. 783, 784 (1977). In Wilson, we
held that a thirty-day time limitation applied to a proceeding for which there
6
was no statutory time period, because the thirty-day period applied to
proceedings that were substantively analogous to the one challenged. Wilson,
117 N.H. at 785.
Pennichuck argues that the trial court should have considered the
ninety-day limitation contained in other provisions of RSA chapter 38, the New
Hampshire Eminent Domain Act and the Model Eminent Domain Act, and
found them to reflect the legislature’s view that ninety days is a reasonable
period of time in which a condemnor must act when invoking its eminent
domain power. See, e.g., RSA 38:3, :7; RSA 498-A:4, III(c) (1971); 6 J.
Sackman, Nichols on Eminent Domain, § 24.07[2], at 24-90 (3d ed. 1995).
Here, unlike in Wilson, the time limitations governing proceedings in
other condemnation statutes are not substantively analogous to filing a
condemnation petition under RSA chapter 38. We do not agree with
Pennichuck’s contention that the ninety-day limitation in the Eminent Domain
Act reflects the legislature’s view that ninety days is a reasonable time in which
to file a condemnation petition. RSA 498-A:4, III(c) (Supp. 2005). The Eminent
Domain Act expressly exempts from its jurisdiction condemnation proceedings
by municipalities subject to RSA chapter 38. RSA 498-A:3 (1997). Thus,
applying the time limitation contained in the Eminent Domain Act would
directly controvert the legislative directive that the Eminent Domain Act should
not apply to municipal condemnation actions.
Nor do we agree with Pennichuck that the time limitations in the Model
Eminent Domain Act should apply to the filing of the City’s condemnation
petition. Under the Model Eminent Domain Act, a condemnor must file a
condemnation petition within six months of the date the condemnation is
authorized, and within three months of the failure of negotiations for the
purchase of property. 6 Sackman, supra. However, the Model Eminent
Domain Act is not the law in this State and the language of the Model Eminent
Domain Act itself reads, “The time limits prescribed are not true statutes of
limitation, since the condemnor is, and in principle should be, free to initiate a
condemnation action at any time. Failure to commence the action within the
time period thus does not bar the action.” Id.
Finally, we disagree with Pennichuck’s argument that the ninety-day
limitation which applies to other procedures governed by RSA chapter 38
should apply to the filing of the City’s condemnation petition. Pennichuck
argues that:
The most critical trigger in the statute is the public vote on the taking.
RSA 38:3. Once this vote is taken, the municipality has only 30 days to
notify the utility that it intends to take the utility’s assets by eminent
domain, and in turn, the utility has only 60 days to respond to the
7
request. RSA 38:6. Thus, 90 days from the public vote, either there
must be an agreement in concept to sell, or the municipality must invoke
its legal sword to attempt to force the taking.
Here, the City complied with the provisions of RSA 38:3 and :6 by notifying
Pennichuck of its intention to take Pennichuck’s assets within thirty days of
the January 14, 2003 referendum. Under RSA 38:3 and :6, a utility must only
respond to the municipality’s notice and, at that stage, need not have
considered price terms, appraisal value or the effect of possible negotiations.
In the fourteen months between the referendum and the City’s filing its
condemnation petition, the parties engaged in complex negotiations, during
which the City determined an offer price and waited for Pennichuck’s response
before resorting to filing a condemnation petition. The ninety-day limitation in
RSA chapter 38 contemplates a process less complex and not substantively
analogous to the City’s filing its condemnation petition following failed
negotiations. We thus conclude that the trial court did not err when it did not
apply a time limitation contained in another statutory provision to the timing of
the City’s filing of its condemnation petition.
Pennichuck next argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
City’s actions were reasonable and argues that, “had the court considered
competent evidence presented by Pennichuck, it should have determined that
Nashua’s actions were in fact unreasonable.” The City argues that, in the
absence of a time limitation for filing a condemnation petition under RSA
chapter 38, filing within twelve months of Pennichuck’s initial refusal to sell
and within sixty days of when Pennichuck terminated negotiations was
reasonable. It argues that Pennichuck “simply did not offer the requisite
‘specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.’”
Where a condemnation statute does not contain an explicit time
limitation, condemnation proceedings must be instituted within a reasonable
time. 6 Sackman, supra § 24.07[1], at 24-87 to -89. While we have not before
had the occasion to apply this principle to condemnation proceedings under
RSA chapter 38, we applied a similar principle in Hughes. There, we held that
in the absence of a statutory time limitation in which the State must exercise
its right of first refusal to purchase property, the State must perform within a
reasonable time. Hughes, 152 N.H. at 39; see also Opinion of the Justices, 114
N.H. 165, 169 (1974).
This equitable principle is derived from contract principles which require
that performance must be within a reasonable time where no time for
performance is specified by statute or agreement. See, e.g., Belleau v.
Hopewell, 120 N.H. 46, 51 (1980) (where listing agreement between real estate
brokers and sellers did not specify a time for payment of broker’s fees,
performance was due in a reasonable time); Leavitt v. Fowler, 118 N.H. 541,
8
543 (1978) (when time is not of the essence in a purchase-and-sale agreement,
a party will have a reasonable period of time after the specified closing date in
which to perform his obligations under the contract).
Other jurisdictions have required initiation of condemnation proceedings
within a reasonable time where condemnation statutes lack an explicit time
limitation. See, e.g., Public Service Co. of Indiana, Inc. v. Decatur County
Rural Elec. Membership Corp., 363 N.E. 2d 995 (Ind. Ct. App. 1977) (eleven
years between conference of public service company authority to begin
condemnation proceedings and exercise of condemnation rights was not
unreasonable); In the Matter of Condemnation by Urban Redevelopment
Authority of Pittsburgh, 544 A.2d 87 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1988) (ten years between
urban redevelopment authority’s receipt of blight certification and declaration
of taking was not unreasonable); Lewis County v. McCutcheon, 101 P. 1083
(1909) (almost twelve years between date legislation passed granting
municipality authority to condemn and commencement of condemnation
proceedings was unreasonable).
In determining whether the City’s delay in this case was reasonable,
Pennichuck argues that the trial court should have found a genuine issue of
material fact. The trial court found that:
[The City] has produced proof by way of the affidavits of Mayor Streeter
and Alderman McCarthy detailing the efforts the City undertook between
March 2003 and January 2004 to reach a negotiated acquisition of
Pennichuck’s assets. Pennichuck has offered no counter affidavits or
other competent evidence to refute the sworn averments of Messrs.
Streeter and McCarthy.
Pennichuck’s verified petition states:
Following [the City’s] March 26[, 2003] letter, the parties held occasional
meetings to discuss [the City’s] interest in purchasing Pennichuck or its
assets. These meetings were always held in response to requests by [the
City], and concerned only issues of a general nature. On information
and belief, the superficial nature of these meetings was a consequence of
[the City] never having retained a financial, tax, valuation or utility
expert to advise it in the complex issues associated with establishing a
price for the Pennichuck assets or to examine tax and operational issues.
In short, the meetings were of necessity perfunctory because [the City]
never engaged in any meaningful due diligence review of the Pennichuck
assets. [The City] plainly intended that these meetings create the
appearance that the parties were talking about a potential acquisition,
when in fact, [the City] made no serious or concerted effort to acquire
Pennichuck. Simply put, they were all form and no substance.
9
The verified petition also states:
As of February 4, 2004, more than fourteen months since the Nashua
Board of Aldermen voted to take Pennichuck[’s] assets and more than a
year since the public referendum, [the City] had failed to file a petition
with the PUC seeking authority to condemn Pennichuck’s assets. This
delay continued despite [the City’s] March 26, 2003 statement that it
“would now proceed to . . . petition the PUC,” and despite more than a
dozen subsequent statements to the press that a PUC filing was
imminent.
Alderman McCarthy’s affidavit states, “Between mid-August and
December 2003 there were four meetings between parties and fifteen telephone
calls between counsel. Outside counsel for the City itemized one hundred
ninety (190) hours of work during this period on all issues related to the
project.” It continues, “At no time did Pennichuck indicate it declined to
negotiate further until it abruptly did so by letter of January 27, 2004, followed
by its first lawsuit on February 4, 2004.” The affidavit further states,
“Following Pennichuck’s termination of negotiations and filing of suit, the City
moved as quickly as possible in February and March, 2004 to appropriate
funds for consultants and counsel to plan for and pursue eminent domain
under RSA 38.”
The party opposing summary judgment must set forth specific evidence
of a genuine issue of material fact. RSA 491:8-a, IV. “Conclusory assertions
do not satisfy the burden in opposing summary judgment.” N.E. Tel & Tel Co.,
141 N.H. at 452. “A dispute of fact is ‘genuine’ if the evidence is such that a
reasonable [fact finder] could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.”
Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986) (citation omitted).
“An issue of fact is ‘material’ if it might affect the outcome of the suit.” Horse
Pond Fish and Game Club v. Cormier, 133 N.H. 648, 653 (1990) (citation
omitted).
Pennichuck’s verified petition was confirmed under oath and expressly
incorporated into its cross-motion for summary judgment. Under RSA 491-8:a,
III, the trial court was required to consider the evidence contained in the
verified petition in deciding summary judgment.
Pennichuck’s allegations that the City “never retained a financial, tax,
valuation or utility expert” and did not engage in “meaningful due diligence,”
even if accurate, do not create a genuine issue of material fact. Pennichuck
does not dispute the City’s evidence that Pennichuck terminated negotiations
with the City on January 27, 2004, and that the City filed its condemnation
petition within sixty days. Moreover, Pennichuck’s verified petition does not
10
dispute the City’s evidence that the parties engaged in numerous meetings and
telephone calls to negotiate the sale of Pennichuck. When this undisputed
evidence is considered in light of Pennichuck’s allegations, no reasonable fact
finder could have found that the fourteen-month delay in filing was
unreasonable. Rather, a reasonable fact finder would have had to find the
fourteen-month delay was explained by negotiations and that filing a
condemnation petition within sixty days of the date Pennichuck terminated
negotiations with the City was reasonable. Thus, the trial court properly found
that the City filed its condemnation petition within a reasonable time.
III. Laches
Finally, we consider Pennichuck’s assertion that the City is barred from
filing its condemnation petition by the doctrine of laches. To succeed on a
laches claim, the party asserting laches bears the burden of proving that there
was unreasonable delay and that prejudice resulted from the delay. State v.
Weeks, 134 N.H. 237, 240 (1991). Where a party asserts laches against a
municipality, it must also show the existence of extraordinary and compelling
circumstances. Town of Seabrook v. Vachon Management, 144 N.H. 660, 668
(2000).
The trial court found that Pennichuck’s laches claim failed as a matter of
law and granted summary judgment to the City. The trial court applied our
reasoning in Petition of Bianco, 143 N.H. 83, 85 (1998), where we refused to
allow a plaintiff to assert laches when the parties were actively engaged in
negotiations aimed at settlement without litigation. Here, the trial court found
that the fourteen-month delay in filing the condemnation petition was
reasonable because the City was engaged in negotiations aimed at settlement.
It found that “Pennichuck . . . cannot seriously claim to have been surprised by
the City’s PUC filing, as it has been aware at all times that the City was
pursuing acquisition of Pennichuck’s property.” It also found that Pennichuck
failed to prove that extraordinary or compelling circumstances existed to permit
a laches claim.
We begin our laches analysis by considering whether Pennichuck
suffered prejudice. A party must present evidence to explain the alleged
prejudice and the evidence must demonstrate more than mere hypothetical and
unlikely financial harm. 27A Am Jur. 2d Equity § 192 (1996). “For prejudice
to apply, the defendant’s asserted prejudice claim must be caused by or result
from the complainant’s delay in pursuing a claim. Where such causation does
not exist between the asserted prejudice and the delay in bringing suit, laches
is not applied.” 27A Am Jur. 2d Equity § 179 (1996) (emphasis added); accord
Murphy v. Timberlane Regional Sch. Dist., 973 F.2d 13, 17 (1st Cir. 1992).
11
Here, while PSC may have terminated merger talks with Pennichuck as a
result of the referendum and Pennichuck’s shareholders may have lost value as
a result of the prospect of condemnation proceedings, Pennichuck offered no
evidence to show that the City’s delay in filing was the cause of its losses.
Pennichuck also offers no evidence of extraordinary or compelling
circumstances that would permit a laches claim against the City. Because
Pennichuck cannot prove prejudice or extraordinary or compelling
circumstances, we need not extend our laches analysis to determine whether
the City engaged in unreasonable delay. We hold that the trial court correctly
ruled that laches did not apply.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
12