THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-402
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ROLAND MACMILLAN
Argued: January 19, 2005
Opinion Issued: April 1, 2005
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Defosses Law Firm, of Portsmouth (Sven D. Wiberg on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The State appeals an order of the Superior Court (T.
Nadeau, J.) denying the State’s motion in limine to admit testimony pertaining
to an Internet conversation between the defendant, Roland MacMillan, and
Detective Frank Warchol of the Portsmouth Police Department. We reverse and
remand.
The following facts are undisputed. On August 22, 2002, Detective
Warchol posed as a fourteen-year-old girl in an Internet chat room using the
screen name “Kimmiesue87.” The defendant, using the screen name
“Willpay4BJ,” contacted “Kimmiesue87” through a private instant message.
After being told that she was fourteen years old, the defendant solicited
“Kimmiesue87” to perform a sexual act in exchange for fifty dollars. Detective
Warchol preserved the online conversation using “Camtasia,” a program which
records online conversations in real time, and by cutting and pasting the on-
screen dialogue into a word processing document that was saved on the hard
drive of his computer.
“Kimmiesue87” agreed to meet the defendant that afternoon in the
parking lot of a New Hampshire State Liquor Store in Portsmouth. At the
prescribed time, a vehicle and driver matching the descriptions provided by the
defendant pulled into the parking lot where Detective Warchol and other police
officers had set up surveillance. The officers stopped the defendant’s vehicle
and the defendant subsequently admitted that he had been on the Internet
earlier that day and “was the one who was talking to the girl.”
In February 2003, the defendant was indicted on one count of certain
prohibited uses of computer services. See RSA 649-B:4 (Supp. 2004). On
November 17, 2003, the defendant filed a motion in limine seeking to “exclude
from evidence any computer chat or other communication intercepted and/or
recorded without the authorization required by [RSA chapter] 570-A.” The
State objected to the motion on the basis that the communication had not been
intercepted or recorded as those terms are defined in the statute. The Superior
Court (Morrill, J.) granted the defendant’s motion and the State timely filed a
motion to reconsider, which was denied. The State did not appeal that ruling.
At a bench conference on May 5, 2004, the State informed the trial court
that it intended to file a motion in limine asking the court to admit Detective
Warchol’s testimony concerning his Internet conversation with the defendant.
The State filed its motion on May 6, which the trial court subsequently denied.
This appeal followed.
The State concedes that under the trial court’s order on the defendant’s
motion to suppress, the Camtasia recording and the word processing document
are not admissible as evidence of the conversation between the detective and
the defendant. The State has not appealed that issue. The State argues,
however, that the trial court erred in excluding Detective Warchol’s testimony
about the contents of the conversation. The defendant argues, first, that the
State’s appeal is untimely because the detective’s testimony was encompassed
in the trial court’s first order, which suppressed evidence of the online
communication. Second, the defendant argues that even if the State’s appeal
is timely, the officer’s testimony must be suppressed under RSA chapter 570-A
(2001 & Supp. 2004). We agree with the State.
We first address whether the State’s appeal is timely. The defendant
argues that the trial court’s order granting his motion in limine to “exclude
from evidence any computer chat or other computer communication
2
intercepted and/or recorded” also precluded Detective Warchol from testifying
about the contents of the Internet conversation. In his prayers for relief, the
defendant asked the trial court to “[e]xclude the computer communication
and/or chat” or, in the alternative, “[h]old a Richards hearing and/or allow the
defense to introduce evidence of the misdemeanors committed by the
investigators.” See State v. Richards, 129 N.H. 669 (1987). The defendant
argues that these requests for relief were not limited to suppression of the
recordings but also encompassed the contents of the communication, including
the detective’s testimony.
The trial court concluded that Detective Warchol illegally recorded the
contents of his online conversation with the defendant. In granting the
defendant’s motion, the trial court found that the Camtasia software functions
as an “on-screen recording,” analogous to a tape recorder, allowing the
detective to play back the online conversation in “real time.” The trial court
also noted that Detective Warchol had copied and pasted the contents of the
conversation into another computer program. The court found that “[i]f
Detective Warchol had not taken these acts, the words of the online
communication would no longer exist after the program was exited or the
computer was shut down.” Accordingly, the trial court granted the defendant’s
motion in limine.
The defendant argues that because his motion sought to exclude the
detective’s testimony, the State’s failure to appeal the trial court’s granting of
his motion renders the State’s subsequent appeal untimely. The trial court’s
order, however, did not explicitly address whether the detective could testify
about the contents of his online conversation with the defendant. Because of
this ambiguity, the State reasonably could have concluded that the trial court
had not considered this issue, and thus the State was not precluded from later
filing a motion to admit the detective’s testimony.
Even if the trial court’s order had addressed the admissibility of the
detective’s testimony, the court could reconsider its previous ruling. “[T]he trial
court’s discretionary powers are continuous. They may be exercised, and prior
exercise may be corrected, as sound discretion may require, at any time prior
to final judgment.” State v. Haycock, 139 N.H. 610, 611 (1995) (quotation
omitted). Because the superior court retains jurisdiction over a matter until its
final judgment, interlocutory rulings may be reconsidered at the discretion of
the same or another judge of the superior court. State v. Wilkinson, 136 N.H.
170, 177 (1992). We thus conclude, on the facts presented, that the State’s
appeal is timely.
We next address whether the trial court erred in excluding the detective’s
testimony about the intercepted communications. Because the State did not
appeal the trial court’s ruling that the interception was illegal under RSA 570-
3
A:1 (2001), the only issue before us is whether the detective’s testimony about
the contents of the communication must also be excluded. The State argues
that exclusion of Detective Warchol’s testimony is not required under RSA 570-
A:6 (2001) because the detective’s knowledge of the contents of the
communication was obtained through his own observations, not through the
illegal interception. The defendant counters that the plain language of RSA
chapter 570-A precludes disclosure of the contents of the intercepted
communication in this case.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. State v. Clark, 151 N.H. 56, 57 (2004). We first examine the language
of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Id. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation. Id. If the statute’s language is clear and
unambiguous, we do not look beyond the language of the statute to discern
legislative intent. State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467 (2003). “Our goal is to
apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light
of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Under the State wiretapping statute, a law enforcement officer may
record a conversation to which the officer is a party if the officer first obtains
authorization from the attorney general’s office to conduct the interception in
the course of investigating certain criminal offenses enumerated in the statute.
RSA 570-A:2, II(d) (2001). Here, the detective failed to obtain the required
authorization prior to his online conversation with the defendant. Assuming
the trial court correctly found that the recording in this case constituted an
“intercept” under RSA 570-A:1, the State concedes that disclosure of the
unauthorized recording itself would be improper but argues that the detective
should be able to testify about the contents of the conversation.
The exclusionary provision of the wiretapping statute states:
Whenever any telecommunication or oral communication has been
intercepted, no part of the contents of such communication and no
evidence derived therefrom may be received in evidence in any
trial, hearing, or other proceeding in or before any court . . . if the
disclosure of that information would be in violation of [chapter
570-A].
RSA 570-A:6. Thus, under the plain language of the statute, the contents of an
illegally intercepted communication must be excluded from trial if their
disclosure would violate another section of RSA chapter 570-A.
4
The State points to RSA 570-A:2, I(c) (2001) as the relevant provision
under which disclosure of the contents of an intercepted communication could
be precluded:
A person is guilty of a class B felony if, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter or without the consent of all
parties to the communication, the person:
. . . .
(c) Wilfully discloses, or endeavors to disclose, to any other
person the contents of any telecommunication or oral
communication, knowing or having reason to know that the
information was obtained through the interception of a
telecommunication or oral communication in violation of this
paragraph.
(Emphasis added.) The State argues that disclosure should be permitted in
this case because the detective obtained his knowledge of the contents of the
conversation first-hand, not through the interception. We agree.
The functions of a statutory exclusionary provision such as RSA 570-A:6
are “to discourage unconstitutional conduct and to insure integrity in the
judicial process by disregarding evidence produced through an impermissible
procedure.” State v. Smith, 242 N.W.2d 184, 186 (Wis. 1976). These purposes
are served by excluding any evidence of the illegal recording and any evidence
derived from the recording. See id. “If live testimony is not the product of an
unauthorized interception but is independent of it, its suppression would go
beyond the policy of deterring law enforcement officers from committing
unauthorized interceptions.” Com. v. Jarabek, 424 N.E.2d 491, 494 (Mass.
1981).
We have previously addressed the scope of the wiretapping statute’s
exclusionary provision in the context of a law enforcement officer’s
unauthorized recording of his conversation with a suspect. See State v. Stiles,
128 N.H. 81, 84 (1986). In Stiles, we held that the State police could arrest a
suspect based on information given to them by an undercover FBI agent who
had conversed with the suspect and recorded the conversations without
complying with the authorization requirement under RSA 570-A:2, II(d). Id.
The defendant moved to suppress cocaine seized at the time of his arrest and
drugs and other items found in the search of his dwelling, arguing that the
justification for the arrest and search was derived from information that the
FBI agent learned in the course of his conversations with the defendant. Id. at
83. We held that there was no basis for suppressing the evidence as having
been derived from an illegal interception because the recordings “were merely
incidental to the direct conversations” and were not the sources of the agent’s
5
knowledge. Id. at 84. Furthermore, nothing in RSA chapter 570-A prohibited
the FBI agent from disclosing the contents of the conversation to the State
police. Id. at 83.
Under the plain meaning of RSA 570-A:2, I(c), Detective Warchol would
not be disclosing information “obtained through the interception” because his
knowledge about the contents of the conversation came from his personal
observations as a participant. Assuming the detective is relying upon his
personal memory of the conversation, his testimony would be the same
regardless of whether the interception occurred. In contrast, if Detective
Warchol obtained his knowledge about the contents of the intercepted
communication by listening to a recording or reading a transcript, he would
not be permitted to testify about the communication because his testimony
would be derived from the illegal interception. See Stiles, 128 N.H. at 84.
Thus, we hold that when a law enforcement officer fails to obtain
authorization for a one-party interception under RSA 570-A:2, II(d), exclusion
of the officer’s testimony is not required under RSA 570-A:6 if the testimony is
based upon personal recollection of the conversation, independent from the
unauthorized recording. Our holding is in accord with other States that have
held that the live testimony of a participant in a conversation that had been
unlawfully recorded is admissible, even though the recordings of the
conversation are subject to suppression under the State’s wiretapping statute.
See, e.g., People v. Gervasi, 434 N.E.2d 1112, 1117 (Ill. 1982); Jarabek, 424
N.E.2d at 494; State v. Maloney, 467 N.W.2d 215, 216 (Wis. Ct. App.), review
denied, 471 N.W.2d 509 (Wis. 1991). But see Rupley v. State, 560 P.2d 146,
147 (Nev. 1977); State v. Williams, 617 P.2d 1012, 1019 (Wash. 1980) (en
banc).
Finally, the defendant argues that the State is precluded from presenting
the detective’s testimony in court because it has not complied with the
procedural requirements in RSA 570-A:9 (2001). Section VIII provides that
“[t]he contents of any intercepted telecommunication or oral communication or
evidence derived therefrom shall not be received in evidence or otherwise
disclosed in any trial, hearing, or other proceeding in a state court” unless each
party is provided a copy of the court order authorizing the interception and the
accompanying application. RSA 570-A:9, VIII. The defendant argues that
because the State did not obtain a court order authorizing the interception and
thus cannot furnish a copy of the order, the detective’s testimony must be
excluded. We disagree.
We interpret this provision in light of the entire statutory scheme and not
in isolation. See Clark, 151 N.H. at 57. RSA 570-A:9 sets forth the procedures
for applying for a court order approving the interception of a
telecommunication or oral communication. RSA 570-A:9, I. If a court order is
6
obtained, then a copy of the order must be provided to all parties in accordance
with RSA 570-A:9, VIII. As discussed above, we hold that the detective’s
testimony is admissible under the statute’s exclusionary provision even though
the State failed to obtain a court order approving the interception. Thus, the
procedural requirements of RSA 570-A:9 do not apply here.
Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s order denying the State’s motion
in limine to admit Detective Warchol’s testimony.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7