THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2004-566
ESTATE OF JAYCOB GORDON-COUTURE
v.
GEORGE BROWN & a.
Argued: February 9, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 23, 2005
Soltani/Mosca P.L.L.C., of Epsom (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
McDonough & O'Shaughnessy, P.A., of Manchester (Robert G. Whaland
on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
DUGGAN, J. This case arises out of the accidental drowning of two-year-
old Jaycob Gordon-Couture while attending a birthday party at property owned
by the defendants, George and Silvia Brown. The plaintiff, the estate of Jaycob
Gordon-Couture, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Perkins, J.) granting
the defendants’ motion for summary judgment. On appeal, the plaintiff argues
that the trial court erred in ruling that the defendants were immune from
liability under two recreational use statutes, RSA 212:34 (Supp. 2004) and RSA
508:14, I (1997). We reverse and remand.
The trial court found the following facts. On August 17, 2002, the
defendants’ daughter held a birthday party for her son at the defendants’
property on Half Moon Pond in Kingston. Elizabeth McNeil attended the party
and brought her boyfriend’s son, Jaycob, with her. McNeil and Jaycob spent
some time playing in the water and then returned to the beach. At some point
after returning to the beach, McNeil realized that Jaycob was missing. After a
search of the area, Jaycob’s body was found in the pond. Later, at the
hospital, he was pronounced dead due to drowning.
The plaintiff brought suit alleging that the defendants negligently failed
“to keep the beach and dock area safe for their guests including providing the
proper supervision or, alternatively, placing appropriate limitations upon the
use of the beach and dock area.” The trial court granted the defendants’
motion for summary judgment, ruling that the defendants were not liable
under the recreational use statutes, RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I. This
appeal followed.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Estate of Joshua T. v.
State, 150 N.H. 405, 407 (2003). If our review of the evidence does not reveal
any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the
defendants are immune from suit under two recreational use statutes, RSA
212:34 and RSA 508:14, I. Specifically, the plaintiff argues that the
recreational use statutes do not apply to private land used for private activities.
Rather, the plaintiff argues that the statutes only apply to private land that is
open to the general public. We agree.
The question before us is one of statutory interpretation. We are the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. In the Matter of Jacobson & Tierney, 150 N.H.
513, 515 (2004). We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
When statutory language is ambiguous, we examine the statute’s overall
objective and presume that the legislature would not pass an act that would
lead to an absurd or illogical result. Marceau v. Concord Heritage Life Ins. Co.,
149 N.H. 216, 220 (2003). Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme. State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467
(2003). We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo.
Remington Invs. v. Howard, 150 N.H. 653, 654 (2004).
Statutes in derogation of the common law are to be interpreted strictly.
Sweeney v. Ragged Mt. Ski Area, 151 N.H. 239, 241 (2004). While a statute
2
may abolish a common law right, there is a presumption that the legislature
has no such purpose. Id. If such a right is to be taken away, it must be
expressed clearly by the legislature. Id. Accordingly, immunity provisions
barring the common law right to recover are to be strictly construed. Id.
Both RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14 were adopted at a time when many
States were enacting recreational use statutes, i.e., statutes that limit the
liability of landowners who make their land available for recreational use. See
Note, Liability of Landowners to Persons Entering for Recreational Purposes,
1964 Wis. L. Rev. 705, 705. New Hampshire was among the first ten States to
enact a recreational use statute. Id. at 705 & n.2 (noting that ten States had
enacted similar statutes “aimed at encouraging public recreational use of
privately-owned forest and farm lands” including Michigan in 1953, New York
in 1956, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire and Pennsylvania in 1961, Ohio,
Tennessee and Wisconsin in 1963 and Virginia in 1964). The primary impetus
behind this trend was “the need for additional recreational areas to serve the
general public.” Committee of State Officials on Suggested State Legislation,
XXIV Suggested State Legislation 150 (1965) (hereinafter Suggested State
Legislation).
Following this trend, the Committee of State Officials on Suggested State
Legislation of the Council of State Governments drafted a model recreational
use statute (model act), which was derived from Wisconsin’s recreational use
statute. Id.; Conant v. Stroup, 51 P.3d 1263, 1266 (Or. Ct. App. 2002). The
model act provided, in pertinent part:
Section 1. The purpose of this act is to encourage owners of
land to make land and water areas available to the public for
recreational purposes by limiting their liability toward persons
entering thereon for such purposes.
. . . .
Section 3. Except as specifically recognized by or provided
in Section 6 of this act, an owner of land owes no duty of care to
keep the premises safe for entry or use by others for recreational
purposes, or to give any warning of a dangerous condition, use,
structure, or activity on such premises to persons entering for
such purposes.
Section 4. Except as specifically recognized by or provided
in Section 6 of this act, an owner of land who either directly or
indirectly invites or permits without charge any person to use such
property for recreational purposes does not thereby:
3
(a) Extend any assurance that the premises are safe for any
purpose.
(b) Confer upon such person the legal status of an invitee or
licensee to whom a duty of care is owed.
(c) Assume responsibility for or incur liability for any injury
to person or property caused by an act of omission of
such persons.
. . . .
Section 6. Nothing in this act limits in any way any liability
which otherwise exists:
(a) For willful or malicious failure to guard or warn against a
dangerous condition, use, structure, or activity.
(b) For injury suffered in any case where the owner of land
charges the person or persons who enter or go on the land for the
recreational use thereof, except that in the case of land leased to
the state or a subdivision thereof, any consideration received by
the owner for such lease shall not be deemed a charge within the
meaning of this section.
Suggested State Legislation, supra at 150-51. The council explained the
purpose behind the model act as follows:
Recent years have seen a growing awareness of the need for
additional recreational areas to serve the general public. The
acquisition and operation of outdoor recreational facilities by
governmental units is on the increase. However, large acreages of
private land could add to the outdoor recreational resources
available. Where the owners of private land suitable for
recreational use make it available on a business basis, there may
be little reason to treat such owners and the facilities they provide
in any way different from that customary for operators of private
enterprises. However, in those instances where private owners are
willing to make their land available to members of the general
public without charge, it is possible to argue that every reasonable
encouragement should be given to them.
Id. at 150. Thus, to fulfill this purpose, the recreational use statutes and
model act limited the liability of private landowners who make their land
available for public recreational uses “on the theory that it is not reasonable to
4
expect such owners to undergo the risks of liability for injury to persons and
property attendant upon the use of their land by strangers from whom the
accommodating owner receives no compensation or other favor in return.” Id.
The model act was subsequently adopted in various forms by more than
three dozen States. See Conant, 51 P.3d at 1267. “Meanwhile, a number of
states began to grapple with a basic drafting problem posed by the wording of
the model act.” Id. As the Oregon Court of Appeals aptly described the
dilemma:
On the one hand, the model act expressed a basic quid pro quo in
its declaration of policy, namely, permission to the general public
to use private land for recreational purposes in exchange for
immunity from liability for resulting injuries. On the other hand,
the model act referred to the immunity as applying when a land
owner granted permission to “any person,” without a qualification
that the person must be a member of the general public to whom
permission had been granted.
Id. Accordingly, the Oregon court recognized that “if read literally and in
isolation, the immunity provisions effectively would nullify the law of premises
liability . . . [.] Any time an individual is invited to use an owner’s back yard for
croquet, immunity would apply.” Id. Nonetheless, “[t]he response of the state
courts who addressed the problem has been uniform.” Id. These courts have
construed the model act to effectuate its purpose and therefore conclude that
“permission to ‘any person’ refers to any person as a member of the general
public to use private property for recreational purposes.” Id.; see also Gibson
v. Keith, 492 A.2d 241, 244 (Del. 1985); Snyder v. Olmstead, 634 N.E.2d 756,
761 (Ill. App. Ct.), rev. denied, 642 N.E.2d 1304 (Ill. 1994); Loyer v. Bucholz,
526 N.E.2d 300, 302 (Ohio 1988); Perrine v. Kennecott Mining Corp., 911 P.2d
1290, 1292-93 (Utah 1996); LePoidevin by Dye v. Wilson, 330 N.W.2d 555, 563
(Wis. 1983).
With this history of recreational use statutes in mind, we now turn to the
language of the two recreational use statutes at issue here, RSA 212:34 and
RSA 508:14.
I. RSA 508:14
RSA 508:14, I, provides in pertinent part:
An owner, occupant, or lessee of land, including the state or
any political subdivision, who without charge permits any person
to use land for recreational purposes or as a spectator of
5
recreational activity, shall not be liable for personal injury or
property damage in the absence of intentionally caused injury or
damage.
(Emphasis added.)
The defendants argue that the phrase, “any person,” evidences a
legislative intent “to broadly immunize landowners in this state” from liability
for negligent acts. The plaintiff argues that to construe RSA 508:14, I, as the
defendants suggest would be in derogation of the common law. As set forth
above, statutes in derogation of the common law are to be interpreted strictly.
Sweeney, 151 N.H. at 241.
Other jurisdictions that have interpreted similar statutory provisions
have construed the phrase “any person” as referring to “any person as a
member of the general public.” Conant, 51 P.3d at 1267; see also Snyder, 634
N.E.2d at 761 (“We believe that the purpose of the Recreational Use Act would
not be advanced by applying the Act to a situation where an owner does not
open his property to the public, but simply invites a few private persons to a
picnic.”); Perrine, 911 P.2d at 1293 (same); LePoidevin by Dye, 330 N.W.2d at
563 (holding that immunity is limited to the general public because the court
does not “presume that the legislature intended . . . to work a wholesale change
in the entire law relating to the obligations of all landowners to all entrants to
the land, including social guests invited to the premises for recreational
purposes”). These courts have recognized that to hold otherwise “would
immunize even homeowners from the negligence claims of social guests invited
for recreational purposes.” Perrine, 911 P.2d at 1293; see also Mozier v.
Parsons, 852 F. Supp. 925, 932 (D. Kan. 1994) (holding that Kansas
recreational use statute does not immunize homeowner from liability for
wrongful death of child who drowned in backyard swimming pool).
In Conant, the Oregon Court of Appeals acknowledged that “[i]n isolation,
the phrase ‘any person’ certainly is broad and unqualified.” Conant, 51 P.3d at
1265. But, the court reasoned that “the term ‘any’ often carries with it
limitations implicit from its context.” Id. Thus, the court stated that “[t]he
question in this case is whether the legislature intended the reference to ‘any
person’ in [the statute] to refer literally to any single person or to any person as
a member of a limited universe of persons to which the statute applies.” Id.
The court noted that the stated purpose of the statute was “to encourage
owners of land to make their land available to the public.” Id. (emphasis and
quotation omitted). The court further noted that the disputed statutory
language was taken from the model act, which has been interpreted uniformly
by other jurisdictions to apply only when landowners permit members of the
public generally to use private property for recreational purposes. Id. at 1266.
Thus, the court held that the immunity granted by the recreational use statute
6
“is limited to cases in which permission is given to the general public to use
private land for recreational purposes.” Id. at 1268. In reaching this holding,
the court recognized that only this construction of the recreational use statute
was consistent with the “purpose of making private land available to the public
for recreational purposes while, at the same time, [avoiding] the inadvertent
evisceration of common-law doctrines concerning the duties of landowners.”
Id. (emphasis omitted).
Moreover, RSA 508:14, I, does not clearly eliminate all common law
duties of landowners toward all entrants on land. If the legislature wishes to
accomplish such a result, it must do so clearly and explicitly. See Sweeney,
151 N.H. at 241. Therefore, our strict interpretation of RSA 508:14, I, is
consistent with our holdings that we will not interpret a statute to abrogate the
common law unless the statute clearly expresses that intent. See, e.g., id.
Accordingly, we hold that the phrase “any person” refers to “any person
as a member of the general public.” See Conant, 51 P.3d at 1267. Thus, for
RSA 508:14, I, to grant immunity, private landowners must permit members of
the general public to use their land for recreational purposes. Here, the
defendants’ land was not opened to the general public but rather was used for
a private birthday party. Accordingly, the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment and ruling that the defendants were entitled to immunity
under RSA 508:14, I.
II. RSA 212:34
We next turn to RSA 212:34, which provides:
I. An owner, lessee or occupant of premises owes no duty of
care to keep such premises safe for entry or use by others for
hunting, fishing, trapping, camping, horseback riding, water
sports, winter sports or OHRVs . . . , hiking, sightseeing, or
removal of fuelwood, or to give any warning of hazardous
conditions, uses of, structures, or activities on such premises to
persons entering for such purposes, except as provided in
paragraph III hereof.
II. An owner, lessee or occupant of premises who gives
permission to another to hunt, fish, trap, camp, ride horseback,
hike, use OHRVs . . . , sightsee upon, or remove fuelwood from,
such premises, or use said premises for water sports, or winter
sports does not thereby:
7
(a) Extend any assurance that the premises are safe for
such purpose, or
(b) Constitute the person to whom permission has been
granted the legal status of an invitee to whom a duty of care
is owed, or
(c) Assume responsibility for or incur liability for an injury to
person or property caused by any act of such person to
whom permission has been granted except as provided in
paragraph III hereof.
III. This section does not limit the liability which otherwise
exists:
(a) For willful or malicious failure to guard or warn against a
dangerous condition, use, structure or activity; or
(b) For injury suffered in any case where permission to hunt,
fish, trap, camp, ride horseback, hike, use for water
sports, winter sports or use of OHRVs . . . , sightsee, or
remove fuelwood was granted for a consideration other
than the consideration, if any, paid to said landowner by
the state; or
(c) The injury caused by acts of persons to whom permission
to hunt, fish, trap, camp, ride horseback, hike, use for
water sports, winter sports or use of OHRVs . . . ,
sightsee, or remove fuelwood was granted, to third
persons as to whom the person granting permission, or
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, owed a
duty to keep the premises safe or to warn of danger.
(Emphasis added).
The defendants argue that under RSA 212:34, the legislature intended
“to broadly immunize landowners in this state” from liability for negligent acts.
The plaintiff argues that to construe the statute as the defendants suggest
would be in derogation of the common law. We look to the language of the
statute to determine whether it clearly abrogates all landowners’ common law
duties owed to all entrants on land for recreational purposes. See Sweeney,
151 N.H. at 241; Jacobson, 150 N.H. at 515. We further note that we do not
construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to do so in harmony with
the overall statutory scheme. Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H. 393, 395 (2003).
When interpreting two statutes that deal with a similar subject matter, we
8
construe them so that they do not contradict each other, and so that they will
lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the statutes.
Id.
Both RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I, limit the liability of landowners
toward entrants on land in circumstances that involve recreational activities.
Because RSA 212:34 deals with a similar subject matter as RSA 508:14, I, the
statutes should be construed so that they do not contradict each other. Id.
Therefore, RSA 212:34 likewise should be construed to grant immunity only to
landowners who open their land to the general public.
The language of RSA 212:34 is virtually identical to the model act.
Compare RSA 212:34, I & II with Suggested State Legislation, supra at 151,
secs. 3 & 4. In addition, RSA 212:34 was adopted during the period in which
the model act was proposed and there was a movement among many States to
provide immunity to landowners through recreational use statutes. Therefore,
we look to similar statutes from other jurisdictions and the model act for
guidance in interpreting RSA 212:34.
As set forth above, the purpose of the model act is to encourage private
landowners to make their land available for public recreational uses by limiting
their liability. Suggested State Legislation, supra at 150. Moreover, RSA
212:34 does not clearly eliminate all common law duties of landowners toward
all entrants on land. If the legislature wishes to accomplish such a result, it
must do so clearly and explicitly. See Sweeney, 151 N.H. at 241. Accordingly,
we hold that the terms “others” and “another” in RSA 212:34 refer to the
general public. Thus, for RSA 212:34 to grant immunity, private landowners
must permit members of the general public to use their land for one of the
listed recreational purposes.
This conclusion is buttressed by an analysis of RSA 212:34, II and its
relation to the common law as it existed when the statute was adopted in 1961.
At that time, we followed the traditional three-pronged classification of entrants
on land in determining the obligations of landowners. See Ouellette v.
Blanchard, 116 N.H. 552, 553-54 (1976). These classifications are no longer
used in our duty of care analysis, but are useful in determining the legislative
intent at the time RSA 212:34 was enacted. They provided that: (1) an entrant
without the consent of the landowner was a trespasser as a matter of law and
the landowner’s liability was limited to intentional injuries; (2) an entrant on
land with the permission of the owner but for the entrant’s purposes was a
licensee and entitled only to a warning of hidden dangers; and (3) an invitee
was an entrant on the property for the transaction of business with the
occupier and as to him or her the ordinary rules of negligence were applicable
to the occupier. Id.; see generally Locke v. Payne, 81 N.H. 266 (1924)
(licensees); True v. Creamery, 72 N.H. 154 (1903) (invitees); Clark v.
9
Manchester, 62 N.H. 577 (1883) (trespassers). But see Ouellette, 116 N.H. at
557 (eliminating use of classifications of entrants).
The third category of entrants, invitees, was further broken down into
two separate groups of entrants: business visitors and public invitees. 1 N.
Landau & a., Premises Liability Law and Practice § 1.05[4], at 1-116 to 1-117
(2000). “A business visitor is a person who is invited to enter or remain on
land for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings with
the possessor of land.” Id. “A public invitee is a person who is invited to enter
or remain on land as a member of the public for a purpose for which the land
is held open to the public.” Id. With regard to public invitees, there is no
requirement that they pay admission or confer an economic benefit upon the
landowner. Id.
In contrast, licensees include the following types of entrants: social
guests, members of the landowner’s household, “solicitors, loiterers, persons
permitted by acquiescence to use short cuts across the premises, sightseers,
persons seeking shelter or assistance, and trespassers and invitees whose
status has changed after entering the premises.” Id. § 1.05[3], at 1-86.
Notably, a social guest, although expressly invited onto the premises by the
landowner, is a licensee and not an invitee. Id.
Accordingly, the common law in 1961 defined invitees as including
members of the general public permitted on the landowner’s premises. A
private social guest permitted on the landowner’s premises was not an invitee,
but rather a licensee.
RSA 212:34, II only grants immunity to landowners with regard to
entrants on land for certain recreational activities who otherwise would be
classified as invitees. As a result, the scope of the immunity statute is limited
to landowners who permit the general public to use the premises for the listed
recreational activities and, but for the statute, would be considered invitees.
See RSA 212:34, II (a). The statute does not extend immunity to landowners
with regard to entrants on land that are social guests or other licensees.
Therefore, the statute contemplates that immunity would only be extended to
landowners who open their land to the general public.
Here, the defendants did not make their land available to the public.
Rather, McNeil and Jaycob were allowed to use their land and swimming area
for a private birthday party. Accordingly, the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment and ruling that the defendants were entitled to immunity
under RSA 212:34.
The defendants urge us to adopt the holding in Collins v. Martella, 17
F.3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 1994), that RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14 do not require that
10
the land at issue be open to the general public. In reaching this decision, the
First Circuit recognized that the statutes “should be narrowly construed
because they are in derogation of the common law,” but declined to “read into
these statutes a limitation that the legislature left out.” Id. The court further
reasoned that, “[u]nlike similar statutes in other jurisdictions and the model
recreational use statute proposed by the Council of State Governments, [RSA
212:34 and RSA 508:14] do not contain any language suggesting a requirement
that the land at issue must be . . . open to the general public.” Id.
We decline to adopt the holding in Collins. We have implicitly recognized
that a landowner owes a duty to certain entrants on land who are present for
recreational purposes. See, e.g., Morse v. Goduti, 146 N.H. 697 (2001) (ten-
year-old developmentally disabled child drowned in neighbor’s man-made
pond); Lemay v. Burnett, 139 N.H. 633 (1995) (plaintiff was injured while
diving in defendant’s backyard swimming pool). Thus, to adopt the holding in
Collins could be viewed as inconsistent with these cases.
In addition, we find it appropriate to rely upon similar statutes from
other jurisdictions and the model act when interpreting RSA 212:34 and RSA
508:14, I. In Collins, the First Circuit pointed to Connecticut’s statute, which
specifically states that “an owner of land who makes all or any part of the land
available to the public without charge . . . for recreational purposes owes no
duty of care.” Conn. Gen. Stat. § 52-557g (a) (1991). The difference in
language, however, does not foreclose our reliance upon the interpretation of
statutes in other jurisdictions similar to our own. The statutes of numerous
jurisdictions do not contain any specific reference to the general public, but
they have been interpreted to include such a limitation. See Conant, 51 P.3d
at 1265; Perrine, 911 P.2d at 1292-93. We acknowledge that these decisions in
part rely upon the purpose section of the statute or legislative history, which
generally indicate that the statute’s goal is “to make [ ] land available to the
public for recreational purposes.” Conant, 51 P.3d at 1265 (quotation and
emphasis omitted).
Nonetheless, as noted above, both RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I, were
enacted around the same time that the model act was proposed and during the
period in which there was a movement among many States to provide
immunity to landowners through recreational use statutes. In addition, the
language of RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I, is similar to that of numerous
other States and the model act. Compare RSA 212:34, I & II with Suggested
State Legislation, supra at 151 secs. 3 & 4 and RSA 508:14, I with Or. Rev.
Stat. § 105.682 (2003). Therefore, it is appropriate to look to similar statutes
from other jurisdictions for guidance in interpreting RSA 212:34 and RSA
508:14, I.
11
Finally, as the First Circuit aptly noted, statutes in derogation of the
common law should be narrowly construed. See Collins, 17 F.3d at 4.
Because the legislature did not clearly abrogate the common law duties of
landowners toward all entrants on land, we narrowly construe RSA 212:34 and
RSA 508:14, I, as providing immunity only to landowners who open their land
to the general public. Accordingly, we decline to adopt the holding in Collins.
Here, the defendants’ land was used for a private birthday party, which
was not open to the general public. Therefore, RSA 212:34 and RSA 508:14, I,
do not apply.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
12