Modified 5/10/06
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to motions for rehearing under Rule 22 as
well as formal revision before publication in the New Hampshire Reports.
Readers are requested to notify the Reporter, Supreme Court of New
Hampshire, One Noble Drive, Concord, New Hampshire 03301, of any editorial
errors in order that corrections may be made before the opinion goes to press.
Errors may be reported by E-mail at the following address:
reporter@courts.state.nh.us. Opinions are available on the Internet by 9:00
a.m. on the morning of their release. The direct address of the court's home
page is: http://www.courts.state.nh.us/supreme.
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2004-725
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
UNO KIM
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: March 28, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (N. William Delker, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Simon R. Brown, senior assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Ted Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and
orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Uno Kim, appeals his conviction by a jury
in Superior Court (Conboy, J.) on two counts of first-degree murder. See RSA
630:1-a (1996). We affirm.
The jury could have found the following relevant facts. For many years,
Theodore and Gury Joseph owned “Joseph Brothers Market” in Manchester. In
the early 1980’s the defendant’s brother bought the store from the Joseph
brothers and the defendant worked at the store for some period of time. As of
February 2003, the defendant’s nephew owned the store, but the Joseph
brothers continued to own the building in which the store was located and
remained involved in the daily operation of the business.
On the morning of February 27, 2003, the bodies of Gury and Theodore
Joseph were discovered in their home in Manchester by a close friend. Gury’s
body was found face down on the living room floor. Theodore was found face
up on a bed in an adjacent first floor bedroom. There were no signs of forced
entry into the residence. Most of the rooms had been ransacked; police found
file cabinet doors open and contents thrown on the floor, a hassock cut open
and appliances knocked over or moved away from walls. Investigators seized
an empty strong box and empty bank bags. A search for fingerprints revealed
multiple impressions left by a gloved hand. The police investigation uncovered
that the defendant’s car had been observed at the Joseph residence the prior
evening.
On February 28, 2003, the police arrested the defendant at the John F.
Kennedy Airport in New York. At the time of his arrest, the defendant was
waiting to board a flight to South Korea. The defendant paid for the one-way
ticket with two thousand two hundred dollars cash. In the defendant’s luggage
and carry-on bag, police found approximately twenty thousand dollars and
Ambien, a sleeping medication. The Ambien was prescribed to the defendant
on February 25, 2003.
A medical examiner determined that the cause of death for both Joseph
brothers was strangulation and the time of the deaths was between 10:00 p.m.
on Friday, February 26, and 1:00 a.m. on February 27. A toxicology report
also revealed the presence of Ambien in both brothers’ bodies.
A plastic cable tie also known as a flex cuff or zip tie was wrapped
around Theodore’s ankle. Investigators determined that plastic cable ties,
similar to the one found on Theodore’s ankle, were sold by Home Depot. The
police obtained a Home Depot video surveillance recording showing the
defendant purchasing similar plastic cable ties two days before the murders. A
fingerprint on the tie found around Theodore’s ankle matched the defendant’s.
After his arrest at the airport, the defendant agreed to an audiotaped
interview with detectives from the Manchester Police Department. In the
interview, he said that he had visited the Joseph residence on February
25, seeking a loan from Theodore in the amount of twenty thousand
dollars. The defendant admitted that he needed the loan because his
business had failed and he had “lost it all.” He told investigators that he
no longer owned his car wash business and his Mercedes was about to be
repossessed for missed payments. He told investigators that his wife’s
Cadillac had been repossessed that month because he did not keep up
with the payments. In addition, he told police that he had a gambling
2
problem. The defendant also said that he knew the victims kept a large
amount of money in their home. According to the defendant, Theodore
told him he would think about making him the loan.
The defendant told police he returned to the Joseph residence on
February 26, 2003. Before arriving, the defendant crushed sleeping pills into
an energy drink he planned to give the brothers in order to rob them. During
his visit the defendant convinced the brothers to drink the beverages
containing the pills. The defendant admitted to stealing approximately thirty-
six thousand dollars after the brothers fell asleep. The defendant denied killing
the Joseph brothers and tying either of them with a plastic tie. The defendant
also told investigators that following the robbery he drove to the Mohegan Sun
Casino in Connecticut where he gambled. He paid off gambling debts at the
Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods casinos before leaving the area.
The defendant’s mistress testified at trial that, after the defendant left the
casinos, he met her in New Jersey. He gave her thirty-five thousand dollars in
cash, slept at her apartment and left a suitcase there containing his clothing.
She testified that she had met the defendant five years earlier and they became
romantically involved, seeing each other once or twice a week. She testified
that the defendant helped pay her mortgage, and that the defendant had run
up a debt of approximately thirty-five to forty thousand dollars on her credit
cards.
During the trial, the State presented evidence of the defendant’s
declining financial situation and lifestyle over the course of several years prior
to the homicides. A certified public accountant testified that from 1997 to
2000, the defendant’s yearly net income ranged between one hundred and one
hundred twenty-five thousand dollars. He testified that the defendant’s
gambling winnings totaled at least one hundred and seventy-three thousand in
1998, and one hundred and thirty-three thousand in 1999. According to IRS
submissions, the defendant’s gambling losses in those years were at least equal
to, if not higher, than those amounts.
In January 2001, the defendant sold his business, Uno’s Car Wash. The
proceeds from the sale increased his bank balances to more than three
hundred thousand dollars. The defendant’s cash withdrawals, credit card
payments and other expenses had substantially depleted the accounts by July
of that year. The defendant then sold his family home in Bedford but, by the
winter of 2001-2002, had again depleted his accounts. At trial, an employee
from the Mohegan Sun casino testified that the defendant’s gambling losses
totaled one hundred and twenty-four thousand in 2001 and one hundred and
fifty-three thousand in 2002. From January 2000 to March 2002, the
defendant maintained credit card balances in the range of forty to fifty
3
thousand dollars, but in the year leading up to February 2003 his credit card
debt escalated to approximately ninety thousand dollars.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion in limine to exclude evidence of
his prior debt and financial difficulties. The trial court denied the defendant’s
motion. Following trial, the jury convicted the defendant of both charges. The
trial court sentenced the defendant to two terms of life imprisonment without
the possibility of parole. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant does not challenge “the admissibility of his
financial status as of the time of the crimes, including his lack of income,
ninety thousand dollar credit card debt, the pending repossession of his
vehicles, and his debts owed to casinos.” Rather, the defendant argues that,
under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b), the trial court erred in
admitting into evidence “specific details of the manner in which [his] financial
situation deteriorated, which included highly prejudicial minutia such as
testimony that [his] gambling winnings and losses each totaled at least one
hundred and seventy-three thousand dollars in 1998; . . . the exact amount,
one hundred and twenty-four thousand dollars, that [he] lost gambling at the
Mohegan Sun in 2001; . . . and the testimony that [he] took his mistress
gambling at casinos in Connecticut and New Jersey, but falsely claimed to his
wife that he was meeting a male friend at casinos or running a business in
Ohio.” The defendant argues that these specific details were irrelevant and
that their impact was substantially more prejudicial than probative in the
context in which they were introduced.
Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
The purpose of Rule 404(b) is to ensure that the defendant is tried on the
merits of the crime as charged and to prevent a conviction based upon evidence
of other crimes or wrongs. State v. Bassett, 139 N.H. 493, 496 (1995). We
have established a three-part test to assess the admissibility of evidence under
Rule 404(b): (1) the evidence must be relevant for a purpose other than proving
the defendant’s character or disposition; (2) there must be clear proof that the
defendant committed the act; and (3) the probative value of the evidence must
not be substantially outweighed by its prejudice to the defendant. State v.
Smalley, 151 N.H. 193, 196 (2004). The State bears the burden of
demonstrating the admissibility of the prior bad acts. Id. We review the trial
4
court’s ruling for an unsustainable exercise of discretion, and will reverse only
if it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s
case. Id. Here the defendant challenges the trial court’s decision with respect
to the first and third prongs of the Rule 404(b) analysis.
I. Relevance
In order to meet its burden under the first prong, the State is required to
specify the purpose for which the evidence is offered and articulate the precise
chain of reasoning by which the offered evidence will tend to prove or disprove
an issue actually in dispute, without relying upon forbidden inferences of
predisposition, character, or propensity. Id. To be relevant under Rule 404(b),
the proffered evidence must be pertinent to an issue that is actually in dispute.
Id. In addition, to be relevant, prior bad acts must be in some significant way
connected to material events constituting the crime charged and not so remote
in time as to eliminate the nexus. State v. McGlew, 139 N.H. 505, 507 (1995).
To ensure that the relevant link between the prior bad acts and the charged
conduct is not merely the defendant’s bad character, there must exist a
sufficient logical connection between the prior acts and his state of mind at the
time of the charged conduct. Smalley, 151 N.H. at 197.
Here, the defendant was charged with two counts of first-degree murder,
which required the State to prove that he acted purposely, with premeditation
and deliberation. See RSA 630:1-a. The defendant had repeatedly asserted
that he did not kill the victims. Rather, he claimed the victims were asleep
when he left their residence. It was the State’s theory that the defendant’s poor
financial situation prior to the homicides was relevant to prove his motive to
kill the victims in connection with the robbery.
The defendant concedes that evidence of his financial situation in the
month preceding the murder was admissible. He also concedes that evidence
that he had substantial gambling losses and large credit card debt in the
months preceding the murders was admissible. The defendant concedes that
the evidence of his having a mistress in February of 2003 was relevant and
admissible because he visited her and gave her money following the crimes. He
argues, however, that the admission of “specific evidence of [his] behavior that,
over the course of years, placed him in that situation, behaviors that many
would consider immoral and wrong,” was irrelevant. The State contends that
evidence of the defendant’s escalating gambling losses at the casinos in the
years leading up to the homicide was relevant to establish how his financial
condition, once healthy, plummeted in the twelve to twenty-four months prior
to the homicides. The State also argues that, “[w]hile there was other evidence
of the defendant’s financial problems, including the defendant’s admissions,
only the casino records fully and accurately demonstrated the gravity of the
defendant’s debt caused by gambling.” The State contends that the trial court
5
correctly admitted this evidence to establish the extent of the defendant’s
financial problems, as it was relevant to the defendant’s motive.
Motive has been defined as supplying the reason that nudges the will
and prods the mind to indulge in criminal intent. State v. Monroe, 142 N.H.
857, 872 (1998). In light of the defendant’s admission that he stole
approximately thirty-six thousand dollars from the Joseph brothers, his
extensive gambling debts and financial support of his mistress, we conclude
that the evidence to which the defendant objects was relevant to show his
motive to kill the Joseph brothers. After the defendant sold his business and
properties in 2001, his income evaporated. As his bank balances declined and
his credit card balances and casino losses soared in 2001 and 2002, the
defendant was no longer in a position to absorb the debt. Thus, the evidence of
the gambling losses was not too remote and was directly relevant to establish
that the defendant had become financially pressured enough to rob and
murder the victims. In addition, his mistress’s testimony regarding the
defendant’s extramarital activities was highly relevant to show that the
defendant incurred large debts even beyond those reflected on his own credit
cards.
In State v. Matthews, 877 P.2d 252 (Wash. Ct. App. 1994), the court
considered whether evidence of a defendant’s declining financial situation was
relevant to prove a motive for murder of a robbery victim. Id. at 256. The
defendant in Matthews was accused of murdering the owner of a jewelry store.
Id. at 253. The State sought to introduce evidence that the defendant had been
living beyond his means and recently declared bankruptcy to demonstrate the
victim’s murder was the result of an interrupted robbery by the defendant. Id.
Matthews held that admission of the defendant’s financial information was not
an abuse of discretion, stating: “Living beyond one’s means could reasonably
provide a motive for robbery, which in turn could reasonably provide a motive
for murder of the robbery victim.” Id. We find compelling the reasoning of the
Matthews court:
The human mind searches for a rational explanation for an
irrational act of murder of a shopkeeper in his store in a shopping
mall at high noon on a seemingly normal working day. Robbery,
and a desire to leave no witness, is the most rational explanation
for such an event. In these circumstances, whether the accused
person had any motive for robbery becomes a relevant subject for
inquiry; if not, the likelihood of that person being the assailant is
rationally reduced. Notwithstanding that motive is not an element
of the crime of murder, it is still a permissible area of inquiry.
Id.
6
Here, the defendant had been under financial pressure for several years.
The trial court articulated the precise chain of reasoning by which evidence of
the defendant’s financial problems would establish such a motive:
[T]here is a sufficient logical connection between [the defendant’s]
declining financial situation and his motive to rob and kill the
victims. Evidence of the defendant’s debt and financial difficulties
establish a motive for [the defendant] to not only rob the Joseph
brothers but also to kill them in order to eliminate any potential
witnesses. The defendant’s dire financial position has further
relevance in assessing the motive to kill witnesses to the robbery
when viewed in light of his failed attempt to obtain a [twenty
thousand dollar] loan from Theodore Joseph immediately prior to
the homicides.
The defendant argues that the relevance of specific details concerning his
excessive gambling was eliminated by his admission to police that he drugged
and robbed the victims due to financial desperation. We disagree. Despite the
defendant’s admissions to robbing the Josephs, the defendant’s motive and his
identity as the killer remained in serious dispute at trial. The defendant
argued at trial that the Josephs were alive when he left. By pursuing this
defense at trial, the defendant placed at issue his identity as the perpetrator
and his motive. Cf. State v. Glodgett, 144 N.H. 687, 694 (2000). Since his
identity was contested, the full extent of the defendant’s grave financial picture
and extramarital affair was relevant to demonstrate that he, a financially
pressured man, and not some other perpetrator, committed the killings. See
People v. Zack, 229 Cal. Rptr. 317, 319 (Ct. App. 1986) (“Evidence having a
direct tendency, in view of the surrounding circumstances, to prove motive on
the part of a person for a crime, and thus to solve a doubt, . . . as to the
identity of the slayer . . . is admissible against a defendant, however
discreditably it may reflect on him, and even where it may show him guilty of
other crimes.” (quotation omitted)).
We conclude that there is a sufficient logical connection between the
defendant’s state of mind on the night of the homicides and his financial
decline, due to his gambling losses over the years and his lengthy extramarital
affair. Thus, the trial court did not err in ruling that the challenged evidence
was relevant to the defendant’s state of mind and, therefore, it was properly
admitted for purposes other than bad character and propensity under Rule
404(b).
II. Prejudice v. Probative Value
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in its analysis under
the third prong of Rule 404(b). Under this prong, evidence of prior bad acts is
7
admissible if the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant does not
substantially outweigh the probative value of the evidence. Smalley, 151 N.H.
at 198. Among the factors to consider under this prong are: (1) whether the
evidence would have a great emotional impact upon a jury; (2) its potential for
appealing to a juror’s sense of resentment or outrage; and (3) the extent to
which the issue upon which it is offered is established by other evidence,
stipulation, or inference. Id. We accord considerable deference to the trial
court’s determination in balancing prejudice and probative worth under Rule
404(b). Id. To prevail, the defendant must show that the trial court’s ruling
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
First, we consider the probative value of the evidence. Id. at 199. As set
forth above, evidence of the defendant’s financial decline was relevant to prove
his motive to commit the murders and leave no witnesses to the theft. We
acknowledge that our evaluation of the probative value of the evidence overlaps
with our prior relevancy determination. We note, however, that although
evidence may be relevant, it may have minimal probative value. Id. Here,
evidence that over the several years preceding February 2003 the defendant
lived lavishly, engaged in gambling activities during his extramarital affair and
experienced dire financial circumstances was highly probative. Further, the
issue of the defendant’s motive was a centrally disputed issue in the case. This
evidence was highly probative of the defendant’s motive for visiting the Joseph
brothers’ home to rob and murder them, and eliminate all witnesses, in order
to protect himself from financial ruin.
Next, we consider whether the prejudice to the defendant substantially
outweighed the probative value of the evidence. The defendant argues that,
even if the details of his gambling and extramarital affair were relevant, their
introduction was unduly prejudicial.
We recognize that the introduction of the defendant’s desperate financial
status is inherently prejudicial. Cases allowing evidence of a defendant’s
strained financial circumstances as a possible motive for a crime point out that
this may put indigent defendants at a disadvantage as compared to the more
affluent. See, e.g., People v. Andrews, 276 N.W. 2d 867, 868 (Mich. Ct. App.
1979). However, as the trial court aptly noted, “inherent prejudice does not
ipso facto render such evidence inadmissible.” When evidence presents a
potential for prejudice, such evidence must possess significantly greater
probative value. Smalley, 151 N.H. at 200.
Courts have noted that while evidence of a prior offense or bad act is
always prejudicial, the prejudice is frequently outweighed by the probative
value of the evidence when the defendant’s knowledge or intent is a contested
issue in the case. Id. As noted above, the challenged evidence presented proof
of the defendant’s motive to not only rob, but also murder the Joseph brothers,
8
a central issue in the case. Thus, in this case, the probative value of the
evidence is not substantially outweighed by any unfair prejudice.
In Matthews, discussed above, the court also considered whether the
probative value of evidence with respect to a defendant’s financial
circumstances was substantially outweighed by its prejudice. Matthews, 877
P.2d at 284. The Matthews court distinguished evidence focused solely on
poverty from evidence reflecting a changed financial condition, noting that,
“[a]lthough recent bankruptcy followed by living beyond one’s means may not
be praiseworthy, neither is such evidence inherently so prejudicial as to
outweigh its probative value . . . .” Id. at 286.
Here, as in Mathews, the focus of the evidence was not the defendant’s
poverty but rather the fact that the defendant’s lifestyle had driven him to
financial ruin. While the defendant argues financial irresponsibility, resulting
in part from having a mistress and gambling, are the types of acts that will
appeal to a juror’s outrage, such evidence is not the sort of evidence that would
arouse the emotions of a jury and cause it to decide the case on emotion rather
than the evidence. See State v. Lamprey, 149 N.H. 364, 370 (2003).
Furthermore, while debt from legal gambling and having a mistress have a
potential for prejudice, we do not find evidence of this nature so inherently
prejudicial as to outweigh its probative value. See, e.g., State v. Gruber, 132
N.H. 83, 89-90 (1989).
Moreover, none of the 404(b) evidence was similar to the crime of first-
degree murder. “Unfair prejudice is inherent in evidence of other similar
crimes or prior convictions.” Smalley, 151 N.H. at 200 (quotation omitted). The
degree of prejudice inherent in a reference to another bad act may depend
upon the similarity of the other incident to that for which the defendant is
currently on trial. Id. Here, as the trial court aptly noted, “The defendant’s
financial irresponsibility is not similar to murder or violent in nature.”
Finally, the issue of the defendant’s financial crisis was already
“established by other evidence, stipulation, or inference.” Id. For instance, as
noted above, the defendant does not challenge the admissibility of his financial
status as of the time of the crimes, including his lack of income, debt to various
creditors and repossession of his vehicles. He concedes the relevance of this
evidence to the issue of his “motive to commit theft and to evade detection by
eliminating witnesses, as the trial court found.” Thus, the evidence the
defendant is challenging is largely cumulative of other evidence properly
introduced. See id. at 199.
Because the probative value of the challenged evidence was not
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant, we
9
conclude that the trial court’s ruling was not clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of the defendant’s case.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
10