THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2005-776
IN THE MATTER OF MOISES CHOY AND ELSA CHOY
Argued: October 18, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 18, 2007
Brian G. Germaine, P.A., of Derry (Brian G. Germaine on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Law Office of Barbara J. Griffin, of Manchester (Barbara J. Griffin on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Moises Choy (father), appeals an order
recommended by a Marital Master (Cross, M.) and approved by the Derry
Family Division (Sadler, J.) granting a motion by the respondent, Elsa Choy
(mother), to modify custody and child support. We affirm.
The record supports the following. The Choys were divorced in August
2003, after nearly nine years of marriage. They had one child, a son, age
seven. According to the divorce decree, the Choys were awarded joint legal and
physical custody of their son. The father was awarded custody “[e]very week
from Thursday at 5:00 p.m. until the following Sunday evening at 6:00 p.m.”
The divorce decree further provided that “[u]nder this shared custodial
agreement [the child] shall attend school in Derry, New Hampshire.” The father
resides in Derry, and the mother lives in Manchester.
In February 2004, the father filed a verified ex parte motion seeking a
change of custody, alleging, in part, that the mother’s boyfriend frequently
struck the child and that the mother and her boyfriend engaged in sexual
activity in front of him. The father requested that he be granted sole physical
custody and that a guardian ad litem (GAL) be appointed for the child. In
response to this, the trial court ordered, among other things, that “[t]he
custodial provisions of the Divorce Decree . . . be implemented forthwith.”
In addition to moving for sole custody, the father also contacted the New
Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF) to report the
alleged physical abuse of his son and sexual impropriety by the mother and her
boyfriend. DCYF investigated and determined that the allegations were
unfounded.
Shortly after the trial court issued its order requiring the immediate
implementation of the custodial provisions in the divorce decree, which
included a requirement that the child be enrolled in school in Derry, the
mother filed a motion for ex parte relief, asking that she be allowed to enroll
her son in the Manchester school system because she lived in Manchester and
her son had been attending school there since the start of the academic year.
The trial court ruled that, “[p]ending further court order, the child shall be
allowed to continue to attend the Manchester school system.”
In July, the trial court assigned a GAL for the child and directed her to
investigate and report on four issues: (1) modification of physical custody; (2)
visitation; (3); the parenting skills of both parents; and (4) the suitability of the
home environment provided by both parents. At the time of the GAL’s
appointment, the only pending motion to modify custody was the one filed by
the father. In October, after the GAL was appointed but before she had
prepared her report, the mother also filed a motion to modify custody in which
she sought sole physical custody of her son.
The GAL’s investigation involved four meetings with the child, four
meetings with the mother, three meetings with the father, two meetings with
the mother’s boyfriend, and one meeting with the child’s teacher. Among other
things, the GAL noted in her April 2005 report that the father: (1) talked
openly in front of his son in a derogatory way about the mother; (2) coached his
son to provide false and negative information about his mother and threatened
him with corporal punishment if he refused to do so; and (3) took his son to
Florida without his mother’s knowledge and directed him to keep the trip a
secret from his mother, which distressed the child to the point where,
according to his teacher, he asked her “what to do when you are asked to keep
a secret from your parent.” The GAL also reported that the father “loves his
son more than anything in the world . . . [and] is fiercely protective,” and that
the child “loves his father and . . . wants to spend time with [him] but he does
2
not want to have to hear, say or report bad things about his mother as I believe
he is currently being told to do.” Based upon her findings, the GAL concluded:
I also believe that if the situation were left as it is that over a period
of time [the father] would influence [his son] so greatly and with
such dominance that [his] relationship with his mother will be
damaged. If [he] lives with his mother, I believe that he will be able
to maintain his relationship with his father in a significant way.
Based upon that conclusion, the GAL recommended “that [the mother] be
awarded primary physical [custody] of [the boy] while still providing substantial
time with [the father].”
The master subsequently held a two-day hearing on both parties’
motions to modify custody. Shortly before day two of the hearing, the father
contacted the GAL alleging that the mother had physically abused their son
and that her boyfriend had verbally abused him. By order dated July 21,
2005, the trial court accepted the master’s recommendation and granted the
mother’s motion to modify custody. In its order, the trial court noted that the
child “lives in an environment of extraordinary hostility, the majority of which
is caused by [his father], and is given far too much negative information about
his mother” and that of the two parents, the mother appeared to be the one
more able to foster a good relationship between the child and the other parent.
Based upon those and other findings, the trial court adopted the GAL’s
recommendations concerning the custodial schedule, which included: (1)
granting the mother primary physical custody; (2) granting the father custody
on alternate weeks, from Thursday after school until Monday morning; (3)
granting the father custody from Thursday after school until Friday morning on
those weeks when he does not have custody for the entire weekend; and (4)
allowing the child to attend school in the district where his mother resides.
The trial court determined that the evidence met the standard in RSA 458:17,
V(a)(3) (2004) (repealed 2005 and recodified at RSA 461-A:11, I(c) (Supp.
2006)), which allows modification of a permanent custody order upon proof by
clear and convincing evidence that the child’s present environment is
detrimental and that the advantages of the proposed modification outweigh any
harms likely to be caused by the change in environment. In addition, the court
found that the evidence satisfied the standard in RSA 458:17, V(a)(5) (2004)
(repealed 2005), which allows modification of a permanent custody order when
each party asserts that the original arrangement is not working and the
proposed modification is found to be in the best interests of the child. With
respect to paragraph V(a)(3), the trial court found “that the present
environment is detrimental to the child’s mental and emotional health and that
the advantage of modifying custody outweighs the likelihood of harm to be
caused by the change in environment.” The trial court further explained that
the child would “benefit from spending more of his time with his mother, who is
3
far more supportive of his father and their relationship, and will consequently
not be as often subjected to his father’s alienation.” This appeal followed.
According to the father, the trial court erred by misapplying RSA 458:17
and unsustainably exercised its discretion by placing too much reliance upon
the GAL’s report and disregarding the evidence that he presented.
We will not overturn a trial court’s modification of a child custody order
unless it clearly appears that the court unsustainably exercised its discretion.
In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. ___, ___ (decided October 31, 2006).
However, we review a trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. In the
Matter of Giacomini & Giacomini, 151 N.H. 775, 776 (2005).
The father presents two legal arguments: (1) that the trial court erred by
applying RSA 458:17, V(a)(5) because, contrary to the plain language of the
statute, both parties were not asserting that the original joint custody
arrangement was not working at the time of the hearing on the mother’s
motion to modify; and (2) that absent a finding of a change in circumstances,
the court was not entitled to rely upon RSA 458:17, V(a)(3). Because the trial
court correctly applied paragraph V(a)(3) to the facts in this case, we need not
address the father’s argument concerning paragraph V(a)(5).
RSA 458:17, V(a)(3) provides that a trial court may modify a permanent
custody order if it “finds by clear and convincing evidence that the child’s
present environment is detrimental to the child’s physical, mental, or emotional
health and that the advantage to the child of modifying a permanent custody
order outweighs the harm likely to be caused by the change in environment.”
In support of its ruling, the trial court noted: (1) the father’s anger and
hostility toward the mother, expressed in the presence of the child; (2) the
various ways in which the father involved the child in his dispute with the
mother and attempted to turn the child against his mother; and (3) the
demonstrable negative effects of the father’s behavior upon his son, as
observed by the child’s teacher, his counselor and the GAL. The father argues,
however, that the trial court misapplied RSA 458:17, V(a)(3) because the
“pattern of mutual recrimination [between him and the mother] has been
consistent since their divorce [and] does not present a change in the child’s
living environment.”
In Perreault v. Cook, 114 N.H. 440 (1974), we articulated the standard
for trial courts to use in determining whether to modify a child custody
arrangement: “The relationship established by the custody award should not
be disturbed unless the moving party demonstrates that the circumstances
affecting the welfare of the child have been so greatly altered that there is a
strong possibility the child will be harmed if he continues to live under the
present arrangement.” Id. at 443.
4
In 2000, the general court enacted a new version of RSA 458:17, V, see
Laws 2000, ch. 145, repealing the previous version that had provided, in part,
that “[e]xcept as provided in this paragraph, nothing in this section shall be
construed to alter the standard for modification of a custody decree affecting
physical custody of the child or children.” RSA 458:17, V (Supp. 2000)
(repealed 2000). At the time the new version of paragraph V was enacted, the
standard for modification of a custody decree was the one we had established
in Perreault. See In the Matter of Pasquale and Paulson, 146 N.H. 652, 654
(2001).
In the father’s view, Perreault’s requirement of a change in
circumstances survived the 2000 revision of RSA 458:17, V, and because the
trial court did not find, as a factual matter, any change in circumstances, it
committed legal error by ruling that the mother had met the standard in RSA
458:17, V(a)(3). If the intent of the legislature was to codify, by statute, the
Perreault standard, then the father’s argument might have merit. See In the
Matter of Hunt and Hunt, 146 N.H. 65, 66-67 (2001). But the legislature did
not codify Perreault; it replaced the Perreault standard with a new one.
The version of RSA 458:17, V enacted in 2000 was characterized in the
legislative history as a codification of the “circumstances under which a parent
can ask the court to change permanent child custody,” N.H.H.R. Jour. 322
(2000), and as an effort to “help those filing pro se to find [the legal standard
for modifying custody] in statute rather than having to research case laws as
well,” id. In other words, the 2000 enactment both codified the legal standard
for modifying child custody and replaced Perreault. The legislature indicated
its intent to replace Perreault, rather than simply restate the rule of that case,
by: (1) eliminating the caveat in the former version of paragraph V providing
that the statute was not to be construed to alter the Perreault standard; (2)
establishing a standard different from the standard stated in Perreault; and (3)
stating, in the legislative history, that the statute was intended to allow
litigants to learn the correct legal standard without “having to research case
laws.”
The 2000 version of paragraph V, unlike Perreault, said nothing about a
change in circumstances, and thus we conclude that the legislature
intentionally chose not to require the moving party to plead and prove a change
in circumstances as a prerequisite to relief under RSA 458:17, V(a)(3).
Although we will not construe a statute as abrogating the common law unless
the statute clearly expresses such an intention, Hill v. Dobrowolski, 125 N.H.
572, 575 (1984), the statute at issue here, reinforced by the legislative history,
clearly expresses the legislature’s intent to replace the legal standard we
established in Perreault. We now hold that the Perreault standard was
superseded by the enactment of RSA 458:17, V(a)(3).
5
Because RSA 458:17, V(a)(3) replaced the standard enunciated in
Perreault, and did not include a change in circumstances requirement, it is of
no consequence that the mother did not plead or prove a change in her son’s
circumstances. Accordingly, the trial court did not commit an error of law by
ordering a modification of custody without evidence of a change in
circumstances.
The father next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by: (1) failing to take into account any evidence supporting his
assertions; (2) ignoring evidence casting doubt upon the credibility of the
mother; and (3) relying almost entirely upon the GAL’s report, which he
characterizes as incomplete and biased.
The trial court has wide discretion in matters involving custody and
visitation. In the Matter of Kosek & Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 724 (2005). That
discretion necessarily extends to matters such as assigning weight to evidence
and assessing the credibility and demeanor of witnesses. Conflicts in the
testimony, questions about the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be
given testimony are for the trial court to resolve. Richelson v. Richelson, 130
N.H. 137, 143 (1987). Our review is limited to determining whether it clearly
appears that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Fulton, 154 N.H. at ___. “This means that we review only ‘whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made,’” In the Matter of Lockaby & Smith, 148 N.H. 462, 465 (2002) (quoting
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)), and we will not disturb the trial
court’s determination if it could reasonably be made, Matthews v. Matthews,
142 N.H. 733, 735 (1998).
Although the father contends that the trial court engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion by ruling as it did, a closer examination
reveals that his real contention is that the trial court was erroneously
persuaded by evidence unfavorable to his position and that it was unpersuaded
by other evidence favorable to his position. Choosing between contradictory
testimony and evidence is the essence of judicial discretion, and there is
nothing in this record constituting an unsustainable exercise of that discretion.
Accordingly, we find no merit in the father’s arguments that the trial court
failed to take into account evidence supporting his assertions and ignored
evidence casting doubt upon the credibility of the mother.
We now turn to the father’s contention that the trial court erred in
relying upon the GAL’s report which, he asserts, was based upon a faulty
investigation. As the father correctly points out, we have held that the
recommendations of a GAL do not, and should not, carry any greater
presumptive weight than the other evidence in a case. Richelson, 130 N.H. at
6
143. While the trial court did rely upon the GAL’s report, its ruling also
discussed other evidence including: (1) the parties’ own testimony; (2) the
testimony of a witness to a specific incident involving the Choys and their son;
and (3) the seemingly self-contradictory nature of the father’s various
allegations that the mother was harming the child – one made just days before
the continuation of the hearing before the master – and his statement that the
joint custody arrangement was working well. Given the trial court’s discussion
and analysis of a range of evidence, we cannot say that it gave unreasonable
weight to the GAL’s recommendations. Moreover, it is not our role to calculate
how much weight a trial court should accord specific evidence. It is for the
trial court to make that determination. In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H.
___, ___ (decided November 1, 2006).
Nor do we conclude that the trial court committed an unsustainable
exercise of discretion by crediting a report that, in the father’s view, was
unfairly biased against him due to the GAL’s decisions not to contact any of the
references he submitted to her and not to view videotapes and other materials
that resulted from the DCYF investigation. At the time of the GAL’s
appointment, the only pending request for a change of custody was the one
filed by the father, in which he made serious allegations against the mother
and her boyfriend. Thus, as the GAL explained at the hearing, she focused her
investigation upon the mother and her boyfriend. While the father complains
that the GAL’s report was biased against him because the GAL contacted some
of the mother’s references but none of his, he does not indicate what
information may have been available from those contacts or suggest how that
information would have altered the GAL’s report if it had it been collected.
Moreover, there was nothing that prevented the father from calling his
references as witnesses at the hearing and in that way counterbalancing any
perceived bias in the GAL’s report. In any event, because the GAL gave a
reasonable explanation for why she proceeded as she did, the record
establishes an objective basis for the trial court’s reliance upon her testimony
and report.
The record also establishes an objective basis for the trial court’s reliance
upon the GAL’s testimony even though she did not examine the materials
collected during the DCYF investigation. The GAL testified that she: (1)
discussed the DCYF investigation with someone from DCYF; (2) conducted her
own investigation and reached the same conclusion as DCYF; and (3) was
aware, through multiple sources, of the information contained in the
videotapes produced as part of the DCYF investigation. Moreover, because the
DCYF investigation resulted in a determination that the charges against the
mother and her boyfriend were unfounded and the GAL independently
investigated the matter, it is difficult to see what additional information
favorable to the father could have resulted from the GAL’s examination of the
DCYF file. The father offers only the suggestion that the DCYF “file contains
7
videotapes and other information that would reflect the other side of the story
and, therefore, give balance to the Guardian ad Litem report.” As with the
father’s argument concerning the GAL’s decision not to contact his references,
the record establishes an objective basis for the trial court’s reliance upon the
GAL’s report, notwithstanding her decision not to examine the actual DCYF
case file.
Because the trial court committed no errors of law and did not
unsustainably exercise its discretion, we affirm its decision to modify the
custody order in this case.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8