THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-279
ALAN HANDLEY & a.
v.
PROVIDENCE MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: February 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 7, 2006
Backus, Meyer, Solomon & Branch, of Manchester (B.J. Branch on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Mulvey Professional Association, of Portsmouth (Lesley F. Cornell on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, Alan Handley (Handley) and his wife,
Cynthia Handley, appeal an order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) granting
summary judgment to the defendant, Providence Mutual Fire Insurance
Company (Providence). We reverse and remand.
The following facts are undisputed. Handley, the owner of a home
building and remodeling company, requires that his subcontractors
demonstrate proof of insurance prior to hire. In September 2003, Handley
asked subcontractor James Miles to provide a certificate of insurance before he
would hire him to install sheetrock. Miles told Handley that he had insurance
through Robert Olivier of the Olivier Insurance Agency. Olivier is an
independent insurance agent and an authorized representative of Providence.
On September 29, 2003, Olivier faxed a certificate of insurance to Handley.
The certificate listed Handley’s company as the certificate holder and indicated
that Miles had general liability coverage through Providence from September 5,
2003, through September 6, 2004. Shortly thereafter, Miles began working for
Handley.
At the time that he issued the certificate, Olivier knew that Miles was not
insured by Providence. In fact, the check that Miles had provided to pay for his
coverage had been returned for lack of sufficient funds in July 2003. Although
Miles had promised Olivier that he would provide a valid check, he failed to do
so before Olivier issued the certificate to Handley.
In mid-October 2003, a piece of sheetrock affixed by Miles fell and
injured Handley. Handley contacted Olivier to request coverage under Miles’
general liability policy. Olivier subsequently informed Handley’s attorney that,
because Miles’ check never cleared, Miles had no general liability insurance
through Providence.
Handley brought suit against Olivier and Providence for negligent
misrepresentation and against Miles for negligence. Providence cross-claimed
against Olivier for misrepresentation and moved for summary judgment on
Handley’s claim. The trial court granted Providence’s summary judgment
motion and concluded that, pursuant to Bradley Real Estate Trust v. Plummer
& Rowe Insurance Agency, 136 N.H. 1 (1992), the certificate of insurance
issued by Olivier “created no contractual relationship or duty on the part of
Providence to inform Mr. Handley of any inaccuracies contained in the
certificate of insurance issued on behalf of Mr. Miles, including whether
coverage actually existed.” The trial court later granted Handley’s motion for
voluntary nonsuit without prejudice as to his claims against Olivier and Miles.
This appeal followed.
On appeal, Handley argues that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment to Providence. Specifically, Handley asserts that Bradley is
distinguishable on its facts and, thus, does not dictate the outcome of this
case. Handley also contends that genuine issues of material fact exist
concerning whether Olivier made oral representations regarding Miles’
coverage.
“In reviewing the trial court’s initial grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Broom v.
Continental Cas. Co., 152 N.H. __, __ 887 A.2d 1128, 1131 (2005). “If there is
no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
2
judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary judgment is proper.” Id.
“We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.” Id.
The trial court concluded that Bradley controls this case. In Bradley, an
insurance agent issued a certificate of insurance purporting to inform a third
party that a contractor had purchased adequate workers’ compensation
insurance. Bradley, 136 N.H. at 2. The certificate contained three disclaimers,
including one that stated that it was “issued as a matter of information only
and confers no rights upon the certificate holder.” Id. The policy was
subsequently cancelled due to the contractor’s failure to pay the premiums. Id.
at 3. The third party argued that the certificate imposed a duty on the agency
to notify it that coverage had been cancelled. Id. at 4. We held that the
certificate contained “clear” disclaimers indicating that it did no more than
“certify that insurance existed on the day the certificate was issued.” Id.
Bradley relied on Broderick Investment v. Strand Nordstrom, 794 P.2d
264 (Colo. Ct. App. 1990). In Broderick, a certificate of insurance accurately
represented the insured’s coverage on the day of its issue, but became
inaccurate after the insured changed the terms of its coverage. Broderick, 794
P.2d at 266. The certificate in Broderick contained the same three disclaimers
as in Bradley. Id. at 265-66; Bradley, 136 N.H. at 4. The Broderick court held
that the certificate’s disclaimers constituted “express limitations . . . as to the
future accuracy of the information contained in that instrument.” Broderick,
794 P.2d at 267. Broderick concluded that the certificate imposed no duty on
the agent to inform the certificate holder of any material changes to the
insurance coverage it described. Id.
Handley points out that the certificate in this case, unlike the certificates
in Bradley and Broderick, lacks language indicating that it is issued for
“information only” and “confers no rights upon the certificate holder.” The
certificate here contains three pertinent provisions.
The first:
This Certificate does not amend, extend or alter the coverage afforded by
the policies below.
The second:
Coverages
This is to certify that the policies of insurance listed below have
been issued to the insured named above for the policy period
indicated, notwithstanding any requirement, term or condition of
any contract or other document with respect to which this
certificate may be issued or may pertain, the insurance afforded by
3
the policies described herein is subject to all the terms, exclusions
and conditions of such policies, limits show [sic] may have been
reduced by paid claims.
The third:
Cancellation
Should any of the above described policies be cancelled before the
expiration thereof, the issuing company will endeavor to mail 10
days written notice to the certificate holder named to the left, but
failure to mail such notice shall impose no obligation or liability of
any kind upon the company, its agents or representatives.
Providence contends that neither Bradley nor Broderick depended solely
on the “informational” language cited by Handley. Instead, Providence argues,
the Bradley and Broderick courts considered the collective effect of the
language of the certificates in those cases. Providence argues that the
certificate in this case, when viewed in its entirety, also disclaims all
obligations to the certificate holder. We agree with Providence that the
certificate’s provisions placed Handley on notice that the terms of coverage are
controlled by the policy and that the agent and insurer have no duty to notify
the certificate holder of cancellation or change to the policy. But, unlike the
certificates in Bradley and Broderick, the certificate here does not clearly
indicate that it is issued for “information only” or that it “confers no rights
upon the certificate holder.”
Moreover, the parties do not dispute that Olivier knew that Miles had no
insurance through Providence when he faxed the certificate to Handley. Thus,
unlike Bradley, the certificate in this case did not even accurately certify that
coverage existed on the day it was issued. The Broderick court declined to
impose a duty on the agent to notify a certificate holder of a policy’s subsequent
inaccuracies in part because it was “unable to conclude that [the agent]
supplied any false information to [the certificate holder].” Broderick, 794 P.2d
at 267. In this case, Olivier, Providence’s authorized representative, admits that
the certificate supplied false information to Handley.
For these reasons, we conclude that the trial court erred in concluding
that Bradley compelled it to grant summary judgment to Providence. Because
we reverse on this issue, we need not address Handley’s other arguments.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4