THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2004-113
IN THE MATTER OF ROBERTA L. KOSEK AND MICHAEL J. KOSEK
Argued: November 9, 2004
Opinion Issued: February 22, 2005
Howie Law Office, PLLC, of Salem (Jocelyn Thomsen on the brief, and
Mary M. Howie orally), for the petitioner.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Roberta L. Kosek, appeals from an order of
the Salem Family Division (Sadler, J.) granting a motion for contempt brought
by the respondent, Michael J. Kosek. The petitioner argues that the trial court
erred by entering a contempt sanction that modified the parties’ visitation
schedule without making an explicit finding that the modification was in the
best interests of the children. The petitioner also argues that the sanction was
not proper for a finding of civil contempt, and that the sanction violated her
right to due process of law. We affirm.
The relevant facts follow. The parties were divorced by decree dated July
18, 2001. They share joint legal custody of their two daughters, while the
petitioner has primary physical custody. The respondent has residual
custodial time (also referred to as “visitation”) with the children every other
weekend, alternate Monday evenings, and various holidays.
The petitioner filed a petition to modify the divorce decree and for
contempt on January 31, 2002. The respondent filed a counterclaim. The
Trial Court (Taube, J.) issued an order on August 22, 2003, which stated:
“Petitioner shall not schedule any activities for either child during Respondent’s
custodial periods unless [R]espondent agrees in writing in advance.”
On September 7, 2003, the petitioner sent an e-mail message to the
respondent regarding enrolling the children in religious education classes. The
classes for one child’s age group were scheduled on certain Monday nights
from September to March. In her e-mail, the petitioner indicated that she had
not yet enrolled the children because she did not want to be found in contempt
for scheduling activities during the respondent’s visitation period. The
respondent replied to the petitioner’s e-mail later that day, and said, “I have no
problem with [the daughter] taking classrooms [sic] as long as the days do not
fall onto my scheduled visitations Mondays [sic] . . . .” The petitioner enrolled
both children in religious education classes the next day, September 8, 2003.
On September 19, 2003, the respondent filed an ex parte motion for
contempt alleging that the petitioner violated a court order by enrolling the
daughter in a religious education class during his custodial time. The
respondent requested that the court award him additional custodial time with
both daughters.
After a hearing, which, by agreement of the parties, proceeded by offer of
proof, the trial court found the petitioner in contempt of the August 22, 2003
order. The trial court ordered: “Because of the contempt, [the respondent] is
awarded additional visitation time with the girls.” The court awarded visits
between 3:30 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. on non-custodial Sundays. The petitioner’s
motion for reconsideration was denied. The petitioner does not appeal the
merits of the contempt finding; she appeals only the sanction.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred by modifying the
visitation schedule without making an explicit finding that the modification
was in the best interests of the children. The trial court has wide discretion in
matters involving custody and visitation. Chandler v. Bishop, 142 N.H. 404,
409 (1997). We review the trial court’s modification of the visitation schedule
for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Richelson v. Richelson, 130
N.H. 137, 144 (1987); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)
(explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
The court’s overriding concern in structuring custody and visitation
matters is the best interests of the child. Chandler, 142 N.H. at 412. In its
order, the trial court did not make an explicit finding that altering the visitation
schedule was in the best interest of the children. However, the petitioner
2
offered no evidence and made no allegation that a change in the visitation
schedule was not in the best interests of the children.
We must assume that the trial court made subsidiary findings necessary
to support its general ruling. Beaudoin v. Beaudoin, 118 N.H. 325, 328 (1978).
In the absence of an explicit finding that the change in visitation was in the
best interests of the children, and in the absence of any evidence or allegation
to the contrary, we will assume that the trial court found that the altered
visitation schedule was not contrary to the best interests of the children.
Therefore, the contempt sanction awarding additional visitation time to the
respondent was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion by the trial court.
In so holding, we are not ignoring the best interests of the children as
suggested by the dissent. We think that where the petitioner does not argue
that the sanction is not in the best interests of the children, and the sanction
only alters visitation time between two parents who share legal custody, a
specifically articulated finding of the best interests of the children is
unnecessary.
Unlike the dissent, we do see a meaningful difference between awards of
custody and awards of visitation. As we have noted in the past, granting
visitation is a far lesser intrusion, or assertion of control, than is an award of
custody. See Roberts v. Ward, 126 N.H. 388, 393 (1985); In the Matter of
Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545, 548 (2003).
And although we have sometimes uttered the words custody and
visitation in the same breath, see, e.g., Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36, 42
(1990); Chasan v. Mintz, 119 N.H. 865, 867 (1979); Chandler, 142 N.H. at 409,
it is clear that different standards are applied when a parent seeks an award of
custody, a modification of a permanent custody decree and a modification of a
visitation schedule. See Webb v. Knudson, 133 N.H. 665, 671-72 (1990);
Nelson, 149 N.H. at 548; In the Matter of Pasquale and Paulson, 146 N.H. 652,
655 (2001).
In making an initial custody award, the court is called upon to consider
the relative abilities of both parents to promote the welfare of the child; the
court must choose between differing factual assessments as to the child’s best
interests. Pasquale, 146 N.H. at 655. In Nelson, a custody award case, we
rejected the petitioner’s theory that he was entitled to custody so long as it was
in the best interests of the children. Nelson, 149 N.H. at 548 (noting that
Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36, was inapplicable to the custody award case
before the court as it dealt with visitation).
The trial court has less discretion in determining whether there should
be a modification of a permanent custody decree. Webb, 133 N.H. at 671. In
3
Webb, where the petitioner sought modification of a permanent custody decree,
we cited Perreault v. Cook, 114 N.H. 440, 443 (1974), for the proposition that a
child custody decree should not be disturbed unless the moving party
demonstrates that the circumstances affecting the welfare of the child have
been so greatly altered that there is a strong possibility the child will be
harmed if he continues to live under the present arrangement. Id. at 671.
And, in visitation matters the court has continuing jurisdiction to modify
arrangements in the best interest of the child. Chandler, 142 N.H. at 411. We
have consistently treated these three areas – custody, modification of custody,
visitation – differently, and we see no reason not to continue to treat them
differently. We will not base our decision in visitation matters upon precedent
defined by custodial disputes.
Finally, the dissent’s reliance upon Webb is misplaced. Webb, despite its
continued references to an “award of custody” cited by the dissent, really
addressed a petition for a modification of a permanent custody decree, and
hence the court applied the Perreault standard. Webb, 133 N.H. at 673. One
of the bases upon which the petitioner rested her claim was that the
respondent had interfered with her visitation rights. The court found the
respondent’s interference with the petitioner’s visitation rights despicable, yet
held that it would not grant the petitioner permanent physical and legal
custody of the children to punish the respondent, where the petitioner failed
otherwise to meet the Perreault standard. Id. at 672-73.
We next address the petitioner’s argument that the contempt sanction
issued was not commensurate with a finding of civil contempt, but was in fact
a criminal penalty. The petitioner argues that a penalty for criminal contempt
cannot be imposed without the requisite constitutional safeguards, which were
absent from the September hearing.
Contempt is an offense at common law — a specific and substantive
offense that is separate and distinct from the matter in litigation out of which
the contempt arose. Town of Nottingham v. Cedar Waters, Inc., 118 N.H. 282,
285 (1978). The power of contempt to enforce previous orders of a court of
general jurisdiction is extensive but the exercise of the power involves
practicalities as well as principles. Douglas v. Douglas, 109 N.H. 41, 43-44
(1968).
The difference between civil and criminal contempt is the character of the
punishment. Town of Epping v. Harvey, 129 N.H. 688, 691 (1987). In civil
contempt, the punishment is remedial, coercive, and for the benefit of the
complainant. Civil contempt proceedings may result in money fines payable to
the complainant or in an indeterminate jail sentence until the contemnor
complies with the court order. The purpose of prosecution for criminal
4
contempt is to protect the authority and vindicate the dignity of the court.
Town of Nottingham, 118 N.H. at 285. The criminal contempt defendant,
unlike the civil contempt defendant, may be imprisoned for a determinate
amount of time without the ability to purge the sentence. State v. Wallace, 136
N.H. 267, 270 (1992).
The petitioner argues that since she does not “hold the keys to the jail,”
the punishment is not appropriate for a finding of civil contempt. While this
phrasing is a hallmark of civil contempt sanctions, it is not absolute. For
example, our case law does not require that the contemnor control the amount
of a fine; a discrete fine is an appropriate remedy for civil contempt. See, e.g.,
Richelson, 130 N.H. at 140 (defendant ordered to pay $300 fine). In this case,
instead of a fine, the respondent requested additional visitation time in his ex
parte motion for contempt. The trial court presumably found that increasing
the respondent’s visitation time would compel the petitioner to obey its orders.
Although stemming from the trial court’s inherent contempt power, this
exercise of coercive power is analogous to that granted by the legislature in
RSA 458:17, V(a)(2) (2004). RSA 458:17, V(a)(2) allows a court that “finds
repeated, intentional, and unwarranted interference” by a custodial parent with
the visitation or custodial rights of the non-custodial parent to “order a change
in [permanent] physical custody.” RSA 458:17, V(a)(2). Through this statute, a
severe remedy, modification of a permanent physical custody order, is available
to the trial court for interference with visitation and custodial rights. It is not
unprecedented then for the trial court to fashion as its own remedy, through its
inherent contempt power, a mere ten hour per month increase in residual
custodial time.
We recognize that children are not chargeable with the misconduct of
their parents and should not be uprooted from their home in order to discipline
a recalcitrant parent. Webb, 133 N.H. at 672. However, we conclude that the
additional custodial time awarded to the respondent does not amount to
uprooting the children.
We disagree with the petitioner’s argument that this sanction was in fact
a criminal penalty. There is no indication in the record that the trial court
sought to protect its authority and vindicate its dignity by issuing this
particular contempt sanction. Cf. Town of Epping, 129 N.H. at 691 (language
of the master’s report indicated the master was vindicating the authority of the
court and not the rights of the parties). Therefore, we find that the award of
additional visitation time was within the trial court’s discretion.
Lastly, the petitioner argues that the contempt sanction deprived her of a
fundamental right, regarding the custody and rearing of her children, without
the full due process protections required by the State and Federal
5
Constitutions. We first address the petitioner’s claim under the State
Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
We agree with the petitioner that a parent’s interest in decisions
regarding the custody and rearing of children is a fundamental right protected
by the due process provisions of the State and Federal Constitutions.
Provencal v. Provencal, 122 N.H. 793, 797 (1982). Procedural due process
requires that parties whose rights are affected have an opportunity to be heard.
The right to be heard in custody and visitation cases encompasses the right to
call and cross-examine witnesses, to be informed of all adverse evidence, and to
challenge such evidence. Chandler, 142 N.H. at 409. However, we do not find
that the petitioner’s procedural due process rights were violated in this case.
The petitioner had notice of the sanction sought by the respondent,
additional custodial time, through his motion for contempt, a copy of which
was delivered to the petitioner’s counsel. The petitioner also had an
opportunity to call and cross-examine witnesses, to be informed of evidence
against her and challenge such evidence as due process requires. However, at
the beginning of the hearing on the sanction, the petitioner’s counsel waived
these rights by agreeing to proceed by offer of proof. Therefore we find that the
petitioner’s procedural due process rights were not violated.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Chandler, 142
N.H. at 409; Tower v. Leslie-Brown, 326 F.3d 290, 298 (1st Cir. 2003).
Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
NADEAU, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J.,
dissented.
BRODERICK, C.J., dissenting. Because I conclude, based upon the
record before us, that the trial court erred as a matter of law in awarding the
respondent additional visitation time as a result of the petitioner’s contempt, I
respectfully dissent. See In the Matter of Giacomini & Giacomini, 150 N.H.
498, 500 (2004). Children have independent interests in divorce proceedings
and may not be used as pawns to punish a non-cooperative parent. See Webb
v. Knudson, 133 N.H. 665, 672-73 (1990). While modification of custody or
visitation may well be triggered as a consequence of contemptuous conduct by
an offending parent, it should only occur upon an express and supportable
finding that modification is in the best interests of the children.
6
The relevant facts giving rise to the contempt sanction are undisputed
and fully recited by the majority. On appeal, the petitioner argues several
errors with respect to the sanction, including: (1) that the court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion in modifying the parties’ custody order
without considering and making findings as to the best interests of the
children; and (2) that because the contempt sanction was criminal, rather than
civil, the trial court erred in failing to afford her the procedures which
accompany criminal contempt proceedings. As to the latter argument, the
majority concludes that the contempt in this case was civil, rather than
criminal. Because I believe that the specific contempt sanction in this case
was improper because it did not involve a best interests analysis with requisite
findings, I do not address the nature of the contempt itself.
We have previously stated that custody modifications are not a proper
means of punishing a non-cooperative parent:
Children are not chargeable with the misconduct of their parents
and should not be uprooted from their home in order to discipline
a recalcitrant parent. Indeed, the award of custody is not a device
to reward or punish parents, and a violation of a court decree by
one of the parties is not necessarily controlling on the question of
custody. Thus . . . an award of custody must ultimately be based
upon the best interests of the child, and may not be sustained as a
means of enforcing the visitation rights of the noncustodial parent.
Rather, the contempt powers of the court may be exercised to that
end.
Webb, 133 N.H. at 672-73 (quotation, citation and brackets omitted; emphasis
added); see Houde v. Beckmeyer, 116 N.H. 719, 721 (1976). Here, the trial
court ordered: “Because of the contempt, [the respondent] is awarded
additional visitation time with the girls. He shall be allowed visits between 3:30
[p.m.] and 8:30 [p.m.] on non-custodial Sundays.” (Emphasis added.) On their
face, the trial court’s words demonstrate that the additional visitation time
awarded to the respondent was in direct response to the petitioner’s
contemptuous behavior, and to enforce the respondent’s visitation rights. I see
no meaningful difference between awards of custody and awards of visitation
as a means to punish contempt and, therefore, I believe that the rule of Webb,
that custody awards are not devices to punish or reward parents, applies to
visitation awards. Because the trial court’s award of additional visitation time
to the respondent was a direct response to the petitioner’s contemptuous
behavior, rather than pursuant to a best interests finding, I believe that the
trial court’s order was not in keeping with the mandate of Webb.
The majority acknowledges Webb, but nevertheless concludes that “the
additional custodial time awarded to the respondent does not amount to
7
uprooting the children.” In practice, however, what one child needs to feel
secure and stable may differ significantly from what another child needs.
Therefore, while five hours of visitation every other Sunday may have little to
no effect on one child’s feelings of security and stability, it may have a
tremendous impact on those of another child. Cf. Perreault v. Cook, 114 N.H.
440, 443 (1974) (recognizing that “[t]he shuffling of a child back and forth
between a father and mother can destroy his sense of security, confuse his
emotions, and greatly disrupt his growth as an individual”). It is for the trial
court to expressly consider the best interests of the children before a change in
visitation is ordered. Contempt, by itself, can never justify a change in
visitation or custody without an independent determination of the best
interests of the children.
We have previously recognized that visitation arrangements are
controlled by the best interests of the children. Chandler v. Bishop, 142 N.H.
404, 411 (1997); Richelson v. Richelson, 130 N.H. 137, 144 (1987). Although
the trial court did not make an express finding that awarding additional
visitation time to the respondent was in the best interests of the children, the
majority concludes:
We must assume that the trial court made subsidiary
findings necessary to support its general ruling. In the absence of
an explicit finding that the change in visitation was in the best
interests of the children, and in the absence of any evidence or
allegation to the contrary, we will assume that the trial court found
that the altered visitation schedule was not contrary to the best
interests of the children.
(Citation omitted.) I disagree that we should assume the trial court made the
necessary subsidiary findings to sustain its visitation award because the
language of the trial court’s order clearly demonstrates that no best interests
analysis was deemed necessary. The trial court unequivocally stated, “Because
of the contempt, [the respondent] is awarded additional visitation time with the
girls.” (Emphasis added.) Nothing in this statement implies that the court
considered the best interests of the children in awarding the respondent
additional visitation time, and I am not prepared to tread where the trial court
elected not to go.
The majority states that in the absence of an explicit finding that
modification of visitation was in the best interests of the children, “we will
assume that the trial court found that the altered visitation schedule was not
contrary to the best interests of the children.” The majority also states:
The court’s overriding concern in structuring custody and
visitation matters is the best interests of the child. In its order, the
8
trial court did not make an explicit finding that altering the
visitation schedule was in the best interest of the children.
However, the petitioner offered no evidence and made no allegation
that a change in the visitation schedule was not in the best
interests of the children.
(Citation omitted.)
The relevant inquiry for purposes of modifying custody or visitation,
however, is not whether a change would be contrary to a child’s best interests,
but whether such a change would be in the child’s best interests. See
Richelson, 130 N.H. at 145 (alteration of visitation schedule sustained where
ruling was “unquestionably in the best interests of the child”); cf. RSA 458:17,
V(a) (2004) (modification of custody due to repeated, intentional and
unwarranted interference by a parent with the visitation rights of the other
parent permissible if court determines that modification “would be in
accordance with the best interests of the child”). Moreover, the petitioner does
not have any burden where, as here, she was not the party seeking to modify
the visitation schedule. To the contrary, the respondent, as the party seeking
to alter the visitation schedule, bore the burden of proof in that proceeding. Cf.
Webb, 133 N.H. at 671 (party seeking to modify custody has burden of proof);
RSA 458:17, V(b) (2004) (same); see Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36, 42 (1990)
(referring to visitation as a custody matter). But see In the Matter of Nelson &
Horsley, 149 N.H. 545, 548 (2003) (in deciding whether granting custodial
rights to unrelated third party over express objection of sole parent violates
parent’s State and federal constitutional rights, noting that visitation is a far
lesser intrusion or assertion of control than custody, and therefore not nearly
as invasive of parents’ rights).
Accordingly, I disagree with the majority that the sanction ordered here
should be sustained. The trial court failed to make an express finding that
awarding the respondent additional visitation time with the children, as a
result of the petitioner’s contempt, was in the children’s best interests.
Consistent with our jurisprudence, I believe that justice demands such a
finding. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
9