THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2005-409
LAMONTAGNE BUILDERS, INC.
v.
R. SCOTT BROOKS & a.
Argued: May 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: October 20, 2006
The Law Office of Rodney L. Stark, P.A., of Manchester (Rodney L. Stark
and Sherry M. Hieber on the brief, and Mr. Stark orally), for the plaintiff.
James M. McNamee, PLLC, of Nashua (James M. McNamee on the brief
and orally), for defendant R. Scott Brooks.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, R. Scott Brooks, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Sullivan, J.), awarding the plaintiff, LaMontagne Builders, Inc.
(LBI), attorney’s fees and costs. Defendants Bank of New Hampshire, Bowman
Green Development Corporation, and HABS/CDM, Inc. did not participate in
this appeal. We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
This case involves protracted litigation over payment for services under a
construction agreement between LBI and defendants Bowman Brook Purchase
Group and R. Scott Brooks. This is the second time this matter has come
before us. A detailed account of the underlying facts of this case can be found
in our previous decision, see LaMontagne Builders v. Bowman Brook Purchase
Group, 150 N.H. 270 (2003). For the purpose of this appeal, however, we recite
the pertinent factual and procedural background below.
LBI is a corporation engaged in road building, site development, house
construction and other construction activities in the Bedford area. Id. at 271.
Bowman Brook Purchase Group (the partnership) is a New Hampshire limited
partnership with HABS/CDM, Inc., a New Hampshire corporation, as its
general partner. Id. R. Scott Brooks was an officer of HABS/CDM, Inc. during
the time of the dispute over payment under the construction agreement. Id.
Brooks also served as an officer of Bowman Green Development Corporation
(BGDC), a New Hampshire corporation incorporated in 1996. Id.
On October 14, 1996, LBI entered into an agreement with the
partnership to construct roads and make infrastructure improvements on real
estate owned by the partnership and known as the Bowman Green Subdivision
(the subdivision). Id. By the end of November 1996, LBI had completed most
of the construction work called for in the agreement. Id.
Also at about the same time, with LBI’s consent, Brooks arranged to
transfer ownership of the property to BGDC. Id. The purpose of the transfer
was, in part, to enable Brooks to obtain financing from a bank. Id. Brooks
was previously unable to obtain funding because the partnership was subject
to an outstanding Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) federal court
judgment and related lien in the amount of two million dollars. Id. at 271-72.
In November 1996, Brooks applied for a bank loan to develop the
subdivision. Id. at 272. In his application, Brooks submitted financial
statements and a description of the project, which stated that the
infrastructure had already been built. Id. The financial statements
represented assets worth one million dollars and a total liability of $687,000 in
the form of a note payable to Great Oaks Family Holdings, L.P. (Great Oaks), an
entity controlled by Brooks and his father. There was no mention in any of the
application materials of the money owed to LBI for its work on the project. Id.
In December 1996, LBI billed Brooks $315,459 for the work it had
completed. Id. A dispute arose between LBI and Brooks regarding payment of
the bill, and as a consequence, LBI halted work on the site. Id. LBI continued
to demand payment from Brooks, who responded that he was seeking
financing for the project that would enable him to pay LBI. Id. Subsequently,
LBI and Brooks executed a written document in which Brooks agreed to pay
LBI out of the proceeds of the bank loan. Id. The bank was never made aware
of this agreement. See id.
2
In the spring of 1997, the parties closed on the loan. At the closing,
Brooks again represented to the bank that all improvements were paid for, but
neglected to disclose the debt to LBI. Id. at 273. After the closing, Brooks
failed to honor his prior agreement to use the loan proceeds to pay LBI. Id.
Instead, all of the loan proceeds went to Brooks individually, or to members of
his family, either directly or through Great Oaks. Id.
On July 31, 1997, LBI attempted to secure payment under the
construction agreement and filed a petition for a mechanic’s lien in superior
court (docket no. 97-C-746). Id. Pursuant to the agreement, the matter was
sent to arbitration and, on May 10, 2001, the arbitrator issued an award in
favor of LBI in the amount of $465,292.85. Id. The arbitration award was
affirmed by the superior court, and LBI filed a motion for an award of costs and
attorney’s fees. In an order dated October 24, 2001, the court ruled that it was
not in a position to award attorney’s fees based upon the claims raised by LBI
“because the matter was never tried.” The court denied LBI’s motion without
prejudice “to any request for attorneys’ fees in connection with any other
claims by [LBI] or alleged wrongful acts by the defendants in this case . . . . If
the court finds that [LBI] has proven that the defendants . . . acted in bad faith,
the court will consider a request for attorneys’ fees.”
In late 1999 while the arbitration was still pending, the bank commenced
foreclosure on the subdivision. LBI countered by filing another equity petition
in superior court seeking to enjoin the foreclosure (docket no. 00-E-011). Id.
LBI argued that the conveyance of the subdivision property from the
partnership to BGDC was fraudulent, and requested that the court either
impose a constructive trust on the subdivision or compel payment of the
foreclosure proceeds into the court. LBI also asked the court to award
attorney’s fees. Id.
The superior court denied LBI’s requests to set aside the conveyance as
fraudulent and enjoin the bank’s foreclosure. Id. However, the court held that
LBI was entitled to: (1) a judgment in the amount of $465,292.85 against
Brooks personally; and (2) an award against Brooks personally, the
partnership, and BGDC for “all of the costs, expenses, and attorney’s fees it
has incurred in pursuit of payment for its services.” Id. With respect to the
issue of attorney’s fees, the court found that the reasons asserted at trial by
Brooks for not paying LBI were “disingenuous and raised in bad faith.” Id. at
276.
The defendants appealed the superior court’s ruling, arguing that the
court: (1) committed an unsustainable exercise of discretion when it awarded
damages against Brooks personally; (2) improperly pierced the corporate veil to
hold Brooks personally liable; and (3) improperly awarded attorney’s fees
3
against Brooks and the partnership. Id. We held that the defendants’ first
argument was not preserved for appellate review, and otherwise affirmed the
superior court’s decision. See id. at 274-76. LBI made no request for costs or
attorney’s fees pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 23.
Following the appeal, the superior court conducted a hearing on
December 6, 2004, to determine the amount of attorney’s fees and costs to be
awarded. The hearing was conducted in Cheshire County Superior Court
because Justice Sullivan — who had previously presided over this case in
Hillsborough County — was transferred to that county. Brooks filed a motion
for change of venue and also a motion for Justice Sullivan to recuse himself,
the basis for the latter motion being that the court’s order awarding judgment
against him personally was improper because it was issued sua sponte. The
court denied both motions.
At the hearing, LBI argued that it was entitled to attorney’s fees and
costs totaling $518,073.73 for the petition for a mechanic’s lien (97-C-746), the
petition to enjoin the foreclosure (00-E-011) and other related actions. The
defendants raised several objections, including an objection to the
reasonableness and appropriateness of the fees. In its order dated February
11, 2005, the court found that although the amount of fees claimed was
“significant,” it was reasonable due to the extremely complicated nature of the
litigation and “the unreasonable, deceitful, dishonest and uncooperative
conduct of the defendant R. Scott Brooks.”
Next, the court addressed whether attorney’s fees and expenses were
recoverable in each individual case before the superior court. The court
concluded that attorney’s fees and expenses in 97-C-746 totaling $162,301.83
were reasonable and necessary. Similarly, the court found that attorney’s fees
in 00-E-011 in the amount of $235,123.56 were reasonable and necessary.
The latter amount included fees and expenses incurred in connection with the
first appeal. LBI’s requests for attorney’s fees in other related cases were
denied.
Finally, the court evaluated LBI’s request for costs in the various cases.
LBI’s request for costs in 97-C-476 in the amount of $360.32 was granted.
With respect to LBI’s request for costs in 00-E-011, the court awarded
$376.72; however, it denied LBI’s request for costs in connection with
subsequent post-judgment attachment proceedings. In all, the court awarded
LBI $397,883.88 in attorney’s fees and expenses, and $12,501.59 in costs.
Brooks filed a motion to reconsider arguing, among other things, that
because there had been no finding that he had acted in bad faith during any of
the proceedings following the trial of the issues in 00-E-011, it was error for the
court to award attorney’s fees and costs incurred during any of the post-trial
4
proceedings. In its order on the motion to reconsider, the court acknowledged
that there was no bad faith in the filing of any post-trial motions. The court
explained that its award of fees and costs was based upon “the acts of
Brooks . . . which necessitated the entire litigation, including the appeal to the
supreme court, the post judgment collection efforts and the hearing on the
amount of attorney’s fees to be awarded.” The court reaffirmed its prior ruling
that LBI was entitled to attorney’s fees for all of these hearings, and denied
Brooks’ motion to reconsider.
Following the court’s February 11 order, LBI filed a supplemental motion
for $13,942.11 in attorney’s fees and costs incurred in 00-E-011 between
November 2004 and March 2005. LBI argued that the fees and costs included
preparation for and attendance at the hearing relative to fees held on December
6, 2004. The court granted LBI’s motion for supplemental fees.
On appeal, Brooks argues that the superior court: (1) committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion when it awarded attorney’s fees and costs
in matters over which it did not preside and matters where there was no
finding of bad faith conduct; (2) committed an unsustainable exercise of
discretion when it awarded costs and fees incurred by LBI in pursuing
analytically severable claims on which it did not prevail; (3) improperly awarded
attorney’s fees and costs occasioned by LBI’s own inefficient and oppressive
behavior; and (4) erred when it denied his requests for recusal and for change
of venue. In response, LBI argues that Brooks is precluded by principles of res
judicata from challenging the scope of the court’s award, since he previously
contested Justice Sullivan’s broad award of fees during the first appeal and
lost.
First, we address LBI’s argument that Brooks is barred from challenging
the award of attorney’s fees and costs on res judicata grounds. The record in
this case shows that LBI did not raise this argument prior to or during the
December 6, 2004 hearing concerning the award of attorney’s fees and costs.
“This court has consistently held that we will not consider issues raised on
appeal that were not presented in the lower court.” LaMontagne Builders, 150
N.H. at 274 (quotation omitted). Because LBI raises this issue for the first time
on appeal, it has not been preserved for our review, and we decline to address
it. See N.H. Dep’t of Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H. 676, 679 (2002).
Next we turn to Brooks’ arguments. Brooks first contends that it was an
error of law for the superior court to award fees and costs in matters over
which it did not preside and in matters where there was no finding of bad faith
conduct on his part. Specifically, Brooks argues that: (1) the superior court
erred by awarding attorney’s fees and costs for the first appeal because there
was no request under Supreme Court Rule 23; (2) the court erred by awarding
fees and costs in 97-C-746; and (3) since the court acknowledged that there
5
was no bad faith conduct on Brooks’ part during the post-trial proceedings, the
basis for awarding fees and costs extends only to the date of judgment in 00-E-
011. We address each argument below.
Supreme Court Rule 23 provides as follows:
The clerk of the supreme court shall audit and allow bills of
costs accruing in this court, and certify the costs to the trial court
with the order made in the case. . . .
Costs will be deemed waived if a request for taxation of costs
with itemization is not filed within 30 days after the date on the
order in the case.
In the interest of justice in extraordinary cases, but not as a
matter of right, the supreme court in its sole discretion may award
attorney’s fees related to an appeal to a prevailing party if the
appeal is deemed by the court to have been frivolous or in bad
faith.
Sup. Ct. R. 23 (emphasis added).
With respect to the issue of costs pertaining to an appeal, the plain
language of Rule 23 is clear: the prevailing party on appeal must file an
itemized request for taxation of costs with the clerk of the supreme court within
thirty days after the date on the order in the case. Id. If the prevailing party
fails to file an itemized request in a timely fashion, costs will be deemed waived.
Id. In this case, LBI did not file a timely request for costs with this court.
Consequently, it was improper for the superior court to award costs arising out
of the first appeal.
Similarly, with respect to attorney’s fees, Supreme Court Rule 23 plainly
states that “the supreme court in its sole discretion may award attorney’s fees
related to an appeal.” Id. (emphasis added). The rule thus gives this court the
exclusive authority to award attorney’s fees for an appeal, “if the appeal is
deemed . . . to have been frivolous or in bad faith.” Id. LBI made no motion to
this court requesting attorney’s fees under Rule 23, and therefore procedurally
defaulted its opportunity to request fees.
LBI argues that our decision in Funtown USA, Inc. v. Town of Conway,
129 N.H. 352 (1987), establishes that it is permissible for trial courts to award
attorney’s fees for appeals. In that case, we partially reversed a trial court’s
award of attorney’s fees for an earlier appeal because the plaintiff was
unsuccessful on one of the claims. See id. at 355-56. LBI argues that
although we reversed the trial court’s award of fees for the unsuccessful
appellate claim, we did not rule that the superior court lacked authority to
award fees for the appeal. We are not persuaded by this argument. Funtown
6
did not address the superior court’s authority to award attorney’s fees for an
appeal, nor did it discuss the scope of Supreme Court Rule 23. As noted
above, given the plain language of Rule 23, it was error for the superior court to
award attorney’s fees and costs for the first appeal in this case, and we reverse
this portion of its award.
Brooks next argues that it was an unsustainable exercise of discretion
for the superior court to award attorney’s fees in 97-C-746, because Justice
Sullivan previously denied LBI’s motion for attorney’s fees in that matter. We
review the trial court’s award of attorney's fees under an unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard, giving deference to the trial court’s decision.
Van Der Stok v. Van Voorhees, 151 N.H. 679, 683 (2005). “To be reversible on
appeal, the discretion must have been exercised for reasons clearly untenable
or to an extent clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of the objecting party. If
there is some support in the record for the trial court’s determination, we will
uphold it.” LaMontagne Builders, 150 N.H. at 275 (quotation omitted).
An award of attorney’s fees must be grounded upon statutory
authorization, a court rule, an agreement between the parties, or an
established exception to the rule that each party is responsible for paying his
or her own counsel fees. Id. at 276. An exception to this rule includes
situations where litigation is instituted or unnecessarily prolonged through a
party’s oppressive, vexatious, arbitrary, capricious, or bad faith conduct. Id.
Another exception exists “where a party must litigate against an opponent
whose position is patently unreasonable.” Id. (quotation omitted).
As detailed above, the court denied LBI’s motion for attorney’s fees in 97-
C-746 without prejudice, explaining that if at some future date, “the court finds
that [LBI] has proven that the defendants . . . acted in bad faith, the court will
consider a request for attorneys’ fees.” After the trial in 01-E-011, the court
awarded attorney’s fees based on Brooks’ bad faith conduct. Indeed, in its
February 11, 2005 order on LBI’s request for attorney’s fees following the
appeal, the court reiterated its conclusion that Brooks’ bad faith permeated the
entire litigation, including the arbitration proceeding. It stated, in pertinent
part:
The court was aware of the bad faith or fraud allegations against
Brooks when it issued its order on 97-C-746. . . . The truth or
falsity of the bad faith or fraud allegations had not yet been tried.
The court in its order [in 97-C-746] specifically and expressly
reserved the issue of attorney’s fees and expenses to be determined
after the issue of the alleged fraud . . . of Brooks and his controlled
entities was tried.
7
Given that the court’s order in 97-C-746 explicitly left open the issue of
awarding attorney’s fees and costs, and that the court later based its award of
fees and costs upon Brooks’ bad faith conduct throughout the litigation, we
reject Brooks’ argument.
For similar reasons, we conclude that the superior court’s award of costs
and fees for the post-trial proceedings — including both the post-judgment
attachment proceedings and the hearing on the amount of attorney’s fees to be
awarded — was lawful. While Brooks points out that the court stated that
there was no bad faith in the filing of any of the post-trial motions, the court
also made a finding that “Brooks’ conduct necessitated the entire litigation
including the post judgment attachment proceedings since Brooks has not paid
the judgment.” Further, the court observed that “Mr. Brooks did everything he
could to delay and obstruct [LBI] from receiving a judgment in this case.”
Consequently, in spite of the court’s seemingly inconsistent findings regarding
Brooks’ conduct during the post-trial proceedings, the court ultimately
concluded that Brooks’ bad faith conduct persisted throughout the entire
litigation. The record in this case supports this conclusion, and, accordingly,
we conclude that it was within the superior court’s discretion to award fees and
costs for the post-trial proceedings.
Brooks also contends that it was improper for Justice Sullivan to award
fees and costs for matters over which he did not preside. Brooks seems to
suggest that it is unlawful for a judge to award fees and costs for matters over
which another judge presided; however, he cites no authority for this position.
It is apparent from the record that Justice Sullivan was intimately familiar with
the litigation between Brooks and LBI, having presided over the trial of the
issues in 00-E-011 and a multitude of hearings in connection with both that
case and 97-C-746. The fact that he did not preside over every hearing
throughout the course of the litigation does not preclude him from awarding
attorney’s fees and costs for proceedings that were conducted by another
superior court justice.
Next, Brooks argues that the superior court committed an unsustainable
exercise of discretion when it awarded costs and fees incurred by LBI in
pursuing analytically severable claims upon which it did not prevail. In
particular, Brooks asserts that the court should have discounted the fees in
00-E-011 that related to LBI’s fraudulent transfer claim. LBI objects, arguing
that the superior court properly awarded fees for the trial in 00-E-011 because
the evidence related to the fraudulent transfer theory was the same evidence
needed to prove Brooks’ personal liability under the theory of piercing the
corporate veil — a theory upon which it succeeded.
Where a party prevails upon some claims and not others, and the
successful and unsuccessful claims are analytically severable, any fee award
8
should be reduced to exclude time spent on unsuccessful claims. Van Der
Stok, 151 N.H. at 685. LBI’s fraudulent transfer claim and request that the
court pierce the corporate veil in order to impose personal liability on Brooks
are not analytically severable claims. Rather, they are alternative theories of
recovery. As LBI pointed out, the evidence necessary to prove liability under
one theory was also relevant to proving liability under the other theory. We
thus agree with LBI that the superior court properly awarded fees for the trial
in 00-E-011.
In addition, Brooks contends that the superior court improperly awarded
attorney’s fees and costs occasioned by LBI’s own “inefficient or oppressive
behavior.” In his brief, Brooks specifically alleges that: (1) it was unreasonable
to award LBI attorney’s fees associated with the ex parte attachment
proceedings since the attachments were later found to be improper; (2) it was
unfair to award attorney’s fees to LBI for the preparation of its motions for fees
and costs because LBI refused to provide prompt discovery; and (3) the award
of fees was erroneous because LBI “harmed its own interests with five separate
court actions.” We disagree.
As stated above, we review a trial court’s award of attorney’s fees under
an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard, and if there is some support
in the record for the trial court’s determination, we will uphold it. Id. at 683;
LaMontagne Builders, 150 N.H. at 275. As to the first claim, the superior court
acknowledged that the ex parte attachments were improperly granted.
Nonetheless, the court awarded attorney’s fees for those proceedings, finding
that Brooks’ bad faith conduct “necessitated the entire litigation including the
post judgment [attachment] proceedings since Brooks has not paid the
judgment.” Given this finding, the fact that the attachments were found to be
improper does not preclude an award of attorney’s fees. With regard to the
second claim, there is no evidence to support Brooks’ contention that LBI
engaged in “dilatory and oppressive tactics” when it failed to promptly respond
to his interrogatories.
Turning to the third claim, Brooks seems to suggest that it was
“inefficient” of LBI to file five separate court actions, and for this reason the
award of attorney’s fees and costs should be reduced. However, the superior
court found that Brooks’ deceitful, unreasonable and uncooperative conduct
required LBI to file each successive action, from the petition for a mechanic’s
lien to the post-judgment proceedings. As we previously stated, the
defendants’ conduct “required LBI to pursue further litigation, which
[was] . . . defended without any reasonable basis in the facts . . . or any
reasonable claim in the law.” LaMontagne Builders, 150 N.H. at 276 (quotation
omitted). Based upon the foregoing, we cannot conclude that the superior
court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion in awarding fees
based upon these claims.
9
Finally, Brooks argues that the superior court erred when it denied his
requests for recusal and for change of venue. Brooks’ basis for both motions
was that the court’s order in 00-E-011 awarding judgment against him
personally was issued sua sponte. Brooks asserts that when a court provides a
sua sponte remedy that neither party has requested, “it is operating beyond its
jurisdiction.” He argues that entering a sua sponte order “removes the court
from the status of an impartial finder of fact and actually aligns the court as a
party.” Brooks also contends that the court should have granted his motion to
recuse because it unlawfully granted ex parte attachments against him. He
argues that the court had knowledge that exigent circumstances to support an
ex parte attachment did not exist because of a settlement agreement approved
by the court on July 27, 2001.
In response, LBI emphasizes that Brooks argued during the first appeal
that the court erroneously imposed personal liability on him sua sponte, and
we concluded that the issue was not preserved for appellate review. LBI argues
that because this issue was not preserved for review in the first appeal, we
should find that the matter is settled by principles of res judicata. Assuming
without deciding that the doctrine of res judicata does not apply in this
instance, we conclude that the superior court properly denied Brooks’ motions
to recuse and for change of venue.
A judge must disqualify himself in a proceeding in which his impartiality
might reasonably be questioned, including but not limited to instances where
“the judge has a personal bias or prejudice concerning a party or a party’s
lawyer . . . .” Sup. Ct. R. 38, Canon 3E(1)(a). The party claiming bias must
show the existence of bias, the likelihood of bias, or an appearance of such bias
that the judge is unable to hold the balance between vindicating the interests
of the court and the interests of a party. State v. Hall, 152 N.H. 374, 377
(2005). Whether an appearance of impropriety exists is determined under an
objective standard. Id.
Assuming arguendo that Brooks’ argument — that an award of damages
issued sua sponte could serve as evidence of a judge’s partiality — has some
merit, the record reveals that the court did not issue its order imposing
personal liability on Brooks sua sponte. In its pre-trial request for findings of
fact and rulings of law, LBI specifically requested judgment against Brooks
personally. Brooks had full notice of the claim of personal liability against him
and, in fact, litigated the issue on the merits at trial.
Moreover, the fact that the court may have granted an attachment or any
other motion in error is not, in and of itself, a basis for recusal. The evidence
fails to support Brooks’ claim that the court knew that exigent circumstances
to support an ex parte attachment did not exist. The settlement agreement
10
Brooks refers to was never signed by Justice Sullivan. Rather, the court only
entered docket markings agreed to by the parties. In the court’s order on
Brooks’ motion to recuse, Justice Sullivan stated that he never reviewed the
settlement agreement. Brooks has failed to show the existence of bias, the
likelihood of bias, or an appearance of such bias in this case. Id. Accordingly,
we conclude that the superior court properly denied both the motion to recuse
and the motion for change of venue.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS, J., concurred; BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under
RSA 490:3, concurred.
11