THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack County Probate Court
No. 2005-316
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF E.L.
Argued: May 10, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 1, 2006
Michael J. Sheehan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the ward.
Scott D. McGuffin, of Laconia, for the guardian, Tri-County Community
Action Program, Inc., filed no brief.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Michael K. Brown, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the New Hampshire Department of
Corrections.
BRODERICK, C.J. The ward, E.L., appeals an order of the Merrimack
County Probate Court (Hampe, J.) denying his motion to terminate
guardianship. E.L. argues that the probate court erred in finding that the
guardian proved beyond a reasonable doubt that he remains incapacitated to
make his own medical decisions and that no less restrictive alternative to
guardianship exists. We affirm.
I
The following facts could be found from the record. In 1994, E.L. was
convicted of sexually assaulting his wife. He was deemed incompetent to be
sentenced and confined to the Secure Psychiatric Unit (SPU) at the New
Hampshire State Prison. While at SPU, his behavior fluctuated. At times, he
was transferred to the most restricted unit because he verbally abused the
staff, failed to follow rules, displayed inappropriate behavior, lacked self control
and refused medication. By November 1995, his behavior was reported to be
increasingly aggressive. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder, and a
guardian was appointed to ensure that he took prescribed medication and
followed medical advice. He cooperated in taking lithium carbonate (lithium), a
mood-stabilizing medication, and his condition improved. By June 1996, E.L.
was deemed competent and was sentenced to seven and one-half to fifteen
years in prison. He was transferred to the prison’s general population in
August 1996. His guardianship continued, and he remained cooperative in
taking lithium.
E.L.’s current treatment team consists of Catherine Fontaine, an
advanced registered nurse practitioner who is primarily responsible for
prescribing and monitoring E.L.’s medication, Laura Magzis, E.L.’s therapist at
the prison, and Bonnie Ham, E.L.’s designated staff guardian, who works for
Tri-County Community Action Program, Inc. In 2003, E.L. exhibited psychotic
behavior and made delusional statements. Specifically, he reportedly was
unkempt and disheveled, would not bathe, spoke “legal mumbo jumbo” and
during therapy sessions related provocative language he used with fellow
inmates that in his therapist’s view had the potential to incite arguments.
According to his therapist, E.L. suspected she was reading his mail, recording
therapy sessions and interfering with his transfer to a prison in Maine. E.L.
also related memories of events in prison that could not have happened and
displayed an inability to appreciate the possibility that his memory was
imprecise. He was diagnosed as suffering from psychotic features of his bipolar
disorder, and in July 2003, an anti-psychotic medication, Risperidone, was
prescribed for him. While E.L. did not agree that he suffered any psychosis, he
agreed to take the prescribed medication. His behavior reportedly improved,
and he continued to be compliant with taking his prescribed medications.
At some point, E.L. complained that he was suffering side effects from
Risperidone. He grew concerned that it could cause diabetes. According to
E.L., his son suffers from diabetes, as did his late father. He expressed a
desire to stop taking Risperidone, or at least reduce the dosage or switch to a
substitute drug. His treatment team agreed to a dosage reduction and to
explore other medications should the side effects continue.
2
In 2004, E.L. requested the probate court to terminate his nearly ten-
year guardianship. His guardian opposed the motion. In February 2005,
psychiatrist Gerald Lazar conducted an independent evaluation of E.L. and
reported that in his judgment, the limited guardianship should continue. In
April 2005, after an evidentiary hearing, the probate court denied E.L.’s
motion, and this appeal followed.
II
Any interested person may file a petition with the probate court seeking a
finding of incapacity with respect to a proposed ward and the appointment of a
guardian. RSA 464-A:4, I (2004). By statute, there is a legal presumption of
capacity, and the party seeking guardianship bears the heavy burden of
proving with “competent evidence [and] beyond reasonable doubt that the
proposed ward is incapacitated and in need of a guardian.” RSA 464-A:8, IV
(2004). At a hearing convened on such a petition, the probate court must “(a)
[i]nquire into the nature and extent of the functional limitations of the
proposed ward; and (b) [a]scertain his or her capacity to care for himself or
herself or his or her estate.” RSA 464-A:9, I (2004). Guardianship may be
imposed over a person only after finding in the record based upon evidence
beyond a reasonable doubt that:
(a) The person for whom a guardian is to be appointed is
incapacitated; and
(b) The guardianship is necessary as a means of providing
continuing care, supervision, and rehabilitation of the
individual, or the management of the property and financial
affairs of the incapacitated person; and
(c) There are no available alternative resources which are
suitable with respect to the incapacitated person’s welfare,
safety, and rehabilitation or the prudent management of his or
her property and financial affairs; and
(d) The guardianship is appropriate as the least restrictive
form of intervention consistent with the preservation of the
civil rights and liberties of the proposed ward.
RSA 464-A:9, III (2004).
When a ward seeks to terminate guardianship, “[u]nless the motion [to
terminate] is without merit, the court shall hold a hearing similar to that
provided for in RSA 464-A:8 and RSA 464-A:9 at which the guardian shall be
required to prove . . . the grounds for appointment of a guardian provided in
RSA 464-A:9.” RSA 464-A:40, II(c). Accordingly, the guardian must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of each factor delineated by RSA 464-
A:9, II; namely, that: (1) the ward remains incapacitated; (2) guardianship is
3
necessary; (3) no suitable alternative resources exist; and (4) guardianship is
the least restrictive form of intervention.
In this case, the probate court concluded that “the reasons that the
guardianship was granted remain.” The probate court’s decision explained:
[E.L.] suffers a mental illness. His diagnosis is Antisocial
Personality Disorder and either Bipolar Affective Disorder, Manic
with Psychotic Features or Schizoaffective Disorder. His illness
has been effectively treated with medications which [have] been
administered because of the existence of the guardianship and
the consent of his guardian.
[E.L.] would like to terminate his guardianship which is
limited to medical issues. He thinks that he is capable of making
his own medical decisions. However, he has repeatedly stated his
desire to stop taking Risperidone because of its side effects. In
the opinion of Gerald Lazar, M.D., an independent psychiatrist,
this would not reflect an informed decision. [E.L.] has limited
insight into his illness.
The court finds that the reasons that the guardianship was
granted remain. [E.L.] remains incapacitated with respect to
making medical decisions. The court further finds that the
limited guardianship is the least restrictive alternative. A power
of attorney would not be sufficient because [E.L.] could cancel it.
A springing guardianship would not meet [E.L.’s] needs because
it would require [E.L.] to decompensate before it could be
implemented. This would make further treatment more difficult
and could result in an injury to [E.L.] or some other person
during the time he decompensated.
The petition to terminate the guardianship is denied.
By statute, “[t]he findings of fact of the [probate court] are final unless
they are so plainly erroneous that [they] could not be reasonably made.” RSA
567-A:4 (1997); see RSA 464-A:47 (2004) (providing that appeals from probate
court decisions are governed by RSA chapter 567-A). Thus, we do not reweigh
the evidence to determine whether we would have ruled differently. Rather, we
review the record of the probate proceedings to determine if the probate court’s
findings could be reasonably made given the testimony and the evidence before
it. In re Buttrick, 134 N.H. 675, 676 (1991). We defer to the judgment of the
probate court to resolve “conflicts in testimony, measur[e] the credibility of
witnesses, and determin[e] the weight to be given to testimony,” In re
Guardianship of Kapitula,153 N.H. 492, 497 (2006), recognizing that as the
trier of fact, it is in the best position to “measure the persuasiveness and
credibility of evidence,” In re Estate of King, 151 N.H. 425, 429 (2004). It lies
“within the province of the trial court to accept or reject, in whole or in part,
4
whatever evidence was presented.” In re Guardianship of Kapitula, 153 N.H. at
497-98 (quotation omitted).
On appeal, E.L. argues that the probate court erred in finding that the
evidence demonstrates beyond a reasonable doubt that he remains
incapacitated and that no less restrictive alternative to guardianship exists,
both necessary statutory components for the continuation of guardianship, see
RSA 464-A:9, III(a), (c), (d). Our task is to review the record to determine
whether it supports the probate court’s finding that the guardian proved these
statutory components beyond a reasonable doubt. See RSA 464-A:8, IV.
Because E.L. challenges the sufficiency of the evidence, we examine whether
the probate court’s actual or implicit factual findings on the statutory
components required for guardianship are reasonably supported by competent
evidence. See id.; In the Matter of B.T., 153 N.H. 255, 259 (2006). “We will not
disturb the probate court’s decree unless it is unsupported by the evidence or
plainly erroneous as a matter of law.” In re William A., 142 N.H. 598, 600
(1998) (quotation omitted).
III
We first turn to whether the evidence supports the probate court’s
finding beyond a reasonable doubt that E.L. remains incapacitated to make his
own medical decisions. E.L. argues that no evidence of recent acts or
occurrences demonstrates beyond a reasonable doubt that he is incapacitated.
According to him, substantial evidence establishes his competency, including
his ten-year history of full compliance with taking his prescribed medications,
his consent to continued consultation with medical providers and the
soundness of his reasons for wanting to stop or reduce his intake of
Risperidone. The New Hampshire Department of Corrections (State) contends
that while the symptoms of E.L.’s mental illness have abated due to the
success of the guardianship, he has limited insight and judgment about his
illness and the consequences of stopping his medications. According to the
State, the evidence establishes that E.L.’s sole motivation for terminating
guardianship is to discontinue the very medications which have dramatically
helped him, thereby causing him to decompensate and pose a danger to
himself and others.
Incapacity is “a legal, not a medical, disability.” RSA 464-A:2, XI (2004).
To be deemed incapacitated, a person must have “suffered, [be] suffering or [be]
likely to suffer substantial harm due to an inability to provide for his personal
needs for food, clothing, shelter, health care or safety or an inability to manage
his or her property or financial affairs.” Id. Further, incapacity is measured by
a person’s “functional limitations,” id.; that is,
5
behavior or conditions in an individual which impair his or her
ability to participate in and perform minimal activities of daily
living that secure and maintain proper food, clothing, shelter,
health care or safety for himself or herself.
RSA 464-A:2, VII (2004). Therefore, to overturn the probate court’s finding that
he continues to have an incapacity for making sound medical decisions, E.L.
must demonstrate that no reasonable fact finder could find beyond a
reasonable doubt that: (1) he is unable to provide for his personal needs for
health care or safety; and (2) this inability has caused him to have suffered, be
currently suffering or be likely to suffer “substantial harm.” See RSA 464-A:2,
XI. We particularly examine the record for evidence of “behavior or conditions”
that impair E.L.’s “ability to participate in and perform minimal activities of
daily living that secure and maintain proper . . . health care or safety . . . for
himself.” See RSA 464-A:2, VII.
The record contains competent evidence to support the conclusion that
E.L. has limited insight into his mental illness, intends to stop taking his
prescribed medications, is unable to exercise sound judgment about the
potential consequences of ceasing or modifying his current medication regime
and is likely to decompensate without medication, thus posing a danger to
himself and others. Considered as a whole, this evidence supports a finding
beyond a reasonable doubt that E.L. is unable to participate in and perform the
minimal activities necessary for his health care such that substantial harm will
likely occur without the medical guardianship.
With respect to E.L.’s understanding of his mental illness, both Lazar
and Fontaine testified that he does not believe that he suffers psychotic
features from his bipolar condition. While E.L. may acknowledge that he
suffers from bipolar disorder, there is evidence that he does not appreciate the
gravity of the symptoms he displays when not taking proper medication. Lazar
testified that E.L.’s sexual assault of his wife, the crime for which he is
incarcerated, is likely connected to his mental illness. Yet, E.L. denied to Lazar
that he committed the assault, stating that his wife fabricated the charge.
Further, E.L. told Lazar that he believes that he is “not mentally ill to the
degree people say.” Indeed, in his motion to terminate guardianship he stated:
“My illness is not severe and I do as well off meds as on them.”
In addition, evidence in the record permits a reasonable person to
conclude that upon termination of the guardianship, E.L. intends to stop
taking his prescribed medications either because he does not believe they are
necessary or because he is concerned about their side effects. E.L. informed
his guardian that he wanted a “medication holiday” to see how he feels. Again,
in his motion to terminate guardianship, E.L. asserted: “I do as well off meds
as on them.” While portions of the record suggest that E.L. may be amenable
6
to continuing lithium and maintaining a reduced dosage of Risperidone or
another anti-psychotic medication, it was within the probate court’s discretion,
having assessed witness credibility, to conclude that E.L. was intent upon
ceasing his medications. See In re Estate of King, 151 N.H. at 429.
No one disputes that E.L. has been compliant with his prescribed
medications since his guardianship was imposed in 1995. Evidence supports
the conclusion, however, that his compliance has been the direct result of the
guardianship. Although requested to do so, E.L. refused to take any
medications before the guardianship was ordered. Further, Fontaine testified
that “[p]art of why he [maintains consistency with his medication] is the fact
that he knows that he has someone else who has control over his need to stay
on medication.” Lazar’s report refers to a January 2000 treatment plan review
which noted that E.L. remained compliant with taking prescribed medications
because he believed that refusing to do so would cause him difficulties. E.L.
himself testified that he would continue to take Risperidone and lithium
because he is “[told] to do it.” Therefore, the probate court could have
reasonably found that E.L. has been compliant with prescribed medications
due to the compulsory nature of the guardianship and not because he
appreciates the need for them.
The record also would support a finding that E.L. is unable to exercise
sound judgment in assessing the risk of interrupting his current medication
regime. While Lazar noted that it is possible for someone to have an illness
and refuse treatment in a sound manner for reasons the medical professional
may disagree with, he testified that E.L. is unable to exercise sound judgment
in deciding upon a particular course of medical treatment. Lazar explained
that while E.L. can understand all the factual information concerning his
illness and the efficacy of medication, he lacks the ability to rationally and
reasonably weigh the competing risks involved with accepting or rejecting a
particular treatment plan.
Although E.L.’s treatment team affirmed his concerns about the side
effects of his medications, evidence would support a finding that E.L. has
focused exclusively upon the side effects. E.L. testified that he initially denied
suffering from bipolar disorder because he did not want to be labeled a “freak,”
but that over time he has grown to accept that he is afflicted with a mental
illness and needs lithium. His testimony, as well as the remaining record,
however, is devoid of evidence that reveals his consideration of and
appreciation for the symptoms that would likely arise in the event he stopped
or altered his medications and decompensated. E.L.’s limited understanding of
his mental illness, as well as his failure to appreciate and consider the risks of
interrupting a medication regime that has effectively treated it, supports the
finding that his ability to exercise sound judgment about his medical treatment
remains meaningfully impaired. As Lazar testified, “It’s hard to make an
7
informed decision about your medications if you don’t have an appreciation for
the fact that you have a particular illness and that there are consequences to
not treat as well as to treating and make a decision based on the most
favorable outcome.”
Finally, there is evidence of E.L.’s prior dangerousness when not
adequately medicated. The record refers to his prior convictions for willful
cruelty towards children, and he currently is incarcerated for sexually
assaulting his wife. Further, there is evidence in the record that E.L.’s wife
reported that he beat her over a five-year period. Once transferred to SPU after
his conviction, he was at times confined in the most restrictive unit because he
verbally abused the staff, failed to follow rules, displayed inappropriate
behavior and lacked self control. He also refused to take medications and
displayed obsessive behavior. Once guardianship was imposed, however, he
began to take prescribed medication, and his behavior substantially improved.
While incarcerated and medicated only with lithium, E.L. was in two
prison fights. The second fight, in 2002, was so significant that his facial
injuries required reconstructive surgery. Although E.L. denies that he
provoked the altercation in any manner, evidence shows that this fight
occurred about one year prior to the diagnosis of the psychotic component to
his bipolar disorder and prescription for Risperidone. According to his
treatment team, before E.L. began taking Risperidone, he would report
interactions with other inmates where he used provocative language that the
treatment team concluded could trigger arguments. Moreover, the probate
court could have reasonably questioned the credibility of E.L.’s account of the
prison fight considering that he denied to Lazar that he sexually assaulted his
wife and blamed her for fabricating the charge.
Lazar testified that E.L.’s crimes involving children and his wife likely
were connected to his mental illness. E.L.’s treatment team and Lazar himself
expressed concern about his history of violence and testified that should he
refuse to take his medications, he will likely decompensate and become a
danger to himself and others. Lazar and members of the treatment team also
expressed concern that should E.L. decompensate, his relationship with others
and the quality of his life would likely suffer, that he might not be able to live in
the prison’s general population, that his opportunity for parole in 2008 could
be diminished and that restoring his current good functioning could be a
lengthy process, if not impossible.
E.L. argues that the acts which gave rise to guardianship in 1995 are not
relevant, and that the guardian failed to present sufficient recent evidence to
support continuation of the guardianship. See RSA 464-A:40. E.L. appears to
contend that by statute, to prove that he remains incapacitated, the guardian
could only rely upon evidence of acts that occurred within six months of the
8
date of the filing of the termination motion. See RSA 464-A:2, XI. The State
argues, however, that application of this specific time requirement is relevant
only to initial petitions for guardianship.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Snedeker v. Snedeker, 145 N.H. 19, 20 (2000). We first examine the
language found in the statute, and where possible, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to words used. Id. at 20-21. However, we will not interpret
statutory language in a literal manner when such a reading would lead to an
absurd result. See State v. Warren, 147 N.H. 567, 568 (2002).
As noted earlier, “incapacity” is defined
to mean or refer to any person who has suffered, is suffering
or is likely to suffer substantial harm due to an inability to
provide for his personal needs for food, clothing, shelter,
health care or safety or an inability to manage his or her
property or financial affairs.
RSA 464-A:2, XI (emphasis added). The statute requires that such “[i]nability
. . . be evidenced by acts or occurrences, or statements which strongly indicate
imminent acts or occurrences.” Id. Moreover,
[a]ll evidence of inability must have occurred within 6
months prior to the filing of the petition and at least one
incidence of such behavior must have occurred within 20
days of the filing of the petition for guardianship.
Id. This specific time requirement, however, does not apply to proceedings for
termination of guardianship.
When a ward seeks to terminate guardianship, the probate court
conducts “a hearing similar to that provided for in RSA 464-A:8 and RSA 464-
A:9.” RSA 464-A:40, II(c) (emphasis added). By utilizing the phrase “similar
to,” the legislature understood that not all aspects of a guardianship
termination proceeding would be identical to an initial proceeding seeking the
appointment of a guardian. At the termination proceeding, “the guardian
[must] prove that the grounds for appointment of a guardian provided in RSA
464-A:9 continue to exist,” id. (emphasis added), including, necessarily, that
the ward remains incapacitated, see RSA 464-A:9, III(a). For a ward who has
been deemed incapacitated and is under guardianship care, the outward
manifestations of incapacity may have decreased, if not completely dissipated,
as a result of the proper attention and care provided through the guardian.
While having secured some ability to provide for his personal needs, the ward
9
may not have necessarily regained capacity to the degree that obviates the need
for a guardianship. In such a case, requiring the guardian to prove the
continuation of the ward’s incapacity based exclusively upon evidence of acts,
occurrences or statements that happened within six months of the termination
motion would lead to an absurd result. Accordingly, we conclude that while a
guardian’s burden to prove the continuation of incapacity under RSA 464-A:40,
II(c) requires proof of the ward’s present inability to provide for his personal
care as defined under RSA 464-A:2, XI, the guardian is not restricted to
presenting evidence of acts, occurrences or statements that occurred within the
specific time period provided under RSA 464-A:2, XI.
In sum, we conclude that evidence in the record supports the probate
court’s finding beyond a reasonable doubt that E.L. is presently unable to
participate in or perform minimal activities of daily living with respect to his
health care and that he is likely to suffer substantial harm if the guardianship
is terminated. See RSA 464-A:2, VII, XI. Accordingly, we uphold the probate
court’s finding that E.L. continues to have an incapacity for making his own
health care decisions.
IV
We next address E.L.’s argument that the probate court erred in finding
that the guardian sustained its burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt
that no less restrictive alternative to guardianship exists. In addition to
establishing E.L.’s continuing incapacity in order for the guardianship to
continue, the record must support beyond a reasonable doubt that, among
other things, no available alternative resources exist that are suitable to E.L.’s
needs, RSA 464-A:9, II(c), and guardianship is the least restrictive form of
intervention, RSA 464-A:9, II(d). Specifically, with respect to available
resources, chapter 464-A requires that
no available alternative resources [exist] which are suitable
with respect to the incapacitated person’s welfare, safety,
and rehabilitation or the prudent management of his or her
property and financial affairs.
RSA 464-A:9, II(c). “Available alternative resource” is defined to mean
“alternatives to guardianship including, but not limited to, . . . powers of
attorney . . . .” RSA 464-A:2, II (2004).
Concerning the least restrictive form of intervention, chapter 464-A
provides that guardianship must be:
10
appropriate as the least restrictive form of intervention
consistent with the preservation of civil rights and liberties of
the proposed ward.
RSA 464-A:9, II(d). “Least restrictive form of intervention” is defined to mean
that the guardianship imposed on the ward represents only
those limitations necessary to provide him or her with
needed care and rehabilitative services, and that the ward
shall enjoy the greatest amount of personal freedom and civil
liberties consistent with his or her mental and physical
limitations.
RSA 464-A:2, XIV (2004).
Evidence was presented on two alternatives to guardianship at the
evidentiary hearing: medical power of attorney and springing guardianship.
Under these alternatives, a power of attorney would be invoked or a
guardianship would “spring” into effect should certain prescribed events occur
or symptoms arise. The probate court found:
A power of attorney would not be sufficient because [E.L.] could
cancel it. A springing guardianship would not meet [E.L.’s]
needs because it would require [E.L.] to decompensate before it
could be implemented. This would make further treatment
more difficult and could result in an injury to [E.L.] or some
other person during the time he decompensated.
We conclude that there is sufficient evidence to support the probate court’s
rejection of the alternatives to continued guardianship.
As discussed earlier, the evidence supports a finding that E.L. intends to
change or discontinue his current medication regime. While E.L.’s
incarceration would permit prison officials and medical personnel to closely
monitor E.L.’s behavior, Lazar testified that if guardianship were terminated
and E.L. went off his medications, his deterioration could be slow and not
immediately visible to others, including his treatment team. Lazar also
explained that “[t]here would be a lag time” between the moment E.L.’s
decompensation is detected, a decision is made to trigger guardianship and
guardianship is actually reinstated. The medical professionals expressed
concern that if E.L. decompensated, he might not be able to be stabilized again
because in some cases medicine that was once effective may be ineffective
when taken again after an interruption.
11
Fontaine testified that the structure of guardianship itself is significant
to E.L.’s clinical treatment because he consistently maintains his medication
due to the fact that another person controls his decision to take it. She
explained that a springing guardianship may be appropriate for an individual
who understands his mental illness as well as the need for continuing his
medication, and who would remain compliant with medication with or without
a guardian. Given E.L.’s limited insight into his illness and his impaired
judgment concerning his current medication regime, evidence supports the
probate court’s finding that E.L. is not an appropriate candidate for a springing
guardianship or a health care power of attorney. In sum, taking the evidence
as a whole, we conclude that it was not unreasonable for the probate court to
find beyond a reasonable doubt that no less restrictive alternative other than
guardianship exists. See RSA 464-A:9, II(c), (d). Accordingly, we hold that the
evidence in the record is sufficient as a matter of law to support the probate
court’s denial of E.L.’s motion to terminate guardianship.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12