THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2005-389
CITY OF ROCHESTER
v.
JAMES CORPENING & a.
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 26, 2006
Wensley, Jones & Azarian, P.L.L.C., of Rochester (Danford J. Wensley
and Dianna J. Parker on the brief, and Mr. Wensley orally), for the petitioner.
Hanlon & Zubkus, of Rochester (Mark D. Hanlon on the brief and orally),
for respondent James Corpening.
Backus, Meyer, Solomon & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (B.J. Branch on
the brief and orally), for respondent George Blaisdell.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, City of Rochester (city), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) denying its request for civil penalties pursuant
to RSA 676:17, I(b) (1996) (amended 2005), and granting respondent George
Blaisdell’s motion to reconsider the court’s remedy regarding certain motor
vehicle junkyard violations. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Respondent James Corpening
owns two adjoining properties located at 788 and 794 Portland Street in
Rochester. Blaisdell resides at 794 Portland Street and Corpening contends
that Blaisdell is supposed to maintain both properties.
By letter dated June 5, 2003, the city notified the respondents that the
condition of the properties was in violation of: (1) various provisions of the
2000 International Property Maintenance Code, which mandates the
maintenance of clean, sanitary and safe premises and requires the proper
storage and removal of rubbish; (2) section 42.14(E)(3) of the city’s General
Ordinances relative to the maintenance of motor vehicle junkyards (General
Ordinances of the City of Rochester § 42.14(E)(3)); (3) RSA 236:114 (1993)
governing State licensing requirements for motor vehicle junkyards; and (4)
section 42.14(c)(6) of the city’s General Ordinances relative to the operation of
flower and plant nurseries and greenhouses (General Ordinances of the City of
Rochester § 42.14(c)(6)). When the use of the properties did not change, the
city sought injunctive relief, civil penalties and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA
676:17.
In January 2005, after a two-day bench trial, the trial court issued an
order that summarized the condition of the properties as follows:
While the court has endeavored to describe the condition of the
properties, any description falls short, with the pictures themselves
speaking volumes about the condition. Simply put, the grounds
surrounding the houses are deplorable and, in addition to being
unsightly, pose an obvious health and safety risk in a residential
neighborhood.
Among other things, the trial court found that the respondents were operating
an unlicensed motor vehicle junkyard in violation of section 42.14(E)(3) of the
city ordinances and RSA 236:114. Specifically, the trial court found that “[a]
boat, a camping trailer, a blue truck, a backhoe, and a white car are located on
the properties.” After noting that there were at least two unregistered motor
vehicles on the property, the trial court found that both the backhoe tractor
and the blue pickup truck were no longer intended for use and ordered the
respondents to “bring the property into conformance with these regulations” by
removing the backhoe, the blue pickup truck, and “all but one of the other
unregistered vehicles that may be on the property.” The trial court denied the
city’s request to impose civil penalties pursuant to RSA 676:17, reasoning that
the imposition of fines would make it financially difficult for the respondents to
bring the properties into conformity with the terms of its order.
The city moved for reconsideration, requesting that the trial court, among
other things, reverse its decision not to impose statutory civil penalties against
2
the respondents. The city asserted that, pursuant to RSA 676:17, I, the
penalties were mandatory given the trial court’s rulings regarding the
respondents’ violations of various city ordinances and State statutes. In the
alternative, the city asked the trial court to impose the statutory civil penalties,
but suspend their imposition for sixty days, thereby giving the respondents
time to bring the properties into compliance with the trial court’s order.
In his motion to reconsider, Blaisdell argued, in pertinent part, that by
registering all motor vehicles on the property, any violations regarding the
motor vehicle junkyard would be cured. He requested the court to modify its
order accordingly.
The trial court ruled that it had properly declined to impose civil
penalties under RSA 676:17. After reviewing both the city ordinance and
applicable State statute, the trial court also ruled, “To be deemed a motor
vehicle junkyard, the property must contain two or more unregistered motor
vehicles which are not intended for or in condition for legal use on the public
highways.” Thus, the trial court found that Blaisdell “can either remove or
register the offending vehicles to bring his property into compliance with the
motor vehicle junkyard regulations.”
On appeal, the city asserts the trial court erred by: (1) failing to impose
statutory civil penalties it contends are mandatory under RSA 676:17, I(b); and
(2) ruling that Blaisdell could remedy the State and local motor vehicle
junkyard violations by registering the unregistered vehicles that were located
on the properties.
We defer to the trial court’s findings of fact if they are supported by the
evidence and are not erroneous as a matter of law. Franklin v. Callum, 146
N.H. 779, 781 (2001). We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de
novo. Foote v. Manchester Sch. Dist., 152 N.H. 599, 601 (2005). We are the
final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute and
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Carignan v. N.H.
Int’l Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 419 (2004). We interpret statutes in the context
of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id. Moreover, the
traditional rules of statutory construction generally govern our review of
ordinances. See Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 79 (2005).
I. Civil Penalties
As a preliminary matter, we note that throughout the litigation at the
trial court level and on appeal, the basis of the city’s claim for the imposition of
civil penalties has been RSA 676:17, I, and not the penalty provisions in the
3
city’s general ordinances. Although the city references sections 42.25(b) and
40.12 of the city’s general ordinances in its brief, it did not rely upon these
provisions in the trial court and did not develop its argument regarding them
either in its brief or at oral argument. Therefore, we decline to address them.
See Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 509 (2004).
The version of RSA 676:17, I, relevant to this case provided in pertinent
part:
I. Any person who violates any of the
provisions of this title, or any local ordinance,
code, or regulation adopted under this title, or
any provision or specification of any application,
plat, or plan approved by, or any requirement or
condition of a permit or decision issued by, any
local administrator or land use board acting
under the authority of this title:
. . . .
(b) Shall be subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed $100 for each day that such violation
is found to continue after the conviction date
or after the date on which the violator
receives written notice from the municipality
that he is in violation, whichever is earlier.
RSA 676:17, I(b) (emphasis added). The city contends that the use of the word
“shall” is a command, requiring mandatory enforcement. While the city
concedes that the trial court has discretionary authority to tailor the imposition
of the statutory penalty on a case-by-case basis, it argues that the trial court
must impose some penalty.
“The intention of the Legislature as to the mandatory or directory nature
of a particular statutory provision is determined primarily from the language
thereof.” Appeal of Rowan, 142 N.H. 67, 71 (1997) (quotation and citation
omitted). The general rule of statutory construction is that “the word ‘may’
makes enforcement of a statute permissive and that the word ‘shall’ requires
mandatory enforcement.” Town of Nottingham v. Harvey, 120 N.H. 889, 895
(1980). Nevertheless, in the instant case, the word “shall” is modified by the
phrase “be subject to,” which affects the overall meaning of the clause. See
Dancart Corp. v. St. Albans Rubber Co., 124 N.H. 598, 602 (1984) (interpreting
“shall be subject to” in the context of a contractual forum selection clause);
Strafford Technology v. Camcar Div. of Textron, 147 N.H. 174, 176 (2001)
(interpreting “shall be determined by” in the context of a contractual forum
selection clause).
4
In Dancart, the parties to a contract action between a New Hampshire
corporation and an English corporation disputed the meaning of a forum
selection clause that stated: “[The contract] shall be subject to the jurisdiction
of the English Courts.” Dancart, 124 N.H. at 600 (emphasis added). In that
case, we declined to interpret this provision as a mandate of exclusive
jurisdiction in the English Courts. Id. at 602. Instead, we concluded that the
clause “shall be subject to” was a grant of authority conferring non-exclusive
jurisdiction in the English Courts. Id. Thus, we interpreted the phrase “be
subject to” as modifying the “mandatory character” of the word “shall.” Id.
Similarly, in the context of the instant case, we interpret the clause “shall be
subject to” as granting the trial court the authority to impose the statutory
penalties set forth in RSA 676:17, I(b) rather than the obligation to impose
such penalties. Thus, RSA 676:17, I(b) grants the trial court the authority to
determine whether or not to impose a penalty and the amount of the penalty
should it choose to impose one. See Town of Nottingham v. Newman, 147 N.H.
131, 134-35 (2001) (affirming trial court’s imposition of civil penalties pursuant
to RSA 676:17, I(b) based upon a lower rate than that requested by the town
after considering the defendants’ financial condition and the totality of the
circumstances). Accordingly, we reject the city’s argument that imposition of a
statutory penalty was mandatory.
II. Motor Vehicle Junkyard Violation
The city asserts that the trial court erred in its interpretation of section
42.6(a)(32) of the city ordinance and RSA 236:112, I(c)(1) (Supp. 2005).
Specifically, the city argues that even if the vehicles were registered, they would
still not be intended for, or in condition for, legal use on the public highways
under both the State statute and the city’s ordinance, and the property,
therefore, would still be an unlicensed motor vehicle junkyard under RSA
236:114.
Blaisdell counters that pursuant to RSA 236:124 (1993), the city’s
ordinance defining motor vehicle junkyards controls because it conflicts with
the statutory definition of motor vehicle junkyard. He contends that the city’s
ordinance requires that there be two or more vehicles stored on the property
which are both unregistered and “no longer intended or in condition for legal
use on public highways” before the property constitutes a motor vehicle
junkyard. While he acknowledges that RSA 236:112, I(c)(1) contains no
requirement that the offending vehicles be unregistered, he argues that the
city’s ordinance controls.
Our determination rests upon an interpretation of both RSA 236:112,
I(c)(1) and section 42.6(a)(32) of the city ordinance and the relationship
between the two. RSA chapter 236, entitled, “Highway Regulation, Protection
5
and Control Regulations,” contains many subdivisions, one of which is entitled,
“Motor Vehicle Recycling Yards and Junk Yards.” RSA 236:111-:129 (1993 &
Supp. 2005). RSA 236:114 requires a person who is operating, establishing or
maintaining a junkyard to obtain a license to operate a junkyard business and
a certificate of approval for the location of the junkyard. For the purposes of
this subdivision, RSA 236:112 defines a “junk yard” as including, in pertinent
part:
Motor vehicle junk yards, meaning any place . . .
where the following are stored or deposited in a
quantity equal in bulk to 2 or more motor vehicles:
(1) Motor vehicles which are no longer
intended or in condition for legal use according
to their original purpose . . . .
RSA 236:112, I(c)(1).
However, the applicable city ordinance defines a motor vehicle junkyard
as, in pertinent part:
Any business and any place of storage or deposit,
whether in connection with another business or not,
which has stored or deposited two (2) or more
unregistered motor vehicles which are no longer
intended or in condition for legal use on the public
highways . . . .
General Ordinances of the City of Rochester § 42.6(a)(32). In order to qualify
as a motor vehicle junkyard under the city ordinance, the property must
contain two or more vehicles that are both unregistered and no longer
intended for legal use on the public highways. Id. Thus, section 42.6(a)(32)
effectively makes it more difficult for a property to be classified as a motor
vehicle junkyard because it contains an extra requirement not present in the
State statute. We, therefore, conclude that there is an actual conflict between
RSA 236:112, I(c)(1) and section 42.6(a)(32). See N. Country Envtl. Servs. v.
Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 611 (2004) (explaining that “[a] conflict
exists when a municipal ordinance or regulation permits that which a State
statute prohibits or vice versa”).
RSA 236:124, “Effect of Local Ordinances,” provides:
This subdivision is not in derogation of zoning ordinances or
ordinances for the control of junk yards now or hereafter
established within the proper exercise of police power granted to
6
municipalities, but rather is in aid thereof. Specific local
ordinances shall control when in conflict with this subdivision.
(Emphasis added.) Despite the city’s contrary assertion, we conclude that RSA
236:124 applies to all statutes contained in the subdivision of RSA chapter 236
dealing with “Motor Vehicle Recycling Yards and Junk Yards.” The plain
language of RSA 236:124 indicates that there was no legislative intent for State
law to preempt local ordinances and comprehensively regulate this particular
field. See JTR Colebrook v. Town of Colebrook, 149 N.H. 767, 770 (2003)
(explaining preemption doctrine). To the contrary, the express language of RSA
236:124 provides that State statutes in this particular field are intended to aid
local ordinances. Thus, the city’s ordinance, section 42.6(a)(32), controls over
the conflicting statutory provision set forth in RSA 236:112, I(c)(1).
We are also not persuaded by the city’s assertion that “allowing Mr.
Blaisdell to escape the City violation merely by registering the vehicles would
defeat the purpose of Chapter 236 of the State legislative scheme,” as set forth
in RSA 236:111. By complying with section 42.6(a)(32) of the city’s ordinance,
Blaisdell would no longer be operating an unlicensed motor vehicle junkyard
on the properties, which supports the underlying purpose of RSA chapter 236.
Moreover, even assuming that the city ordinance is a less effective method of
serving the purposes set forth in RSA 236:111, the legislature has specifically
authorized municipalities to enforce less protective ordinances. If the
legislature had intended RSA 236:111-:129 to provide minimum standards
binding upon all municipalities, it could have specifically so stated. See RSA
485-C:20 (2001).
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err when it denied
the city’s request for civil penalties pursuant to RSA 676:17 and granted, in
part, Blaisdell’s motion to reconsider its remedy for the motor vehicle junkyard
violations.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J.,
dissented.
BRODERICK, C.J., dissenting: I do not believe that a plain meaning
analysis is the proper approach to examining the phrase “shall be subject to”
as used in RSA 676:17, I(b). Nor do I believe that the legislature intended its
definition of motor vehicle junkyard in RSA 236:112 to be merely a gap-filler in
the event that a municipality had not legislated in that area. For these
reasons, I respectfully dissent.
7
I
I would not apply a plain meaning analysis to determine whether the
phrase “be subject to” modifies what would generally be the mandatory nature
of the word “shall” in RSA 676:17, I(b). As I do not believe that this is the
proper analysis by which to examine this phrase, I express no opinion as to
whether the majority correctly reaches the conclusion that the trial court was
merely authorized, not obligated, to issue a fine “not to exceed $100.” I write
simply to demonstrate my opinion that the phrase “shall be subject to” does
not have the plain and ordinary meaning the majority would ascribe to it.
A plain meaning analysis is not supported by our holding in Dancart
Corp. v. St. Albans Rubber Co., 124 N.H. 598 (1984). There, we were asked to
uphold the trial court’s interpretation of a forum selection clause. The clause
stated that the contract at issue “shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the
English courts.” Dancart, 124 N.H. at 601. The trial court had determined
that the phrase granted exclusive jurisdiction to the English courts, and
therefore dismissed the plaintiff’s action from the superior court. Id.
In examining this ruling we stated:
We assume that the trial court did not reach its conclusion by
reference to the plain meaning of the language of the clause,
because the language does not expressly provide that jurisdiction
shall rest exclusively in the English courts. We therefore infer that
the trial judge found the language ambiguous, and supplemented
his understanding of it by reference to the extrinsic evidence to
which we have referred in our statement of the facts.
Id. at 601-02 (citations omitted and emphasis added). We then examined the
record to determine whether the trial court’s ruling was “supported by the
language of the contract considered in the light of those exhibits and inferences
that may be drawn from them.” Id. at 602.
Given the ambiguous nature of this phrase, “shall be subject to” should
not be examined under a plain meaning analysis. Accordingly, I cannot join
the conclusion that this phrase necessarily reduces the generally mandatory
nature of “shall” to a discretionary grant of authority.
Indeed, in State v. Dickson, 116 N.H. 175, cert. denied, 429 U.S. 803
(1976), we interpreted RSA 502-A:11 and concluded that inclusion of the
phrase “subject to” did not change the mandatory nature of “shall” in that
statute. The statute states, “Each district court . . . shall have original
jurisdiction, subject to appeal, of [certain] crimes and offenses . . . .” RSA 502-
A:11. The statute parallels the constitutional provision that established these
8
courts. “And the general court are further empowered to give to police courts
original jurisdiction to try and determine, subject to right of appeal and trial by
jury, all criminal causes wherein the punishment is less than imprisonment in
the state prison.” N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 77. Although the “subject to”
language was not at issue in Dickson, we stated, “The clear import of the
statutory scheme is that cases within their jurisdiction which are begun in the
district courts shall be tried there, subject to appeal and trial de novo.”
Dickson, 116 N.H. at 177.
In reaching this conclusion, we relied on State v. Handfield, 115 N.H.
628 (1975), cert. denied, 427 U.S. 909 (1976). In Handfield, a defendant
claimed that his Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial was violated by forcing
him to first defend a bench trial in the district court. Through RSA 502-A:11,
the legislature had given the defendant the ability to appeal his conviction to
the superior court for a jury trial. We stated, “Defendant attacks our two-tier
system . . . by which a person charged with a misdemeanor is tried in the
district court without a jury and if found guilty is given the right of appeal to
the superior court with a trial de novo by jury unless waived.” Handfield, 115
N.H. at 629 (emphasis added).
As Dickson and Handfield make clear, the presence of “subject to” does
not change an individual’s ability to appeal, as of right, from the district to the
superior court. I do not suggest that these cases support a conclusion that
“shall be subject to” should always be read to be mandatory, equivalent to the
term “shall” by itself. Indeed, in neither case did we purport to apply a plain
meaning analysis. Rather, Dickson and Handfield demonstrate that the term
“shall be subject to” does not have the plain meaning the majority suggests.
As the majority notes, we first examine the language of a statute and
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Carignan v. N.H.
Int’l Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 419 (2004). However, we have additionally
stated that, when the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, we do
not look beyond it to determine legislative intent. Id. As Dancart indicates,
“shall be subject to” neither has a plain and ordinary meaning, nor is clear and
unambiguous. Thus, I believe that it is necessary to consider the legislative
history of RSA 676:17 to determine the legislature’s intent in choosing the
phrase “shall be subject to.”
When first enacted in 1983, this section contained only one paragraph:
Any violation of this title may be made punishable by a fine of not
more than $100 for each day that such violation continues after
the conviction date; provided, however, that the total fines imposed
for any single violation shall not exceed $500.
9
Laws 1983, 447:1 (emphasis added) (enacting RSA 676:17). In 1988, this was
amended to read as follows:
I. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this title,
or any local ordinance, code, or regulation adopted under this title,
or any provision or specification of any application, plat, or plan
approved by, or any requirement or condition of a permit or
decision issued by, any local administrator or land use board
acting under the authority of this title:
(a) Shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person.
(b) Shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $100 for
each day that such violation is found to continue after the
conviction date or after the date on which the violator receives
written notice from the municipality that he is in violation,
whichever is earlier.
Laws 1988, 19:6 (repealing and reenacting RSA 676:17, I) (emphases added).
Corpening and Blaisdell were found to be in violation of the 1988 version.
One could reasonably argue that the legislature, by expressly amending
the statute to replace “may be made punishable by” with “shall be subject to”
and “shall be guilty of,” indicated its intention that the imposition of a civil fine
be mandatory and not discretionary. In discussing changes to the statutes,
Senator White indicated the legislature’s intent to strengthen a town’s
enforcement mechanisms:
As amended this bill gives some teeth to the current laws which is
long overdue and have not been useful to the municipalities trying
to enforce their codes. The bill clarifies certain penalty provisions
in order to avoid confusion which had caused delays for the towns
once they were in court. Any one having been a selectmen [sic] will
know that you never really could enforce any of the zoning
ordinances.
N.H.S. Jour. 59 (1988) (statement of Sen. White). It is not unreasonable to
infer that, where the legislature intended to “give[ ] some teeth to the current
laws,” id., it did not intend to make application of the fines merely
discretionary. The legislative history of RSA 676:17 underscores the ambiguity
in this section and the need for more than a plain meaning analysis.
This conclusion could also be supported by two other amendments to the
statutes. As the majority indicates, RSA 676:17 was again modified in 2004.
10
At that time, the legislature again redrafted paragraph I, explicitly requiring
that an individual both “shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a natural person, or
guilty of a felony if any other person; and shall be subject to a civil penalty” by
payment of fines. RSA 676:17, I (Supp. 2005) (emphasis added). This further
suggests that the legislature may have intended both the criminal and civil
penalties in the 1988 version to be treated as mandatory, despite the inclusion
of the phrase “be subject to” in the provision regarding fines.
Moreover, when the legislature amended RSA 676:17 in 1988, it included
in the same bill an addition to RSA chapter 502-A, expanding the jurisdiction
of the district court to hear cases arising under RSA 676:17. “The district
court shall have concurrent jurisdiction, subject to appeal, of the prosecution
of any violation of a local ordinance, code, or regulation properly adopted
pursuant to the enabling statutes . . . .” Laws 1988, 19:1 (enacting RSA 502-
A:11-a). This jurisdictional statute remains unchanged today. One could
argue that it is unlikely the legislature chose to use the phrase “subject to” to
modify “shall” twice in the same bill, but intended it to mean something
different in each use — in Laws 1988, 19:1 allowing appeals as of right, and in
Laws 1988, 19:6 making the application of the fines discretionary.
Finally, I believe that the majority has perhaps overlooked the larger
implications of declaring the phrase “shall be subject to” to be clear and
unambiguous on its face. An electronic search indicates that the legislature
has used this phrase nearly 200 times in the statutes. It is doubtful that the
legislature intended all, if any, of these statutes to be merely discretionary.
See, e.g., RSA 5-A:1 (2003) (“No judgment obtained against any person in any
proceeding to which he had become a party by reason of service of process
effected pursuant to the provisions of this compact shall be subject to attack
on the ground that the adjudicating court did not have personal jurisdiction
over such person.”); RSA 7:11 (2003) (“Nothing herein contained shall relieve
any officer or person of any duty prescribed by law relative to the enforcement
of any criminal law, but such officer or person, in the enforcement of such law,
shall be subject to the control of the attorney general . . . .”).
For these reasons, I believe that “shall be subject to” does not have the
plain and ordinary meaning the majority would ascribe to that phrase. It may
be that there are other aspects of the legislative history that would support the
majority’s conclusion. See, e.g., Laws 1988, 19:4 (amending RSA 651:2, IV to
include, “The limitations on amounts of fines . . . shall not include the amount
of any civil penalty, the imposition of which is authorized by statute or by a
properly adopted local ordinance, code, or regulation.” (emphasis added)).
However, because I disagree with the conclusion that the phrase has a plain
and ordinary meaning, I need not decide the issue of which interpretation the
legislative history supports.
11
II
The majority’s use of a plain meaning analysis of RSA 236:111 (Supp.
2005), RSA 236:112 (Supp. 2005), RSA 236:124 (1993), and General
Ordinances of the City of Rochester § 42.6(a)(32) (the ordinance) leads to an
interpretation of these provisions that is more generous than the legislature
intended. As the majority correctly points out, there is a conflict between the
current version of RSA 236:112 and the ordinance — namely, that RSA
236:112 requires only that the motor vehicles no longer be intended or in
condition for legal use, while the ordinance additionally requires that the
vehicles be unregistered. It is also true that RSA 236:124 states, “Specific local
ordinances shall control when in conflict with this subdivision.”
However, I do not believe that the legislature, in establishing RSA
236:124, meant that its definition of “junk yard” in RSA 236:112 was to be
merely advisory, setting neither a floor nor a ceiling. The majority ends its
analysis by stating, “If the legislature had intended RSA 236:111-:129 to
provide minimum standards binding upon all municipalities, it could have
specifically so stated. See RSA 485-C:20 (2001).” I agree that the legislature
could have explicitly stated, as it did in RSA 485-C:20, that the definition in
RSA 236:112 established minimum guidelines for municipalities to follow.
However, rather than ascribing a plain meaning to RSA 236:124, this
recognition only underscores the confusion created by that section.
As the majority notes, we interpret statutes in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation. Carignan, 151 N.H. at 419. Doing so
reveals the legislature’s intent in enacting RSA 236:124.
In RSA 236:111, the legislature expressly established its purpose for the
subdivision of RSA chapter 236 dealing with motor vehicle junkyards:
A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of
importance to the health and safety of the inhabitants and the
safeguarding of their material rights against unwarrantable
invasion. In addition, such an environment is considered essential
to the maintenance and continued development of the tourist and
recreation industry which is hereby declared to be of significant
and proven importance to the economy of the state and the general
welfare of its citizens.
It immediately followed this by recognizing “that the maintenance of junk yards
. . . is a useful and necessary business and ought to be encouraged when not
in conflict with the express purposes of this subdivision.” Id. (emphasis
added).
12
Through RSA 236:111, the legislature clearly and expressly indicated its
intent that there be some minimal levels of junkyard regulation in order to
maintain the clean, wholesome, and attractive environment that is so
important to the State’s economy and general welfare. As such, I believe that
the clear and unambiguous meaning of RSA 236:124, as indicated by the
entire statutory scheme, is that the legislature intended “when in conflict” to
mean “when more restrictive than.”
Accordingly, I believe that the legislature intended that RSA 236:112
create minimum guidelines — it did not intend this section to be merely a gap-
filler, applicable only when towns and cities have not established their own
regulations in this area. A contrary reading allows towns to set standards so
broadly as to completely frustrate the clear policy established by RSA 236:111.
However, even assuming that this reading is not made clear by the language of
the subdivision, the policy articulated in RSA 236:111 at the very least makes
RSA 236:124 ambiguous. As such, it would again be necessary to examine the
legislative history of these statutes. See Carignan, 151 N.H. at 419.
In 1965, the legislature passed House Bill 693, thereby enacting RSA
chapter 267-A, the precursor to RSA chapter 236. In discussing this bill,
Senator Gove stated:
It isn’t so much the organized junk yard, but the indiscriminate
junking of automobiles that offends most people. These junk yards
have caused surrounding land values to decrease considerably.
The beauty of the areas has been diminished at a time when the
State is embarking on a program to bring in as many tourists as
they can. The principle of the bill is set out pretty well in the
preamble. This demand for something to control the junk yards is
widespread.
N.H.S. Jour. 1300 (1965) (statement of Sen. Gove). The preamble described is
what later became RSA 236:111. See Laws 1965, 372:1 (enacting RSA 267-
A:1, titled “Purposes” and containing language found in RSA 236:111).
This prior version of the statutes contained the exact same language as
the ordinance at issue here. Both required that, for a location to be defined as
a motor vehicle junkyard, the cars must have been unsuitable for their
intended use and unregistered. Compare Laws 1965, 372:1, with General
Ordinances of the City of Rochester § 42.6(a)(32).
These definitions remained identical until 2002 when the legislature
passed House Bill 141. That bill amended RSA 236:112 to remove the
registration requirement. Senator Below explained this change:
13
House Bill 141 amends the RSA dealing with junkyard statutes. In
the past there’s been legislation passed giving the Department of
Environmental Services control on environmental issues with
respect to junkyards so that no harmful pollutants enter our water
supply or the ground water. In particular, this bill focuses on
motor vehicle salvage yards where individuals continue to
reregister non-usable vehicles so they do not have the hassle of
registering for the proper permits to have a junkyard. Under the
current RSA, an individual may keep registering automobiles,
which is a loophole in the law to avoid being classified as being a
junkyard. House Bill 141 closes that loophole.
N.H.S. Jour. 61 (2002) (statement of Sen. Below) (emphasis added).
These statements, coupled with the policy defined by RSA 236:111, make
clear that the legislature intended RSA 236:112 to create minimum standards
with respect to motor vehicle junkyards. In my opinion, it does not follow that
the legislature expressly closed the loophole contained in RSA 236:112, only to
leave it wide open by intending “where they conflict” to mean, as the majority
declares, that “the legislature has specifically authorized municipalities to
enforce less protective ordinances.”
For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.
14