THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2005-865
JAMES M. GREELISH
v.
DIANE WOOD
Argued: September 7, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2006
John F. Lake, of Barnstead, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Donald F. Whittum, of Rochester, by memorandum of law and orally, for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, James M. Greelish, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Perkins, J.) awarding damages arising out of the defendant’s
occupancy of a home purchased by the plaintiff at a foreclosure sale. We
affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The defendant, Diane Wood, possessed a life estate in a residence located
in Center Barnstead. The property was sold to the plaintiff at a foreclosure
sale, however, which terminated the life estate. On July 7, 2003, the plaintiff
served the defendant with a notice to quit and a notice to leave the premises
and not re-enter. When the defendant failed to vacate the premises, the
plaintiff filed a landlord-tenant writ in Laconia District Court, which the
defendant removed to superior court. On or about January 1, 2004, the
defendant vacated the premises. This resolved the issue of possession, but the
action continued – the plaintiff sought damages for his inability to rent the
property during the time that the defendant had refused to vacate, while the
defendant sought damages for harassment she allegedly suffered before she
vacated and for the value of personal property she alleged was missing when
she attempted to retrieve it on January 10, 2004.
In May 2004, the trial court ruled that after the foreclosure, the
defendant became a tenant at sufferance. The court found that the plaintiff
had engaged in a course of conduct designed to force the defendant to leave,
including parking a truck across the driveway to block access to the premises,
parking a vehicle within inches of the steps leading to the porch also to block
access, and removing without permission an unregistered vehicle that the
defendant was storing on the property.
The court further found that when the defendant left the premises on or
about January 1, 2004, she was unable to remove certain personal property
stored in the basement. When she returned on January 10 to retrieve it,
property worth $1,030 was missing. The court noted that the plaintiff did not
deny at trial that he had removed those items.
The case was appealed to this court, resulting in a remand for further
proceedings. On remand, the trial court found that the plaintiff had procured a
prospective tenant who was willing to take possession of the premises on
August 18, 2003, and pay $1,100 per month in rent. The plaintiff was unable
to rent the property to the prospective tenant, however, because the defendant
did not vacate until January 1, 2004. The trial court awarded the plaintiff
damages equal to $1,100 per month from August 18 through January 1, 2004,
totaling $4,876.71.
With respect to the defendant’s claims for damages, the trial court found
that the plaintiff’s “harassing conduct was unreasonable, excessive and
effectively constituted an attempted self-help constructive eviction.” The court
awarded the defendant damages equal to the fair rental value of the premises
from the beginning of the harassment (August 4, 2003) until she vacated on
January 1, 2004, totaling $5,390.09. In addition, the court found that the
plaintiff had removed the defendant’s personal property and had not returned
it. Therefore, the court awarded an additional $1,030 to the defendant. After
the damage awards were offset against each other, the final judgment was
$1,543.38 to the defendant.
The plaintiff appeals, arguing that the trial court erred: (1) in calculating
his damages resulting from the defendant’s failure to vacate the premises; and
(2) in awarding damages to the defendant because the only duty he owed her
was to refrain from inflicting willful or wanton injury.
2
We have not been provided with transcripts of the proceedings in the trial
court. Accordingly, we assume that the evidence was sufficient to support the
trial court’s findings, and we review the trial court’s decision for errors of law
only. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 396-97 (1997).
The trial court’s order states that the plaintiff requested damages from
July 11, 2003, through January 1, 2004, at a rate of $1,100 per month, due to
the defendant’s failure to timely vacate the premises. The trial court refused to
award damages for the period prior to August 18, 2003, however, as that was
the date upon which the prospective tenant would have taken possession had
the defendant timely vacated. The court concluded that the defendant’s
occupancy prior to August 18 did not cause any damage to the plaintiff,
presumably because the plaintiff presented no evidence that he had found a
tenant who was willing to take possession prior to August 18.
The plaintiff argues that he is entitled to damages for the defendant’s
occupation of the premises prior to August 18 despite his failure to prove that
he had procured a tenant who was willing to take possession prior to that date.
We agree. In the absence of proof of special damages, the general rule is that
the proper measure of recovery “against a tenant for the failure to surrender
the premises is the reasonable rental value for the time possession is
withheld.” 49 Am. Jur. 2d Landlord and Tenant § 278 (2006). This is
consistent with the view of the Restatement (Second) of Property, which states
that a landlord is entitled to recover from a tenant who improperly holds over
after the termination of a lease “for the use and occupation of the leased
property during the holdover period at a rate based on the previous rental rate,
or on the proven reasonable value independently established if that differs from
the previous rental rate.” Restatement (Second) of Property, Landlord and
Tenant § 14.5 (1977). As the Reporter’s Note explains, this rule “simply
requires the tenant to pay for what he got during the holdover period.” Id. at
34 Reporter’s Note 2.
We see no reason why a similar rule should not apply to the defendant,
who was a tenant at sufferance. Thus, we conclude that the defendant is liable
for the reasonable value of the premises for the time possession was withheld,
including such time prior to August 18. On appeal, neither party contests the
trial court’s determination that $1,100 per month is the rate for the calculation
of the plaintiff’s damages. Accordingly, we vacate the award of damages to the
plaintiff and remand for recalculation based upon the rate of $1,100 per month
in accordance with this opinion.
The plaintiff next challenges the damages awarded to the defendant.
Because the defendant was a tenant at sufferance, the plaintiff argues that the
only duty he owed her was to refrain “from doing her willful or wanton injury.”
He contends that his actions were permissible under the common law, and
3
continue to be so in light of RSA 540:26 (1997). In essence, he argues that he
was entitled to use self-help in an attempt to gain possession of the premises.
In Hill v. Dobrowolski, 125 N.H. 572 (1984), we addressed a similar issue
with respect to tenancies at sufferance that result from holding over after the
expiration of a lease or rental agreement. We concluded that the enactment of
RSA chapter 540-A “removed the landlord's common law right to self-help in
evicting a residential tenant whose tenancy at sufferance was preceded by a
different leasehold tenancy.” Hill, 125 N.H. at 575. We stated, however, that
the relevant prohibitions in RSA chapter 540-A do not apply to every tenancy at
sufferance – in particular, they do not apply in “cases of a tenancy at
sufferance arising outside of the rental or leasehold context.” Id. at 576.
Because we concluded that RSA chapter 540-A removed the landlord's common
law right to self-help for tenancies at sufferance like the one at issue in Hill, we
had no need to consider whether the common law right to self-help otherwise
continues to co-exist with RSA chapter 540, which provides for summary
possession actions. Because the tenancy at sufferance in the instant case
arose outside of the rental or leasehold context and thus the provisions of RSA
chapter 540-A do not apply, we must now address that issue.
At common law, no action for trespass to land or goods would lie against
a landlord who entered and removed goods of a tenant whose prior tenancy
had been converted to a tenancy at sufferance, where the goods were removed
to a convenient distance, without breach of the peace, doing them no
unnecessary damage. Weeks v. Sly, 61 N.H. 89, 90 (1881). Furthermore, we
once noted that under the “strongly preponderating opinion of the American
courts, . . . no civil action lies against a landlord for regaining with force the
possession of the demised premises, unless there is an excess of force, and
then only for such excess.” Sterling v. Warden, 51 N.H. 217, 232 (1871). No
party has cited any authority, and we are aware of none, that gave greater
rights under the common law to a tenant at sufferance who did not have a
prior rental or lease agreement. Thus it appears that under the common law,
self-help was once available in circumstances such as are presented here. The
question is whether that common law remedy continues to exist.
We considered an analogous issue in Standish v. Moldawan, 93 N.H. 204
(1944). In that case, a landlord detained a tenant's furniture because the
tenant owed rent. The landlord argued that in seizing and holding the
furniture, she was asserting her common-law right of distraint for rent in
arrears. While doubting that distress for rent was ever a part of our common
law, we stated:
The fact, however, that it may have been adapted to
circumstances existing when the Constitution was adopted
does not necessarily mean that it still endures. If there was
4
ever a time when the public interest required its existence,
that time has long since passed. This being so, the rule that
no law should survive the reasons on which it is founded is
particularly applicable.
Standish, 93 N.H. at 205. We noted that “[c]urrent public opinion” concerning
debtor’s rights could be found in statutes providing exemptions from
attachment for household furniture, and concluded that distraint was not an
available remedy. Id. at 205-06.
In determining whether the time when the public interest requires the
existence of a self-help remedy for cases such as the one before us has passed,
we begin by noting that the legislature has provided a statutory remedy. In
order to simplify and facilitate the owner's recovery of possession, summary
possessory actions were authorized beginning with RS chapter 209 (1843), the
predecessor to current RSA chapter 540. These statutes established rights and
benefits which a landlord did not enjoy at common law. Lavoie v. Szumiez, 115
N.H. 266, 267 (1975). The statutory process was intended to be summary and
was designed to provide an expeditious remedy to a landlord seeking
possession. Matte v. Shippee Auto, 152 N.H. 216, 218 (2005).
The statutory summary process provides an alternative to the use of self-
help. Indeed, the Restatement (Second) of Property contends that a statutory
summary process should substitute for the right of self-help, absent clear
legislative intent to the contrary, with respect to tenancies at sufferance that
result from holding over after the expiration of a lease or rental agreement:
If the controlling law gives the landlord . . . a speedy judicial
remedy for the recovery of possession of leased property from a
tenant improperly holding over after the termination of the lease,
. . . the landlord . . . [may not] resort to self-help to recover
possession of the leased property from such tenant, unless the
controlling law preserves the right of self-help.
Restatement (Second) of Property, Landlord and Tenant, supra § 14.2 (1); see
Restatement (Second) of Property, Landlord and Tenant, supra § 14.2 comment
a at 11.
We have recognized that while the remedy by summary process may not
be as speedy as self-help, “it is the one that the Legislature has deemed
generally satisfactory to settle disputes between landlord and tenant.” Exeter
Realty Co. v. Buck, 104 N.H. 199, 201 (1962). Furthermore, other judicial
remedies may be available in appropriate cases – despite the existence of the
statutory summary process, a superior court may still use its equity
5
jurisdiction to preserve the status quo, prevent a breach of the peace, or
prevent irreparable injury to any litigant. Id. at 202.
The modern trend has been to recognize that the existence of a speedy
judicial remedy makes a right of self-help unnecessary.
Most common . . . is the modern rule that a landlord entitled to
possession must resort to the remedy that the law provides to
secure the leased premises when the tenant refuses to surrender
them. . . . If the controlling law gives the landlord or an incoming
tenant a speedy judicial remedy for the recovery of possession of
leased property from a tenant improperly holding over after the
termination of the lease, neither the landlord nor the incoming
tenant may resort to self-help to recover possession of the leased
property from the tenant, unless the controlling law also preserves
the right of self-help.
49 Am. Jur. 2d Landlord and Tenant § 829 (2006) (footnotes omitted); see
Annotation, Tenant – Dispossession Without Process, 6 A.L.R.3d 177, 186
(1966). The modern trend is “founded on the recognition that the potential for
violent breach of the peace inheres in any situation where a landlord attempts
by his own means to remove a tenant who is claiming possession adversely to
the landlord.” Berg v. Wiley, 264 N.W.2d 145, 151 (Minn. 1978). It furthers
important public policies by preventing landlords from taking the law into their
own hands, thereby improving the prospects for preserving the public peace.
See Restatement (Second) of Property, Landlord and Tenant, supra § 14.2
comment a at 11.
For similar reasons, other changes have been made to the common law.
For example, in noting that the legislature has abolished the common law right
to resist an unlawful arrest, we stated:
A society which seemingly becomes more complex with each
passing day is enlightened when its laws reflect a high purpose to
have apparent differences between those who wield the authority of
government, and those who do not, resolved in the courts or by
some other orderly process, rather than by physical confrontation
on the street or in the gutter.
State v. Haas, 134 N.H. 480, 484 (1991). Similar considerations likely
motivated the legislature to prohibit the use of self-help to regain possession of
premises under most circumstances by enacting RSA 540-A:2 and :3. We are
hard-pressed to see why these same considerations should not lead us to
conclude that the modern rule should apply with respect to tenancies at
sufferance such as the one in this case.
6
It is clear that the statutory summary process in RSA chapter 540 was
available to the plaintiff. RSA 540:12 (1997) provides in part that the
purchaser at a mortgage foreclosure sale may recover possession thereof from a
person in possession, holding it without right, after notice in writing to quit as
prescribed in RSA chapter 540. See also RSA 540:2, I (Supp. 2006) (owner may
terminate "any tenancy" by giving occupant notice to quit); AIMCO Props. v.
Dziewisz, 152 N.H. 587, 589 (2005) (“any tenancy” includes tenancies at
sufferance). Indeed, the plaintiff initiated this action by filing a landlord-tenant
writ under RSA chapter 540. Given the availability of that process and in light
of the policy reasons discussed above, we conclude that the time when the
public interest required the existence of self-help for a purchaser at a
foreclosure sale to recover possession from a tenant at sufferance has passed.
Cf. Standish, 93 N.H. at 205.
The plaintiff relies upon RSA 540:26, which provides that “[n]othing in
this chapter shall be construed to prevent a landlord from pursuing his legal
remedy at common law,” to argue that the common-law remedy of self-help has
been preserved by controlling law. The term “legal remedy,” however, is
ambiguous. It can be broadly construed to refer to any right established by law
that corrects or counteracts an evil; that is, any remedy permitted under the
common law including the remedy of self-help. See Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1290, 1920 (unabridged ed. 2002). Alternatively, it
can be more narrowly construed as a term of art, referring to a remedy
historically available in a court of law. Black’s Law Dictionary 1320 (8th ed.
1999). The narrow construction would obviously exclude self-help, which is an
extrajudicial remedy. See id. at 1391.
In construing this ambiguous phrase, we are assisted by RSA 21:2
(2000), which provides:
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language; but technical words
and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
“Legal remedy” has acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, and
we therefore construe it accordingly. Our adoption of the narrow construction
is consistent with Cooperman v. MacNeil, 123 N.H. 696, 700-01 (1983), where
we stated that RSA 540:26 plainly expresses an intent to retain the common-
law possessory actions of ejectment and entry, which could be brought in
superior court. We hasten to note that if the legislature disagrees with the
result we reach today, it is of course free to amend the statutes accordingly.
7
We now turn to the damages awarded to the defendant. The plaintiff’s
sole arguments with respect to these damages are that his duty to the
defendant was limited to refraining from doing her willful or wanton injury, and
that his actions were permissible at common law. He does not otherwise
challenge the amount of the damages awarded. Having concluded that the
common-law remedy of self-help was not available to the plaintiff, we have no
difficulty rejecting the arguments made by him.
In summary, we affirm the damage awards of $5,390.09 and $1,030 to
the defendant. We vacate the damage award of $4,876.71 to the plaintiff, and
remand for recalculation of that award at the rate of $1,100 per month in
accordance with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8