THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2005-819
APPEAL OF THE TOWN OF HAMPTON
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: June 7, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 23, 2006
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Elizabeth A. Bailey
on the brief and orally), for the appellant.
McKittrick Law Offices, of North Hampton (J. Joseph McKittrick on the
brief and orally), for the appellee.
DALIANIS, J. The appellant, Town of Hampton (town), appeals a decision
of the New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB), in
which the PELRB ordered the town to cease and desist from directly dealing
with members of the Hampton Police Association (the union). We reverse.
The record contains the following facts: At the town’s 2005 annual
meeting, voters rejected a proposed warrant article concerning payment for
private police details. As a result, the town notified the union, which acts as
the exclusive bargaining representative for all police officers in the Hampton
Police Department (HPD), that no private details would be assigned to union
members for the remainder of the 2005 fiscal year. The union thereafter
demanded impact bargaining, and the parties participated in a bargaining
session on May 4, 2005. At the bargaining session, the parties discussed
proposals for alternative solutions regarding the issue of private police details,
but failed to reach an agreement.
The president of the union, Officer Steven Henderson, was present at the
bargaining session. On May 18, 2005, Henderson, using the HPD’s official e-
mail system, distributed an e-mail addressing an article about the bargaining
session which had been published in a local newspaper. The e-mail stated, in
relevant part:
The inaccuracies in the article have been noted. . . . The two dollar
quote was an outright lie. A part time officer gets 29 dollars
currently, 22 dollars was proposed, [t]he difference is $7 dollars. A
sergeant can get up to $40 an hour, proposal $27 [sic] the
difference would be $13. The real issue is liability insurance,
[workers’ compensation]. Who takes care of your family or you if
you are injured on duty[?] God forbid if someone was killed.
Henderson sent the e-mail to all HPD personnel, union members and non-
union members alike.
On May 19, 2005, the town’s Chief of Police, William Wrenn, posted a
response to Henderson’s e-mail on the HPD’s official bulletin board. The
response, which was addressed to “All Hampton Police Officers,” stated, in
relevant part:
I am writing to you to correct the misinformation that you were
given by Ptl. Henderson regarding the private detail proposal that
would have addressed the private detail problem. A local
businessman . . . came up with a plan that would have paid ALL
OFFICERS $27 PER HOUR FOR WORKING DETAILS. He would
have made all the necessary deductions and would pay ALL THE
INSURANCES INCLUDING WORKER’S COMPENSATION AND
LIABILITY INSURANCE. . . . This is the proposal the Town made to
your Union’s representatives on May 4th. It was rejected by them.
The union filed a complaint with the PELRB on June 1, 2005, alleging
that the town, through Wrenn’s memorandum, engaged in an unfair labor
practice in violation of RSA 273-A:5 (1999). The PELRB conducted an
evidentiary hearing, and, on September 8, 2005, issued an order finding that
the town had committed an unfair labor practice. Specifically, the PELRB
concluded that Wrenn’s memorandum contained “promises of benefit,” that the
memorandum was directed to union members rather than to elected union
leadership, and that such “direct dealing” violated RSA 273-A:5, I(e). The
PELRB ordered the town to cease and desist from “directly dealing” with the
union membership, and further directed that the order be posted on the HPD’s
2
official bulletin board. The town filed a motion for reconsideration, which the
PELRB denied.
On appeal, the town argues that the PELRB erred in determining that
Wrenn’s memorandum constituted direct dealing with the union membership
in violation of RSA 273-A:5, I(e). “When reviewing a decision of the PELRB, we
defer to its findings of fact, and, absent an erroneous ruling of law, we will not
set aside its decision unless the appealing party demonstrates by a clear
preponderance of the evidence that the order is unjust or unreasonable.”
Appeal of Nashua Police Comm’n, 149 N.H. 688, 689 (2003) (quotation
omitted); see also RSA 541:13 (1997). Though the PELRB’s findings of fact are
presumptively lawful and reasonable, we require that the record support its
determinations. Appeal of City of Laconia, 150 N.H. 91, 93 (2003).
It is a prohibited practice for a public employer to refuse to negotiate in
good faith with the exclusive representative of a bargaining unit. RSA 273-A:5,
I(e). Accordingly, a public employer must refrain from negotiating with any
union member who is not designated as an exclusive representative. Appeal of
Franklin Education Assoc., 136 N.H. 332, 335 (1992). “Dealing directly with
employees is generally forbidden because it seriously compromises the
negotiating process and frustrates the purpose of [RSA chapter 273-A].” Id.
(citation omitted.) However, the mere act of communication by an employer
with its employees is not a per se unfair labor practice under RSA 273-A:5.
Appeal of AFL-CIO Local 298, 121 N.H. 944, 946 (1981).
Having reviewed the record, we conclude that the PELRB erred in
determining that the town dealt directly with union members in violation of
RSA 273-A:5, I(e). It is undisputed that Henderson distributed his e-mail to all
HPD employees, including non-union members and Wrenn, using the HPD’s
official e-mail system. Henderson did not indicate that he was sending the e-
mail in his capacity as union president, and the e-mail does not purport to
communicate to union members information pertaining to ongoing collective
bargaining. Rather, Henderson specifically notes in the e-mail that he is
addressing alleged inaccuracies in a published newspaper article.
Wrenn, in turn, directed his response at alleged misinformation in
Henderson’s e-mail. It provides information about a proposal that, among
other things, “would have” addressed the private detail problem, “would have”
paid officers a certain hourly wage, and “would have” paid for insurance
benefits. Wrenn closed his response by noting that the union had rejected the
proposal. Nothing in the response indicates that collective bargaining
pertaining to private police details was ongoing – in fact, no further sessions
were scheduled – and Wrenn, having described the proposal entirely in the past
tense, does not suggest that it would be available for future consideration.
3
An attempt by a public employer to negotiate directly with union
members rather than with their exclusive representative constitutes an unfair
labor practice, because all such actions thwart the collective bargaining
purposes of RSA chapter 273-A. See Appeal of Franklin Education Assoc., 136
N.H. at 336. In Appeal of Franklin Education Assoc., we found that
impermissible “direct dealing” had occurred when a public employer
unilaterally contacted and applied pressure to union members with regard to
contracts that were to be the subject of renegotiation. Id. at 336-37. In this
case, however, Wrenn composed and posted his letter in response to arguably
inflammatory and allegedly inaccurate comments that Henderson had
disseminated throughout HPD. Moreover, his letter pertained not to ongoing or
future negotiations between the town and the union, but, rather, failed past
negotiations. As such, we conclude that the PELRB erred in finding that the
town violated RSA 273-A:5, I(e) by engaging in direct dealing with union
members.
In finding that the town engaged in direct dealing, the PELRB, citing 29
U.S.C. § 158(c) (2000), concluded that the language in Wrenn’s letter pertaining
to hourly wages and insurance benefits constituted a “promise of benefit.”
Section 158(c) “implements the First Amendment by requiring that the
expression of ‘any views, argument, or opinion’ shall not be ‘evidence of an
unfair labor practice,’ so long as such expression contains ‘no threat of reprisal
or force or promise of benefit’ . . . .” N.L.R.B. v. Gissel Packing Co., 395 U.S.
575, 617 (1969) (quoting 29 U.S.C. § 158(c)). Because we are reviewing only an
alleged unfair labor practice under RSA 273-A:5, and because RSA chapter
273-A contains no clause analogous to 29 U.S.C. § 158(c), we need not
consider whether Wrenn’s comments constituted a “promise of benefit.” Even if
RSA chapter 273-A did contain an analogous clause, we would simply restate
our conclusion that Wrenn had merely responded to perceived misinformation
regarding past negotiations, and, as such, promised no future benefit.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4