THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-312
JOSEPH THOMAS & a.
v.
TOWN OF HOOKSETT
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2006
Hebert & Uchida, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Richard Y. Uchida and Maria T.
Dolder on the brief, and Mr. Uchida orally), for the petitioners.
Law Office of Donald A. Kennedy, of Manchester (Donald A. Kennedy on
the brief and orally), for the intervenor, Richard Boisvert.
HICKS, J. Richard Boisvert, the intervenor in this case, appeals an order
of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) reversing decisions of the Town of
Hooksett’s Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) that had: (1) overturned the
revocation of a building permit issued to him; and (2) granted him a variance
from two sections of the Town of Hooksett’s zoning ordinance. We affirm in
part, vacate in part, and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court or appear on the record
before us. Boisvert owns property at 1554 Hooksett Road in Hooksett. In late
2000 and early 2001, Boisvert and/or a predecessor in interest sought
permission from the Hooksett Planning Board to develop the property as a
gasoline filling station and convenience store. The Hooksett Conservation
Commission (conservation commission) challenged the proposed development
and the case was litigated until January 23, 2003, when this court held that
the conservation commission lacked standing. See Hooksett Conservation
Comm’n v. Hooksett Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 149 N.H. 63 (2003).
While that litigation was pending, the Town of Hooksett (town) amended
its zoning ordinance to create a Groundwater Conservation District
(conservation district) and restrict the location of new gas stations.
Specifically, the amended ordinance prohibits the building of new gas stations
within the conservation district or within 1000 feet of an existing gas station.
Boisvert’s property is located both within the conservation district and within
1000 feet of a gas station owned by the petitioners, Joseph and Cindy Thomas.
Following the issuance of our opinion in Hooksett Conservation Comm’n,
Boisvert consulted with Ken Andrews, Hooksett’s Code Enforcement Officer,
and Charles Watson of the Hooksett Planning Board (planning board) about the
status of the site plan approval for his property. Both Andrews and Watson
told Boisvert that if he obtained a building permit within a year of January 23,
2003, and began construction within six months after that, the approval would
not be rescinded. Boisvert was issued a building permit on January 5, 2004.
He then contracted with Cumberland Farms to start the construction of a gas
station and convenience store by June 30, 2004.
By letter dated May 27, 2004, Andrews revoked Boisvert’s building
permit. The letter stated, in part, that our decision concerning the property
was issued on January 23, 2003, that “RSA 674:39 clearly set guidelines for
‘active and substantial development’ within one-year in order to secure
protection from zoning changes,” and that no development had occurred within
the one year period.
Boisvert appealed to the ZBA, claiming that he had relied upon the
assurances of Andrews and Watson that if he obtained a building permit within
one year of January 23, 2003, he had six months from the issuance of the
permit to begin construction. The ZBA overturned the revocation of the
building permit. In addition, Boisvert obtained variances from two of the
zoning ordinance provisions restricting the location of gas stations.
The petitioners, Joseph and Cindy Thomas, appealed to the superior
court the ZBA’s decisions to overturn the revocation of the building permit and
to grant the variances. See RSA 677:4 (Supp 2005). The superior court
reversed both ZBA decisions. Boisvert now appeals.
Boisvert argues that the trial court erred by: (1) failing to apply the
correct standard of review; (2) misapplying the law of municipal estoppel; (3)
2
substituting its judgment for the ZBA’s in determining that the requirements
for a variance were not met; and 4) concluding that the petitioners had
standing to petition the ZBA for a rehearing and to petition the superior court
for review of the ZBA’s decisions.
We will first address Boisvert’s standing argument. Boisvert argues that
the petitioners do not have standing to appeal the ZBA’s decision because their
principal motive is to prevent competition. We disagree.
RSA 677:4 states that any “person aggrieved” by an order of the zoning
board of adjustment may appeal to the superior court and that a “person
aggrieved” includes any party entitled to request a rehearing under RSA 677:2.
See RSA 677:4. RSA 677:2 states that any party to the action or proceedings
or any person directly affected thereby may apply for a rehearing. See RSA
677:2. We have said that whether or not a person has standing to challenge a
zoning board decision is a factual determination to be undertaken on a case by
case basis. See Nautilus of Exeter v. Town of Exeter, 139 N.H. 450, 452 (1995).
In making this factual determination, the court may consider factors such as
the proximity of the challenging party’s property to the site at issue, the type of
change proposed, the immediacy of the injury and the plaintiff’s participation
in the administrative hearings. See id.
Here, there is no dispute that the petitioners’ property is located both
within one thousand feet of Boisvert’s property and within the Groundwater
Conservation District. The trial court found that the proximity of the
properties and the location within the protected district, combined with the
petitioners’ extensive participation in the proceedings before the ZBA, conferred
standing. Moreover, we have said that the presence of an anticompetitive
motive does not by itself deprive a plaintiff of standing. See Weeks Restaurant
Corp. v. City of Dover, 119 N.H. 541, 545 (1979). Accordingly, we find no error
in the trial court’s determination that the petitioners had standing to appeal.
Boisvert next argues that the trial court erred in failing to uphold the
ZBA’s reinstatement of his building permit based upon the doctrine of
municipal estoppel. “We will uphold the trial court’s decision on appeal unless
it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.” Vigeant v. Town of
Hudson, 151 N.H. 747, 750 (2005).
The doctrine of municipal estoppel has been applied to municipalities to
prevent unjust enrichment and to accord fairness to those who bargain with
the agents of municipalities for the promises of the municipalities. Aranosian
Oil Co. v. City of Portsmouth, 136 N.H. 57, 59 (1992).
3
The elements of estoppel are:
first, a false representation or concealment of material facts made
with knowledge of those facts; second, the party to whom the
representation was made must have been ignorant of the truth of
the matter; third, the representation must have been made with
the intention of inducing the other party to rely upon it; and
fourth, the other party must have been induced to rely upon the
representation to his or her injury.
Aranosian Oil Co., 136 N.H. at 59 (quotation and brackets omitted). “Each
element of estoppel requires a factual determination.” City of Concord v.
Tompkins, 124 N.H. 463, 468 (1984). The trial court found that this case did
not satisfy the requirements for municipal estoppel. We agree.
The trial court rejected Boisvert’s municipal estoppel claim because it
found that Andrews’ and Watson’s representations “were not made with
knowledge of the actual expiration of the permit, and were not made for the
purpose of inducing Mr. Boisvert to act, and because Mr. Boisvert’s reliance on
[their] representations was not reasonable.” The court noted that “[n]othing in
the record suggests that the information given to Mr. Boisvert was not given in
good faith.”
We uphold the trial court’s finding that Boisvert’s reliance upon the
town’s representations was not reasonable. We have said that the reliance by
the party bringing the estoppel claim on the representation or concealment
must have been reasonable. Healey v. Town of New Durham, 140 N.H. 232,
240 (1995). Reliance is unreasonable when the party asserting estoppel, at the
time of his or her reliance or at the time of the representation or concealment,
knew or should have known that the conduct or representation was improper,
materially incorrect or misleading. Id.
Although Ken Andrews and Charles Watson informed Boisvert and
Cumberland Farms that the permit would be valid as long as construction
began within six months following issuance of the permit on January 5, 2004,
both Boisvert and Cumberland Farms should have been aware that those
representations were incorrect. Pursuant to RSA 674:39, Boisvert had one
year from the date of the issuance of our opinion in Hooksett Conservation
Comm’n to begin “active and substantial” development of the property in order
to secure protection from the zoning changes. The trial court correctly noted
that “[s]ince a statute squarely addressed the issue about which Boisvert was
concerned, he was on notice that any representations by town officials to the
contrary were materially incorrect, and therefore his reliance was not
reasonable.”
4
The trial court’s decision is supported by Petition of Perkins, 147 N.H.
652 (2002). There we rejected a claim of municipal estoppel regarding the
pursuit of a discrimination claim with the New Hampshire Commission for
Human Rights. Id. at 655. Although the petitioner claimed that “she followed
the procedure suggested by the commission’s executive director,” id., we ruled
that her reliance upon the director’s representations was not reasonable on the
following ground: “RSA chapter 354-A contains the procedures for and
restrictions in seeking relief from the commission. In light of the statutory
language, the petitioner knew or should have known that filing an action in
federal court would foreclose her right to bring her complaint before the
commission.” Id. at 655-56.
Similarly, here, RSA 674:39, I, governs the time period within
which a right to construct remains vested after a zoning ordinance is
amended to prohibit a proposed project.
At the time of the events at issue, RSA 674:39 provided, in relevant part:
Every plat or site plan approved by the planning board and
properly recorded in the registry of deeds shall be exempt from all
subsequent changes in subdivision regulations, site plan review
regulations, and zoning ordinances adopted by any . . . town . . .
except those regulations and ordinances which expressly protect
public health standards, such as water quality and sewage
treatment requirements, for a period of 4 years after the date of
recording; . . . provided that:
I. Active and substantial development or building has begun
on the site by the owner or the owner’s successor in interest in
accordance with the approved plat within 12 months after the date
of approval . . . .
RSA 674:39 (1996) (amended 2004). In light of our holding in Perkins and
pursuant to RSA 674:39, we find no error in the trial court’s decision that
Boisvert’s reliance was unreasonable for purposes of municipal estoppel.
Next, Boisvert argues that the trial court erred in determining that the
requirements for a variance were not met. The trial court reversed the ZBA’s
grant of a variance after finding that Boisvert failed to meet the requirements
for a variance and that the ZBA made no findings that justified a departure
from the ordinance. The court applied the test set forth in Simplex
Technologies v. Town of Newington, 145 N.H. 727 (2001).
We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless the evidence does not
support it or it is legally erroneous. Bacon v. Town of Enfield, 150 N.H. 468,
5
471 (2004). For its part, the trial court must treat all factual findings of the
ZBA as prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 677:6 (1996). It “may set aside
a ZBA decision if it finds by the balance of probabilities, based on the evidence
before [it], that the ZBA’s decision was unreasonable.” Simplex, 145 N.H. at
729. Our inquiry is not whether we would find as the trial court found, but
rather whether the evidence before the court reasonably supports its findings.
Bacon, 150 N.H. at 471.
In order to receive a variance, an applicant must meet five criteria: (1)
the variance will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions
exist such that a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will
result in unnecessary hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of
the ordinance; (4) substantial justice is done; and (5) the variance will not
diminish the value of surrounding properties. RSA 674:33, I(b) (Supp. 2004);
Simplex, 145 N.H. at 729.
In Simplex, we recognized that in seeking a variance, the hardship
requirement had been historically the most difficult to meet. Accordingly, we
adopted a less restrictive test of unnecessary hardship to better safeguard the
constitutional rights of all landowners and to more properly balance those
rights against the necessity of zoning ordinances. See Simplex, 145 N.H. at
731-32. Rather than require a showing that an ordinance unduly restricts the
use of their land, applicants for a use variance could establish unnecessary
hardship by proof that: (1) a zoning restriction as applied to their property
interferes with their reasonable use of the property, considering the unique
setting of the property in its environment; (2) no fair and substantial
relationship exists between the general purposes of the zoning ordinance and
the specific restriction on the property; and (3) the variance would not injure
the public or private rights of others. Id. at 730-32.
The trial court found that the ZBA failed to make any findings with
regard to its decision to grant the variance. In addition, the trial court found
that Boisvert did not offer sufficient proof on any of the Simplex elements for
unnecessary hardship to support the grant of the variance. The trial court also
stated that the “ZBA made no finding as to why a departure from the ordinance
[was] justified.”
In Boisvert’s application for a variance he addressed the five elements of
the test set forth in Simplex. The ZBA briefly discussed the variance and ruled
unanimously in favor of granting it. The ZBA’s decision to grant the variance
amounted to an implicit finding by the board that the Simplex factors were
met. Pappas v. City of Manchester Zoning Bd., 117 N.H. 622, 625 (1977).
Although disclosure of specific findings of fact by a board of adjustment may
often facilitate judicial review, the absence of findings, at least where there is
no request therefor, is not in and of itself error. Id. In reviewing an appeal of a
6
ZBA decision, the superior court does not sit as a “super zoning board.” Cook
v. Town of Sanbornton, 118 N.H. 668, 671 (1978). The court may not
substitute its judgment for that of the board. Nor may an order permitting a
variance be set aside or vacated except for errors of law, or if the court is
persuaded by a balance of the probabilities that the order is unjust or
unreasonable. Pappas, 117 N.H. at 625.
While we disagree with the trial court that the ZBA was required to set
forth specific findings to support its decision to grant the variance, we find that
the ZBA minutes reflect that the ZBA gave only cursory consideration to the
variance issue because it had already decided to reinstate Boisvert’s building
permit based upon his municipal estoppel claim. A review of the record reveals
that ZBA members questioned whether or not they needed to address the
variance issue at all in light of the fact that they were reinstating the building
permit. One ZBA member asked, “If we reinstate the building permit, do we
then have to review the variance.” Another member during the same meeting
said, “If we were to over rule [sic] the code enforcement officer, I believe our job
is done.” Although the ZBA granted the variance, it is unclear how the ZBA
would have ruled on the variance had it denied Boisvert’s municipal estoppel
claim. Therefore, a further developed record is necessary. We vacate the
rulings on the variance and remand to the ZBA for further proceedings
consistent with this order. Given this disposition, we need not consider the
parties’ remaining arguments.
Affirmed in part;
vacated in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7