THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Newport Family Division
No. 2005-808
IN THE MATTER OF ELIZABETH A. CHAMBERLIN AND WILLIAM L.
CHAMBERLIN
Submitted: November 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 21, 2007
Brennan Caron Lenehan & Iacopino, of Manchester (William J. Quinn on
the brief), for the petitioner.
Loftus & Borgstrom, PC, of Lebanon (William R. Loftus on the brief), for
the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Elizabeth A. Chamberlin, appeals a
recommended order of a Marital Master (Forrest, M.) approved by the Newport
Family Division (Cardello, J.) determining that the corpus of the William
Chamberlin and Elizabeth Chamberlin Irrevocable Charitable Trust (Trust) was
not marital property and that the settlors’ right to receive interest from the
Trust, although marital property, was of negligible monetary value. We affirm.
The record supports the following. The parties were married in 1987.
During their marriage, they established the Trust for the purposes of gaining
personal tax benefits, generating income and funding donations to certain
charitable institutions. Under the terms of the Trust, the only interest they
retained was the right to receive income distributions generated by the Trust
corpus if it exceeded $110,000.
For reasons not relevant to this opinion, Elizabeth Chamberlin filed for
divorce in 2003. At that time, the Trust corpus was valued at $85,596.84.
When the parties were divorced in 2005, William L. Chamberlin, the
respondent, was seventy-four years old and in poor health. The petitioner was
sixty-six. In the final decree of divorce, the Trust corpus was valued at
$90,827.23, treated as a marital asset, and awarded to the respondent. In
addition, the respondent was awarded the interest generated by the Trust and
the sum of money necessary to increase the Trust corpus to $110,000. The
overall property division was skewed in favor of the petitioner, with
approximately fifty-seven percent of the marital property awarded to her and
the balance awarded to the respondent. Among the assets awarded to the
respondent was “an additional lump sum [equalization] payment of $27,000.00
in order to achieve an equitable division of the marital assets.”
The respondent sought reconsideration of the final divorce decree,
arguing that the “Trust [was] irrevocable and [its corpus was] not a spendable
asset” available to him, thus making it erroneous for the trial court to have
counted the corpus as a marital asset in its division of the parties’ marital
estate. He further argued that even if the Trust corpus were increased to
$110,000, given his probable five-year life expectancy and a seven-percent rate
of return, his interest in the Trust – i.e., his right to receive distributions from
it – was worth only $35,000 rather than the higher figure used by the court.
The trial court granted the motion to reconsider, explaining that “[t]he Trust is
irrevocable, and the [corpus] is not, therefore, an asset properly counted as
part of the respondent’s equitable share of the assets distributed pursuant to
the . . . Final Decree.” As well, the trial court relieved the petitioner of her
obligation to increase the Trust corpus to $110,000 and allowed the
respondent to retain the right to receive income generated from the Trust.
Based upon the readily ascertainable values of all the other marital
assets and the trial court’s ruling that its final distribution was intended to
result in a split of fifty-seven percent for the petitioner and forty-three percent
for the respondent, it is apparent that the trial court determined that the
respondent’s right to receive distributions from the Trust once the corpus
exceeded $110,000 had negligible value. In addition, the trial court increased
the petitioner’s lump sum equalization payment to the respondent by $8,000,
to correct for the change in the value of the total marital estate caused by the
deletion of the Trust corpus and to keep the overall division of assets in line
with percentages determined to be equitable in the final divorce decree. This
appeal followed.
2
The petitioner argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by determining that: (1) the Trust corpus was not a part of the
marital estate notwithstanding that it was funded with marital assets and had
value for both parties in the form of tax advantages and income generation;
and (2) the value of the respondent’s interest in the Trust was negligible. We
disagree.
We begin by discussing the applicable standard of review. It is well
established that the trial court is afforded broad discretion in determining
property distribution when fashioning a final divorce decree. In the Matter of
Harvey & Harvey, 153 N.H. 425, 430 (2006). We will not overturn a trial
court’s decision on property distribution absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id.
The foregoing standard of review applies when we examine a trial court’s
“equitable division of property between the parties” pursuant to RSA 458:16-a,
II (2004). However, the standard we apply when we review a trial court’s
determination that a particular asset is or is not marital property as defined by
RSA 458:16-a, I (2004) is somewhat unclear. Compare Harvey, 153 N.H. at
438 (“[g]iven the broad [statutory] definition of ‘marital property’ . . . the trial
court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by classifying the
[husband’s] interest in certain real estate parcels, timeshares and [a] dental
practice as marital property”), with In the Matter of Preston and Preston, 147
N.H. 48, 49 (2001) (“the trial court [did not] erroneously conclude that [an]
annuity [owned by the husband] was marital property subject to equitable
distribution”).
Of the two approaches we have followed – treating RSA 458:16-a, I,
determinations as a matter of trial court discretion, as in Harvey, and treating
those same determinations as a matter of law, as in Preston – the better
approach is to treat a trial court’s RSA 458:16-a, I, determination as a matter
of law. Whether, at the time a divorce petition is filed, a given asset does or
does not belong to the husband or the wife, individually or collectively, calls for
a legal analysis of the characteristics of the asset in question, not an exercise of
discretion or a weighing of the equities. Obviously, judicial discretion has a
central role in the determination of which spouse is awarded which assets, see
RSA 458:16-a, II, but as to whether or not in the first instance a particular
asset is marital property, as that term is defined in RSA 458:16-a, I, we see no
proper role for the exercise of discretion. A pension, an annuity, a trust, or any
other asset is or is not owned by either or both parties, and that determination
is generally a pure question of law, subject to de novo review. To the extent our
cases have employed a different standard of review, they are overruled.
We now adopt, as herein modified, the two-step analysis outlined in In
the Matter of Valence and Valence, 147 N.H. 663, 666 (2002), under which the
3
trial court first determines, as a matter of law, what assets are marital property
under RSA 458:16-a, I, and thus subject to equitable distribution, and then
exercises its discretion to make an equitable distribution of those assets. Trial
court determinations under RSA 458:16-a, I, are reviewed de novo, while
equitable divisions of property pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, II are reviewed for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Finally, we note that while determining
whether or not a particular asset is marital property under the statute is
normally a question of law, determining the value of any given asset is left to
the sound discretion of the trial court. See Hoffman v. Hoffman, 143 N.H. 514,
521 (1999) (reviewing trial court’s valuation of marital assets for unsustainable
exercise of discretion); cf. In the Matter of Nyhan and Nyhan, 147 N.H. 768,
771 (2002) (“We reiterate the rule that trial courts are free to exercise their
sound discretion in establishing an appropriate valuation date for the equitable
distribution of marital assets.”).
Having established our standard of review, we now turn to the questions
before us; namely, whether the trial court committed an error of law by
determining that the Trust corpus was not a marital asset or unsustainably
exercised its discretion by determining that the respondent’s interest in the
Trust had little or no value. We answer both questions in the negative.
Marital “[p]roperty shall include all tangible and intangible property and
assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to the
property is held in the name of either or both parties.” RSA 458:16-a, I.
Because the Trust corpus was not an asset belonging to either or both of the
parties at the time of their divorce, the trial court did not commit legal error by
excluding the Trust corpus from the marital estate.
The petitioner concedes that neither she nor the respondent has the right
to invade the Trust corpus. That is, indeed, one of the defining features of an
irrevocable trust. See 7 C. DeGrandpre, New Hampshire Practice, Wills, Trusts
and Gifts § 31.02[2], at 399 (4th ed. 2003); G. Bogert & G. Bogert, The Law of
Trusts and Trustees § 234, at 56-57 (2d ed. rev. 1992). It necessarily follows
that the assets the parties used to fund the Trust ceased being property
belonging to either or both of them once those assets were placed in the Trust
and beyond the reach of the parties. See In re Marriage of Pooley, 996 P.2d
230, 232 (Colo. Ct. App. 1999) (“it is the extent of the beneficiary’s right to or
interest in the trust rather than the source of funding for the trust that
determines whether the trust and the income from it are [marital] property”); cf.
Abrams v. Abrams, 131 N.H. 522, 524-25 (1989) (affirming trial court
determination, under unsustainable exercise of discretion standard, that once
husband’s trust terminated, trust corpus distributed to husband was marital
property). Thus, the parties’ act of placing liquid assets in an irrevocable trust
removed them from the statutory definition of marital property. See RSA
4
458:16-a, I. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in so
concluding and consequently affirm its ruling on that issue.
We find support for our holding in the Uniform Trust Code, RSA ch. 564-
B (Supp. 2006), which provides that “[w]ith respect to an irrevocable trust, a
creditor or assignee of the settlor may reach [only] the maximum amount that
can be distributed to or for the settlor’s benefit.” RSA 564-B:5-505(a)(2). If
neither the settlor nor the settlor’s creditors may invade the corpus of an
irrevocable trust, it would be incongruous to count such a trust as a marital
asset, interchangeable with other assets upon which the parties freely may
draw. Decisions from other jurisdictions support our holding. See, e.g.,
Findlen v. Findlen, 695 A.2d 1216, 1220 (Me. 1997) (holding that residence
placed in irrevocable trust by husband’s mother for the benefit of husband and
wife was not marital property); Loomis v. Loomis, 158 S.W.3d 787, 790 (Mo. Ct.
App. 2005) (holding that insurance policy placed in irrevocable trust by wife
who was not trustee or beneficiary was not marital property).
However, determining that the Trust corpus was not marital property is
not the end of the matter because ownership of the corpus is not the only
property interest incident to a trust. See Flaherty v. Flaherty, 138 N.H. 337,
340 (1994). As the trust at issue is a charitable one, the parties have no
remainder interest, but they did retain the right to receive distributions of
interest so long as the Trust corpus exceeded $110,000. Whether the statutory
definition of marital property includes a settlor’s right to receive interest from
an irrevocable charitable trust is a question of first impression in this state.
We hold that such an interest does constitute marital property subject to
distribution in a divorce and that such an entitlement has a present value that
must be taken into account in the division of marital property.
In Findlen, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court explained that “the marital
interest subject to division is not the [corpus] itself but the parties[’] interest in
the trust.” Findlen, 695 A.2d at 1220. Following that reasoning, the North
Dakota Supreme Court has held that a trial court committed clear error by
failing to place any value on a wife’s interest in an irrevocable insurance trust
established by her husband. Fox v. Fox, 592 N.W.2d 541, 546 (N.D. 1999). In
Fox, the wife’s interest included the right to receive interest generated from the
trust corpus and a limited right to withdraw the principal. Id. Similarly, the
Vermont Supreme Court has held that a husband’s right, upon his mother’s
death, to receive income from and invade the principal of an irrevocable trust
established to benefit him and his mother was marital property. Chilkott v.
Chilkott, 607 A.2d 883, 884 (Vt. 1992). We find the reasoning of these cases to
be persuasive.
In the case before us, the trial court recognized the parties’ interests in
the Trust and awarded the respondent the right to distributions of interest,
5
once the Trust corpus reached $110,000. In doing so, given the overall
distribution of marital assets, the court necessarily must have determined that
the value of that interest, to the respondent, was negligible. When the trial
court determined that the respondent’s interest in the Trust was of little or no
value, the Trust corpus needed to grow by approximately $20,000 before the
respondent would be able to draw interest income from the Trust, and the
respondent was at least seventy-five years old and in poor health. Moreover, to
the extent the petitioner had a right to receive distributions of interest from the
Trust that she was able to assign to the respondent, it would have been
reasonable for the trial court to deduce that the right to receive interest would
revert to the petitioner upon the respondent’s death. Because the Trust was
still $20,000 short of paying interest, and because the petitioner is eight years
younger than the respondent, it would have been reasonable for the trial court
to conclude that the petitioner’s reversion interest was at least as valuable as
the respondent’s interest – if not more so – providing further support for the
court’s determination that the respondent’s interest had little or no value in the
context of the task before it, which was to equitably divide the parties’ marital
property. Given the terms of the Trust, the size of the Trust corpus, the
respondent’s age and poor health, and the petitioner’s failure to present any
evidence supporting an alternative value, we cannot say that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by determining that the respondent’s
interest in the Trust was negligible.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6