THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-649
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JAMES J. HALL
Argued: June 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: September 26, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jeffery A. Strelzin, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Kacavas & Ramsdell, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (John P. Kacavas on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, James J. Hall, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (McGuire, J.) denying his motion for appointment of new
counsel. We vacate and remand.
The relevant facts are not in dispute. The defendant was convicted of
second degree murder in 2000. That conviction was reversed on appeal. See
State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 394, 401 (2002). The defendant was retried and again
convicted of second degree murder. We affirmed that conviction. See State v.
Hall, 152 N.H. 374, 379 (2005).
Subsequently, the defendant’s trial counsel filed a motion to appoint new
counsel for the purpose of assisting the defendant with a motion for new trial.
In the motion, she alleged that while awaiting this court’s decision on the
defendant’s second appeal, the defendant had informed her of federal case law
which supported an argument that certain evidence at his retrial should have
been excluded on double jeopardy grounds. The defendant’s trial counsel
informed him that she would raise this issue at a third trial if the defendant’s
conviction were again reversed. She argued in the motion to appoint new
counsel that she had rendered ineffective assistance of counsel by not raising
the evidentiary issue during the defendant’s second trial. The State objected to
the motion, and it was denied without a hearing.
The defendant appeals, arguing that: (1) an indigent defendant seeking a
new trial based upon a non-frivolous claim of ineffective assistance of counsel
has a right to counsel under the Due Process Clause of Part I, Article 15 of the
New Hampshire Constitution; and (2) even if the defendant had no absolute
right to counsel, the trial court’s denial of his motion under these
circumstances was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
I. Right to Counsel
The defendant argues that Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution
guarantees him the right to the assistance of counsel on his motion for a new
trial. We disagree.
Whether a defendant has a right to be represented by counsel on a
motion for new trial is an issue of first impression for this court. Because the
defendant relies solely upon the State Constitution, we base our decision upon
it alone, using federal cases only to aid in our analysis. See Gonya v. Comm’r,
N.H. Ins. Dept., 153 N.H. ___, ___, 899 A.2d 278, 280 (2006). Because this
issue poses a question of constitutional law, we review it de novo. See In the
Matter of Berg & Berg, 152 N.H. 658, 661 (2005).
In deciding whether the State Constitution mandates the appointment of
counsel in a given proceeding, we employ the three-prong test articulated by
the United States Supreme Court in Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 335
(1976). State v. Cook, 125 N.H. 452, 455 (1984); see, e.g., In re Brittany S.,
147 N.H. 489, 491 (2002) (considering State constitutional right to counsel in
proceeding to terminate guardianship); Cook, 125 N.H. at 459 (considering
State constitutional right to counsel in habitual offender proceedings). Thus,
we consider: (1) the private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of
an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and
the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards;
and (3) the government’s interest, considering the function involved and the
2
fiscal and administrative burdens that additional or substitute procedural
requirements would entail. Brittany S., 147 N.H. at 491; see Cook, 125 N.H. at
455-56.
We begin by examining the private interest in this case. The defendant
argues that he maintains a liberty interest in the reliability of his conviction,
the fundamental fairness of the trial resulting in that conviction, and the
liberty of which he has been deprived as a consequence. The State argues that
the defendant has no liberty interest since he has already been convicted and
has had that conviction affirmed on appeal.
Post-conviction relief, such as a motion for a new trial based upon
ineffective assistance of counsel, is “civil in nature.” Pennsylvania v. Finley,
481 U.S. 551, 557 (1987). It is initiated by the defendant, who has exhausted
his avenues to secure direct relief, see id., and, unlike a criminal trial, will not
result in increased penalties. Therefore, the due process considerations that
require appointment of counsel to criminal defendants are not present in
actions for post-conviction relief.
We note that a conviction does not, on its own, terminate a defendant’s
constitutional rights. See Hudson v. Palmer, 468 U.S. 517, 523 (1984).
However, we have previously recognized the “crucial distinction between being
deprived of a liberty one has . . . and being denied a conditional liberty interest
one desires” and that incarcerated and non-incarcerated defendants do not
share “an equal liberty interest.” State v. Gibbons, 135 N.H. 320, 321 (1992)
(quotation omitted; ellipsis in original). Moreover, the possible loss of a liberty
interest does not automatically guarantee the right to counsel. Cf. Duval v.
Duval, 114 N.H. 422, 426 (1974) (“[federal] due process does not require the
right to counsel in every instance where the possibility of incarceration exists”).
The liberty interest at issue in this case is analogous to that at issue in
Brittany S., 147 N.H. at 491-92. There, a mother sought appointed counsel to
assist in terminating a guardianship order placing her daughter in the custody
of a third party. Id. at 490. While we recognized the “fundamental nature of a
parent’s liberty interest,” we found that the mother’s interest in the termination
hearing was “less substantial” than that at issue in the initial guardianship
proceeding. Id. at 491-92. We reasoned that “[t]he private interest associated
with the possible return of parental rights is not a mirror image of the private
interest involved with the initial loss of those rights” because the mother’s
rights had already been “curtailed during the initial guardianship proceeding.”
Id. at 491-92. Moreover, we found that the termination proceeding “impose[d]
no increased risk to further deprivation of” those rights, and therefore the
private interest at stake was less than at the initial proceeding. Id.
3
Similarly, the defendant here possessed a fundamental liberty interest
prior to his conviction. Like the liberty interest of the mother in Brittany S.,
the defendant’s liberty interest was curtailed during previous proceedings;
namely, his conviction and appeal. A motion for a new trial, like an attack on
an award of guardianship, is an attempt by the defendant to have certain
rights returned to him. His interest in that proceeding is not the “mirror
image” of his liberty interest at his trial or on appeal. Thus, while a defendant
retains some liberty interest post-conviction, it is less substantial than that of a
defendant who has not been convicted.
We next examine the risk of an erroneous deprivation of a defendant’s
liberty interest through the procedures used. The defendant argues that not
having the assistance of counsel creates a high risk that he will be erroneously
deprived of his liberty interest because he has the burden of proof on an
ineffective assistance of counsel claim and the issues are of a complex
constitutional nature. While a defendant may benefit from the assistance of
counsel on a collateral attack, certain factors lessen the need for the assistance
of counsel.
In this case, the motion for new trial was decided by a judge, not a jury.
We have recognized that where there is no jury trial, there is less need for the
assistance of an attorney in organizing arguments. Cook, 125 N.H. at 456.
Additionally, in this case, there are transcripts, motions, and briefs from the
trial and direct appeal that the defendant can use in preparing a motion for a
new trial. See Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 615 (1974) (finding access to the
trial record, appellate briefs and opinions sufficient for pro se litigant to gain
meaningful access on discretionary appellate review). Such documents are
also available to the judge to provide a reliable factual basis for rendering a
decision. See id. Furthermore, the risk that the defendant may be erroneously
deprived of a new trial is lessened here because the reliability of the
defendant’s conviction has been tested through both trial and appellate review.
Thus, we conclude that a lack of assistance of counsel on a motion for a new
trial does not create a substantial risk that the defendant will be erroneously
deprived of a liberty interest.
Finally, we examine the government’s interest, including the function
involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the provision of court-
appointed counsel would entail. See Brittany S., 147 N.H. at 493. While we
recognize that appointment of counsel would benefit a defendant collaterally
attacking a conviction and would likely assist courts by narrowing and
organizing the issues, the automatic appointment of counsel would also impose
a significant fiscal and administrative burden on the State.
On the record before us, we have no facts regarding the number of
collateral attacks filed in New Hampshire. However, our experience is that
4
such filings are not uncommon and frequently, a single prisoner will attempt to
collaterally attack a conviction several times. Certainly, the number of these
petitions is not insignificant. Thus, requiring the State to appoint counsel in
all such proceedings would impose a significant financial and administrative
burden on the State.
In balancing the three factors, we conclude that given the defendant’s
less than substantial liberty interest, the low risk of an erroneous deprivation
of that interest, and the government’s interest in avoiding a fiscal and
administrative burden, due process does not require counsel to be appointed to
assist a defendant making a post-conviction motion for a new trial.
This conclusion is consistent with that of the United States Supreme
Court in Pennsylvania v. Finley. There the defendant sought appointed
counsel to assist her in seeking post-conviction relief in state court on her
second degree murder conviction. Finley, 481 U.S. at 553. The Court rejected
her argument that the State was obligated under the Federal Constitution to
provide counsel, holding that “the right to appointed counsel extends to the
first appeal of right, and no further.” Id. at 555. The Court reasoned that post-
conviction relief “is not part of the criminal proceeding itself” and “is in fact
considered to be civil in nature.” Id. at 557. The Court determined that post-
conviction relief “is even further removed from the criminal trial than is
discretionary direct review.” Id. at 556-57. The Court concluded that “States
have no obligation to provide this avenue of relief, and when they do, the
fundamental fairness mandated by the Due Process Clause does not require
that the State supply a lawyer as well.” Id. at 557 (citation omitted).
II. Unsustainable Exercise of Discretion
The defendant’s fallback argument is that even if no absolute right to
counsel exists, trial courts have discretion to appoint counsel on a motion for
new trial, and that by not doing so in this case, the trial court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. We agree that a trial court has discretion
to appoint counsel.
In Duval v. Duval, 114 N.H. at 426, we held that the State Constitution
does not guarantee an automatic right to counsel in civil contempt
proceedings. We recognized, however, that “the trial court may in its discretion
appoint counsel” in “complicated” cases. Id. at 427; see Cook, 125 N.H. at 400.
Complicating factors include the capability of a defendant to speak for himself,
the character of the proceeding, the complexity of the issues, and
circumstances which show that the defendant would be treated unfairly if the
assistance of counsel were not provided. See Duval, at 114 N.H. 426-27.
5
While Duval involved a civil contempt proceeding, the reasoning applies
to a motion for a new trial, as both types of proceedings involve a potential or
ongoing restriction of one’s liberty. Thus, the trial court may, in its discretion,
appoint counsel to assist the defendant in making a motion for a new trial.
Because the trial court denied the defendant’s motion to appoint counsel
without a hearing or an explanation, we are unable to determine whether it did
so because it concluded that the defendant had no constitutional right to
counsel, or if the court, in its discretion, concluded that the Duval factors did
not require the appointment of counsel. Thus, we remand the case for
application of the discretionary factors announced in this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6