THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2005-531
IN THE MATTER OF SUSAN CLARK AND NATHAN CLARK
Argued: September 12, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 29, 2006
Tarbell Professional Association, of Concord (Friedrich K. Moeckel on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Nathan D. Clark, by brief and orally, pro se.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, Susan Clark, appeals an order of the Salem
Family Division (DalPra, M.) declining to modify the child support obligation of
the respondent, Nathan Clark. Additionally, the petitioner argues that the trial
court erred in failing to hold the respondent in contempt for withholding
alimony and in failing to recalculate the respondent’s child support obligation
to comport with the requirements of RSA chapter 458-C (2004 & Supp. 2005).
We affirm in part and remand.
The following facts appear in the record. The parties were divorced on
February 23, 2004. A permanent stipulation drafted by the parties was
incorporated into the divorce decree. Under the terms of the stipulation, the
respondent was obligated to pay $267 per week in child support and $113 per
week in alimony for two years.
On September 3, 2004, the petitioner requested the trial court to change
the parties’ visitation schedule and the amount of the respondent’s child
support obligation. She contended that the child support order should be
amended because she had become aware that the support obligation was
erroneously calculated, resulting in the respondent paying less than required
by the guidelines. That same day, the petitioner also filed a petition for
contempt alleging that the respondent improperly withheld $84.50 of her
alimony because of a dispute over insurance. As a result of numerous
continuances, the matter was not heard until May 2005. Prior to that hearing,
the petitioner filed a second petition for contempt alleging that the respondent:
(1) was six months in arrears on his alimony payments; (2) had not provided
proof of life insurance; and (3) had not provided copies of certain tax forms.
At the May 2005 hearing on the petitioner’s pleadings, the respondent
repaid the $84.50 in disputed alimony, with interest, produced proof of life
insurance and the requested tax forms and represented that the parties’
dispute over visitation had been resolved. The parties only briefly mentioned,
but presented no evidence regarding, the petitioner’s contention that the
respondent was six months in arrears on his alimony payments. The
remainder of the hearing focused upon the petitioner’s recent discovery that
the respondent was residing in his employer’s home, while paying only a
nominal rent, was permitted personal use of a vehicle belonging to his
employer and received other benefits. The petitioner argued that the
respondent’s “gross income” ought to be adjusted to reflect the value of these
benefits and that a corresponding adjustment to the child support amount
should be made.
Following the hearing, the trial court issued an order finding that
although the respondent’s tax status might be affected by his receipt of fringe
or in-kind benefits, the benefits were not “gross income” as defined in RSA 458-
C:2, IV, and that his support obligation should not, therefore, be increased.
Additionally, the trial court found that the respondent was not in contempt,
but made no other findings or rulings regarding child support.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred by failing to:
(1) include the respondent’s in-kind benefits as gross income for child support
purposes; (2) rule and make findings upon her motion for contempt regarding
unpaid alimony; and (3) recalculate child support in light of the original
erroneous calculation. We address each issue in turn.
The petitioner first argues that the respondent’s receipt of in-kind
benefits constituted “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV, for the purpose of
calculating his child support obligation. Resolution of this issue requires that
we interpret RSA 458-C:2, IV. “We review the trial court’s statutory
interpretation de novo.” In the Matter of Giacomini & Giacomini, 151 N.H. 775,
776 (2005). “We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in
the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “We first examine the
2
language of the statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used.” Id. “When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent, and we refuse to consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to incorporate in the statute.” Id. at
776-77.
RSA 458-C:2, IV defines “gross income” for child support purposes as:
all income from any source, whether earned or unearned,
including but not limited to, wages, salary, commissions, tips,
annuities, social security benefits, trust income, lottery or
gambling winnings, interest, dividends, investment income, net
rental income, self-employment income, alimony, business profits,
pensions, bonuses, and payments from other government
programs . . . including, but not limited to, workers’ compensation,
veterans’ benefits, unemployment benefits, and disability benefits
. . . .
When the legislature uses the phrase “including, but not limited to” in a
statute, the application of that statute is limited to the types of items therein
particularized. Roberts v. General Motors Corp., 138 N.H. 532, 538 (1994); see
also Conservation Law Found. v. N.H. Wetlands Council, 150 N.H. 1, 5-6
(2003) (applying same reasoning to the term “including”).
We recently held in In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. ___, ___
(decided Oct. 31, 2006), that the items particularized in RSA 458-C:2, IV share
two characteristics. First, they are payable in money, and second, they are
things that, as a general matter, the recipient has a legal right to obtain and
which the provider has a legal obligation to give. Id. In Fulton, we held that
gifts do not constitute “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV because, unlike
the other items listed, the recipient has no legal right to them. Id.; see also
Stanley v. Kimball, 80 N.H. 431, 434 (1922) (“[A]n agreement to make a gift
creates no legal duty to perform the promise, and no action can be maintained
for breach of the promise.”).
Here, the petitioner contends that the respondent’s employer-provided
housing, vehicle and other benefits constitute “gross income.” Initially, we note
that the respondent took up residence with his employer prior to the time of his
employment and his housing situation, including the amount of rent, was not
affected by his subsequent employment. As such, it is not clear that the
benefits provided the respondent are employer-provided in-kind benefits.
Irrespective of whether the benefits are employer-provided, we hold, as we did
in Fulton, that the items at issue are not “gross income” as defined in RSA 458-
C:2, IV.
3
A plain reading of the statute discloses that the benefits the respondent
receives are not of the same type as those in RSA 458-C:2, IV. The
respondent’s benefits are not paid in money. Thus, the benefits received by the
respondent do not share one of the primary attributes of the items listed in
RSA 458-C:2, IV, and are not, therefore, of the same type as those items.
Accordingly, we hold that in-kind benefits are not includable in “gross income”
as defined in RSA 458-C:2, IV.
As we cautioned in Fulton, however, merely because we hold that the
items at issue are not included as “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV, does
not mean that they can never be included in a child support award calculation.
Fulton, 154 N.H. at ___. RSA 458-C:5 gives the trial court discretion to deviate
from the child support guidelines when a party’s special circumstances make a
deviation appropriate. Id. In an appropriate situation, the trial court could
deviate from the guidelines if a party’s receipt of benefits were so substantial
that ignoring the value they confer would result in an unreasonably low
support order, taking all relevant circumstances into consideration. RSA 458-
C:5, I(j); see also Principles of the Law of Family Dissolution: Analysis and
Recommendations § 3.13 comment a (Am. Law Inst. 2002) (problematic forms
of income, such as in-kind benefits, may be included in child support
calculation at the discretion of the court). Thus, we believe it proper under the
statutory scheme to leave the inclusion of in-kind benefits to the discretion of
the trial court under RSA 458-C:5. If the legislature determines that in-kind
benefits should be considered “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV, it is, of
course, free to amend the statute. See Marceau v. Concord Heritage Life Ins.
Co., 149 N.H. 216, 221 (2003).
The petitioner points to cases from other jurisdictions in support of the
conclusion that free or low-cost housing, or other in-kind benefits, when
provided by an employer, are to be counted in computations of “gross income”
for child support purposes. The child support guidelines at issue in the cases
cited by the petitioner, however, unlike RSA 458-C:2, IV, specifically mention
in-kind benefits when defining “gross income” for child support purposes.
Styka v. Styka, 972 P.2d 16 (N.M. 1999) (reviewing N.M. Stat. Ann. §40-4-11.1
(1995)); Roberts v. Roberts, 677 So. 2d 1042 (La. Ct. App. 1996) (reviewing La.
Rev. Stat. Ann. § 9:315 (West 1991)); Bemis v. Bemis, 305 A.D.2d 739 (N.Y.
App. Div. 2003) (reviewing N.Y. Dom. Rel. Law § 240 [1-b] [b] [5] (1999 & Supp.
2002)); Crowe v. Fong, 701 N.E.2d 359 (Mass. App. Ct. 1998) (reviewing Mass.
Child Support Guidelines, Guideline I-A). Also, we note that several other
states’ guidelines specifically include fringe or in-kind benefits in the definition
of “gross income” for child support purposes. See, e.g., Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit.
19A § 2001 (5)(B) (West 1998 & Supp. 2005); Vt. Stat. Ann. tit. 15 § 653
(5)(A)(ii) (2002 & Supp. 2005); Regs. Conn. State Agencies § 46b-215a-
1(11)(A)(vi) (2005). The fact that other jurisdictions specifically include in-kind
4
benefits reinforces our conclusion that these benefits should not be considered
as “gross income” unless they are specifically included in the statutory
definition.
The petitioner points to our decision in Thayer v. Thayer 119 N.H. 871
(1979), wherein we concluded that fringe or in-kind benefits could be
considered when determining child support. In Thayer we held that it was not
error for the trial court to include fringe benefits because they “are a form of
enrichment which indirectly bear upon plaintiff’s ability to pay alimony and
child support” and “represent compensation for personal expenditures which
plaintiff would otherwise be required to pay from his salary.” Id. at 873.
While, for reasons set out above, we agree with the determination in Thayer
that such benefits may be considered in certain circumstances, see RSA 458-
C:5, we find Thayer inapplicable to this case.
In Thayer we stated that “[m]atters of support and alimony are within the
sound discretion of the trial court unrestricted by fixed formulas and
guidelines . . . .” Id. at 873 (emphasis added). After Thayer was decided, the
legislature adopted child support guidelines for determining child support. See
generally RSA chapter 458-C. The statute specifically defines “gross income”
and states that the child support guidelines shall be applied in all child
support cases. RSA 458-C:2, IV, :4, I; see also In the Matter of Forcier &
Mueller, 152 N.H. 463, 464 (2005). Thus, to the extent Thayer held that child
support orders were unrestricted by formulas or guidelines, it has been
superseded by the enactment of RSA chapter 458-C, and does not govern our
interpretation of the statute.
For the above reasons, we hold that in-kind benefits are not included as
items of “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV, but may be considered under
the special circumstances set out in RSA 458-C:5. Here, the petitioner argued
that the respondent’s in-kind benefits should be included in his “gross income”
when calculating child support. As we have concluded that in-kind benefits
are not an item of “gross income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV, we hold that the trial
court did not err in rejecting the petitioner’s argument. Also, although in-kind
benefits may be considered under the special circumstances stated in RSA
458-C:5, the petitioner offered no argument that the respondent’s receipt of
benefits created such circumstances. Accordingly, the trial court did not err by
not considering the benefits under RSA 458-C:5.
The petitioner next contends that the trial court failed to rule and make
findings upon her motions for contempt. More specifically, the petitioner
argues that her motions had requested that the respondent be held in
contempt for numerous reasons, including his failure to pay alimony, and that
the trial court did not address her motions.
5
“The contempt power is discretionary and the proper inquiry is not
whether we would have found the respondent in contempt, but whether the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion.” In the Matter of Stall &
Stall, 153 N.H. 163, 168 (2005). The record demonstrates that the petitioner
requested that the respondent be held in contempt for withholding a portion of
an alimony payment, not providing proof of life insurance, not providing tax
documents, and for being six months in arrears on alimony. During the May
2005 hearing, the respondent paid the previously withheld portion of the
alimony payment, and turned over the requested documents. Thus, the only
issue remaining was the respondent’s alleged arrears on alimony, an issue
upon which the petitioner presented no evidence. Because the petitioner
presented no evidence upon the only issue requiring a ruling from the trial
court, we cannot say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion
by not finding the respondent in contempt.
Finally, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred in failing to
recalculate the respondent’s child support obligation so that it would comport
with the guidelines. According to the petitioner, when the respondent’s
support obligation was first calculated, an error resulted in a support amount
lower than that required by the guidelines. The petitioner argues that even
though she requested recalculation to correct the error, the trial court did not
address the issue. The respondent counters that there is no error in the
amount, but if there is an error, the parties’ agreement on the amount of
support makes any error irrelevant.
Because the trial court did not address the parties’ arguments and
because resolving them may require additional factual findings, we remand this
issue to the trial court for resolution in the first instance. See N. Country
Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 619 (2004).
Affirmed in part and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6