THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hampton District Court
No. 2005-884
RENEE FISHER
v.
MADALINE MINICHIELLO
Argued: January 11, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2007
Forsley & Eggleston, P.A., of Hampton (Lawrence S. Forsley on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff
Patrick M. Carron, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the defendant
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Madaline Minichiello, appeals a stalking
final order, see RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2006), issued against her by the Hampton
District Court (Frasier, J.). We affirm.
The following facts were adduced at the district court hearing on the
stalking petition. The plaintiff, Renee Fisher, is the administrator of The
Partridge House Assisted Living in Hampton. The defendant’s parents were
residents there for approximately two years.
When her parents were admitted to The Partridge House, the defendant
had a power of attorney for healthcare for each of them. Consequently, the
staff of The Partridge House communicated with her concerning the care her
parents were receiving. Fisher testified that it was “difficult to communicate
with [the defendant] for healthcare issues. She started to be very threatening
to the staff, . . . and it started to interfere with the caregiving of her mother.”
Fisher said the defendant made “threatening phone calls” and that “she would
keep the nurses on the phone for hours and hours at a time.” In addition, the
defendant complained to Fisher about the care of her parents. After Fisher
investigated these complaints, the defendant accused her of lying. On several
occasions when the defendant threatened staff, the police were called.
On July 5, 2005, Fisher sent the defendant a letter prohibiting her from
accessing The Partridge House. The letter was precipitated by an incident in
which the defendant “walked into the kitchen and was very loud and abusive
towards the kitchen staff, waving her fists in the air, punching her finger
directly in the kitchen staff’s face, and threatening.” In response to the letter,
the defendant left Fisher a forty-five minute voice mail message stating “she
planned to retaliate.” On July 8, Fisher petitioned the district court for a
protective order.
The defendant, however, returned to The Partridge House on July 10
with her attorney, his wife and his daughter, at which time she was discovered
in her mother’s room packing her mother’s clothes. The police were called and
the defendant fled.
Fisher also testified that sometime in 2005, she reported to the New
Hampshire Division of Elderly Services “an allegation of physical abuse in the
dining room of The Partridge House.” The alleged perpetrator was the
defendant and the victim was her mother. There was “a finding of abuse.”
At some point, a new guardian was appointed for the defendant’s mother.
He sent the defendant a letter telling her she could no longer visit her mother.
In October 2005, a week before the hearing on the stalking petition, the
defendant’s mother was moved from The Partridge House to another facility.
Fisher testified that she nonetheless still fears for her personal safety because
in various phone conversations the defendant “brings up things that have
happened so many years ago that she still holds grudges and she still holds
people accountable for things for years to come . . . .”
During the hearing on the stalking petition, the defendant also testified.
She denied, sometimes at length, both ever yelling at or threatening the staff
and telling Fisher she would retaliate against her.
After the hearing, the district court issued a protective order barring the
defendant from being within “500 feet of [the] plaintiff or any of her property.”
The court’s written order stated:
2
In a close case the court finds plaintiff proved by a
preponderance of the evidence that the conduct of the
defendant well exceeded a concern for the care of her
mother and entered an area of activity which
threatened the well being of the plaintiff and was in its
result a pattern of intimidation to plaintiff and her
staff.
This appeal followed.
Here, the defendant raises two issues. First, she challenges the
sufficiency of the evidence. Second, she argues that the trial court’s decision
contravenes RSA 633:3-a and RSA chapter 173-B and therefore is erroneous as
a matter of law and public policy. We address each issue in turn.
On appeal, we review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law
and uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidential support or tainted by error of law. Fichtner v. Pittsley, 146 N.H. 512,
515 (2001). We accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on
the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id. We view
the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Cf. State v. Gubitosi,
152 N.H. 673, 681 (2005).
The defendant’s arguments on the sufficiency of the evidence are closely
intertwined with questions of statutory interpretation. For example, the
defendant contends that there was insufficient evidence that the defendant
stalked the plaintiff because the text of the statute does not permit the court to
consider, as evidence of stalking, events or conduct not directly involving the
person seeking the stalking petition. The defendant also argues that there was
insufficient evidence that the defendant engaged in a course of conduct as
defined in RSA 633:3-a, II(a).
We begin our analysis by outlining the pertinent portions of the statutory
scheme. Under RSA 633:3-a, III-a, a person who has been the victim of
stalking may file a civil petition in either district or superior court seeking the
relief available under RSA chapter 173-B, including a protective order. The
person must prove “stalking” by a preponderance of the evidence. Id. The
definition of stalking has three variants. See RSA 633:3-a, I(a), (b), (c). For
purposes of this appeal, two variants arguably apply. Both subsections (a) and
(b) require proof of a “course of conduct targeted at a specific” individual or
person.
Course of conduct is defined in RSA 633:3-a, II(a) to include, but not be
limited to, any of the following acts or a combination thereof:
3
(1) Threatening the safety of the targeted person or an
immediate family member.
(2) Following, approaching, or confronting that person,
or a member of that person’s immediate family.
(3) Appearing in close proximity to, or entering the
person’s residence, place of employment, school, or
other place where the person can be found, or the
residence, place of employment or school of a member
of that person’s immediate family.
(4) Causing damage to the person’s residence or
property or that of a member of the person’s immediate
family.
(5) Placing an object on the person’s property, either
directly or through a third person, or that of an
immediate family member.
(6) Causing injury to that person’s pet, or to a pet
belonging to a member of that person’s immediate
family.
(7) Any act of communication, as defined in RSA 644:4,
II.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Town of Hinsdale v. Town of Chesterfield, 153 N.H. 70, 72 (2005).
When examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. ___, ___,
911 A.2d 1, 5 (2006). We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written
and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that
the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We do not construe statutes in
isolation; instead, we attempt to do so in harmony with the overall statutory
scheme. Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005).
When interpreting two or more statutes that deal with a similar subject matter,
we construe them so that they do not contradict each other, and so that they
will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the
statutes. Id.
We first consider whether the language of RSA 633:3(a) and (b) requires
the conduct at issue to directly involve the targeted person or individual. Since
the district court found that the defendant engaged in a “pattern of
intimidation,” we agree with the defendant that it appears the court considered
4
conduct that did not involve Fisher directly, such as that directed towards
other staff members. Although it is unclear from the record exactly what other
acts the court considered, we do not agree with the defendant that it was error
for the district court to have looked to these acts in determining whether the
statutory requirements were satisfied.
While the defendant correctly points out that there must be proof of a
course of conduct targeted at a specific person or individual, the acts that
constitute a course of conduct, as defined in section II, are not limited to acts
against the targeted person directly. Subsection (a)(1), for example, includes
threats against the targeted person’s “immediate family.” Subsection (a)(6)
includes injury to the targeted person’s pet or a pet belonging to that person’s
immediate family. Indeed, subsection (a)(3) expressly includes the act of
merely “appearing” at or in “close proximity to” the targeted person’s place of
employment. Moreover, the statute, through its use of the phrase “may
include, but not be limited to,” provides that the enumerated acts do not
constitute an exhaustive list. When a statute sets forth a nonexhaustive list of
acts, we have held that other acts which are similar may be considered.
Conservation Law Found. v. N.H. Wetlands Council, 150 N.H. 1, 5-6 (2003).
Thus, we conclude that threats directed at the targeted person’s co-workers
may be considered as acts constituting a course of conduct under section II.
This conclusion finds support in State v. Gubitosi. There, one of the acts
alleged in the indictment was that the defendant attempted to telephone the
victim after being told by the police not to contact her. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. at
681. The defendant argued that a telephone call during which he spoke to the
victim’s friend – not to the victim herself – was merely an attempt to telephone
the victim and could not be considered part of the course of conduct. Id. at
682. We held that under RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(7), a course of conduct may
include any act of communication as defined in RSA 644:4, II (Supp. 2004) and
that that statute “does not require that the act of communication take place
between the defendant and the intended victim.” Id. We thus concluded that
the act of telephoning the victim’s friend could be considered one of the two
acts required to prove a course of conduct. Id. at 682-83. Similarly, here we
conclude that the district court correctly considered the acts against the other
staff members in deciding whether the plaintiff met her burden.
The defendant’s other sufficiency argument is that the plaintiff did not
prove “2 or more acts.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a) defines a course of conduct as
involving “2 or more acts,” and we acknowledge that the district court, in
finding a “pattern of intimidation,” did not specify the two acts that constituted
the “pattern.” However, the defendant appears to concede that her threat to
retaliate constitutes one act for purposes of subsection (a). We agree that the
threat falls within (a)(1). As to a second act, the defendant argues that there is
insufficient evidence, especially since the court did not make a specific finding
in this regard. We disagree. In the first part of this opinion we held that the
5
acts the defendant perpetrated against the plaintiff’s coworkers fall within the
definition of course of conduct. Thus, any one of these several acts – all of
which are within the definition of course of conduct – satisfies the statutory
requirements.
However, the defendant’s argument raises an important question:
whether trial courts are required to make specific findings as to precisely which
two acts constitute the course of conduct required by the statute. We have not
yet had occasion to decide whether such a requirement exists under RSA
633:3-a.
RSA 633:3-a, III-a specifically provides, “The types of relief that may be
granted, the procedures and burdens of proof to be applied in such
proceedings, the methods of notice, service, and enforcement of such orders,
and the penalties for violation thereof shall be the same as those set forth in
RSA 173-B.” Thus, RSA 633:3-a, III-a arguably mandates the applicability of
our interpretation of RSA chapter 173-B to orders on civil stalking petitions.
In Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H. 283, 284 (2001), we vacated a protective
order issued under RSA chapter 173-B. We stated: “Because RSA 173-B:1
contains an enumerated list of prohibited conduct, we read RSA 173-B:5 to
require that a trial court must make a specific finding of criminal conduct in
order to issue a final restraining order against a defendant.” Id. at 285
(emphasis added). Our holding in Fillmore was based upon the statutory
language of RSA 173-B:5 and thus became a procedural requirement for all
protective orders issued under RSA chapter 173-B. This procedural
requirement exists in addition to the requirement of RSA 173-B:3, I, that the
facts alleged against the defendant be included within the petition for the
protective order. We acknowledge that by operation of RSA 633:3-a, III-a, the
requirements of RSA 173-B:3, I, would also be applicable to petitions for civil
stalking orders. However, in order to be consistent with our interpretation of
RSA 173-B:5 in Fillmore, we must conclude that RSA 633:3-a, II(a), which also
contains an enumerated list of prohibited conduct, likewise requires specific
findings of the course of conduct, which is defined as two or more acts. See
RSA 633:3-a, II(a).
Thus, in light of the reasoning articulated above, and in the interest of
prospectively avoiding similar confusion concerning which acts were
established to constitute the course of conduct, we take this opportunity to
exercise our supervisory authority and provide instructions to trial courts in
their issuance of civil stalking orders under RSA 633:3-a, III-a. See N.H.
CONST. pt. II, art. 73-a. We hold that when issuing a stalking order in
response to a civil petition filed pursuant to RSA 633:3-a, III-a, the trial court
must make findings on the record that a defendant engaged in two or more
specific acts “over a period of time, however short, which evidences a continuity
of purpose.” See RSA 633-3-a, II(a).
6
Aside from her sufficiency arguments, the defendant also contends that
because RSA 633:3-a specifically references and incorporates RSA chapter
173-B, RSA 633:3-a is limited in scope by RSA chapter 173-B. In particular,
the defendant argues that RSA 173-B:1, X limits who may file a stalking
petition to those who meet the definition of “family or household member.” In
that vein, the defendant claims that “disruption of a place of business is not a
matter for a stalking petition.” The defendant’s narrow interpretation of RSA
633:3-a is inconsistent with its plain language. RSA 633:3-a, III(a) allows “[a]
person who has been the victim of stalking” to seek a protective order. The
plain language of the statute does not limit the availability of a protective order
or other relief to a family or household member. See Soraghan, 152 N.H. at
405; Bethlehem, 154 N.H. at ___, 911 A.2d at 5.
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, we affirm the order of the district
court.
Affirmed.
GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS, J., concurred specially;
BRODERICK, C.J., dissented.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. I agree that given our deferential
standard of review, the evidence was sufficient to support a finding under RSA
633:3-a (Supp. 2006). We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter
of law and uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are
lacking in evidential support or tainted by error of law. Fichtner v. Pittsley,
146 N.H. 512, 515 (2001). We accord considerable weight to the trial court’s
judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.
Id.
The record in this case supports the trial court’s entry of a protective
order under RSA 633:3-a, I. It includes evidence that the defendant engaged in
a course of conduct, including telephone messages and threatening phone calls
and statements directed towards the plaintiff. It also includes evidence that
the plaintiff was afraid for her own safety and that her fear was reasonable.
Thus, I concur with the majority that the record supports the trial court’s
finding that the plaintiff was the “targeted individual” here. See RSA 633:3-a,
I(a). I also concur with the majority that the “targeted individual” may be
stalked through persons other than family members, such as employees, see
State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 681-82 (2005). I write separately, however,
because I believe that the defendant’s conduct did not amount to stalking as it
is commonly understood.
7
The record reveals that the defendant was disgruntled about the care
given to her parents, especially her mother. She aggressively complained about
claimed staff abuses of her mother. There were angry exchanges between the
defendant and the staff. She was an irate customer, demanding better services
from a business. The trial court could have found that her conduct should
have been curtailed, but I question whether a stalking petition was the proper
vehicle for doing so, especially as other remedies were available.
In 1993, New Hampshire followed more than thirty other states in
establishing the crime of stalking by enacting House Bill (HB) 476. HB 476
was entitled “An Act Establishing the Crime of Stalking and Authorizing the
State to Enforce Domestic Violence Protective Orders Issued in Other States.”
Laws 1993, ch. 173. As this title suggests, and as their remarks during
legislative hearings on the bill demonstrate, domestic violence was a chief
concern of the bill’s sponsors and supporters.
The bill’s sponsor, Representative Donna Sytek, testified before the
senate judiciary committee: “I had no idea . . . that there is such a wide spread
need in New Hampshire for legislation to allow the police to interfere before a
domestic violence situation escalates into violence.” Senate Comm. on
Judiciary, Hearing on HB 476 (April 12, 1993). Sandra Matheson, Director of
the State Office of Victim and Witness Assistance of the Attorney General’s
Office, urged passage “on behalf of the Attorney General’s Office and the many
survivors of domestic violence murders.” House Comm. on Corrections and
Criminal Justice, Hearing on HB 476 (Jan. 28, 1993).
Similarly, at the hearing in the house corrections and criminal justice
committee, Representative Carl Johnson stated: “Harassing and threatening
behaviors toward innocent people is a serious problem particularly for victims
of domestic violence and sexual abuse.” Id. At the same hearing, Senator
Susan McLane noted that many women whose husbands or boyfriends
murdered them, stalked them before doing so. Id. As Representative Peter
Burling remarked, “Domestic violence is becoming a national sport. . . .
Stalking is a part of this.” Id. In addition, Governor Stephen Merrill, law
enforcement officers, prosecutors and stalking victims testified about domestic
violence and similarly threatening behavior. Id.; see Senate Comm. on
Judiciary, Hearing on HB 476 (April 12, 1993).
While the statute as written is not limited to domestic violence, the
deliberations surrounding its passage were focused upon domestic violence
and problems of like gravity, such as threatening strangers and obsessive
former lovers. There is no indication in the legislative history that the intended
purpose of the law was to protect businesses and their staff from overly
aggressive consumers. Representative Sytek specifically noted that “the
legitimate activities of picketers, demonstrators, . . . or even pesky reporters”
do not amount to stalking. N.H.H.R. Jour. 242 (1993).
8
I agree with Representative Sytek’s remarks; there is a difference between
a “pesky” individual and a stalker. Unfortunately, under the statute as written,
a “pesky reporter” or a labor picketer, who goes too far, could be convicted just
as the defendant was. As written, I believe that the statute blurs the line
between an aggressive customer and a calculating stalker.
BRODERICK, C.J., dissenting. Either of the two statutory variants of
stalking at issue in this appeal requires proof of “a course of conduct targeted
at a specific person.” RSA 633:3-a, I(a) (emphasis added); see also RSA 633:3-
a, I(b). Here, however, the trial court issued a stalking final order against
Madaline Minichiello because her conduct “well exceeded a concern for the care
of her mother and entered an area of activity which threatened the well being of
the plaintiff and was in its result a pattern of intimidation to plaintiff and her
staff.” (Emphasis added.)
A pattern of intimidation to the plaintiff and her staff is not the same
thing as a course of conduct targeted at the plaintiff, which is what the stalking
statute requires. To be sure, the statute enumerates six acts which may be
part of a course of conduct when directed toward “the targeted person or an
immediate family member.” RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(1); see also RSA 633:3-a,
II(a)(2)-(6). But given the statutory requirement of a course of conduct targeted
at a specific person, threatening, following, approaching or confronting an
immediate family member is only part of a course of conduct for purposes of
the stalking statute when the intent behind interacting with an immediate
family member is to threaten the targeted person. Furthermore, the statute
does contemplate a situation in which interactions involving a targeted
person’s co-workers could count as part of a course of conduct, such as when
a stalker communicates a threat against a targeted person through a targeted
person’s co-worker or enters a targeted person’s place of employment for the
purpose of threatening the targeted person, see RSA 633:3-a, II(a)(3). But as
with interactions involving an immediate family member, an interaction
involving a co-worker would only count as part of a course of conduct if it took
place as a result of the stalker’s attempt to threaten the targeted person. To
the extent the majority opinion seems to expand the legislature’s list of “all-
purpose” surrogates to include co-workers, I disagree.
As defined by the legislature, stalking is an offense directed against
individuals, not groups of individuals or institutions. While I do not doubt that
the defendant’s conduct entitled Partridge House and its staff – and perhaps
Renee Fisher individually – to legal protection, I do not believe that Minichiello
engaged in the kind of conduct the legislature enacted the stalking statute to
prevent. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
9