THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Personnel Appeals Board
No. 2005-592
APPEAL OF TRACY WATERMAN
(New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board)
Argued: October 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 30, 2006
Donchess & Notinger, P.C., of Nashua (James W. Donchess on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nancy J. Smith, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Tracy Waterman, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) affirming her dismissal by the
respondent, the New Hampshire Department of Safety, Division of State Police
(Division), from her employment as a state trooper for willful insubordination
because she refused to take a polygraph test. N.H. Admin. Rules, Per
1001.08(a)9. We affirm.
The PAB found or the record reflects the following facts. On August 29,
2003, Vicky Lamere, the wife of a state trooper, informed one of the petitioner’s
supervisors, Lieutenant Nedeau, that the petitioner had made threats against
her supervisors. Lamere said that the petitioner had said that she did not
know how she might react or what she might do if Nedeau or her other
supervisor, Sergeant McCormack, yelled at her. The petitioner told Lamere
that she would “like to put a bullet in Lieutenant Nedeau’s head” and “deck
Sergeant McCormack.”
The Division began an internal investigation of these allegations on
September 3, 2003. Investigators interviewed several witnesses, including
Lamere and the petitioner, who denied making any threats. The investigators
found Lamere to be more credible than the petitioner, and, therefore, they
recommended that the petitioner be ordered to submit to a polygraph
examination. Colonel Gary Sloper, the Division director, authorized the
investigators to conduct a polygraph test of the petitioner on September 15,
2003.
The petitioner arrived for the polygraph examination with her attorney
and advised that she would not take the test. The investigating officer
explained that her refusal could mean that she violated an order from Colonel
Sloper and that she could receive discipline for this, up to and including
dismissal. The petitioner indicated that she understood and still would not
take the test.
In a September 18, 2003 memorandum, Colonel Sloper notified the
petitioner of his intent to dismiss her from her employment as a state trooper
because of willful insubordination for failing to take the polygraph examination
as he had ordered. Colonel Sloper met with the petitioner and her attorney on
September 22, 2003; her employment was terminated that day.
The petitioner appealed her termination to the PAB. The petitioner
acknowledged that the Division’s professional conduct standards authorized
the use of polygraph examinations during internal investigations. Specifically,
section 26-E.5.1 of those standards provides, in pertinent part:
During the course of internal affairs investigations, if
conditions are such that certain investigatory procedures are
appropriate, Division members may be compelled to provide
specialized information or submit to testing or examinations.
These procedures shall be specifically directed and narrowly
related to the matter under investigation. . . . Examples of special
investigative procedures which may be compelled during the
course of an administrative internal affairs investigation include
. . . polygraph examinations.
She further acknowledged that Colonel Sloper had ordered her to take a
polygraph test and that she had refused. She also admitted that she was
advised in the presence of counsel that her refusal to comply with Colonel
Sloper’s order could result in disciplinary action, which could include
dismissal.
2
The petitioner urged the PAB to rule that her termination for refusing to
take the polygraph test was unlawful because the test is unreliable and
degrading and its results are inadmissible in court. She also argued that the
order that she submit to the polygraph test was retaliatory. The PAB disagreed
and upheld her termination. The petitioner filed a motion for rehearing, which
the PAB denied.
This is an appeal from a final decision of the PAB pursuant to RSA 21-
I:58, II (2000), RSA 541:6 (1997) and Supreme Court Rule 10. The petitioner
has the burden of demonstrating that the PAB’s decision was clearly
unreasonable or unlawful. RSA 541:13 (1997). The PAB’s findings of fact are
deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id. We will affirm the
decision unless we are satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence
before us, that it is unjust or unreasonable. See RSA 541:13; Appeal of
Armaganian, 147 N.H. 158, 162 (2001).
Under Section 1.3.4 of the Division’s professional standards of conduct,
an employee is willfully insubordinate when he or she “deliberately and/or
intentionally disobeys a lawful order.” The petitioner contends that, contrary to
the PAB’s finding, she did not engage in willful insubordination because the
order that she take the polygraph test was unlawful. The petitioner argues
that the order was unlawful because: (1) it involved a polygraph test, which
she contends is unreliable, unfair and degrading; and (2) the order was
motivated by retaliation.
I
We first address whether the order was unlawful because it involved
taking a polygraph test. Whether a police officer may be terminated for failing
to take a polygraph test is an issue of first impression in New Hampshire. We
therefore look to other jurisdictions for guidance. See Stateline Steel Erectors
v. Shields, 150 N.H. 332, 334 (2003).
“[C]ourts have generally held that a public employer can require a
policeman to submit to a polygraph test as part of an investigation of his
conduct.” D. Nagle, The Polygraph in the Workplace, 18 U. Rich. L. Rev. 43, 68
(1983); see also Annotation, Refusal to Submit to Polygraph Test, 15 A.L.R.4th
1207, 1209-18 (1982). “Courts have concluded that, since a police officer must
be above suspicion of violation of the laws that he is sworn to enforce . . . and
must perform his duty to investigate crime and maintain the public trust,
questions concerning the propriety of his conduct must be resolved promptly.”
Nagle, supra at 68. “In furtherance of this objective, polygraph tests can be
administered, and an officer’s refusal to submit to such an examination can
result in his dismissal.” Id.
3
Thus, in Eshelman v. Blubaum, 560 P.2d 1283, 1285 (Ariz. Ct. App.
1977), for instance, the court reasoned, “[T]he compulsory use of the polygraph
during departmental investigations is consistent with the maintenance of a
police or sheriff’s department that is of the highest integrity and beyond
suspicion.” Therefore, the court ruled that a police officer may be ordered to
submit to a polygraph test upon penalty of dismissal provided that there are
reasonable grounds for demanding such a test, the answers are not used in
any subsequent criminal prosecution, and the questions relate specifically and
narrowly to the performance of the police officer’s official duties. Eshelman,
560 P.2d at 1285-86; see also Roux v. New Orleans Police Department, 223 So.
2d 905, 912 (La. Ct. App. 1969) (“While appellant’s refusal to obey the order is
not evidence of guilt or of knowledge of the identity of the guilty party, he may
not be permitted to refuse to take the polygraph test in view of his sworn duty
to cooperate in the investigation of crime.”), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1008 (1970).
While numerous courts, including this court, have ruled that polygraph
test results are inadmissible as evidence of guilt or innocence in criminal trials,
see State v. Ober, 126 N.H. 471, 471-72 (1985), courts have found that the
unreliability of polygraph test results for these purposes does not negate their
utility for other purposes. In City of Warrensville Heights v. Jennings, 569
N.E.2d 489, 492 (Ohio 1991), for instance, the court observed that polygraph
tests “can be a useful tool in internal department investigations of police
misconduct.” At issue in Jennings was whether a police dispatcher’s refusal to
obey an order to take a polygraph constituted “just cause” for his dismissal,
thus, making him ineligible for unemployment insurance benefits. Jennings,
569 N.E.2d at 491. The court ruled that because polygraph test results are
reliable enough for some purposes, there was just cause for the dispatcher’s
termination because he refused to take a polygraph after being ordered to do
so. Id. at 492; see also Fichera v. State Personnel Board, 32 Cal. Rptr. 159,
164 (Ct. App. 1963) (observing in case involving investigation of officer
misconduct, that a polygraph test “might have proved useful in limiting and
channeling the investigation in this case”). But see Farmer v. City of Fort
Lauderdale, 427 So. 2d 187, 190 (Fla.) (“[T]he possible investigative benefit of
building a case upon the foundation of the results of a polygraph examination
is too thin a reed to support a denial of a police officer’s right to be subjected
only to lawful and reasonable orders.”), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 816 (1983);
Kaske v. City of Rockford, 450 N.E.2d 314, 320 (Ill.) (recognizing that “a
polygraph examination is . . . of some investigatory utility and value,” but
concluding that refusing to submit to polygraph test cannot be basis for
disciplinary action against officer; to hold otherwise would be “inconsistent”
with court’s ruling that such test results are inadmissible in administrative
hearings), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 960 (1983).
The Federal Employee Polygraph Protection Act of 1988, 29 U.S.C.
§§ 2001-2009 (2000 & Supp. III), which prohibits many private sector
employers from using polygraph tests for pre-employment screening or during
4
the course of employment, also appears to recognize that the polygraph test
may be useful for some purposes. This act contains a limited exemption for
ongoing investigations provided certain conditions are met, as well as an
exemption for private employers whose primary business consists of providing
security. 29 U.S.C. § 2006(d), (e) (2000).
“Although the superior officer has broad powers to order a polygraph
examination, his request or order must still be reasonable in the view of most
courts.” Nagle, supra at 68-69; see Jennings, 569 N.E.2d at 494 (request to
take polygraph test must be for a lawful reason). In Eshelman, 560 P.2d at
1286, the court found that there were reasonable grounds to require the officer
to submit to a polygraph where the officer’s credibility was in question. As the
court explained: “[A] polygraph is always proper to verify statements made by
law enforcement officers during the course of a departmental investigation.”
Id.; see Seattle Police Officers’ Guild v. City of Seattle, 494 P.2d 485, 493
(Wash. 1972) (holding that where serious charges of crime and corruption have
been levied against department and public has serious doubts about
department’s integrity and morality, it was permissible to request officers to
submit to polygraph tests upon pain of dismissal).
Courts that have ruled that police officers may not be terminated for
failing to submit to a polygraph test have done so for reasons that do not apply
here. In the case upon which the petitioner relies, Stape v. Civil Service
Commission of City of Philadelphia, 172 A.2d 161, 164 (Penn. 1961), “nowhere
in the City Charter, the City Ordinances, the Civil Service Regulations, or the
Police Department regulations [was] there a provision which authorize[d] the
Police Commissioner or the Civil Service Commission, expressly or by
implication, to force a city employee to submit to a polygraph test.” There was
also no regulatory authority to require the police officers at issue in Molino v.
Board of Public Safety of City of Torrington, 225 A.2d 805, 809 (Conn. 1966), to
take polygraph tests.
By contrast, section 26-E.5.1(B)(6) of the Division’s professional conduct
standards expressly states that “Division members may be compelled to
provide specialized information or submit to testing or examinations,” which
may include polygraph tests. Pursuant to this provision, any such testing or
examination “shall be specifically directed and narrowly related to the matter
under investigation.”
Further, under section 26-E.5.1(B)(4), (5), before any interview of a
Division member may take place, a so-called “Garrity Warning” must be given.
See Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967). Such a warning informs the
accused that the purpose of questioning is to assist in determining whether to
impose administrative discipline. Even if the accused were to disclose during
questioning information indicating that he may be guilty of criminal conduct,
the warning explains that neither his “self-incriminating statements, nor the
5
fruits thereof” will be used against him in any criminal proceeding. The
warning further states that if the accused refuses to answer questions or fails
to give truthful answers, he will “be subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including dismissal.”
In light of the above discussion of the persuasive authority from other
jurisdictions, we hold that an order made pursuant to the Division’s
professional conduct standards to require a Division member to take a
polygraph test is a lawful order.
II
We next address whether the order at issue was unlawful because it was
impermissibly motivated by retaliation. The petitioner asserts that Colonel
Sloper ordered her to take the polygraph test to retaliate against her for filing a
sex discrimination complaint against the Division. She observes that before
she was ordered to do so, it had been eight years since the Division had
ordered a trooper to take a polygraph test. She further contends that the
Division did not order her to take a polygraph test until it knew that she would
refuse to take one.
The PAB found that Colonel Sloper was not motivated by retaliation when
he ordered the petitioner to take the polygraph test. The PAB credited Colonel
Sloper’s testimony that his primary concern was whether the petitioner had
made threats of physical violence against her superiors. As Colonel Sloper
testified: “[I]t was clear to me that the only one that could . . . really answer
this truthfully was . . . [the petitioner], and it was clear to me that I had no
other choice but to order her to submit to a polygraph and get these issues
resolved.” He explained that because Lamere did not work for the Division, he
could not compel her to take a polygraph, but that he could compel the
petitioner to do so. He also explained that, in his experience, it is generally not
necessary to order an employee to take a polygraph because “usually there’s an
admission and one way or the other, it can be proved that they are being
truthful or not. That wasn’t the case here.” Because there is evidence to
support the PAB’s finding, we uphold it. See RSA 541:13.
Having concluded that the order that the petitioner take the polygraph
test was lawful, we affirm the PAB’s determination that she engaged in willful
insubordination.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6