THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-775
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
TERRY MILLER
Argued: February 27, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 18, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R.
Schulman on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Terry Miller, appeals his conviction by a
jury on three counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2,
III (1996), and one count of felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:3, III
(1996) (amended 2003). He argues that the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.)
erred when it granted the State’s motion in limine to preclude him from cross-
examining the victim about her allegations that her father had physically and
emotionally abused her. We remand.
The record reveals the following: The aggravated felonious sexual assault
indictments alleged that the defendant engaged in a pattern of sexual assault
involving sexual intercourse, cunnilingus and masturbation; the felonious
sexual assault charge alleged a single sexual assault involving fellatio. At the
time of trial, the victim was eighteen years old; the charges alleged conduct
from 1993, when she was six, from 1995, when she was eight, and from 1996,
when she was nine.
Before trial, the State moved in limine to exclude, among other things,
evidence that the victim had alleged that her father had abused her. The State
acknowledged that the New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and
Families (DCYF) had classified the allegations as unfounded. The State sought
to preclude the defendant from cross-examining the victim about them.
Over the defendant’s objection, the trial court granted this portion of the
State’s motion in limine. The trial court ruled that the defendant could not
cross-examine the victim about the allegations against her father unless he
showed that they were demonstrably false by clear and convincing evidence.
See State v. White, 145 N.H. 544, 548 (2000), cert. denied, 533 U.S. 932
(2001), petition for habeas corpus denied by White v. Coplan, 296 F. Supp. 2d
46 (D.N.H. 2003), vacated on fed’l constitutional grounds, 399 F.3d 18 (1st
Cir.), cert. denied, 126 S. Ct. 478 (2005). The court found that the defendant
failed to meet this burden. Noting that the defendant intended to call several
witnesses to testify that the victim was untruthful, the court ruled that “while
the abuse allegations may be informative, their weight is diminished and the
Court does not see the introduction of those statements as compelling.” The
court, therefore, precluded the defendant from cross-examining the victim
about the abuse allegations against her father.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court misconstrued and
misapplied New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 608(b) by requiring him to show
that the victim’s allegations against her father were demonstrably false before
permitting him to cross-examine her about them.
I
A trial court has broad discretion to determine the admissibility of
evidence, and we will not upset its ruling absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See State v. Abram, 153 N.H. 619, 632 (2006). To prevail under
this standard, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s decision
was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
A
Rule 608(b) provides, in pertinent part:
Specific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the
purpose of attacking or supporting the witness’ credibility, other
2
than conviction of crime as provided in Rule § 609, may not be
proved by extrinsic evidence. They may, however, in the discretion
of the court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be
inquired into on cross examination of the witness (1) concerning
the witness’ character for truthfulness or untruthfulness . . . .
Although Rule 608(b) permits a cross-examiner to inquire into conduct that is
probative of the witness’s character for truthfulness or untruthfulness,
generally, the examiner must take the answer as the witness gives it. State v.
Hopkins, 136 N.H. 272, 276 (1992). Rule 608(b) prohibits the examiner from
introducing “extrinsic evidence, such as calling other witnesses to rebut the
witness’s statements.” Id. The objective is to avoid a trial within a trial; that
is, to avoid the litigation of issues that are collateral to the case at hand. Id.
Nothing in this rule requires that a defendant prove that allegations a
victim made against someone else are demonstrably false by clear and
convincing evidence before being permitted to cross-examine the victim about
them. See Coplan, 399 F.3d at 22. The “demonstrably false” requirement
comes from our decision in White. See id.
In White, the defendant appealed his convictions for felonious sexual
assault, arguing, in part, that the trial court erred when it excluded extrinsic
evidence of the victims’ prior allegations of sexual assault against other
individuals. White, 145 N.H. at 547. Extrinsic evidence means evidence other
than the witness’s own answers on cross-examination. See State v. Higgins,
149 N.H. 290, 299 (2003). Although Rule 608(b), on its face, bars extrinsic
evidence of “[s]pecific instances of the conduct of a witness” introduced “for the
purpose of attacking or supporting the witness’ credibility,” the trial court ruled
that the defendant could introduce extrinsic evidence of the victim’s prior
allegations if he proved that they were demonstrably false. White, 145 N.H. at
547. We agreed that this was the correct standard to impose before permitting
the defendant to introduce extrinsic evidence of prior allegations of sexual
assault under Rule 608(b). Id. at 548. We explained that we interpreted
“demonstrably false” to mean “clearly and convincingly untrue.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
We did not rule, however, that a defendant had to meet the
“demonstrably false” standard before Rule 608(b) permitted him to cross-
examine a victim about prior allegations of sexual assault. Rather, we ruled
that the Confrontation Clauses of the Federal and State Constitutions did not
mandate such cross-examination unless the defendant met the “demonstrably
false” standard. Id. at 553-54. We held that because there was no clear and
convincing evidence that the prior allegations of sexual assault were
“demonstrably false,” the trial court did not violate the defendant’s
constitutional rights under the Federal and State Confrontation Clauses when
3
it precluded him from cross-examining the victims about them. Id. On habeas
review, the First Circuit Court of Appeals in Coplan, 399 F.3d at 22-23, 26-27,
took issue with this part of our decision.
Thus, the trial court erred when it construed Rule 608(b) to require the
defendant to prove that the victim’s allegations against her father were
demonstrably false by clear and convincing evidence before it could permit him
to cross-examine the victim about them. Consistent with Rule 608(b), the trial
court could have exercised its discretion to permit the defendant to cross-
examine the victim about the prior false allegations, provided that the court
found that the allegations were probative of truthfulness and untruthfulness
and otherwise admissible. Consistent with White, the trial court would not
have been constitutionally required to permit this cross-examination unless the
defendant proved that the prior allegations were demonstrably false. Contrary
to the trial court’s ruling, the trial court’s discretion with respect to cross-
examination about prior false allegations of sexual assault is broader under
Rule 608(b) than it is under the State Constitution.
The trial court’s misinterpretation of White is understandable given that
in opinions decided after White, we have been less than clear in describing its
holding. See Abram, 153 N.H. at 631-33; State v. Etienne, 146 N.H. 115, 118-
19 (2001); State v. Gordon, 146 N.H. 258, 261 (2001). In Abram, 153 N.H. at
631, for instance, we stated that in White: “We affirmed the trial court’s
exclusion of both cross-examination of the victims and extrinsic evidence
concerning the prior allegations, holding that ‘a defendant may introduce a
victim’s prior allegations of sexual assault by showing that the prior allegations
were demonstrably false,’ which we interpreted to mean ‘clearly and
convincingly untrue.’” In Etienne, 146 N.H. at 118-19, we interpreted White to
mean that before the defendant could impeach the credibility of a witness by
inquiring about a police report alleging a sexual assault that she filed and later
recanted, he must show that the prior allegations were demonstrably false. In
Gordon, 146 N.H. at 261, we described our holding in White as “stating that a
defendant in a sexual assault case may cross-examine the victim about a prior
false allegation of sexual assault under Rule 608(b) only if the defendant makes
a threshold showing of ‘probity and similarity,’ and demonstrates clearly and
convincingly that the prior allegations were false.”
In the above cases, we conflated the issues of when, as a constitutional
matter, a trial court must permit a defendant to cross-examine a witness about
allegedly false accusations of sexual assault and when, as an evidentiary
matter, a court may allow a defendant to do this. In so doing, we were
imprecise about what White actually held. In Gordon, in particular, we erred
when we construed White to require a defendant to demonstrate clearly and
convincingly that the prior allegations were false before being permitted to
cross-examine the victim about them under Rule 608(b). “While we recognize
4
the value of stability in legal rules, we have also acknowledged that the
doctrine of stare decisis is not one to be either rigidly applied or blindly
followed. The stability of the law does not require the continuance of
recognized error.” State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118, 127-28 (2003) (quotation
omitted). Accordingly, we overrule Gordon to this limited extent.
B
The State argues, alternatively, that the trial court precluded the
defendant from cross-examining the victim about the allegations against her
father under Rule 403. “Rule 403 is an exclusionary rule that cuts across the
rules of evidence.” State v. McGill, 153 N.H. 813, 816 (2006) (quotation
omitted); see N.H. R. Ev. 608 Reporter’s Notes. Rule 403 provides: “Although
relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or
misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” Evidence is unfairly prejudicial
if its primary purpose or effect is to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its
sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of
human action that may cause a jury to base its decision upon something other
than the established propositions in the case. State v. Ainsworth, 151 N.H.
691, 696 (2005).
We accord the trial court considerable deference in determining whether
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
and we will not disturb its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id.
We disagree with the State that the trial court exercised its discretion
under Rule 403. The trial court’s order refers to the demonstrably false
standard in White and whether, in effect, it was compelled to permit the
defendant to cross-examine the victim about the allegations against her father.
As we are unable to decide whether the proposed cross-examination was
permissible under Rule 403 as a matter of law, see Simpson v. Young, 153 N.H.
471, 474 (2006), and as the State has not argued that any error was harmless,
we remand this issue to the trial court for resolution in the first instance, see
State v. Hall, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 908 A.2d 766, 770 (2006). Accordingly, if, on
remand, the trial court decides that the cross-examination was admissible
under Rule 403, then it shall grant the defendant a new trial. If, on the other
hand, the trial court decides that cross-examination was not admissible under
Rule 403, then the defendant’s conviction shall stand.
Because we have not previously discussed the interplay between Rules
403 and 608, we set forth the following principles to aid the trial court in its
5
analysis. “The probative value of specific-instances evidence offered under
[Rule 608(b)] derives from the fact that this evidence may help the trier of fact
accurately determine witness credibility.” 28 Wright & Gold, Federal Practice
and Procedure § 6118, at 94 (1993). “The degree of probative value can be the
function of a number of factors” including: (1) “whether the testimony of the
witness . . . is crucial or unimportant”; (2) “the extent to which the evidence is
probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness”; (3) “the extent to which the
evidence is also probative of other relevant matters”; (4) “the extent to which
the act of untruthfulness is connected to the case”; (5) “the extent to which the
circumstances surrounding the specific instances of conduct are similar to the
circumstances surrounding the giving of the witness’s testimony”; (6) “the
nearness or remoteness in time of the specific instances to trial”; (7) “the
likelihood that the alleged specific-instances . . . conduct in fact occurred”; (8)
“the extent to which specific-instances evidence is cumulative or unnecessary
in light of other evidence already received on credibility”; and (9) “whether
specific-instances evidence is needed to rebut other evidence concerning
credibility.” Id. at 94-97.
Unfair prejudice can occur in at least three ways. Id. at 97. First, “the
jury may develop a bias against the party associated with th[e] witness” who
committed the bad acts. Id. Second, the jury could give the specific-instances
evidence “too much weight,” even if the evidence was admissible only to bear
upon the witness’s character for truthfulness or untruthfulness. Id. at 98-99.
Third, where the witness at issue is the defendant, the jury could use the
misconduct evidence to “draw an inference about the likelihood that [the]
defendant committed the acts with which he is charged in the case at bar.” Id.
at 99.
The court may also consider other “costs and dangers” of specific-
instance evidence, including whether doubts over the occurrence of the
specific-instance evidence will result in “time consuming and distracting
minitrials on that point” and whether admitting the evidence will subject
witnesses to “harassment and undue embarrassment.” Id. at 97.
II
We next address the defendant’s constitutional claims. We must address
these claims because if either the State or Federal Constitution required the
trial court to permit the defendant to cross-examine the victim about the prior
false allegations, remand to allow the trial court to exercise its discretion under
Rule 403 would be unnecessary.
The defendant contends that the trial court’s decision infringed upon his
rights under the Confrontation Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions.
See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amend. VI, XIV. We first consider
6
his arguments under the State Constitution, referring to federal decisions only
for guidance. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
“The opportunity to impeach a witness’s credibility through cross-
examination is an incident of rights guaranteed by part I, article 15 of the State
Constitution.” State v. Newman, 148 N.H. 287, 289 (2002) (quotation omitted).
Although a trial court has broad discretion to fix the limits of cross-
examination, it may not completely deny a defendant the right to cross-
examine a witness on a proper matter of inquiry. Id. at 289-90. “Once a
defendant has been permitted a threshold level of inquiry, however, the
constitutional standard is satisfied, and the judge’s limiting of cross-
examination is measured against an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard.” Id. at 290 (quotation and brackets omitted). “Thus, when the
record reveals that a threshold level of inquiry was allowed, we will uphold the
trial court’s decision limiting the scope of further cross-examination unless the
defendant demonstrates that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id.
The defendant contends that cross-examining the victim about the
allegations against her father was relevant to his assertion at trial that she
fabricated the charges against the defendant. While we agree that whether the
victim falsely accused her father of physical and emotional abuse was relevant
to the defendant’s fabrication defense, we conclude that the trial court’s order
did not bar the defendant from making a threshold inquiry at trial into the
victim’s character for truthfulness or untruthfulness. See id. We therefore
conclude that the trial court’s decision “did not impermissibly limit the
defendant’s ability to effectively impeach the principal witness against him at
trial in violation of Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.” Id.
The trial court’s order did not deny the defendant the right to attack the
victim’s credibility altogether. At trial, the jury heard from seven witnesses
regarding the victim’s character for untruthfulness. The victim’s father
confirmed that he told an investigator that the victim “fabricates stories and is
known by the family to be a liar and untrustworthy.” He explained that when
the victim was a child, he found her to be trustworthy, but that since
approximately 2002, he has not. He also testified that he personally has
always had doubts about his daughter’s allegations against the defendant.
The victim’s step-uncle, who had known her since birth, testified that the
victim was a “drama queen” with “a propensity for lying to get what she wants.”
He testified that she “doesn’t know very many moral boundaries, and it’s
unfortunate that she’s willing to do whatever she needs to do.” He testified
that because he believes that she is untrustworthy, he would not believe her
testimony given under oath. The victim’s step-aunt also testified that she
found the victim to be untruthful as did: (1) a neighbor who had known the
7
victim for approximately fourteen years and babysat for her five days a week
from 1994 through 1996; (2) the neighbor’s husband; (3) a friend of the victim’s
father who had known her since she was five or six years old; and (4) the
mother of one of the victim’s friends who had known the victim for
approximately eight years.
Additionally, the defendant cross-examined the victim at length about
the inconsistencies between her trial testimony and the information she gave to
police investigators. For instance, while at trial, the victim testified that she
had sexual intercourse with the defendant between twenty and thirty times,
she told the investigators that she had intercourse with him between two and
four times.
Our review of the record demonstrates that the defendant was able to
make a sufficient threshold level of inquiry in his attempt to discredit the
victim in the eyes of the jury and establish her character for untruthfulness.
See State v. Flynn, 151 N.H. 378, 388-89 (2004). Under these circumstances,
we hold that the State Confrontation Clause did not require the trial court to
allow the defendant to cross-examine the victim about the allegations against
her father.
III
We now analyze the defendant’s arguments under the Federal
Confrontation Clause. See U.S. CONST. amends. VI, XIV. “The Confrontation
Clause lies obscurely behind claims of evidentiary error because, in a few
extreme cases, the Supreme Court has invoked it to overturn state court
restrictions on cross-examination or impeachment.” Ellsworth v. Warden, 333
F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2003) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “The Supreme Court
has declared cross-examination an essential constitutional right for a fair trial,
subject to reasonable limits reflecting concerns such as prejudice, confusion or
delay incident to marginally relevant evidence.” Coplan, 399 F.3d at 24
(quotations omitted). In this way, the Federal Confrontation Clause
“guarantees an opportunity for effective cross-examination, not cross-
examination that is effective in whatever way, and to whatever extent, the
defense might wish.” Delaware v. Fensterer, 474 U.S. 15, 20 (1985) (per
curiam).
“In a criminal case, restrictions on the defendant’s rights to confront
adverse witnesses and to present evidence may not be arbitrary or
disproportionate to the purposes they are designed to serve.” Coplan, 399 F.3d
at 24 (quotations omitted). “Factors that the Supreme Court has deemed
relevant are the importance of the evidence to an effective defense, the scope of
the ban involved, and the strength vel non of state interests weighing against
admission of the evidence.” Id. (citations omitted).
8
The Supreme Court has distinguished between a “general attack” on a
witness’s credibility, in which evidence is offered to support an inference that
the witness has a tendency to lie, and a more specific attack on credibility
“directed toward revealing possible biases, prejudices, or ulterior motives of the
witness as they may relate directly to issues or personalities in the case at
hand.” Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S 308, 316 (1974). In Davis, the Court
concluded that “[t]he partiality of a witness . . . is always relevant as
discrediting the witness and affecting the weight of testimony,” id. (quotation
omitted), and ruled this kind of attack “to be part of the constitutionally
protected right of cross-examination,” Boggs v. Collins, 226 F.3d 728, 737 (6th
Cir. 2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 913 (2001). In his concurring opinion,
Justice Stewart opined: “[T]he Court neither holds nor suggests that the
Constitution confers a right in every case to impeach the general credibility of a
witness through cross-examination about his past convictions.” Davis, 415
U.S. at 321 (Stewart, J., concurring). In Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S.
673, 680 (1986), the Court held that “a criminal defendant states a violation of
the Confrontation Clause by showing that he was prohibited from engaging in
otherwise appropriate cross-examination designed to show a prototypical form
of bias on the part of the witness.”
Some federal circuit courts of appeal have interpreted these decisions to
mean that “cross-examination as to bias, motive or prejudice is constitutionally
protected, but cross-examination as to general credibility is not.” Boggs, 226
F. 3d at 737; see Quinn v. Haynes, 234 F.3d 837, 845 (4th Cir. 2000), cert.
denied, 532 U.S. 1024 (2001); United States v. Bartlett, 856 F.2d 1071, 1088-
89 (8th Cir. 1988); Hughes v. Raines, 641 F.2d 790, 793 (9th Cir. 1981). In a
rape case, courts have explained that cross-examination as to general
credibility means cross-examination that is intended to permit the inference
that “because the victim made a false accusation in the past, the instant
accusation is also false.” Bartlett, 856 F.2d at 1088; see Raines, 641 F.2d at
793. Cross-examination as to bias or motive, on the other hand, is intended to
establish that the victim had a bias against the defendant or for the
prosecution or had a motive to lie. Raines, 641 F.2d at 793.
Although the First Circuit has not ruled that cross-examination as to
general credibility is entitled to no federal constitutional protection, it has ruled
that such cross-examination may be entitled to less constitutional protection.
See Coplan, 399 F.3d at 26. While, in theory, we are not bound by the
decisions of the First Circuit Court of Appeals, we elect to follow them on this
subject. See State v. Remick, 149 N.H. 745, 747 (2003).
Cross-examination as to general credibility may be entitled to less federal
constitutional protection, the Seventh Circuit has explained in a case upon
which the First Circuit relied in Coplan, 399 F.3d at 25-26, because its
9
probative value “is small and may be outweighed by the prejudicial effect of
revealing that the witness had made such a serious charge falsely.” Redmond
v. Kingston, 240 F.3d 590, 593 (7th Cir. 2001). By contrast, cross-examination
to show that the complaining witness had a motive to lodge a false accusation
against the defendant can be “highly probative.” Id. at 592.
In Redmond, the court held that the defendant had a federal
constitutional right to cross-examine the victim about her assertion, eleven
months before the alleged offense, that she had been forcibly raped. Id. at 591.
She repeated the story to a hospital nurse and to a police officer, but later
admitted that she had made up the story to get her mother’s attention. Id.
The defendant wanted to cross-examine the victim about this prior false
allegation to show that she “would lie about a sexual assault . . . to get
attention, and thus had a motive to accuse him falsely.” Id. The court of
appeals ruled that precluding the defendant from cross-examining the victim
about this prior false charge infringed upon his constitutional right of
confrontation. Id. at 591-93. The defendant wanted to use the cross-
examination not merely to show that the victim was a liar, but to demonstrate
that she had a motive for fabricating a charge against him. Id. at 591.
In Coplan, 399 F.3d at 18, the First Circuit used the distinction between
cross-examination as to general credibility and cross-examination as to bias,
motive or prejudice, when it decided that the defendant was entitled as a
matter of federal constitutional law to cross-examine the victims about their
prior allegations of sexual assault. The court ruled that the evidence the
defendant sought to introduce by cross-examining the victims about their prior
allegations of sexual assault, was “not merely ‘general’ credibility evidence.”
Coplan, 399 F.3d at 24. Rather, it was “considerably more powerful” because
“[t]he past accusations were about sexual assaults, not lies on other subjects”
and “the past accusations by the girls bore a close resemblance to [their]
present testimony—in one case markedly so.” Id. As the court explained: “We
are dealing here with something far more potent than ‘general credibility’
evidence which, under confrontation clause standards, may have a lower
status.” Id. at 26.
Because of the similarity between the prior accusations and the
accusations against the defendant, the evidence suggested a motive to lie. Id.
at 24, 26. The court stated: “In our case the nature of the motive may be
unknown; but if the prior accusations are similar enough to the present ones
and shown to be false, a motive can be inferred and from it a plausible doubt or
disbelief as to the witness’ present testimony.” Id. at 26. Under these
circumstances, the court ruled, the defendant was entitled under the Federal
Confrontation Clause “to explore the prior accusations on cross-examination.”
Id.
10
The evidence at issue is not the kind of “potent” evidence in Coplan. In
Coplan, “the past accusations by the girls bore a close resemblance to [their]
present testimony—in one case markedly so.” Id. at 24. Here, the victim’s
allegations against her father of physical and emotional abuse were not
remotely similar to her allegations against the defendant.
Similarly, in Coplan, the other accusations of sexual assault were made
before the victims accused the defendant of sexual assault. Id. at 21. Here,
the victim’s allegations against her father were made more than two years after
she accused the defendant of sexually assaulting her.
Also, the evidence that the victims’ prior sexual assault allegations in
Coplan were false was far more compelling than the evidence here that the
accusations against the victim’s father were false. In Coplan, regarding the
charges against the victims’ neighbor, the defendant “proferred the neighbor’s
verdict of acquittal; testimony from two witnesses at the 1994 trial claiming
that the older girl had admitted . . . that the original accusations were a lie;
and various law enforcement reports of the incident from the younger girl that
described the alleged assault inconsistently.” Id. With respect to the older
girl’s accusation against her cousin, the defendant “proferred testimony . . .
suggesting that the older girl had admitted the accusations . . . were a lie,” as
well as reports from a police investigation into the incident, which was
eventually terminated because of a finding of reasonable doubt, and
inconsistencies between the girl’s claim and facts collected by the police. Id. at
21-22.
By contrast, here, the most compelling evidence that the allegations were
false was the decision by DCYF to close its investigation. There was no
evidence that the victim had ever recanted her allegations against her father.
Given the dissimilarities between the type of evidence at issue in Coplan
and that presented in this case, we conclude that the defendant had no federal
constitutional right to cross-examine the victim about her allegations that her
father physically and emotionally abused her.
Remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11