THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2005-040
PETITION OF THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
(State v. San Giovanni)
Argued: October 3, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 17, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Robert S. Carey and Karen A. Gorham,
assistant attorneys general, on the brief, and Elizabeth A. Dunn, assistant
attorney general, orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for defendant Joseph San Giovanni.
DUGGAN, J. The State filed a petition for writ of certiorari, see Sup. Ct.
R. 11, challenging an order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) denying its
motion to join multiple offenses in a single trial against the defendants, Joseph
San Giovanni and Farid Kim Tari. The State’s petition concerns only the
indictments pending against San Giovanni. We deny the petition.
The record supports the following facts. In 2002, San Giovanni filed an
application with the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS) for a residential or health care license to open St. Jude’s
Residence (St. Jude’s) in Ossipee. According to the application, the primary
mission of St. Jude’s was “to provide therapeutic residential supports to
individuals with special needs. The targeted population [was to] be individuals
that have suffered an acquired brain injury.” St. Jude’s was to provide various
services, including, among other things, assistance with: (1) personal care; (2)
developing an appropriate wardrobe for all seasons; (3) maintaining personal
space and common areas in an acceptable manner; and (4) accessing
community resources.
Soon thereafter, the defendants opened St. Jude’s, which they marketed
as a drug and alcohol treatment facility. One brochure described St. Jude’s as
a “Residential Inpatient Recovery Center” that “offer[ed] inpatient care services
to individuals suffering from addiction, and in need of our assistance, to help
them reach their goal of recovery.” According to another brochure, the services
offered at St. Jude’s included vocational training, substance abuse recovery
and “the opportunity to learn, practice and generalize skills across a variety of
functional settings.”
In May 2004, both defendants were charged by indictment with fifteen
counts of theft by deception. One of the indictments against San Giovanni
alleges that:
[P]ursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, and acting in concert
with and aided by Farid Kim Tari, Joseph San Giovanni obtained
or exercised control over property valued at more than $1,000
belonging to Robert Reczek by deception and with the purpose to
deprive Robert Reczek of these funds.
San Giovanni created or reinforced the impression, which was
false and which he did not believe to be true, that the St. Jude’s
Residence in Ossipee, New Hampshire, was a drug and alcohol
treatment facility that would provide such treatment to Mr.
Reczek’s son. As a result of this impression, San Giovanni
obtained approximately $18,670.00 from Mr. Reczek, with a
purpose to deprive Mr. Reczek of those funds.
The fifteen indictments are identical, except for the names of the victims
and the amounts of money paid either by the victims or their families. The
amounts of money range from $4,500 to $45,000. Each indictment also alleges
a different time period, although all of the alleged offenses occurred during a
sixteen-month period between December 2002 and April 2004.
The State filed motions to join both defendants as well as all of the
offenses for trial. In support of its motions to join the offenses for trial, the
State argued that they were based upon a common plan under State v. Ramos,
149 N.H. 118 (2003). The State also argued that the offenses were “not so
numerous or complex that a jury [would] be unable to distinguish the evidence
and apply the law intelligently.” Both defendants objected, arguing that the
offenses were unrelated, and that joining them would be unfairly prejudicial.
2
The superior court heard argument on the motions and subsequently
issued an order denying the State’s motions to join offenses for trial, but
granting the State’s motions to join the defendants for trial. With respect to the
motions to join offenses, the court concluded that:
While each of the defendants’ charged offenses are, when viewed in
retrospect, a cohesive plan, the State has not presented evidence
that satisfies the Ramos/ABA standards. Specifically, the State
has not shown that the defendants’ alleged defrauding of each of
the individual victims was “intertwined with” or “mutually
dependent” on the other victims. The defendants could have
committed their alleged conduct as to one victim, but not to
another, and still succeeded as to the first. As such, the
defendants[’] alleged acts are not a “plan” for purposes of
consolidations. Therefore, the offenses are unrelated and the
defendants have an absolute right to have them severed for trial.
(Citations omitted.) The State then filed this petition for writ of certiorari
challenging the superior court’s ruling.
Certiorari is an extraordinary remedy that is not granted as a matter of
right, but rather at the discretion of the court. Petition of State of N.H. (State v.
Theodosopoulos), 153 N.H. 318, 319 (2006); see Sup. Ct. R. 11. We exercise
our power to grant the writ sparingly and only where to do otherwise would
result in substantial injustice. Petition of State of N.H., 153 N.H. at 319.
Certiorari review is limited to whether the trial court acted illegally with respect
to jurisdiction, authority or observance of the law, or unsustainably exercised
its discretion or acted arbitrarily, unreasonably, or capriciously. Id. at 319-20.
The State argues that the superior court’s conclusion that the offenses
were not related was error, and relies upon several factual allegations to
support its position that the defendants had a common plan to defraud the
residents named in the indictments. In addition, the State asserts that the
superior court’s decision is at odds with the legislature’s intent to aggregate
theft offenses committed pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct under RSA
637:2, V(a) (1996). It also contends that joinder is appropriate because the
jury would be able to distinguish the evidence pertaining to each offense and
apply the law intelligently.
In response, San Giovanni contends that the superior court correctly
determined that the State failed to establish that the charges constituted a
common plan. He points out that the State’s arguments as to why the charges
were mutually dependent – and therefore formed a common plan – were
unsupported by any factual basis. Further, San Giovanni asserts, as an
3
alternative ground for affirming the superior court’s decision, that severance
was appropriate in this case in order to promote a fair determination of his
guilt or innocence.
We will uphold the superior court’s decision not to join charges in this
case unless we conclude that the decision constitutes an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. State v. Abram, 153 N.H. 619, 623 (2006). To show that
the superior court’s decision is error, the State must show that the ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its case. Id.
In State v. Ramos, we adopted the ABA standards for joinder and
severance of criminal offenses, holding that “any two or more offenses
committed by the same defendant may be joined for trial, upon the application
of the prosecuting attorney or the defense.” Ramos, 149 N.H. at 128. We
further explained that:
Whenever two or more unrelated offenses have been joined for
trial, the prosecuting attorney or the defendant shall have a right
to severance of them. “Unrelated” offenses are those that are not
“related.” “Related” offenses are those that are based upon the
same conduct, upon a single criminal episode, or upon a common
plan.
Id. (citations omitted).
For the purposes of the relatedness test outlined above, we recently
adopted the definition of “common plan” as set forth in New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 404(b). State v. McIntyre, 151 N.H. 465, 466-67 (2004). In McIntyre
we stated:
The distinguishing characteristic of a common plan under Rule
404(b) is the existence of a true plan in the defendant’s mind
which includes the charged crimes as stages in the plan’s
execution. That a sequence of acts resembles a design when
examined in retrospect is not enough; the prior conduct must be
intertwined with what follows, such that the charged acts are
mutually dependent.
Id. at 467 (citations omitted).
The State argues that the offenses are mutually dependent for two
reasons: first, without the money from the earlier thefts, the defendants could
not have committed the later thefts; second, the offenses are interconnected
because if the earlier victims had reported the defendants to law enforcement,
the later thefts would not have occurred.
4
Both of these arguments rely upon the same legal theory; namely, that
the charges are mutually dependent because the success of the later-occurring
crimes depends upon the success of the earlier crimes. In two recent sexual
assault cases, we found joinder to be proper relying upon this theory. See
Abram, 153 N.H. at 625 (joinder appropriate where defendant’s success on
later offenses was dependent upon his having desensitized the victims by
regularly subjecting them to severe acts of sexual abuse); McIntyre, 151 N.H. at
467 (occurrence of the later assaults hinged upon the success of the earlier
incidents). The present case, however, is distinguishable from both Abram and
McIntyre for several reasons. Most significant among them is that both Abram
and McIntyre involved repeated crimes perpetrated against the same victim or
victims. Here, we have discrete offenses committed against multiple victims.
This case is also distinguishable from the facts of State v. Schonarth,
152 N.H. 560 (2005), where we upheld the consolidation of seventeen counts of
theft by deception, all against the same elderly victim. Id. at 562. Although we
did not expressly apply the theory articulated above in our decision, there is no
question that in that case, the success of the later frauds depended upon the
success of the earlier frauds, as all involved the same victim and were all
“connected to the defendant’s alleged desire to repay his debt to the victim.” Id.
Furthermore, the State has failed to present any facts to support its
claims that the defendants could not have committed the later thefts without
the money from the earlier thefts. From what we can glean from the sparse
record, approximately eighty people resided at St. Jude’s during the course of
its operation. Of these eighty residents, only fifteen were named as victims in
the indictments; at least sixty-five were not. On this record, it would be sheer
speculation to conclude that the monetary proceeds from the earlier crimes
made it possible to commit the later crimes. Presumably, the residents who
were not named victims paid many thousands of dollars for the services
provided by St. Jude’s, just as the alleged victims did. The State has thus
failed to allege a sufficient connection between the money paid by the earlier
victims and the thefts committed against the later victims.
Similarly, the State has failed to substantiate its claim that the later
thefts were made possible because the victims of the earlier thefts did not
report the defendants to law enforcement officials. Standing alone, the State’s
argument casts too wide a net to justify finding offenses mutually dependent
and therefore capable of joinder. From the record, it is impossible to discern
why the victims of the earlier thefts did not complain at an earlier time to the
authorities. The State has provided no factual basis linking the victims’ silence
to the defendants’ conduct. Moreover, we note that in cases involving multiple
offenses committed by a single perpetrator, if the victims report the offenses to
5
law enforcement officials, early reporting will likely prevent subsequent
offenses.
Next, the State argues that the defendants’ marketing efforts created the
opportunities for their thefts. It contends that the defendants attracted their
victims to St. Jude’s through the Internet, the Yellow Pages, and brochures.
Historically, we have required a substantial degree of interconnectedness
before offenses may be joined as mutually dependent. See Abram, 153 N.H. at
627; Schonarth, 152 N.H. at 562; McIntyre, 151 N.H. at 467; State v. Michaud,
150 N.H. 359, 362 (2003). The examples of marketing proffered by the State
are all targeted at the general public, and not at specific individuals. While the
defendants’ marketing efforts may have created opportunities for the
defendants to commit the indicted offenses, the State has failed to show how
these efforts contribute to a finding that the offenses at issue here are mutually
dependent and thus constitute a common plan.
The State next argues that the fact that the defendants deposited the
residents’ money into business bank accounts supports finding that the
indicted offenses were part of a common plan. In its brief, the State argues
that:
A business that receives money from customers needs a bank
account. The forethought required to open bank accounts shows
that the defendants envisioned many victims. Thus, the deposits
of the victims’ money into these bank accounts prove that these
offenses were based upon a common plan.
As with the previous argument, the State has neglected to show how
depositing the resident’s money into business bank accounts supports finding
that these particular offenses were part of a common plan. The superior court
could reasonably have found that the actions described by the State – without
more – at most establish a pattern or systematic course of conduct, which is
not enough to prove the existence of a common plan. See State v. Whittaker,
138 N.H. 524, 528 (1994) (discussing the requirements for a common plan
under Rule 404(b)).
Finally, the State asserts that the superior court’s decision is at odds
with the legislature’s intent to aggregate theft offenses committed pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct under RSA 637:2, V(a) (1996). This argument was
never raised during the proceedings in superior court. Consequently, it is not
preserved for our review, and we decline to address it. See Gulf Ins. Co. v.
AMSCO, 153 N.H. 28, 40-41 (2005) (citing Broughton v. Proulx, 152 N.H. 549,
552 (2005)).
6
Based upon the foregoing, we conclude that the superior court did not
unsustainably exercise its discretion by ruling that the charged offenses were
unrelated and that joinder is inappropriate. In light of this result, we need not
reach the remainder of the parties’ arguments.
Petition denied.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7