THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Milford District Court
No. 2005-326
RIC PAUL
v.
FRANKLIN C. SHERBURNE
Argued: May 17, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 21, 2006
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Peter E. Hutchins on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
McLaughlin Law Office, P.C., of Laconia (Philip T. McLaughlin on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Ric Paul, appeals a decision of the Milford
District Court (Crocker, J.) dismissing his small claim action for malicious
prosecution against the defendant, Franklin C. Sherburne. We reverse and
remand.
The undisputed facts are as follows. In early February 2002, Sherburne
brought a civil stalking petition against Paul in the Rochester District Court.
See RSA 633:3-a, III-a (Supp. 2005). The District Court (Jones, J.) promptly
issued an ex parte temporary order of protection against Paul. See id.; RSA
173-B:4, I (2002). A final hearing on the merits was scheduled to be held on
March 27, 2002. Sherburne failed to appear at the hearing and the stalking
petition was dismissed.
In April 2002, Paul, appearing pro se, filed a small claims complaint
against Sherburne in Milford District Court seeking damages for civil malicious
prosecution. Sherburne, who was also appearing pro se, filed an answer and
cross-claim as well as a motion to dismiss Paul’s malicious prosecution claim.
In his motion to dismiss, Sherburne asserted that Paul’s claim did not satisfy
two of the four required elements necessary to prevail on a civil malicious
prosecution claim. In June 2002, the Milford District Court (Ryan, J.) denied
Sherburne’s motion to dismiss. Thereafter, in July 2002, Paul moved to
dismiss Sherburne’s cross-claim. The trial court scheduled a hearing on the
merits for October 2002, and notified the parties that Paul’s motion to dismiss
would be heard at the time of trial.
At the October 2002 hearing, the trial court, sua sponte, heard
arguments regarding Sherburne’s motion to dismiss, which had previously
been denied by Judge Ryan in June 2002. By order dated February 16, 2005,
the Trial Court (Crocker, J.) granted Sherburne’s motion to dismiss Paul’s
malicious prosecution claim, ruling that Sherburne’s claim had not been
instituted without probable cause, and that Paul had not received a “favorable
termination” in the underlying proceedings. Therefore, Paul’s claim failed to
satisfy, as a matter of law, two of the four required elements of the tort of
malicious prosecution. Specifically, the trial court ruled that the ex parte
protective order constituted a judicial finding of probable cause for the purpose
of a malicious prosecution claim because the issuance of that order required a
judicial finding that Sherburne was “in immediate and present danger of
abuse.” The trial court also ruled that Paul did not receive a favorable
termination in the underlying proceeding because the stalking petition was
dismissed on procedural grounds. The trial court reasoned that, “In order to
sustain a cause of action for malicious prosecution, the determination in the
underlying cause of action must be decisive, i.e. an actual acquittal after trial,
dismissal of the case by the court after having heard evidence or testimony,
and upon the making of certain findings of fact.” Thus, because no
determination had been made of the merits of the stalking petition, the court
ruled that its dismissal did not constitute a favorable termination for the
purposes of Paul’s malicious prosecution claim.
On appeal, Paul argues that the trial court: (1) misinterpreted and
misapplied two elements of the tort of malicious prosecution; and (2) erred by
reconsidering and reversing its prior order denying Sherburne’s motion to
dismiss the malicious prosecution claim.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which
relief may be granted, we assume the truth of the facts alleged by the plaintiff
2
and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to him.
Dewyngaerdt v. Bean Ins. Agency, 151 N.H. 406, 407 (2004). If the facts do not
constitute a basis for legal relief, we will uphold the granting of the motion to
dismiss. Id.
In order to prevail on a civil malicious prosecution claim, the plaintiff
must prove: (1) that he was subjected to a civil proceeding instituted by the
defendant; (2) without probable cause; (3) with malice; and (4) that the
proceedings terminated in the plaintiff’s favor. ERG, Inc. v. Barnes, 137 N.H.
186, 190 (1993).
Paul first contests the trial court’s ruling that the ex parte protective
order issued in the underlying stalking petition constitutes, as a matter of law,
conclusive evidence of probable cause. Paul contends that whether probable
cause necessary to avoid liability for civil malicious prosecution existed is a
factual question to be determined by the trier of fact following an evidentiary
hearing. He argues that an evidentiary hearing is required to determine the
defendant’s state of mind and reasonable belief when he or she initiated the
underlying civil proceeding.
It is well settled that in the context of a malicious prosecution claim,
probable cause is defined as “such a state of facts in the mind of the
prosecutor as would lead a [person] of ordinary caution and prudence to
believe or entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person arrested is
guilty.” Stock v. Byers, 120 N.H. 844, 846 (1980) (citing Cohn v. Saidel, 71
N.H. 558, 567 (1902)). The plaintiff is required to prove that the defendant,
when he initiated the underlying suit against the plaintiff, “did not possess
such knowledge of facts as would lead a [person] of ordinary caution and
prudence to believe that [he or she] had a cause of action against the plaintiff.”
Cohn, 71 N.H. at 567 (quotation omitted). The existence of probable cause, in
this context, is a question for the trier of fact “to the extent that it depends
upon the credibility of conflicting evidence proffered on that issue.” Stock, 120
N.H. at 846. “Whether there was probable cause is ultimately, however, a
question of law to be determined by the court.” Id.
We have not yet considered whether an ex parte protective order is
conclusive evidence of probable cause in the context of a subsequent civil
malicious prosecution claim. Other jurisdictions have addressed this issue
with respect to a preliminary injunction, which is analogous to a temporary
protective order. A majority of these jurisdictions have found that the granting
of a preliminary injunction is not conclusive evidence of the existence of
probable cause for initiating the underlying proceedings. See Bokum v. Elkins,
355 P.2d 137, 141 (N.M. 1960) (ex parte preliminary injunction granted
without notice to or a hearing of the other side, which is later dissolved,
constitutes prima facie evidence of probable cause); Bank of Barcelona v. Riggi
3
Bros. Co., 179 N.Y.S. 391, 394 (Sup. Ct. 1919) (preliminary injunction is prima
facie, and not conclusive, evidence of probable cause because it is a temporary
and provisional order to maintain the status quo until a trial on the merits is
conducted); H.P. Rieger & Co. v. Knight, 97 A. 358, 361 (Md. 1916) (ex parte
preliminary injunction is not conclusive of probable cause for obtaining an
injunction and whether probable cause exists depends on the facts of the
particular case); Annotation, Malicious Prosecution-Injunction, 70 A.L.R.3d
536, 571-74 (1976). But see South Georgia Bldg. & Inv. Co. v. Mathews, 61
S.E. 293 (Ga. Ct. App. 1908) (judgment rendered after an ex parte hearing is
not conclusive evidence of probable cause, unless the decision is based upon
undisputed facts, or upon a statement of the case fairly and honestly made);
but cf. Dunham v. Roer, 708 N.W.2d 552 (Minn. Ct. App. 2006) (issuance of a
restraining order, “without other compelling evidence,” precludes malicious
prosecution claim based upon the underlying ex parte petition and temporary
restraining order).
The underlying rationale appears to be that because the judicial ruling
granting the preliminary ex parte injunction requires only a prima facie case,
then it is only prima facie evidence of probable cause for the purposes of a
subsequent malicious prosecution case. Bokum, 355 P.2d at 141; Bank of
Barcelona, 179 N.Y.S. at 395. As the Knight court reasoned, if an ex parte
preliminary injunction or temporary protective order is granted without notice
to or hearing from the other side, and is subsequently dissolved or dismissed,
“[t]here would be a temptation to some to make their bills as strong as possible,
for the purpose of saving themselves from [a subsequent malicious prosecution
claim],” if the granting of a preliminary injunction constituted conclusive
evidence of probable cause. Knight, 97 A. at 361. We find this rationale
persuasive.
Here, the trial court granted Sherburne’s ex parte protective order
pursuant to RSA 633:3-a, III-a and RSA 173-B:4. To issue that ex parte order,
the issuing judge was required to find that Sherburne made a “showing of an
immediate and present danger of abuse.” RSA 173-B:4, I. Because the ex
parte temporary protective order was issued without notice to or hearing
evidence from the other party, we cannot conclude that it constitutes
conclusive evidence of probable cause. Rather, we hold that an ex parte
protective order based only upon information provided by the petitioner
constitutes prima facie evidence of probable cause. See New Hampshire Ins.
Co. v. Duvall, 115 N.H. 215, 217 (1975) (prima facie presumption permits a
finding in accordance with it, but does not require such a finding). This
conclusion strikes the proper balance between supporting the judicial finding
necessary to grant the ex parte temporary protective order and giving the party,
against whom the protective order was issued, an opportunity to present
evidence to refute the allegations contained in that protective order and to
4
establish the absence of probable cause for a subsequent malicious
prosecution claim.
Paul also contests the trial court’s ruling that he did not receive a
favorable termination in the underlying claim. He argues that the trial court’s
dismissal of the underlying stalking petition, based upon Sherburne’s failure to
appear at the March 27, 2002 final hearing on the merits, constitutes a
favorable termination for the purposes of satisfying the requisite elements of
his subsequent malicious prosecution claim. He contends that the trial court
misinterpreted Robinson v. Fimbel Door Co., 113 N.H. 348 (1973), when it
ruled that: (1) a favorable determination in the underlying cause of action
“must be decisive”; and (2) “[a] termination or dismissal based on technical or
procedural grounds does not constitute a decisive termination.” We agree.
In Robinson, the plaintiff was a contractor employed by the defendant.
Robinson, 113 N.H. at 349. When the parties disputed the defendant’s liability
to pay the plaintiff for some “extra work” that was performed by the plaintiff,
the plaintiff left the defendant’s employ and refused to return some of the
defendant’s contracting equipment until he was paid for the extra work. Id.
The plaintiff was subsequently arrested for embezzlement based upon an arrest
warrant and complaint procured by the defendant. Id. Prior to a scheduled
court appearance, the parties agreed that the criminal action would be nol
prossed in exchange for the plaintiff’s return of the equipment. Id. The
equipment was returned and the criminal action was nol prossed. Id. at 350.
The plaintiff then brought a claim for malicious prosecution against the
defendant. Id. We affirmed the trial court’s dismissal of the malicious
prosecution claim, concluding that where an underlying proceeding ends in a
compromise or settlement, “voluntarily and understandingly consummated by
the accused,” it does not constitute a favorable termination that will support a
subsequent malicious prosecution claim. Id.
However, we also specifically found that “if the complaint is dismissed
either by reason of insufficient evidence or because the complaining witness
fails to appear or abandons the prosecution, the proceedings have terminated
in the plaintiff’s favor.” Id. at 351 (citation omitted). Here, Sherburne failed to
appear for the March 27, 2002 final hearing on the merits of his stalking
petition. His failure to appear was the trial court’s sole grounds for dismissing
the stalking petition. Therefore, as a matter of law, the matter favorably
terminated in Paul’s favor for purposes of his malicious prosecution claim. See
id.
Sherburne argues that Robinson supports the trial court’s ruling that
Paul did not receive a favorable termination in the underlying claim based
upon the facts and circumstances before the trial court when it made its
ruling. While we recognize that there are instances in which the trial court is
5
required to make a factual determination in order to decide whether the
proceedings have been favorably terminated for the purposes of the subsequent
malicious prosecution case, the instant case requires no such determination.
Unlike Robinson, which dealt with a decision to nol pros the underlying claim
and, therefore, required a factual determination to determine whether the
plaintiff procured the nol pros or was a party to the compromise, see Robinson,
113 N.H. at 351-52, the instant case was dismissed solely because of
Sherburne’s failure to appear at the scheduled hearing. Moreover, in its
February 16, 2005 order, the trial court recognized that Paul had a statutory
right to an immediate hearing, which was scheduled for March 27, 2002. See
RSA 173-B:3, VII. We find, therefore, that the trial court misinterpreted
Robinson as it applies to the instant case and erred, as a matter of law, in
ruling that the plaintiff’s claim failed to meet the requisite showing of a
favorable termination in the underlying proceeding.
For the foregoing reasons, the trial court erred, as a matter of law, in
ruling that Paul’s malicious prosecution claim failed to meet two of the four
elements necessary to prevail on a civil malicious prosecution claim. Having
determined that the trial court erred in dismissing Paul’s malicious prosecution
claim on substantive grounds, we need not address his contention that the trial
court also erred on procedural grounds; namely, by reconsidering and
reversing its prior order denying Sherburne’s motion to dismiss.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6