THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-062
THOMAS BEHRENS & a.
v.
S.P. CONSTRUCTION COMPANY, INC.
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 17, 2006
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.A., of Concord (Jeanne P. Herrick on
the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Danis Lewis Law Office, of Natick, Massachusetts (Robert M.
Daniszewski on the memorandum of law and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, Thomas and Kerry Behrens, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) denying their request for specific
performance of a sales agreement they entered into with the respondent, S.P.
Construction Company, Inc., as well as their request for contract damages. We
affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In late 2002, the petitioners
sought to purchase property in Newport from the respondent, a real estate
brokerage and sales company. The petitioners and the respondent signed a
sales agreement on January 31, 2003, and February 2, 2003, respectively. The
selling price, as recorded in the signed sales agreement, was $315,000, and the
petitioners paid a $5,000 deposit on February 7, 2003. The sales agreement
contained a financing provision stating that the agreement was “contingent
upon the [petitioners] obtaining financing” in the amount of $200,000 “or less.”
An addendum to this provision contains the following term: “Sellers to provide
up to $200,000 in first mortgage financing at the rate of 7% interest for the
first 7 years of the purchase . . . .”
Prior to closing, a dispute arose regarding the financing provisions in the
agreement, delaying the culmination of the sale. In August 2003, the
petitioners filed a petition seeking specific performance of the sales agreement
and damages. They claimed that the financing terms obligated the respondent
to provide as much financing as they required, up to $200,000. The
respondent, however, argued that the agreement obligated the petitioners to
accept as much financing as the respondent could provide, up to $200,000.
After a bench trial, the trial court found the sales agreement to be
ambiguous, and, therefore, considered parol evidence. Noting that both
parties’ positions were reasonable, the trial court concluded that there was no
meeting of the minds on an essential term of the sales agreement, and, as
such, the contract was unenforceable. Accordingly, the trial court denied the
petitioners’ request for specific performance and damages.
On appeal, the petitioners argue: (1) that the trial court erred in its
application of contract law to the sales agreement; (2) that the trial court
improperly applied a subjective standard in evaluating contract formation; (3)
that the trial court erred by finding the sales agreement to be ambiguous and
admitting parol evidence; and (4) that the trial court erred when it declined to
order specific performance of the sales agreement.
Because the sales agreement is a contract, we apply the general rules of
contract interpretation in our review. See Sherman v. Graciano, 152 N.H. 119,
121 (2005). The interpretation of a contract, including whether a contract term
is ambiguous, is ultimately a question of law for this court to decide. Id.
Accordingly, we review a trial court’s interpretation of a contract de novo. Id.
Where, however, the terms of a contract are indeed ambiguous, and the fact
finder has properly looked to extrinsic evidence to determine the intent of the
parties, our standard of review is more deferential. Galloway v. Chicago-Soft,
142 N.H. 752, 756 (1998). We will sustain a trial court’s findings and
conclusions unless they are lacking in evidential support or tainted by error of
law. Appeal of the State of N.H., 147 N.H. 426, 429 (2002).
2
I. Application of Contract Law
The petitioners first contend that the trial court improperly conflated
contract formation principles with contract interpretation principles.
Specifically, they argue that courts must first determine that a contract was
formed between the parties before construing the contract’s language, and that
the trial court erred by interpreting the language of the contract to find that no
contract was formed. The petitioners offer no authority supporting the position
that principles of contract formation and interpretation must remain exclusive
of each other in a court’s analysis of a contract.
Offer, acceptance, and consideration are essential to contract formation.
Tsiatsios v. Tsiatsios, 140 N.H. 173, 178 (1995). There must be a meeting of
the minds on all essential terms in order to form a valid contract. See Simonds
v. City of Manchester, 141 N.H. 742, 746 (1997); see also 17A Am. Jur. 2d.
Contracts § 30 (2004). A meeting of the minds is present when the parties
assent to the same terms. Chisholm v. Ultima Nashua Indus. Corp., 150 N.H.
141, 145 (2003). Moreover, the terms of a contract must be definite in order to
be enforceable. See id; see also Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 33(1),
comment b at 92 (1979) (contract not formed “unless the terms of the contract
are reasonably certain”).
The trial court found the disputed financing terms to be ambiguous. A
trial court may use parol evidence to aid in interpreting an ambiguous term of
a contract. Richey v. Leighton, 137 N.H. 661, 663 (1993); see also Ouellette v.
Butler, 125 N.H. 184, 187-88 (1984) (“Extrinsic evidence is admissible when it
serves to aid in interpretation, or to clarify an ambiguity rather than to
contradict unambiguous terms of a written agreement.”). After considering
testimonial evidence from both parties, as well as documentary evidence from
the respondent, the trial court concluded that the sales agreement was
unenforceable because there was no “meeting of the minds” as to one of its
essential terms.
Having reviewed the record before us, we conclude that the trial court
properly inquired into the formation of the sales agreement prior to finding it
unenforceable. As such, the trial court did not err in this respect.
II. Application of Objective Standard
The petitioners next argue that the trial court erred by failing to apply an
objective standard when assessing whether a meeting of the minds existed
between the parties. We disagree.
3
It is true that existence of a meeting of the minds sufficient to form a
valid contract is analyzed under an objective standard. See Chisholm, 150
N.H. at 145. When there is a dispute regarding the terms of a contract, it is to
be determined by the trier of fact. Id. “In determining the actual
understanding and intent of the parties, the trier of fact should consider the
objective meaning of the expressed contract terms.” Tsiatsios, 140 N.H. at 178.
An objective standard places a reasonable person in the position of the
parties, and interprets a disputed term according to what a reasonable person
would expect it to mean under the circumstances. N.A.P.P. Realty Trust v. CC
Enterprises, 147 N.H. 137, 140 (2001). In determining the parties’ intentions
under an objective standard, a court “must determine what the parties, as
reasonable people, mutually understood the ambiguous term to mean.” Id. at
140-41. Having reviewed the record, we conclude that the trial court, in
seeking to determine whether a meeting of the minds existed as to the disputed
financing terms, first examined the language of the terms under an objective
standard.
In its order of November 17, 2004, the trial court stated:
The sales agreement, in regard to financing, notes that
the amount will be “$200,000 or less” and that the
seller is “to provide up to $200,000 in first mortgage
financing.” However, it does not state which party
would decide the amount to be financed, or how the
financed money would be used, i.e. as purchase
mortgage money, for improvements, or for some other
purpose that might affect the amount of the actual
mortgage on the property.
Though the trial court did not explicitly announce that it was applying an
objective standard, it plainly sought to understand, from an objective
perspective, “what a reasonable person would expect [the terms] to mean under
the circumstances.” N.A.P.P. Realty Trust, 147 N.H. at 140. It was only after
examining the disputed terms in this objective light that the trial court
determined the language to be ambiguous.
III. Ambiguity and the Admission of Parol Evidence
The petitioners contend that, “because reasonable persons could not
disagree as to its meaning,” the trial court further erred by finding the sales
agreement to be ambiguous. As we note above, the interpretation of a contract,
including whether a contract term is ambiguous, is ultimately a question of law
for this court to decide, and we review a trial court’s interpretation of a contract
4
de novo. Sherman, 152 N.H. at 121. Having reviewed the sales agreement, we
agree with the trial court that the disputed financing terms are ambiguous.
When interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by the
parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the context
in which the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole.
Ryan James Realty v. Villages at Chester Condo. Assoc., 153 N.H. __, __, 893
A.2d 661, 664 (2006). It is axiomatic that we give an agreement the meaning
intended by the parties when they wrote it. Gen. Linen Servs. v. Franconia Inv.
Assocs., 150 N.H. 595, 597 (2004). Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will
be determined from the plain meaning of the language used in the agreement.
Ryan James Realty, 153 N.H. at __, 893 A.2d at 664.
A clause of an agreement is ambiguous when the contracting parties
reasonably differ as to its meaning. Appeal of Town of Durham, 149 N.H. 486,
487 (2003). If the agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be determined,
under an objective standard, what the parties, as reasonable people, mutually
understood the ambiguous language to mean. See General Linen Services,
Inc., 150 N.H. at 597; see also N.A.P.P. Realty Trust, 147 N.H. at 140-41.
The disputed language in the sales agreement stipulates that the
agreement is “contingent upon the [petitioners] obtaining financing” in the
amount of $200,000 “or less.” An addendum to the sales agreement states,
with regard to financing, that the respondent is to “provide up to $200,000 in
first mortgage financing at the rate of 7% interest for the first 7 years of the
purchase . . . .” The parties differ as to the meaning of these terms; the
petitioners allege that they obligate the respondent to provide as much
financing as they require up to $200,000, while the respondent contends that
they obligate the petitioners to use as much financing as it elects to provide, up
to $200,000.
We believe that the respective interpretations assigned to the financing
terms by the parties, though irreconcilable, are reasonable. As the trial court
correctly noted in its November 2004 order, the express language of the sales
agreement fails to identify which party would decide the amount to be financed.
From an objective perspective, a reasonable person in the position of either
party could understand only what the maximum amount of financing was. The
criteria for setting the actual amount to be financed – including the identity of
the party controlling that determination – is not objectively ascertainable from
the plain language of the agreement. We conclude, therefore, that the trial
court did not err by finding the disputed terms to be ambiguous. Accordingly,
the trial court properly considered parol evidence in interpreting the
ambiguous terms. See Richey, 137 N.H. at 663; see also Ouellette v. Butler,
125 N.H. at 187-88. When a trial court properly looks to extrinsic evidence to
determine the intent of the parties, the question of a contract term’s meaning
5
should be left to the trier of fact unless the meaning of the extrinsic evidence is
so clear that reasonable people could reach only one conclusion. Galloway,
142 N.H. at 756.
The first step in determining whether parol evidence is admissible is to
consider whether the writing is a total integration and completely expresses the
agreement of the parties. Richey, 137 N.H. at 664; see 11 S. Williston & R.
Lord, Williston on Contracts §33:14 (4th ed. 1999) (parol evidence rule applies
only when parties integrate their agreement). We disagree with the trial court’s
finding that the sales agreement was “not a total integration that completely
expresse[d] the agreement of the parties.” The question of whether a contract
is integrated is determined by the parties’ intent. 11 S. Williston & R. Lord,
Williston on Contracts §33:15, :16 (4th ed. 1999). Though not dispositive, an
integration clause is evidence that parties intended a writing to be a total
integration. See Lapierre v. Cabral, 122 N.H. 301, 306 (1982). The sales
agreement signed by the parties contained an integration clause stating: “Any
verbal representation, statements and agreements are not valid unless
contained herein. This agreement completely expresses the obligations of the
parties.” Having reviewed the record before us, we believe that at the time the
parties signed the sales agreement, they intended it to be an integration
completely expressing their agreement. We note, however, that an integration
clause does not necessarily render a contract unambiguous. See Hopkins v.
Fleet Bank – NH, 143 N.H. 385, 389 (1999). As such, it was not error for the
trial court to examine parol evidence in its effort to clarify and interpret the
ambiguous financing terms.
The trial court heard evidence from the parties as to their respective
interpretations of the financing terms, and “how they intended to benefit” from
them. The trial court also considered documentary evidence submitted by the
respondent that supported its argument. Based upon the evidence presented,
the trial court determined that there had been no meeting of the minds
between the parties as to an essential term, and that the sales agreement was,
therefore, unenforceable.
We concur with the trial court’s finding that the disputed financing terms
were essential to the sales agreement. Though we have never precisely defined
what makes a term “essential,” the word is commonly defined as “constituting
an indispensable . . . condition of a thing,” “necessary,” “important in the
highest degree,” and “unavoidably significant.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 777 (unabridged ed. 2002). This common definition
accords with other jurisdictions’ determinations as to what makes a contract
term essential. See Miller v. Tawil, 165 F. Supp. 2d 487, 494 (S.D.N.Y. 2001) (a
term is “essential” if “it seriously affects the rights and obligations of the
parties”); cf. Neeley v. Bankers Trust Co. of Texas, 757 F.2d 621, 628 (5th Cir.
1985) (“[A]n ‘essential’ promise denotes one that the parties reasonably
6
regarded, at the time of contracting, as a vitally important ingredient in their
bargain.”). Any term governing the right to determine the amount of financing,
up to $200,000, would plainly be essential to the sales agreement, as evidenced
by the dispute now before us.
We conclude that the trial court properly looked to extrinsic evidence to
determine the intent of the parties. Our standard of review, therefore, becomes
a deferential one. Galloway, 142 N.H. at 756. We do not find the trial court’s
conclusions to be lacking in evidential support or tainted by error of law, see
Appeal of State of N.H., 147 N.H. at 429, and we therefore sustain its finding
that the sales agreement was unenforceable because there was no meeting of
the minds on an essential term.
IV. Specific Performance
The petitioners finally claim that the trial court erred by failing to order
specific performance of the contract. Because we affirm the trial court’s finding
that the sales agreement was unenforceable for lack of a meeting of the minds
on an essential term, this issue is moot.
V. Conclusion
We conclude that the trial court did not err in its application of contract
law and that it properly applied an objective standard in its analysis of the
sales agreement. Further, we conclude that the disputed financing terms are
indeed ambiguous, and that it was not error for the trial court to examine parol
evidence in its efforts to clarify the ambiguity. As such, we concur with the
trial court that the sales agreement was unenforceable because there was no
meeting of the minds on an essential term, precluding an order of specific
performance.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY, J., concurred.
7