THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–northern judicial district
No. 2005-408
G2003B, LLC & a.
v.
TOWN OF WEARE
Argued: May 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2006
Neal M. Kurk, of Weare, by brief and orally, for the intervenors.
William A. Theroux, Jr., of Plaistow, by brief and orally, for the plaintiffs.
Drescher & Dokmo, P.A., of Milford (William R. Drescher on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The intervenors, who are residents of the Town of Weare,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Mangones, J.) granting a motion to enter
a consent decree filed by the defendant, the Town of Weare (Town), and the
plaintiffs, G2003B, LLC (G2003B), Aspen Acquisitions, LLC (Aspen), and
Gerard Beique. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Beique is the sole member of
G2003B, which owns a parcel of land consisting of over forty-five acres. The
land abuts Mt. Dearborn Road in Weare and is the parcel at issue in this
appeal. G2003B is the successor in interest to Aspen, of which Beique was a
member. In June 2001, Aspen acquired the parcel and submitted an
application for subdivision approval to the Weare Planning Board. In
December, various citizens of Weare living near the parcel circulated a petition
to place an article on the ballot for the next town meeting. The proposed article
would amend the Town’s zoning ordinance by adding a historic overlay district
in the vicinity of Mt. Dearborn Road, which included the parcel at issue. The
historic overlay district would restrict development within its bounds. Both the
planning board and the Weare Board of Selectmen opposed the article. In
January 2002, the planning board approved Aspen’s subdivision proposal. In
March, the Town held its annual meeting and the citizens passed the article,
amending the zoning ordinance.
In June 2003, the plaintiffs filed for declaratory judgment against the
Town. The plaintiffs argued, inter alia, that the amended ordinance was
unconstitutional, both on its face and as applied to the parcel at issue. The
plaintiffs sought damages for inverse condemnation, claiming that the
amended ordinance rendered the parcel valueless. Subsequent to the
plaintiffs’ filing, the selectmen sent a letter to certain residents of Weare,
particularly those residents who circulated the petition to place the zoning
amendment on the March 2002 ballot. The letter stated that, due to both the
planning board’s and the selectmen’s disagreement with and concerns
regarding the zoning amendment, the Town did not intend to expend the
amount of money from the Town budget necessary for a vigorous defense of the
action, but notified the recipients of the letter that they could intervene.
Certain recipients of the letter filed a motion to intervene, which the court
granted in October 2003. In its order on the motion to intervene, the trial
court ruled:
[T]he intervenors do not constitute, or legally represent, the Town
of Weare as a party defendant. Thus, while it may be that the
intervenors have standing to participate in certain aspects of this
matter, such as issues relating to the lawfulness of the ordinance,
they might not have such standing as to other aspects.
(Quotations and citation omitted.) The trial court bifurcated the proceedings so
as to first address the plaintiffs’ argument that the zoning amendment was
unconstitutional on its face. In March 2004, the trial court issued a twenty-
three-page order that detailed the relevant facts in the case and denied the
plaintiffs’ motion for declaratory judgment on the issue of facial
constitutionality. The court deferred the remaining issue of as-applied
constitutionality.
After the court’s decision, the plaintiffs and the Town filed a motion to
enter a consent decree. In the proposed consent decree, both the plaintiffs and
the Town agreed that the amended ordinance was unconstitutional as applied
to the property at issue, because the ordinance prevented reasonable use of the
2
land. The agreement thus permitted the plaintiffs to subdivide and develop the
property. In exchange, the plaintiffs and the Town also agreed that the
plaintiffs would withdraw all other causes of action against the Town and waive
recovery of any damages against the Town. The intervenors objected to the
proposed consent decree, arguing that facts in the consent decree were either
false or unsupported by evidence. In February 2005, the court held a hearing
on both the motion to approve the consent decree and the intervenors’
objection. In March, the trial court issued an order granting the motion to
approve the consent decree.
At oral argument before this court, the intervenors conceded: “We are
not, in any way, suggesting that we can step in as a true party and say, ‘The
consent decree cannot be advanced unless the intervenors approve.’” Thus,
the narrow issue before us is whether the trial court erred in approving the
consent decree, which the intervenors argue was based upon erroneous facts
and conclusions of law and was determined without an adequate hearing.
Neither the plaintiffs nor the Town appeal the trial court’s grant of limited
standing to the intervenors. Accordingly, for the purposes of this case, we
assume without deciding that the intervenors have standing to contest the trial
court’s ruling.
We first address the procedural aspect of the intervenors’ appeal. They
argue that the trial court should have granted them an evidentiary hearing or
the opportunity to present affidavits before ruling on the consent decree. The
intervenors, however, received notice of and attended the hearing in February
2005, the purpose of which was to address the motion to approve the proposed
consent decree and their objection to the proposal. Prior to the hearing, the
intervenors filed an objection to the motion to approve the consent decree. In
the objection, they argued that the facts asserted in the consent decree were
erroneous and that its approval would violate public policy. At the hearing, the
trial court permitted them to present their case against approval of the consent
decree, which included the opportunity to argue. There is nothing in the
record to suggest that they could not have presented evidence. They asserted
that there were factual errors in the proposed decree, but never presented any
evidence to support that position. Further, they never asked to present any
evidence, nor did they make an offer of proof as to what their evidence would
show. Even if they had requested an evidentiary hearing, the decision as to
whether to hold a full evidentiary hearing is within the discretion of the trial
court. Town of Bedford v. Brooks, 121 N.H. 262, 266 (1981). It is clear from
the record that the intervenors had adequate hearing rights afforded to them.
We next address the substantive aspect of the intervenors’ appeal, which
is their argument that the trial court should not have approved a consent
decree without verifying the facts asserted in it. Consent decrees contain
elements of both contracts and judicial decrees. Frew v. Hawkins, 540 U.S.
431, 437 (2004); see also Brooks, 121 N.H. at 266 (stating that consent decrees
3
are contractual in nature). As consent decrees are agreements to settle, they
are encouraged by New Hampshire’s well-established principle of favoring the
settlement of litigation. Halstead v. Murray, 130 N.H. 560, 564 (1988); Waters
v. Hedberg, 126 N.H. 546, 552 (1985). The promotion of settlement is widely
accepted in other jurisdictions, as well. E.g., Schering-Plough Corp. v. FTC,
402 F.3d 1056, 1072 (11th Cir. 2005); Robert Comstock, LLC v. Keybank
National Assoc., 130 P.3d 1106, 1109-10 (Idaho 2006). Pursuant to the
policies of promoting settlement and treating consent decrees as freely
contracted agreements between parties, many appellate courts have adopted
an abuse of discretion standard for reviewing a trial court’s decision to accept,
reject, or modify a consent decree. Tennessee Assoc. of Health Maintenance
Organizations, Inc. v. Grier, 262 F.3d 559, 564 (6th Cir. 2001); Durrett v.
Housing Authority of the City of Providence, 896 F.2d 600, 604-05 (1st Cir.
1990); United States v. Hooker Chemical & Plastics Corp., 776 F.2d 410, 411
(2d Cir. 1985); Long v. State, 807 A.2d 1, 9 (Md. 2002); Boillet v. Conyer, 826
S.W.2d 95, 97 (Mo. App. 1992); Beaver v. Kingman, 785 P.2d 998, 1001 (Kan.
1990). Considering this weight of authority and New Hampshire’s longstanding
policy of promoting settlement, we will apply the unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard to our review of the trial court’s approval of the consent
decree in the instant case. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)
(explaining the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). To show that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, the appellant “must
demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of [the appellant’s] case.” Id. (quotations omitted).
The intervenors argue that the trial court was not provided with
sufficient material facts and erroneously approved the consent decree. We
disagree. During the litigation and as part of the record, the parties provided
the trial court with factual information, including the complete certified record
from a related case that the intervenors had earlier withdrawn and four
separate sets of town records that included documents relating to the adoption
of the zoning amendment. The court also took a view of the site, allowed the
parties to submit memoranda of law and requests for findings of fact, and
heard oral arguments. In the trial court’s twenty-three-page order deciding the
facial constitutionality of the ordinance, the court made numerous factual
findings and interpreted the zoning ordinance at length. Based upon the
court’s extensive familiarity with the case and the court’s understanding of the
intervenors’ objections, both written and oral, we hold that the trial court’s
ruling did not constitute an unsustainable exercise of discretion because the
record supports a finding that the trial court had sufficient knowledge of the
facts and applicable law so as to constitute a reasonable basis for the court’s
approval of the consent decree.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4