THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-215
DANIEL M. HUGHES
v.
SPEAKER OF THE NEW HAMPSHIRE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES & a.
Argued: May 3, 2005
Opinion Issued: June 2, 2005
Brown, Olson & Gould, P.C., of Concord (Bryan K. Gould and E. Maria
Reinemann on the brief, and Mr. Gould orally), for the plaintiff.
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (James P. Bassett & a. on the brief, and Mr.
Bassett orally), and Richard J. Lehmann, senate legal counsel, by brief, and
Patrick Donovan, house legal counsel, by brief, for the defendants.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Daniel J. Mullen, associate attorney
general, on the brief), for the State, as amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The defendants appeal the ruling of the Superior Court
(McGuire, J.) that they violated Part I, Article 8 of the State Constitution and
RSA chapter 91-A when they privately negotiated a compromise of Senate Bill
(SB) 302. This appeal requires that we carefully consider: the public’s
constitutional right of access to governmental proceedings, see N.H. CONST. pt.
I, art. 8; the public’s statutory right to know, see RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp.
2004); the legislature’s constitutional authority to adopt its own rules, see N.H.
CONST. pt. II, arts. 22, 37; the legislature’s right to free deliberation and
debate, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 30; and the constitutional principle of
separation of powers, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37. We reverse.
We hold that whether the defendants violated the statutory provisions
governing the public’s right to know is a political question not subject to our
review. Answering this question would infringe upon the legislature’s exclusive
constitutional authority to adopt and enforce its own rules of procedure.
However, whether the defendants violated Part I, Article 8 is not a
political question. We further hold that the defendants did not violate that
constitutional provision. In context, the constitutional import of free legislative
debate outweighs the public’s right of access to the disputed negotiations.
Considering the public and open nature of the legislative process in this case
and the public access to the records and debates, we believe that the
legislature could properly have determined that denying the public access to
the negotiations at issue was reasonable.
I. Background
The defendants are the Speaker of the New Hampshire House of
Representatives (House), the President of the New Hampshire Senate (Senate),
the General Court of the State of New Hampshire, the House Conference
Committee on SB 302, and the Senate Conference Committee on SB 302. The
plaintiff is Representative Daniel M. Hughes, a member of the House.
The instant dispute concerns the enactment of SB 302, a 2004 bill
concerning school funding. We briefly summarize the legislative history of SB
302 below. We incorporate by reference the more detailed history set forth in
Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H. ___, ___ (decided April 20, 2005).
SB 302 was introduced in the Senate on January 7, 2004, to “make
technical corrections to the education funding formula.” Baines, 152 N.H. at
___ (quotation and brackets omitted). Before passing the bill on March 17,
2004, the Senate rejected an amendment that would have raised the existing
cigarette tax rate. Id. at ___.
The House amended SB 302 to increase the existing cigarette tax rate.
Id. at ___. A committee of conference was appointed for SB 302 when the
Senate did not concur with the House amendment. Id. at ___. Consistent with
2
legislative rules, the Senate President appointed three Senate conferees and the
Speaker of the House appointed four House conferees. Id. at ___.
A committee of conference or “conference committee,” “is two committees,
one appointed by each house. It is normally appointed for a specific bill and its
function is to gain accord between the two houses either by the recession of
one house from its bill or its amendments or by the further amendment of the
existing legislation or by the substitution of an entirely new bill.” N. Singer, 1
Statutes and Statutory Construction § 11:8, at 654 (6th ed. 2002 rev.).
“Although the managers on the part of each House meet together as one
committee they are in effect two separate committees, each of which votes
separately and acts by a majority vote.” Id. § 16A:4, at 934; see National
Conference of State Legislatures, Mason’s Manual of Legislative Procedure
§ 770, at 558 (2000) (Mason’s).
“When the conferees, by majority vote of each group, have reached
complete agreement . . . they embody their recommendations in a report made
in duplicate.” Singer, supra § 16A:4, at 936. The report may not be forwarded
to the legislature unless the conferees have unanimously approved it. Manual
of the New Hampshire General Court 2003-2004 at 20. The report is then
acted upon by each house of the legislature. Mason’s, supra § 771, at 560.
“When both houses have adopted the report, they have both approved the bill
in its final form and it is ordered to enrollment.” Id.
“The conference committee process is older than Congress itself. State
legislatures used conference committees before 1789 to reconcile differences
between the chambers of their bicameral legislatures.” W. Oleszek,
Congressional Procedures and the Policy Process 255 (6th ed. 2004). “The
Massachusetts Bay Colony . . . held the first recorded conference committee in
the New World as early as 1645.” L. Longley & W. Oleszek, Bicameral Politics:
Conference Committees in Congress 29 (1989).
“Almost immediately upon the convening of the first session of the First
Congress in 1789, the Senate and the House considered rules providing for
conferences between the two chambers.” Id. at 30. The first congressional
conference committee met on May 14, 1789, to resolve an issue of
congressional etiquette: How should the Congress address the President of the
United States? Id. at 31. “One of the first bills passed by Congress, H.R. 15
(introduced on July 22, 1789), required a conference committee to iron out
differences between the House and Senate versions.” J. Roberts, Are
Congressional Committees Constitutional?: Radical Textualism, Separation of
Powers, and the Enactment Process, 52 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 489, 545 (2001).
Committees of conference “are an important element of the constitutional
concept of bicameralism.” Id. at 547. “While it is sometimes possible to
3
reconcile differences between the chambers by amendment . . ., this is rarely
the case for important legislation.” Id. “It is usually the conference committee,
a quintessential bicameral body, that carries out the crucial constitutional
function of preparing from the disparate House and Senate bills one final set of
legislative provisions for final passage.” Id. at 547-48.
The committee of conference in this case met publicly on three dates:
May 17, 2004; May 18, 2004; and May 19, 2004. The Senate and House
conferees met jointly on these dates, with members of the public and press in
attendance.
Before each of the public meetings convened, House conferees met with
the Speaker of the House in his office to discuss SB 302. Also present at these
meetings were House legal counsel and various House members. These
meetings were not publicly noticed and were not open to the public. During
these non-public meetings, representatives for the House conferees
communicated with the Senate President to negotiate a compromise of SB 302.
The trial court credited testimony that, at these non-public meetings, the
House conferees “discussed and decided what to say during the noticed public
meetings of the Committee of Conference.” The court also credited testimony
that the conferees “agreed . . . on a ‘script’ of what they would say in the public
meeting.” During one of the committee of conference’s public meetings, a
conferee indicated that she disapproved of conferees scripting their public
comments in advance.
The Senate conferees also met with the Senate President in his office
before at least one public meeting of the committee of conference. Additionally,
pairs of Senate conferees met in person or by telephone to discuss the bill.
Neither the Senate President’s meeting with the Senate conferees nor the
discussions between pairs of Senate conferees were publicly noticed or open to
the public.
The committee of conference reached a final compromise on SB 302 on
May 19, 2004. The committee’s report recommended amending SB 302 to
increase the uniform rate at which the statewide property tax was imposed.
Baines, 152 N.H. at ___. The report did not recommend changing the rate of
the cigarette tax. See N.H.H.R. Jour. ___ (May 25, 2004).
At the May 19, 2004 public meeting of the committee of conference, three
conferees explained that they could not support the committee’s report. These
conferees were replaced, and the replacement conferees signed the report.
The legislature considered the committee’s report in public session on
May 25, 2004. See N.H.S. Jour. ___ (May 25, 2004); see also N.H.H.R. Jour.
4
___ (May 25, 2004). Before the House voted on the report, the plaintiff asked
the Speaker of the House whether RSA chapter 91-A applied to the committee
of conference. The Speaker of the House answered:
If . . . both sides were meeting, yes. But in the situation where
either the House meets by themselves or the Senate side meets by
themselves, that does not constitute a quorum of the committee of
conference. Because the committee of conference has to act as a
whole. So that the term “meeting” under [RSA chapter 91-A] . . .
refers to a convening of a quorum of any committee.
The plaintiff then moved to discharge the committee of conference for SB
302 on the ground that it violated House Rule 110, which requires all meetings
of any House or Senate committee to be open, and RSA chapter 91-A. The
Speaker of the House again ruled that neither House Rule 110 nor RSA chapter
91-A applied to “either the House and/or the Senate meeting independently
amongst themselves.” The plaintiff sought to appeal this decision to the House,
but later withdrew his appeal and spoke against SB 302. See Manual of the
New Hampshire General Court 2003-2004 at 121.
Following debate, the House voted by a margin of 195 to 165 to adopt the
committee of conference report. See N.H.H.R. Jour. ___ (May 25, 2004). The
Senate also adopted the report. See N.H.S. Jour. ___ (May 25, 2004). SB 302
became law without the Governor’s signature on June 9, 2004. Baines, 152
N.H. at ___.
On June 23, 2004, the plaintiff brought the instant action alleging that
the defendants had violated RSA chapter 91-A and Part I, Article 8 of the State
Constitution by excluding him and other members of the public from the
separate meetings of the House and Senate conferees. The plaintiff asked the
trial court to invalidate the committee of conference report, void SB 302, and
award him reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
The trial court found in the plaintiff’s favor, ruling “that the conduct of
the negotiations on SB 302 violated Part I, Article 8 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and the Right-to-Know law.” The court found that the conferees
did not substantively negotiate SB 302 during the publicly noticed meetings.
Rather, the “de facto meetings of the Committee of Conference occurred with
the House and Senate conferees meeting separately and negotiating through
intermediaries for the purpose of negotiating the school funding bill outside the
public eye and without public scrutiny.” This conduct, the court ruled,
violated the plaintiff’s constitutional and statutory right to know. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 8; see also RSA ch. 91-A.
5
The court declined, however, to invalidate SB 302, finding that “[u]nder
the circumstances, [this was] not warranted or wise and perhaps not even
possible.” As the court noted, “all but one of the monetary distributions called
for in SB 302” had been made, “and the final distribution [was] due to be made
on April 1, 2005.” The court determined that “[t]o invalidate the report, or the
legislation resulting from it, would disrupt the monetary distribution upon
which the school districts of the State are, no doubt, relying.” The court
awarded the plaintiff reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, however, finding
that “there can be no doubt that Senate and House leadership and committee
members” knew or should have known that their conduct violated RSA chapter
91-A.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erroneously denied
their earlier motion to dismiss, in which they had argued that the plaintiff’s
claims were not justiciable. Alternatively, the defendants contend that the trial
court erred when it found that they had violated RSA chapter 91-A and Part I,
Article 8. We discuss these arguments in turn.
II. Justiciability
We first address whether the plaintiff’s claims under Part I, Article 8 and
RSA chapter 91-A, the Right-to-Know Law, are nonjusticiable political
questions. This is a question of law, which we review de novo. See Carbone v.
Tierney, 151 N.H. 521, 533 (2004).
“The nonjusticiability of a political question derives from the principle of
separation of powers. The justiciability doctrine prevents judicial violation of
the separation of powers by limiting judicial review of certain matters that lie
within the province of the other two branches of government.” Petition of
Judicial Conduct Comm., 151 N.H. 123, 128 (2004) (quotation and citation
omitted). Where there is such commitment, we must decline to adjudicate the
matter to avoid encroaching upon the powers and functions of a coordinate
political branch. Id. “Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been
committed by the Constitution to another branch of government . . . is itself a
delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility of this
Court as ultimate interpreter of the [State] Constitution.” Baker v. Carr, 369
U.S. 186, 211 (1962).
“A controversy is nonjusticiable – i.e., involves a political question –
where there is a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue
to a coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it.” Petition of Judicial Conduct Comm.,
145 N.H. 108, 111 (2000) (quotations and ellipsis omitted); see Baker, 369 U.S.
at 217.
6
A. RSA Chapter 91-A
We first examine the claim that the defendants violated RSA chapter 91-
A. The plaintiff asserts, and the trial court found, that because most of the
deliberations, negotiations and resolution of the differences regarding SB 302
took place outside of the public meetings, RSA chapter 91-A was violated.
RSA 91-A:2, II (Supp. 2004) provides that “[a]ll public proceedings shall
be open to the public, and all persons shall be permitted to attend any
meetings of those bodies or agencies.” The term “public proceedings” refers to,
among other things, proceedings of “[t]he general court including executive
sessions of committees.” RSA 91-A:1-a, I(a) (Supp. 2004).
For the purposes of this section, a “meeting” is “the convening of a
quorum of the membership of a public body, as provided in RSA 91-A:1-a, to
discuss or act upon a matter or matters over which the public body has
supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power.” RSA 91-A:2, I (Supp.
2004). A meeting does not include, however, “[a]ny chance meeting or a social
meeting neither planned nor intended for the purpose of discussing matters
relating to official business and at which no decisions are made.” RSA 91-A:2,
I(a) (Supp. 2004). Nor does it include “[c]onsultation with legal counsel” or a
“caucus consisting of elected members of a public body of the same political
party who were elected on a partisan basis.” RSA 91-A:2, I(c), (d) (Supp. 2004).
RSA 91-A:2, II also requires that such meetings be publicly noticed.
With respect to meetings of a legislative committee, the statute requires that
“publication [be] made pursuant to the rules of the house of representatives or
the senate, whichever rules are appropriate.” RSA 91-A:2, II.
We begin by determining whether resolving the plaintiff’s Right-to-Know
Law claim will usurp authority that the State Constitution textually commits to
the legislature.
Part II, Articles 22 and 37 of the New Hampshire Constitution contain
textually demonstrable commitments to the House and Senate to adopt their
own “rules of proceedings.” Baines, 152 N.H. at ____ (quotation omitted). Such
rulemaking authority “is a continuous power absolute.” Paisner v. Attorney
General, 458 N.E.2d 734, 739 (Mass. 1983). This means that “each branch of
each successive Legislature may proceed to make rules without seeking
concurrence or approval of the other branch, or of the executive, and without
being bound by action taken by an earlier Legislature.” Id. The legislature,
alone, “has complete control and discretion whether it shall observe, enforce,
waive, suspend, or disregard its own rules of procedure.” Des Moines Register
v. Dwyer, 542 N.W.2d 491, 496 (Iowa 1996); see Mason’s, supra § 13, at 22-23.
7
The same is true of statutes that codify legislative procedural rules. See
Baines, 152 N.H. at ____; see also Board of Trustees v. Atty. Gen. of Com., 132
S.W.3d 770, 777 (Ky. 2004). Statutes relating to the internal proceedings of
the legislature “are not binding upon the Houses . . . . Either branch, under its
exclusive rule-making constitutional prerogatives, is free to disregard or
supersede such statutes by unicameral action.” Paisner, 458 N.E.2d at 740;
see Singer, supra § 7:4, at 609-11.
“[C]ourts generally consider that the legislature’s adherence to the rules
or statutes prescribing procedure is a matter entirely within legislative control
and discretion, not subject to judicial review unless the legislative procedure is
mandated by the constitution.” State ex rel. La Follette v. Stitt, 338 N.W.2d
684, 687 (Wis. 1983). Thus, in Baines, 152 N.H. at ___, we held that whether
the legislature violated RSA 14:8 (2000) and RSA 20:2-a (2000) in enacting SB
302 was a nonjusticiable political question. These statutes, we explained,
“concern nonconstitutionally mandated legislative procedures.” Baines, 152
N.H. at ___. “[B]ecause the State Constitution grants the legislature the
authority to establish such procedures, the question of whether the legislature
violated these statutes is nonjusticiable.” Id.
Courts throughout the country have found that whether a legislature has
violated the procedures of a state right-to-know law is not justiciable. In Abood
v. League of Women Voters of Alaska, 743 P.2d 333, 339-40 (Alaska 1987), for
instance, the Alaska Supreme Court ruled that whether, by holding closed
meetings, members of the legislature violated the Alaska Open Meetings Act
was nonjusticiable. The Alaska Constitution, like the New Hampshire
Constitution, “expressly commits to the legislature authority to adopt its own
rules of procedure.” Abood, 743 P.2d at 337. The Alaska Supreme Court
reasoned that as the open meetings act “merely establishes a rule of procedure
concerning how the legislature has decided to conduct its business,” and as the
constitution grants the legislature authority to enact its own rules of
procedure, to hold the open meeting act claim justiciable would “place[ ] the
judiciary in direct conflict with the legislature’s constitutionally authorized
rulemaking prerogative.” Id. at 338, 339.
The Tennessee Court of Appeals employed similar reasoning in Mayhew
v. Wilder, 46 S.W.3d 760 (Tenn. Ct. App. 2001). One question in that case was
whether the general assembly had violated the state open meetings act.
Mayhew, 46 S.W.3d at 768. The court first concluded that the open meetings
act did not apply to the legislature. Id. at 770. The court then observed that
even if the legislature intended to bind itself by the open meetings act when the
act was passed, “the act would not bind a subsequent [legislature].” Id. As the
court explained, “It is constitutional, and not statutory, prohibitions which
bind the legislature.” Id. (quotation omitted). Thus, “[b]inding the Legislature
8
with procedural rules passed by another General Assembly would violate [the
constitution]’s grant of the right to the Legislature to determine its own rules.”
Id.
The Florida Supreme Court in Moffitt v. Willis, 459 So. 2d 1018, 1021-22
(Fla. 1984), declined to decide whether the legislature violated open meeting
procedures set forth in the legislature’s rules, despite a statute requiring
legislative committees to abide by these rules. In that case, thirteen
newspaper-publishing companies sued the speaker of the house and senate
president, alleging that they had violated a Florida statute that required
legislative committees to abide by the legislature’s procedural rules. Moffitt,
459 So. 2d at 1019, 1021. The procedural rules mandated that all committee
meetings “shall be open to the public.” Id. at 1021 (quotation omitted). The
Florida Supreme Court ruled that the statutory claim was not justiciable.
“While the judiciary certainly has the power to determine what effect a statute
has and to whom it applies as well as its constitutionality,” that was not the
issue, the court ruled. Id. at 1021-22. “We are not confronted with whether a
statute applies, rather we are asked to allow the courts to determine when and
how legislative rules apply to members of the legislature.” Id. at 1022. “Just
as the legislature may not invade our province of procedural rulemaking for the
court system, we may not invade the legislature’s province of internal
procedural rulemaking.” Id.
The plaintiff seeks to distinguish these cases, in part, by arguing that,
unlike the procedures set forth in the right-to-know laws of other States, the
procedures prescribed by the New Hampshire Right-to-Know Law are
constitutionally mandated. He asserts that the 1976 amendment to Part I,
Article 8 incorporated RSA chapter 91-A into the State Constitution. We
disagree.
Part I, Article 8 provides:
All power residing originally in, and being derived from, the
people, all the magistrates and officers of government are their
substitutes and agents, and at all times accountable to them.
Government, therefore, should be open, accessible, accountable
and responsive. To that end, the public’s right of access to
governmental proceedings and records shall not be unreasonably
restricted.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. The 1976 amendment added the last two sentences
of this provision.
The journal of the 1974 Constitutional Convention reveals that the
framers of the 1976 amendment did not intend to make Part I, Article 8
9
coextensive with RSA chapter 91-A. To the contrary, the framers intended that
the amendment would be “a living article” that “chang[ed] with the times.”
Journal of Constitutional Convention 174 (1974). As the amendment’s sponsor
explained: “The Legislature can make the law – the same law that it has now –
and, if the Legislature sees fit that there are some areas that should be
restricted or should be opened, the Legislature can do it, but they can’t go and
completely repeal the right to know.” Id. The amendment was necessary, the
sponsor argued, because it prevented the legislature from “completely do[ing]
away with the right to know.” Id. at 176.
Nothing in Part I, Article 8 requires the legislature to adopt particular
internal legislative procedures to protect the public’s right of access to public
proceedings. See Opinion of the Justices, 111 N.H. 175, 177-78 (1971). Part I,
Article 8 does not specify what legislative proceedings must be open to the
public, or how the legislature must make these proceedings open to the public.
See id. It merely provides that government “should” be open to the public and
that the public’s right of access to governmental proceedings must not be
“unreasonably restricted.”
By contrast, analogous provisions in other state constitutions are more
specific than Part I, Article 8. For instance, Article III, Section 4(e) of the
Florida Constitution provides:
The rules of procedure of each house shall provide that all
legislative committee and subcommittee meetings of each house,
and joint conference committee meetings, shall be open and
noticed to the public. The rules of procedure of each house shall
further provide that all prearranged gatherings, between more than
two members of the legislature, or between the governor, the
president of the senate or the speaker of the house of
representatives, the purpose of which is to agree upon formal
legislative action that will be taken at a subsequent time, or at
which formal legislative action is taken, regarding pending
legislation or amendments, shall be reasonably open to the public.
Similarly, Article IV, Section 14 of the Oregon Constitution requires that
the “deliberations of each house, of committees of each house or joint
committees and of committees of the whole, shall be open.” See MONT.
CONST. art. V, § 10, cl. 3 (“The sessions of the legislature and of the committee
of the whole, all committee meetings, and all hearings shall be open to the
public.”); GA. CONST. art. III, § 4 (in addition to legislative sessions, “all
standing committees” of the legislature “shall be open to the public”); N.D.
CONST. art. IV, § 14 (“All sessions of the legislative assembly, including the
committee of the whole and meetings of legislative committees, must be open
and public.”).
10
Following our holding in Baines, we conclude that whether the
defendants violated RSA chapter 91-A presents a nonjusticiable political
question. As the New Hampshire Constitution commits to each house of the
legislature the authority to adopt its own rules of proceedings and as there is
no constitutional mandate that committee of conference meetings be open, the
question of whether the defendants violated the procedures set forth in RSA
chapter 91-A is nonjusticiable. Baines, 152 N.H. at ____. “[P]roper recognition
of the respective roles of the legislature and the judiciary requires that [we] not
intervene.” Id. at ___ (quotation omitted).
We emphasize that the question before us is not whether the Right-to-
Know Law applies to the legislature. By the statute’s express terms, it does.
See RSA 91-A:1-a, I(a). The question before us is whether the legislature’s
alleged violation of the Right-to-Know Law is justiciable. We have concluded
that this question is not justiciable because this legislative enactment “merely
establishes a rule of procedure concerning how the legislature has decided to
conduct its business,” and the legislature has sole authority to adopt such
rules of procedure. Abood, 743 P.2d at 339. “Of course, having made the rule,
it should be followed, but a failure to follow it is not the subject of judicial
inquiry.” Id.
B. Part I, Article 8
Although we have concluded that the plaintiff’s RSA chapter 91-A claim
is not justiciable, we reach the opposite conclusion with respect to his Part I,
Article 8 claim. As we recognized in Baines, 152 N.H. at ___, “[c]laims
regarding compliance with these kinds of mandatory constitutional provisions
are justiciable.” We have the responsibility to examine whether the defendants’
conduct violated Part I, Article 8. See Baines, 152 N.H. at ____. It is our duty
to interpret constitutional provisions and to determine whether the legislature
has complied with them. State v. LaFrance, 124 N.H. 171, 177 (1983).
While the constitution vests the legislature with the authority to create
its own rules of procedure, no provision of the constitution commits to the
legislature the determination of whether the public’s right of access to
governmental proceedings has been unreasonably restricted. See Baines, 152
N.H. at ___. A legislative determination whether restrictions to public access
are “reasonable” is subject to judicially discoverable and manageable
standards. See Union Leader Corp. v. Chandler, 119 N.H. 442 (1979); Petition
of Union Leader Corp., 147 N.H. 603 (2002).
Our decision that the plaintiff’s Part I, Article 8 claim is justiciable is
consistent with our opinion in Chandler. In that case, we intimated that
claims against the legislature brought under Part I, Article 8 are justiciable,
11
while claims under RSA chapter 91-A are not. Chandler, 119 N.H. at 445. In
that case, the Union Leader Corporation (Union Leader) brought a bill in equity
under RSA chapter 91-A to compel the clerk of the House to produce a tape
recording of certain House proceedings so that the Union Leader could
duplicate the tape and use it for “voice stress analysis.” Id. at 443 (quotation
omitted). While a reporter for the Union Leader had been permitted to listen to
the tape and to procure typed transcripts of it, he had not been permitted to
remove it from the House’s possession. Id. at 444.
We held that this was not a “true Right-to-Know Law case under RSA ch.
91-A because the . . . [House] session was open to the public and press, an
official journal was prepared of the proceedings, and written transcripts are
available if the [Union Leader] or anyone else wishes to obtain them.” Id. at
445. We further held that the House “could properly decide, consistent with
the right of reasonable public access required by N.H. Const. pt. I, art. 8, that
its official tape should not be duplicated or subjected to a so-called voice stress
analysis.” Id.
We now turn to whether the defendants in this appeal could have
properly decided, consistent with the right of reasonable access provided by
Part I, Article 8, to negotiate the compromise of SB 302 in private.
III. Analysis
New Hampshire is one of only a handful of States with a constitutional
provision that explicitly protects the public’s right of access and/or the right to
know. See L. Elison & D. Elison, Comments on Government Censorship and
Secrecy, 55 Mont. L. Rev. 175, 189 (1994). The United States Supreme Court
has not yet recognized a federal constitutional or common law right to attend
legislative sessions. See Houchins v. KQED, Inc., 438 U.S. 1, 15 (1978)
(plurality opinion) (“Neither the First Amendment nor the Fourteenth
Amendment mandates a right of access to government information or sources
of information within the government’s control.”).
The concept of public access to legislative proceedings is relatively new.
“In England, parliamentary debates were originally closed to the public on the
theory that secrecy protected against interference by the Crown and later
debates were closed to conceal the members’ statements and votes from
constituents.” L. Elison & D. Elison, supra at 179. “Although common law
recognized a limited right of the public to inspect government-held documents,
the right to observe deliberations of governmental bodies did not exist.” Id. at
179-80.
12
The English tradition of holding legislative debate in secret was carried
on in the legislative bodies of Colonial America. Abood, 743 P.2d at 340. “In
1776, the names of the signers of the Declaration of Independence were
withheld for six months, and both the Continental Congress and the
Constitutional Convention excluded the public from all deliberations.” L.
Elison & D. Elison, supra at 180.
Before 1976, Part I, Article 8 provided: “All power residing originally in,
and being derived from, the people, all the magistrates and officers of
government are their substitutes and agents, and at all times accountable to
them.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. Its companion provision, Part I, Article 7 of
the State Constitution, provides, in pertinent part: “The people of this state
have the sole and exclusive right of governing themselves as a free, sovereign,
and independent state.” Together with Part I, Article 7, Part I, Article 8
“express[ed] the American theory of government.” Opinion of the Justices, 111
N.H. at 177. Neither Part I, Article 7 nor Part I, Article 8 required any “special
method of . . . accountability.” Id.
As we have previously noted, as amended in 1976, Part I, Article 8 now
provides that “[g]overnment . . . should be open, accessible, accountable and
responsive” and that “the public’s right of access to governmental proceedings
and records shall not be unreasonably restricted.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8.
The public’s right of access to governmental proceedings thus is not absolute.
See Petition of Union Leader, 147 N.H. at 604-05. It must yield to reasonable
restrictions. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8.
To determine whether restrictions are “reasonable,” we balance the
public’s right of access against “the competing constitutional interests in the
context of the facts of each case.” Associated Press, Inc. v. Department, 4 P.3d
5, 10 (Mont. 2000)(quotation omitted); see also Petition of Union Leader, 147
N.H. at 604.
In this case, we balance the public’s right of access against two
constitutional interests. The first such interest is the legislature’s
constitutional authority to make its own procedural rules. See N.H. CONST.
pt. II, arts. 22, 37. As we have already discussed, the constitution vests in the
legislature the exclusive authority to adopt its own procedural rules. See
Baines, 152 N.H. at ___. As mentioned previously, procedural rules include the
question of whether legislative business should be conducted in open or closed
session. Abood, 743 P.2d at 337. Thus, although plaintiff’s Part I, Article 8
claim is justiciable, the legislature’s constitutional authority to make its own
procedural rules counsels that we tread carefully when reviewing its
determination to close certain conference committee negotiations to the public.
13
The second countervailing interest against which we balance the public’s
right-to-know is the legislature’s constitutionally protected right to free
deliberation and debate, to which we now turn. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 30.
A. The Speech and Debate Clause
The legislature’s right to free deliberation and debate is protected by Part
I, Article 30 of the New Hampshire Constitution, the Speech and Debate
Clause. This clause provides: “The freedom of deliberation, speech, and
debate, in either house of the legislature, is so essential to the rights of the
people, that it cannot be the foundation of any action, complaint, or
prosecution, in any other court or place whatsoever.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art.
30.
Part I, Article 30 has been part of the New Hampshire Constitution since
1784. See Keefe v. Roberts, 116 N.H. 195, 198 (1976). New Hampshire was
one of the first States “to preserve the principle that the legislature must be
free to both speak and act without fear of criminal or civil liability.” Id.
New Hampshire’s Speech and Debate Clause “is the equivalent of the
speech or debate clause, article I, section 6 of the United States Constitution.”
Id. Both the State and federal clauses appear to have emanated from the
English Bill of Rights of 1689. See Holmes v. Farmer, 475 A.2d 976, 981 (R.I.
1984). “The English Bill of Rights was established to ensure that the freedom
of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament ought not to be impeached
or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The framers of the Federal Constitution recognized that such a clause
was “indispensably necessary” to enable the legislative branch to fulfill its
constitutional duties. Id. (quotation omitted). The privileges secured by the
Speech and Debate Clause are intended not to protect legislators “against
prosecutions for their own benefit, but to support the rights of the people, by
enabling their representatives to execute the functions of their office, without
fear of prosecutions, civil or criminal.” Coffin v. Coffin, 4 Mass. 1, 27 (1808)
(interpreting Massachusetts’ Speech and Debate clause, which is nearly
identical to New Hampshire’s).
“In the American governmental structure the clause serves the . . .
function of reinforcing the separation of powers so deliberately established by
the Founders.” United States v. Johnson, 383 U.S. 169, 178 (1966). “[T]he
central role of the . . . Clause [is] to prevent intimidation of legislators by the
Executive and accountability before a possibly hostile judiciary.” Gravel v.
United States, 408 U.S. 606, 617 (1972). The clause “was designed neither to
assure fair trials nor to avoid coercion. Rather, its purpose was to preserve the
constitutional structure of separate, coequal, and independent branches of
14
government.” United States v. Helstoski, 442 U.S. 477, 491 (1979). “The
English and American history of the privilege suggests that any lesser standard
would risk intrusion by the Executive and the Judiciary into the sphere of
protected legislative activities.” Id. The clause “protect[s] the integrity of the
legislative process by insuring the independence of individual legislators.” Id.
at 493 (quotation omitted). It assures that the legislature, as a co-equal
branch of government, will have “wide freedom of speech, debate and
deliberation without intimidation or threats.” Gravel, 408 U.S. at 616. “[T]hat
the legislators can carry out their duties without being questioned in any other
place allows the free flow of debate among legislators and the maximization of
an effective and open exchange of ideas.” Holmes, 475 A.2d at 982 (quotation
omitted).
The clause “has been read broadly to effectuate its purposes.” Doe v.
McMillan, 412 U.S. 306, 311 (1973) (quotation omitted); Keefe, 116 N.H. at
198. It protects the legislature and individual legislators from incurring
liability for “any act generally done in a session of the [legislature] . . . in
relation to the business before it.” Keefe, 116 N.H. at 199 (quotation omitted);
see Doe, 412 U.S. at 312 (complaint barred by Speech or Debate Clause insofar
as it sought relief from committee members and staff for introducing material
at committee hearings that identified particular individuals, referring report to
speaker of house, and for voting upon publication of report). For instance,
under the Speech and Debate Clause, voting, drafting committee reports, and
conduct at legislative committee hearings “may not be made the basis for a civil
or criminal judgment against a [legislator] because that conduct is within the
sphere of legitimate legislative activity.” Doe, 412 U.S. at 311-12 (quotations
omitted). “In order fully to effectuate the purpose and design of the . . . clause,
it must be construed as an immunity from suit as well as a testimonial
privilege.” Holmes, 475 A.2d at 984 (“Inquiry by the court into the actions or
motivations of the legislators in proposing, passing or voting upon a particular
piece of legislation . . . falls clearly within the most basic elements of legislative
privilege.”).
In the Speech and Debate Clause, the framers recognized that the public
has an interest in permitting legislators to deliberate privately. It is “obvious
. . . that officials will not communicate candidly among themselves if each
remark is a potential item of discovery and front-page news.” Department of
Interior v. Klamath Water Users Protective Assn., 532 U.S. 1, 8-9 (2001)
(discussing deliberative process privilege under Federal Freedom of Information
Act). The public has an interest not in protecting government secrecy, but in
“protecting open and frank discussion among those who make [decisions]
within the Government.” Id. at 9.
The ability to meet in private may be necessary, in some circumstances,
for good decision-making. As one commentator has noted, it is “no more
15
practical to require [a legislative] committee to formulate its final
determination, which is often a report of several hundred pages, in the
presence of public representatives than it would be to require an appellate
court to prepare its opinion in the presence of counsel.” Singer, supra § 11:13,
at 660.
Arguably, the Speech and Debate Clause renders the plaintiff’s Part I,
Article 8 claim nonjusticiable. “The Clause is a . . . paradigm example of a
‘textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of an issue to a coordinate
political department.’” Davis v. Passman, 442 U.S. 228, 235 n.11 (1979)
(quotation and brackets omitted). Because the defendants have not sought
immunity from suit under the Speech and Debate Clause, nor argued that the
plaintiff’s claims are nonjusticiable under it, we need not decide these
questions. That the clause potentially makes the plaintiff’s claims
nonjusticiable suggests that it has significant weight when balanced against
the public’s right of access.
B. Factual Context
In addition to analyzing the countervailing constitutional interests
implicated by this case, we also must examine the specific factual context in
which the plaintiff’s Part I, Article 8 claim arose.
Here, the public lacked access only to the private discussions of
conferees and the negotiations that ultimately resulted in the final compromise
of SB 302 in an otherwise public and open process. In context, this was a
limited denial of the public right of access.
All of the legislative sessions at which SB 302 was discussed were
posted, open to the public and recorded. See Baines, 152 N.H. at ____.
Likewise, all of the formal meetings of the committee of conference, as well as
the legislative sessions at which legislators debated the committee’s report and
voted upon it were posted, open to the public and recorded. See id. Further,
the legislature’s official journals published the committee’s report and
transcripts were prepared, and are publicly available, of the legislative debate
on it. The plaintiff himself attended the public meetings of the committee of
conference, and actively participated in the debate on its report.
The historical context in which the plaintiff’s claim arose further
demonstrates the limited nature of the denial of public access here.
Historically, the entire conference committee process was closed to the public.
See Oleszek, supra at 256. At the federal level, “[u]ntil the mid-1970’s,
conference committees almost always met in secret sessions with no published
record of their proceedings. The conference committee reports they produced
revealed the results of the secret negotiations, but the bargaining and
16
deliberations that led to these results were not formally disclosed.” Id. In
1975, Congress adopted rules requiring open conference committee meetings,
unless a majority of the conferees from either chamber voted in public to hold
secret sessions. Id.; see also W. Brown, Jefferson’s Manual and Rules of the
House of Representatives of the United States Ninety-Sixth Congress § 548, at
253 (1979).
Despite these rule changes, congressional “[c]onferees still conduct much
of their important business in secret.” Oleszek, supra at 256. As one long-
time United States Senator commented:
[W]hen we started the openness thing we found it more and more difficult
to get something agreed to in the conferences, it seemed to take forever.
So what did we do? . . . We would break up into smaller groups and then
we would ask our chairman . . . to see if he could not find his opposite
number on the House side and discuss this matter and come back and
tell us what the chances would be of working out various and sundry
possibilities.
Id. (quotation omitted).
Informal negotiating outside of public conference committee meetings is
the norm, not the exception at the federal level. Oleszek, supra at 269. “These
negotiations commonly involve only key House and Senate staff aides, but may
also include committee members, party leaders, and others. In addition, each
chamber may engage in private preconference deal making, often only among
majority party members without either the formal appointment of conferees or
the participation of minority party members.” Id.
Also, at the federal level, in some instances, preconference informal
discussions may serve as the forum for major negotiations and the working out
of compromises.” Longley & Oleszek, supra at 57. When this occurs, “the
subsequent conference meeting may well be staged almost along the lines of a
script, with conferees for one House proposing an alternative that is quickly
agreed to, followed by the other conferees making a proposal that is likewise
concurred with, and so forth.” Id. “Bargaining and compromise may be
formally represented in the conference, but only as an agreed-upon reflection of
preconference agreements.” Id.
The New Hampshire committee of conference process bears some
similarities to the federal process. Particularly when complex bills are at issue,
New Hampshire legislators have engaged in informal negotiations outside of
public committee of conference meetings. Sometimes, these kinds of informal
negotiations take place before the committee of conference is appointed. As
one legislator observed, “There’s certainly a lot of conversation and formal and
17
informal communication that goes on in a legislature, that’s the only way we
eventually get anything done.”
Thus, when we examine the process by which SB 302 was enacted, we
see that the public was denied access to only one part of that process -- the
informal negotiations that led to the final compromise of the bill. Moreover,
when we examine the legislative environment, we see that informal negotiations
are integral to the legislative process. Accordingly, the context in which the
instant dispute arose weighs heavily against requiring the public access to the
negotiations at issue.
C. Conclusion
Having examined the competing constitutional provisions here, as well as
the factual context of the plaintiff’s claims, we hold that the public interest in
protecting the legislature’s prerogative to set its own procedural rules and
engage in free and frank debate significantly outweighs the public’s right of
access to the contested negotiations. “If the suggested access were permitted,”
we believe that “government might become unduly cumbersome and candor
among government officials stifled.” Petition of Union Leader, 147 N.H. at 605.
“It cannot be overlooked that the public’s constitutional right of access is
meant to satisfy an ‘end’; to wit, that government should be open, accountable,
accessible and responsive. This ‘end’ can and should be accomplished without
severely curtailing the efficient operation of the government.” Id. (citation
omitted).
Under the specific factual circumstances of this case, the legislature
could properly have determined that denying the public access to these
negotiations was a reasonable restriction on the public’s right of access. See
Chandler, 119 N.H. at 445. We in no way retreat from the principle that
“[g]overnment . . . should be open, accessible, accountable and responsive” to
the public. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. Rather, we believe that the generally
public and open nature of the legislative process here and the availability of
official journals of that process were sufficient to meet this constitutional
mandate. See Petition of Union Leader, 147 N.H. at 606. Where, as here, the
denial of access “is supported by a weighty State interest and is not a complete
bar,” the denial “can only be viewed as a reasonable restriction on the public’s
right of access.” Petition of Burling, 139 N.H. 266, 271 (1994).
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
18