THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. LD-2005-001
REINER'S CASE
Argued: April 20, 2005
Opinion Issued: May 6, 2005
Landya B. McCafferty, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the attorney
discipline office.
Shaheen & Gordon, P.A., of Concord (Steven M. Gordon on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. This case arises out of the interim suspension of the
respondent, Gary H. Reiner, from the practice of law. A Judicial Referee (Gray,
J.) recommended that the suspension should not remain in effect. We remand
to the referee for a new hearing.
The respondent, a member of both the New Hampshire and Maine bars,
was indicted by a federal grand jury on several felony charges arising out of his
alleged connection with prostitution and money laundering activities allegedly
occurring at a health club in Kittery, Maine. On January 26, 2005, we received
a copy of the indictment from the Attorney Discipline Office (ADO). On
February 4, 2005, we suspended the respondent from the practice of law in
New Hampshire pending further order of the court. Sup. Ct. R. 37(9)(i). In the
same order, we stated that the respondent may show cause why the
suspension should be lifted and why he should not be assessed all expenses
that may be incurred in the investigation and prosecution of this matter.
On February 22, 2005, the respondent filed a response to the court’s
suspension order, challenging the suspension on three grounds: (1) the interim
suspension without notice and a pre-suspension hearing violated due process;
(2) Supreme Court Rule 37(9)(i) is unconstitutionally vague; and (3) the interim
suspension constituted public condemnation in violation of his due process
rights. We issued an order scheduling a hearing for March 9, 2005, on the
matter. At the same time, we ordered the ADO to file a memorandum
addressing the issues raised by the respondent and advising the court whether
it believed that the respondent should remain suspended pending resolution of
the criminal charges against him.
On March 9, 2005, oral argument was held before the court. Following
argument, the matter was referred to the judicial referee to hold a hearing on
the issue of whether the respondent’s suspension should remain in effect
pending resolution of the criminal charges. That hearing was held on March
21, 2005, and, on March 22, 2005, the referee recommended that the
suspension should not remain in effect because the suspension was not
necessary for the protection of the public or the preservation of the integrity of
the legal profession.
After reviewing the report and recommendations of the referee as well as
the transcript of the hearing, we concluded that briefing and further argument
of this case was necessary. On April 20, 2005, oral argument was held on the
issue of whether we should adopt the referee’s recommendation.
We address each issue in turn.
I. Post-suspension hearing
First, the respondent argues that his suspension violated due process
under the State and Federal Constitutions because he was not first afforded
notice and a pre-suspension hearing. We first address the respondent's claim
under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite
federal opinions only for guidance. Id. at 232-33. We determine whether
challenged procedures satisfied due process under a two-part test. Petition of
Preisendorfer, 143 N.H. 50, 52 (1998). First, we must determine whether the
challenged procedures concern a legally protected interest. Id. Second, we
must determine whether the procedures afford the appropriate procedural
safeguards. Id. Because there is no dispute that an attorney has a
constitutionally protected interest in his license to practice law, see Appeal of
2
Plantier, 126 N.H. 500, 507 (1985), we turn to the question of the appropriate
procedural safeguards.
In this context, we address the respondent’s challenge to the use of a
post-suspension hearing for an interim suspension based solely upon an
indictment. In analyzing what procedures are due in a particular case, we
consider the following factors:
(1) the private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of
an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures
used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including
the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens
that the additional or substitute procedural requirements would
entail.
Preisendorfer, 143 N.H. at 53 (quotation omitted).
The United States Supreme Court addressed a similar situation in FDIC
v. Mallen, 486 U.S. 230, 240-41 (1988). In Mallen, the FDIC temporarily
suspended a bank official on the basis of a federal indictment without
providing the bank official with a pre-suspension hearing. Id. The Court noted
that “[a]n important government interest, accompanied by a substantial
assurance that the deprivation is not baseless or unwarranted, may in limited
cases demanding prompt action justify postponing the opportunity to be heard
until after the initial deprivation.” Id. at 240. The Court concluded that “the
postponement of the hearing [was] supported by such an interest” because
prompt suspension of indicted bank officers is “necessary to protect the
interests of depositors and to maintain public confidence in our banking
institutions.” Id. at 240-41. The Court further concluded that because a grand
jury had determined that there was probable cause to believe that the bank
official had committed a felony, the “suspension was supported by findings that
assure that the suspension was not baseless.” Id. at 241. Thus, a post-
suspension hearing comported with due process in these circumstances. Id.
Here, the respondent’s interest in his license to practice law is “without
doubt an important interest that ought not be interrupted without substantial
justification.” Id. at 243. Like Mallen, however, a post-suspension hearing is
justified because prompt suspension of indicted attorneys is necessary in some
instances to protect the public and preserve the integrity of the legal
profession. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(9)(i), 37(16)(f). In addition, the suspension is
supported by a grand jury indictment, thereby assuring that the suspension is
not baseless. See Mallen, 486 U.S. at 241. Accordingly, an immediate interim
suspension followed by a post-suspension hearing for an attorney who has
been indicted comports with due process.
3
The next question is whether the post-suspension procedures satisfied
due process. In that context, the Court in Mallen considered the time delay of
the hearing and decision because “there is a point at which an unjustified
delay in completing a post-deprivation proceeding would become a
constitutional violation.” Id. at 242 (quotation omitted).
In determining how long a delay is justified in affording a post-
suspension hearing and decision, it is appropriate to examine the
importance of the private interest and the harm to this interest
occasioned by the delay; the justification offered by the
Government for delay and its relation to the underlying
governmental interest; and the likelihood that the interim decision
may have been mistaken.
Id.
In Mallen, the statute required the FDIC to hold a hearing “within 30
days of a written request for an opportunity to appear before the agency to
contest a suspension.” Id. The statute further provided that a decision be
issued within sixty days of the hearing. Id. “Thus, at maximum, the
suspended officer receives a decision within 90 days of his or her request for a
hearing.” Id. In evaluating this time frame, the Court noted that Mallen had
an important interest in his continued employment. Id. at 243. Nonetheless,
the Court balanced this interest against a suspended bank officer’s interest in
seeing that a decision is not made with excessive haste, the agency’s ability to
give greater weight to the public interest and the fact that, given the
indictment, the suspension would not likely augment the injury to the officer’s
reputation. Id. at 243-44. The Court concluded that a thirty-day delay of the
hearing and a potential ninety-day delay of a decision did not violate due
process. Id. at 245.
Rule 37(9)(i) does not provide a procedural framework for a post-
suspension hearing. We take this opportunity to interpret the rule to require a
post-suspension hearing to occur promptly so as to comply with due process.
See Matter of Kenney, 504 N.E.2d 652, 656 (Mass. 1987); State v. Winslow,
134 N.H. 398, 400 (1991). Following an interim suspension order based upon
an indictment, the suspended attorney may request a hearing. The hearing
will be scheduled within thirty days and held before the court or before a
referee, at the court’s discretion. At the hearing, the ADO bears the burden of
persuading the court that, by a preponderance of the evidence, suspension is
necessary for the protection of the public and the preservation of the integrity
of the legal profession. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(16)(f). The court will issue a
decision regarding the suspension as soon as practicable after the hearing.
4
These procedures satisfy the due process requirements as stated in Mallen,
486 U.S. at 245.
The Federal Constitution offers the respondent no greater due process
rights than does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See
Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 333 (1976); Preisendorfer, 143 N.H. at 52.
Therefore, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
II. Standard
Second, the respondent argues that the standard for suspension under
Supreme Court Rule 37(9)(i) is unconstitutionally vague. We disagree.
Rule 37(9)(i) provides that: “Whenever an attorney is indicted or bound
over for any felony, the court shall take such actions as it deems necessary,
including but not limited to the suspension of the attorney.”
Although the rule does not set forth a standard by which the court may
exercise its discretion in suspending an attorney, the necessary specificity need
not be contained in the rule itself; the rule in question may be read in the
context of related rules, prior decisions, or generally accepted usage. See State
v. Porelle, 149 N.H. 420, 423 (2003). Rule 37(16)(f) provides a standard for
determining when suspension is appropriate: “The court may suspend
attorneys . . . upon such terms and conditions as the court deems necessary
for the protection of the public and the preservation of the integrity of the legal
profession.” Moreover, we have held that:
This court has the inherent power to take reasonable and
expeditious action in the suspension or removal of members of the
bar for the protection of the community. In the exercise of this
power this court has the obligation to make appropriate
disciplinary orders for the protection of the public, as well as for
the maintenance of public confidence in the bar as a whole.
Barnard’s Case, 101 N.H. 33, 34 (1957) (quotation and citations omitted).
Accordingly, the court may impose an interim suspension pending the
resolution of criminal charges pursuant to Rule 37(9)(i) when it is deemed
necessary for the protection of the public and the preservation of the integrity
of the legal profession. Sup. Ct. R. 37(16)(f); see Barnard’s Case, 101 N.H. at
34. Because the necessary specificity of the standard for suspension is
contained within the context of related rules, Rule 37(9)(i) is not
unconstitutionally vague. See Porelle, 149 N.H. at 423.
5
The standard set forth above shall also be applied at the post-suspension
hearing. At the hearing, the ADO bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the suspension is necessary pursuant to
Rule 37(16)(f). In meeting this burden, the ADO may rely upon the allegations
set forth in the indictment, make offers of proof and introduce additional
evidence. Although the indicted attorney is presumed innocent of the charges,
the allegations set forth in the indictment may nonetheless be considered in
determining whether suspension is necessary. See Barnard’s Case, 101 N.H.
at 34 (recognizing that “[a]lthough the respondent is presumed innocent until
he has been proved guilty of the criminal charges pending against him, his
right to continue the practice of law in the interim is not in the public
interest”). The ADO need not prove that the allegations in the indictment are
true. Rather, the ADO must establish that, considering the allegations in the
indictment, the suspension is necessary for the protection of the public and the
preservation of the integrity of the legal profession. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(16)(f).
III. Condemnation
Third, the respondent argues that the interim suspension constituted
public condemnation in violation of his due process rights. We disagree.
We have held that “incidental injury to reputation, without more, is not a
deprivation of ‘liberty.’” Riblet Tramway Co. v. Stickney, 129 N.H. 140, 148
(1987). In Mallen, the Court recognized that “[t]hrough the return of the
indictment, the Government has already accused [Mr. Mallen] of serious
wrongdoing. The incidental suspension is not likely to augment this injury to
the officer’s reputation.” Mallen, 486 U.S. at 243.
Likewise, the federal government’s indictment charges the respondent
with money laundering and solicitation of prostitution. The suspension of the
respondent is not likely to augment the injury to his reputation. Accordingly,
the incidental injury to his reputation by the suspension does not violate due
process. See Riblet Tramway Co., 129 N.H. at 148.
IV. Referee’s Recommendation
Finally, we must determine whether we should adopt the referee’s
recommendation that the suspension is not necessary for the protection of the
public or the preservation of the integrity of the legal profession. Our standard
of review for the referee’s factual findings in a lawyer discipline case is whether
a reasonable person could have reached the same decision as the referee.
Feld’s Case, 149 N.H. 19, 22 (2002), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 815 (2003).
6
However, we review de novo to determine whether the referee committed errors
of law. Id.
The ADO argues that we should not adopt the referee’s recommendation
because: (1) the referee erred as a matter of law by failing to give any weight to
the allegations in the indictment; and (2) the allegations in the indictment
support the interim suspension of the respondent pursuant to Rules 37(9)(i)
and 37(16)(f). The respondent argues that we should adopt the referee’s
recommendation because: (1) the referee adequately considered the allegations
within the indictment; (2) a reasonable person could have reached the same
decision as the referee; and (3) the ADO failed to introduce sufficient evidence
to warrant suspension.
At the March 21, 2005 hearing, the referee placed the burden of proof on
the respondent. We recognize that our February 4, 2005 show cause order
may have misled the referee with regard to which party should bear this
burden. Nonetheless, we now hold, as explained above, that the ADO has the
burden of proving that suspension is necessary for the protection of the public
and preservation of the integrity of the bar.
In addition, the referee misconceived the function of the presumption of
innocence in this proceeding. The referee reasoned that continuing the interim
suspension would suggest that “the Court has placed its imprimatur on the
veracity of the indictment prior to adjudication of the charges contained therein
and in contravention of the presumption of innocence to which he is entitled.”
Although the respondent retains the presumption of innocence with regard to
the charges within the indictment, the allegations themselves may nonetheless
warrant suspension. As noted above, the burden on the ADO is not to prove
that the respondent committed the crimes alleged. Rather, the ADO must
show that the respondent’s alleged conduct in the alleged crimes makes
suspension necessary for the protection of the public and the integrity of the
legal profession. To meet this burden, the ADO may supplement the
allegations in the indictment with additional evidence of the respondent’s
conduct.
Accordingly, we remand to the referee for a new hearing to reevaluate the
evidence in light of the function of the presumption of innocence described
above and to give the ADO an opportunity to meet its burden. On remand, we
note that the referee should consider the presumption of innocence in light of
our holding above and should not view this presumption as an impediment to
determining whether the ADO has met its burden.
Remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7