THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-211
K & B ROCK CRUSHING, LLC & a.
v.
TOWN OF AUBURN
Submitted: March 16, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 19, 2006
Hebert & Uchida, PLLC, of Concord (Richard Y. Uchida and Quentin J.
Blaine on the brief), for the petitioners.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Dean B. Eggert on the
brief), for the respondent.
Gottesman & Hollis, PA, of Nashua (Anna B. Hantz on the memorandum
of law), for intervenors Canedy, Canedy, and Chalmers.
Stephen Blaha, by brief, as intervenor, pro se.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, Town of Auburn (town), appeals a decision
of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) ruling that the petitioners, K & B Rock
Crushing, LLC and Keith Babb, were entitled to submit to the Town of Auburn
Planning Board (board) an application for a permit to excavate 5.5 acres. We
reverse.
The record supports the following facts. The petitioners applied to the
board for a permit to excavate and crush rock on a tract of land in Auburn.
The application stated that 5.5 acres of the land would be excavated over
twelve years, with “Phase I” involving excavation of approximately 1.6 acres.
After proceedings not relevant to the issue before us, the board ruled that the
petitioners’ application was complete only for a 1.6-acre excavation. Without
filing a motion for rehearing, the petitioners directly appealed to the superior
court. The town moved to dismiss, arguing that the superior court lacked
jurisdiction to hear the appeal because the petitioners did not first move for a
rehearing before the board. The court denied the town’s motion, and ruled that
the petitioners were entitled to submit an application for 5.5 acres of
excavation to the board.
On appeal, the town argues, among other things, that the petitioners
were required to move for a rehearing before the board as a prerequisite to their
appeal to the superior court. The petitioners respond that RSA 155-E:9 (2002),
which provides for appeals from an excavation permit proceeding, did not
require them to move for a rehearing before appealing to the superior court.
They assert that RSA 155-E:9 allows direct appeal to the superior court when
the planning board is the body authorized to issue excavation permits.
In considering the town’s motion to dismiss, “our standard of review is
whether the allegations in the [petitioners’] pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. We assume the
[petitioners’] pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences drawn
therefrom most favorably to [them].” In the Matter of Juvenile 2004-789-A, 153
N.H. ___, ___ (decided April 7, 2006). In deciding the motion to dismiss, the
superior court was essentially asked to construe RSA 155-E:9. Thus, this
appeal presents a question of law, which we review de novo. See id.
In matters of statutory interpretation, “[w]e are the final arbiters of the
legislature's intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.” Woodview Dev.
Corp. v. Town of Pelham, 152 N.H. 114, 116 (2005) (citation omitted).
RSA 155-E:9, which is entitled “Appeal” and which governs the
procedure for appeals from decisions on excavation permits, provides as
follows:
If the regulator disapproves or approves an application for an
excavation permit or an application for an amended permit, any
2
interested person affected by such decision may appeal to the
regulator for a rehearing on such decision or any matter
determined thereby. . . . Any person affected by the regulator’s
decision on a motion for rehearing to the regulator may appeal in
conformity with the procedures specified in RSA 677:4-15.
“Regulator” is defined in relevant part in RSA 155-E:1, III (Supp. 2005) as:
(a) The planning board of a city or town, or if a town at an
annual or special meeting duly warned for the purpose so provides,
the selectmen of the town or the board of adjustment; or
(b) If there is no planning board, the selectmen of the town or
the legislative body of the city . . . .
RSA 155-E:9 clearly sets forth the procedure to appeal an excavation
permit decision. The statute states that if an interested person affected by the
regulator’s decision wishes to appeal the regulator’s decision, he may do so by
moving for a rehearing. If that person then wishes to appeal the regulator’s
rehearing decision, he may appeal in conformity with RSA 677:4-:15 (1996 &
Supp. 2005), which generally govern appeals to the superior court. See 15 P.
Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and Zoning § 36.17, at
522-23 (2000) (stating that, under RSA 155-E:9, the “aggrieved party must file
for a rehearing before going to Superior court”). Nothing in the statute
authorizes an interested person to appeal the regulator’s initial decision in
conformity with the procedures specified in RSA 677:4-:15, yet that is what the
petitioners did in this case.
The petitioners argue that because the “regulator” was a planning board
in this case, the petitioners were allowed to appeal the initial decision directly
to the superior court without the necessity of moving for a rehearing. They rely
upon RSA 677:15 (Supp. 2005), which states, in relevant part: “Any persons
aggrieved by any decision of the planning board concerning a plat or
subdivision may present to the superior court a petition, duly verified, setting
forth that such decision is illegal or unreasonable in whole or in part . . . .”
Although RSA 677:15 provides for direct appeals to the superior court from
planning board decisions involving plats or subdivisions, the plain language of
RSA 155-E:9, involving decisions on excavations, makes clear that an appeal of
an excavation permit decision to the superior court in conformity with RSA
677:4-:15 is authorized only when a “person affected by the regulator’s decision
on a motion for rehearing to the regulator” chooses to appeal. RSA 155-E:9
(emphasis added). The petitioners seek to apply the appeal procedures in RSA
677:15 to a person affected by the board’s initial decision on an application for
an excavation permit. RSA 155-E:9 does not incorporate the provisions of RSA
677:4-:15 at that stage of the proceeding. Thus, even if we assume that the
3
petitioners are correct that the procedures in RSA 677:15 govern when the
regulator is a planning board, the petitioners still failed to follow the proper
procedure established by RSA 155-E:9.
We additionally note that RSA 155-E:9 is a specific grant of authority to
municipalities to regulate a particular land use. Town of Goffstown v.
Thibeault, 129 N.H. 454, 458-59 (1987). “[T]he regulation of earth excavation
[is] an exercise of the police and general welfare powers of the towns, exclusive
of the authority granted by the zoning enabling legislation.” Id. at 457. The
legislature’s placement of the excavation statute in Title XII, governing public
safety and welfare, instead of in Title LXIV, which governs land planning and
zoning, shows the legislature’s intent to grant authority independent of the
zoning enabling laws. Id. at 458. It would be contrary to the statutory scheme
to apply appeal procedures established in the zoning laws that conflict with the
specific procedures in RSA 155-E:9.
The petitioners next argue that RSA 155-E:9 allows an applicant to move
for a rehearing before the regulator prior to appealing to the superior court, but
does not require such a motion. If the legislature wanted to require a motion
for rehearing, the petitioners argue, the legislature would have incorporated
RSA 677:3 (1996) into RSA 155-E:9, or included similar language in RSA 155-
E:9. RSA 677:3 states, in relevant part, “No appeal from any order or decision
of the zoning board of adjustment, a board of appeals, or the local legislative
body shall be taken unless the appellant shall have made application for
rehearing as provided in RSA 677:2 . . . .”
We are not persuaded. The legislature did not need to include in RSA
155-E:9 the language used in RSA 677:3 to require motions for rehearing. RSA
155-E:9 clearly instructs as to how interested persons are to appeal a
regulator’s approval or disapproval of an excavation permit. The legislature’s
decision to incorporate the procedures specified in RSA 677:4-:15 instead of :3-
:15 does not mean that the legislature intended rehearings to be optional. The
plain language of RSA 155-E:9 provides that an interested person who wishes
to appeal a regulator’s initial ruling may do so by appealing for a rehearing;
only persons who wish to appeal a regulator’s ruling on a motion for rehearing
are authorized to appeal in conformity with the procedures in RSA 677:4-:15.
Since the procedures in RSA chapter 677 do not apply until after a motion for
rehearing has been ruled upon, the incorporation of the language at issue in
RSA 677:3 would be superfluous.
Finally, the petitioners make a brief argument that, though the board
“denied” their initial application, the board never “disapproved” it as stated in
RSA 155-E:9, which allowed the petitioners to appeal directly to the superior
court. This argument lacks merit, as the petitioners articulate no distinction
between a denial and a disapproval, and we can find none. Further, the
4
petitioners provide no support for their argument that the disapproval of a
permit requires a motion for rehearing, but a denial allows a petitioner to
appeal directly to the superior court. Because the board denied the petitioners’
application, it was incumbent upon them to apply for a rehearing pursuant to
RSA 155-E:9 before appealing to the superior court.
We conclude that the trial court lacked jurisdiction to hear the
petitioners’ appeal because they did not follow the appeal procedure required
by RSA 155-E:9. The trial court’s denial of the town’s motion to dismiss was
thus in error. Accordingly, we need not address the remaining issues raised on
appeal.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5