THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2005-185
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GRAHAM GIBSON
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 27, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Ann M. Rice, associate attorney general,
on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Graham Gibson, appeals his conviction by
a jury in the Superior Court (Perkins, J.) of three counts of felonious sexual
assault. See RSA 632-A:3 (Supp. 2005). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The victims in this case are
identical twin sisters, MG and KG, born in 1981. On December 24, 2000, MG
and KG, who no longer lived with their parents, were home visiting. Their
father, the defendant, began yelling that he needed scissors for wrapping
Christmas presents. Upon hearing the defendant yell, KG became “really
angry” and yelled back at him. MG and her mother entered the room at this
point. KG then accused the defendant of sexually assaulting her and MG as
young children by forcing them to masturbate him. MG agreed, stating that
the assaults happened “[a]ll the time.”
Approximately three days later, KG, MG and their mother left the house
and went to New York, where the mother remained. During the weeks
following December 24, 2000, both KG and MG allegedly recovered memories of
numerous incidents of sexual abuse by the defendant throughout their
childhood until they were approximately thirteen years old. Neither victim
received psychological counseling in the months after December 24, 2000,
during which time both recovered memories that they described as having been
“repressed.”
A grand jury returned ninety-seven indictments against the defendant for
felonious sexual assault of MG and KG. See RSA 632-A:3. Before trial, the
defendant moved to dismiss the indictments, arguing that the victims’
testimony in support of the charges was based upon recovered memories that
were unreliable under State v. Hungerford, 142 N.H. 110, 125-26 (1997). The
trial court conducted a pretrial evidentiary hearing to determine the reliability
of the victims’ testimony. At this hearing, the defendant conceded that both
MG and KG had continuous memories of incidents involving pink bath mitts.
The trial court found that MG and KG had recovered memories of other sexual
assaults that had been repressed, and ruled that testimony based upon these
memories was “unreliable under Hungerford.” As a result, the court dismissed
eighty-nine indictments, stating in its order that “the [unreliable] testimony is
central to [these] indictments.” The court ruled, however, that “[KG] and [MG]
may testify to events that each always had a recollection of.”
Of the eight remaining indictments, two alleged alternative theories for a
single event: one charged that the defendant had “touched his penis to [KG’s]
hand” and the other charged that he had “touched his penis to [KG’s] soapy,
mitted hand.” The other six indictments alleged that the defendant had “placed
his penis in [MG’s] baby-oiled and mitted hand” on six separate occasions
during six separate weeks. Both KG and MG testified at trial that these
particular assaults took place when they were approximately five years old and
involved touching the defendant while wearing pink bath mitts on their hands.
At the close of the State’s case, the trial court dismissed five of the six charges
involving MG. The jury convicted the defendant of the remaining three
charges.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court should have
stricken portions of MG’s testimony and dismissed the charge that the
defendant sexually assaulted MG. He contends that MG’s testimony was based
upon recovered memories that were unreliable under Hungerford. Second, the
defendant argues that the trial court should have granted his motion for a
mistrial following certain testimony by MG. He argues that her testimony
2
prejudiced him by alleging prior criminal acts, and that the prejudice was not
sufficiently cured by the court’s curative instruction. We address each
argument in turn.
I. Motions to Strike and Dismiss
The defendant argues that MG’s trial testimony “reveal[s] that her
testimony drew not only on [her] continuous memories, but also on her
previously-repressed memories” and thus was inadmissible under Hungerford.
He argues that the assault charge involving MG was based upon inadmissible
repressed memories and therefore it should have been dismissed.
In Hungerford, 142 N.H. at 113-16, we addressed whether two witnesses
could testify to memories of sexual abuse that they had repressed and
subsequently recovered. We described “recovered memory” as memory “that
previously had been completely absent from a witness’s conscious recollection.”
Id. at 119. We held that “testimony that relies on memories which previously
have been partially or fully repressed must satisfy a pretrial reliability
determination.” Id.
We then considered “the showing that the proponent must make before
evidence of the content of repressed memories will be admissible at trial.” Id.
at 121. We ruled that the proponent of the recovered memory must establish
that the memory is reliable, by showing “a reasonable likelihood that the
recovered memory is as accurate as ordinary human memory,” in order for it to
be admissible. Id. at 125. Our holding in Hungerford applied only to repressed
memories that were subsequently recovered; continuous memories are not
subject to the rigorous Hungerford analysis. See N.H. R. Ev. 601.
Here, the defendant argues that MG’s testimony was unreliable because
it was based upon repressed memories that she recovered after the December
24, 2000 altercation with the defendant. As we noted above, following the
pretrial evidentiary hearing, the court dismissed eighty-nine indictments,
finding that they were based upon subsequently recovered repressed memories
that were unreliable under Hungerford. The trial court refused to dismiss six
assault charges involving MG, finding that they were based upon her
continuous memories. On appeal, the defendant does not challenge the trial
court’s pretrial ruling. He instead argues that MG’s trial testimony was, in
fact, based upon her repressed memory.
The admissibility of evidence is a matter left to the sound discretion of
the trial court. State v. Rogan, 151 N.H. 629, 631 (2005). Because the trial
court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial impact of particular
testimony, we will not upset the trial court’s ruling unless it was an
3
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 631-32. To sustain his burden, the
defendant must show that the trial court’s decision was unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. See id. at 632.
When questioned by the prosecutor during trial about the frequency of
the alleged pink mitt assaults, MG testified, “I don’t know how to answer that.
I’m not sure if I can answer that.” When asked about whether she and KG
were naked when the assaults took place, MG stated, “[W]e were naked, – um
– yeah. I mean, I feel a little confused.” When asked whether there were “some
times when [she was] naked and some times not,” MG testified, “I can’t answer
that. I don’t – I don’t – I can’t – I don’t know how to answer that. I can’t
answer that.”
The defendant moved to strike the above portions of MG’s testimony and
dismiss the six assault charges involving MG, arguing that her inability to
provide answers indicated that she was relying upon inadmissible recovered
memories. The prosecutor objected, asserting that MG’s inability to testify
resulted from her efforts to comply with the court order and not mention events
about which she was not allowed to testify. The trial court denied the
defendant’s motion without prejudice. The prosecutor resumed questioning
MG about the “pink mitt” assaults. MG testified that they did not occur on a
daily basis and never took place more than once a day.
At this point, in response to the defendant’s repeated objections to the
prosecutor’s questions and MG’s testimony and to clarify the situation, the trial
court permitted the parties to voir dire MG outside the presence of the jury.
During voir dire, MG stated, “[T]here’s merging in my mind between what
happened with the pink mitts and then escalating into something else.
Sometimes it seems on the same occurrence. I’m trying to be really careful.”
MG also stated, “[M]y difficulty answering about frequency is in conjunction
with my – my worry that I’ll begin to speak about events, things that also
happened, that are not to be talked about with what’s going on here.” This
statement reflects the fact that before trial MG had been informed that she was
not permitted to testify to any of the events involving recovered memories.
Following voir dire, the trial court permitted the prosecutor to continue
his direct examination of MG before the jury. MG testified that she did not
think that the pink mitt assaults took place over a period longer than one year.
At this point, the defendant renewed his motion to dismiss the six indictments
involving MG, arguing that her testimony as to the frequency of the assaults
went beyond what she could recall in her continuous memory and relied upon
inadmissible recovered memories. The trial court again denied the motion.
On appeal, the defendant relies heavily upon MG’s statement that there
was “merging” in her mind between events, arguing that “[b]y the time of the
4
trial . . . MG had lost her ability to distinguish her repressed memories from
her continuous memories.” He concludes that MG’s testimony was unreliable
under Hungerford and, therefore, the court erred in failing to strike it.
Hungerford requires the trial court to make a pretrial determination of
whether the memory is repressed or continuous. Hungerford, 142 N.H. at 121.
Hungerford prohibits the admission of unreliable testimony based upon
repressed memory. Id. at 133-34. The trial court complied with the
Hungerford requirements by conducting a pretrial evidentiary hearing and
determining that MG had continuous memory of the pink mitt assaults. The
defendant has not shown that MG’s statement about “merging” demonstrated
that her memory of the pink mitt assaults was no longer continuous. Indeed,
nothing in the record demonstrates that, by the time she testified at trial, MG
had lost her ability to distinguish between memories of assaults that she had
repressed and later recovered and memories of assaults that were continuous.
The defendant relies upon the equivocation and hesitation in MG’s
testimony as demonstrating her inability to distinguish between repressed and
continuous memories. We find nothing, however, in MG’s testimony indicating
that her equivocation and hesitation stemmed from an inability to distinguish
repressed from continuous memories. In fact, MG stated during voir dire that
she was trying to avoid testifying to events that she had been instructed not to
discuss. We thus conclude that the trial court acted within its discretion by
not striking her testimony as unreliable under Hungerford.
II. Motion for Mistrial
The defendant next argues that a mistrial was required because a
statement made by MG irreparably prejudiced him. During trial, the
prosecutor asked MG about a conversation she had with KG on the evening of
December 24, 2000, following the altercation with the defendant. MG
described the conversation:
[W]e were just like talking, – um – and we were like sharing
different things. And then the most important thing to me was
that – was mom, because we were all out of the house, and mom
was still there, and I really feel like I – there were certain things I’m
not supposed to talk about here, and I just – I feel like I’m very
limited.
Following this statement, the defendant moved for a mistrial, arguing
that MG’s statement that she felt “very limited” prejudiced him. Specifically, he
argued that, in light of the victims’ mother’s previous testimony indicating that
she feared the defendant, the jury would construe MG’s statement to suggest
5
that the defendant had been violent toward the victims’ mother. The victims’
mother had testified before MG. During cross-examination, the victims’ mother
had asked, “[C]an I tell anybody why I was afraid of [the defendant]?” The
defendant did not move to strike this comment.
The prosecutor objected to the defendant’s motion for a mistrial, arguing
that MG’s statement that she felt “very limited” did not irreparably prejudice
the defendant because the jury could construe it to mean that MG did not want
to say something that she was not allowed to say, and that any potential
prejudice could be cured by a jury instruction.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, reasoning that the jury
could infer from MG’s statement that she was confused as to the boundaries of
the hearsay rule; specifically, as to whether she could testify to what her sister
or sister’s boyfriend had said in prior conversations. As an additional
precaution, however, the court permitted the defendant to draft curative
instructions, which the court read to the jury. The trial court instructed the
jury “not to speculate as to what [MG] meant or was referring to by her
comment,” and “to disregard her comment and to not consider it for any
purpose.” The defendant now asserts that, in light of the other statements
made at trial, MG’s statement that she felt “very limited” irreparably prejudiced
him.
Because the trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial
nature of the testimony being challenged, the court’s ruling on a motion for
mistrial will not be overturned absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
State v. Carbo, 151 N.H. 550, 554 (2004). To justify a mistrial, the evidence in
question must be more than merely inadmissible; it must constitute an
irreparable injustice that cannot be cured by jury instructions. Id. Where the
jury could draw several inferences from challenged testimony, one of which is
innocuous, the testimony is not so prejudicial as to be incurable by
contemporaneous jury instructions. See State v. Steele, 125 N.H. 190, 192
(1984). The jury is presumed to follow a trial court’s curative instruction.
State v. Sammataro, 135 N.H. 579, 582 (1992).
The defendant argues that “the challenged testimony, in context,
communicated to the jury that [the defendant] had, on a number of prior
occasions, committed a crime.” Specifically, he contends that the testimony
communicated that the defendant had committed uncharged acts of violence
toward his wife. He argues that the “curative instruction here could not repair
the harm because . . . the curative instruction assumed that the jury might
understand MG’s feeling as rooted in a concern about the hearsay rules.”
The State argues that MG’s testimony was “disjointed and ambiguous”
and did not “suggest or allude to the specifics of what she had been prevented
6
from mentioning.” It acknowledges that “[v]iewed in context, [MG’s] comments
could have been understood to mean that she was restricted in her ability to
talk about the conversation she had with her sister or her concerns for her
mother’s safety.” The State argues that her testimony “did not create any basis
for the jury to infer that the testimonial restrictions concerned other criminal
acts committed by the defendant.” Moreover, the State argues that “[a]ny
potential prejudice stemming from [MG’s] comment was effectively eliminated
by the court’s instruction to the jury” because the instruction “conveyed the
message that testimonial restrictions are commonplace during trial, and that
such restrictions, and [MG’s] remark in particular, should be accorded no
significance.”
We agree with the State that, even in light of potentially prejudicial
testimony by other witnesses, a jury could have construed MG’s statement of
feeling “very limited” as an expression of frustration and confusion with
limitations upon what she could testify to. This statement did not clearly refer
to the defendant’s past acts of violence toward the victims’ mother and was,
thus, ambiguous. Given that the jury could have drawn several inferences
from MG’s statement, at least one of which was innocuous, we find that the
statement was not so suggestive of other criminal conduct as to be incurable
by a contemporaneous jury instruction. Cf. Steele, 125 N.H. at 192. The trial
court’s curative instruction clearly instructed the jury to disregard MG’s
remark and not draw any inferences from it; thus it sufficiently cured any
prejudice stemming from MG’s statement. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court did not err in refusing to grant a mistrial.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7