THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-014
BLAGBROUGH FAMILY REALTY TRUST
v.
TOWN OF WILTON
Argued: September 29, 2005
Opinion Issued: February 14, 2006
Cleveland, Waters and Bass, P.A., of Concord (William B. Pribis and
Mark S. Derby on the brief, and Mr. Pribis orally), for the plaintiff.
Fernald, Taft, Falby & Little, P.A., of Peterborough (Silas Little on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Patricia M. Panciocco and Gregory
E. Michael on the brief, and Mr. Michael orally), for the intervenor, A & T Forest
Products, Inc.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, the Blagbrough Family Realty Trust,
appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Groff, J.) that the defendant, the
Town of Wilton (town), was not precluded by State law from amending its
zoning ordinance. We affirm.
In 2002, the town’s planning board approved a two-lot subdivision of
property owned by the intervenor, A & T Forest Products, Inc., abutting the
plaintiff’s property. The subdivision provided for a shared driveway with two
culverts. At the time of the approval, the town’s zoning ordinance provided
that no structure could be located less than 200 feet from open water and
perennial streams or less than 150 feet from intermittent streams, the 100 year
floodplain or any wetland. Wilton, N.H. Zoning Ordinance § 14.3.3 (2002). A
structure was defined as “[a]ny construction, erection, assemblage or other
combination of materials upon the land which is made in such a manner as to
imply that it will remain in position indefinitely or which in fact remains on the
land for a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days.” Id. § 3.1.31 (2002).
The plaintiff appealed to the town’s zoning board of adjustment (ZBA),
arguing that the approval was illegal because it permitted the installation of
structures, i.e., the culverts, in the driveway within the protected setback from
a wetland. At the ZBA hearing, a letter from the town’s board of selectmen was
presented stating that the board, as the enforcement agency for the zoning
ordinance, had never treated culverts as structures. The ZBA determined that
pursuant to the “spirit and intent of the Wilton Zoning Ordinance, neither a
driveway nor a culvert is considered a structure” and upheld the planning
board’s approval of the subdivision.
The plaintiff appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court.
Subsequent to the appeal but before the case was heard, the town amended its
zoning ordinance to specifically exclude culverts from the definition of
“structure.” The superior court denied the appeal, ruling that the “time of
decision” rule applied, thereby mandating that the case be decided according to
the ordinance in effect at that time. The plaintiff appealed to this court and we
affirmed by order the superior court’s decision, but remanded the case to
determine whether the town was precluded by State law from amending its
zoning ordinance to exempt driveways and culverts from the definition of
“structure.” On remand, the superior court determined that the ordinance as
amended does not conflict with a State statute or regulation and that State law
does not preempt it.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred: (1) when it
ruled that the driveway, culverts and outfall pipes were not “structures” within
the meaning of the town’s ordinance and that the amendments to the
ordinance were not preempted by State law; and (2) when it declined to
consider the argument that the driveway, culverts and outfall pipes were
initially constructed pursuant to a logging permit that forbade retention of the
roads and culverts in the wetlands setback.
“The state preemption issue is essentially one of statutory interpretation
and construction – whether local authority to regulate under a zoning enabling
act is preempted by state law or policy.” N. Country Envtl. Servs. v. Town of
Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 611 (2004) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “State
2
law preempts local law . . . when there is an actual conflict between State and
local regulation.” Id. “A conflict exists when a municipal ordinance or
regulation permits that which a State statute prohibits or vice versa” or when a
local ordinance “frustrates the statute’s purpose.” Id. “We infer an intent to
preempt a field when the legislature enacts a comprehensive, detailed
regulatory scheme.” Town of Lyndeborough v. Boisvert Properties, 150 N.H.
814, 817 (2004) (quotation omitted). “We are the final arbiter of the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole.”
Id.
The plaintiff argues that the town’s amendment to its zoning ordinance is
preempted by State law because it created a definition of “structure” that is
less protective than the definition of “structure” contained in RSA chapter 482-
A (2001 & Supp. 2005). According to the plaintiff, because RSA chapter 482-A
comprehensively regulates development in and adjacent to the waters and
wetlands of the State, the preemption doctrine requires the town to include the
proposed culverts within its definition of “structure” just as the State did
explicitly in RSA 482-A:2, IX and New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules,
Env-Wt 101.87. Otherwise, the plaintiff contends, the town will have enacted a
regulation that frustrates the legislative intent of RSA chapter 482-A to protect
the public health and the waters of the State.
“Wetlands” is defined in RSA 482-A:2, X as “an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support . . . a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions.” The waters and adjacent areas to which chapter
482-A applies is defined as follows:
Wherever fresh water flows or stands and in all areas above tidal
waters . . . [RSA chapter 482-A] shall apply . . . to all surface
waters of the state as defined in RSA 485-A:2 which contain fresh
water, including the portion of any bank or shore which borders
such surface waters, and to any swamp or bog subject to
periodical flooding by fresh water including the surrounding
shore.
RSA 482-A:4, II. “Surface waters of the state” are defined as “perennial and
seasonal streams, lakes, ponds, and tidal waters within the jurisdiction of the
state, including all streams, lakes, or ponds bordering on the state, marshes,
water courses, and other bodies of water, natural or artificial.” RSA 485-A:2,
XIV (2001). “Structure” is defined as including but not limited to “fence, dock,
breakwater, post, pile, building, bridge, culvert, and wall.” RSA 482-A:2, IX;
see also N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 101.87.
The town’s amended zoning ordinance provides that “[n]o residence,
building, structure, feed lot, outflow from building drainage, septic system or
3
its containment area shall be located less than two hundred (200) feet from
open water and perennial streams nor less than one hundred fifty (150) feet
from intermittent streams, the hundred year flood plain . . . or any wetland.”
Wilton, N.H. Zoning Ordinance § 14.3.3 (2003). “Structure” is then further
defined to exclude “driveways, fences, stonewalls, mailboxes, culverts, and
drainage measures approved by the Planning Board as part of a subdivision or
site plan.” Id. § 3.1.31 (2003).
The superior court found no conflict between the two definitions of
“structure,” concluding that the town’s ordinance and the State statute may be
applied without conflict because they regulate two different areas. As the court
stated, RSA chapter 482-A
regulates the construction of a structure in a wetlands area while
the Town ordinance regulates the construction of a structure
within a setback from such wetlands. These two definitions may
be applied harmoniously. A person would be permitted to
construct a culvert within a setback from state waters, but would
not be permitted to build a culvert in a wetland.
In addition, the superior court found that the ordinance, which regulates
the construction of a structure within a setback, does not conflict with RSA
chapter 482-A, which regulates the construction of a structure within a
wetland. The court found “no indication that RSA 482-A is to be exclusive.
There is no language in the statute to this effect and the state scheme is not so
pervasive or comprehensive that it would preclude municipal regulation.”
Finally, the court stated that the ordinance does not frustrate the purpose of
RSA chapter 482-A to protect and preserve submerged lands and wetlands
from despoliation and unregulated alteration, see RSA 482-A:1, because “[t]he
ordinance’s definition of ‘structure’ does not interfere with the regulation of
submerged lands or wetlands, but is only applicable to a setback from a
wetland.”
Having reviewed the applicable statutes and regulations, we find no error
in the superior court’s ruling. Assuming, without deciding, that the State has
preempted local regulation in wetlands, municipalities may adopt local
ordinances to further wetland protection in areas outside the State’s
regulation. We disagree with the plaintiff that the State has defined the term
“adjacent” in regards to wetlands to include the setback areas covered by the
town’s zoning ordinance. Accordingly, local regulation within the setback area
does not conflict with the State’s jurisdiction over wetlands or interfere with the
State’s purpose in regulating wetlands.
We also disagree with the plaintiff’s argument that the State regulates in
the setback area because administrative rules under RSA chapter 482-A
contemplate an application process for, and regulation of, projects “within 100
4
feet of the highest observable tide line.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 303.04(b).
The term “highest observable tide line” is defined in RSA 483-B:4, XVII(c) (2001
& Supp. 2005) for coastal waters as “a line defining the furthest landward limit
of tidal flow.” Other than for coastal waters, nowhere in the statutes or
regulations cited by the plaintiff does the State indicate that it intends to
regulate any lands outside the immediate area of wetlands. Consequently, we
hold that the State has not extended jurisdiction into the setback area as
defined by the town, and thus there is no conflict between the town’s zoning
ordinance and the State’s statutes and regulations.
The plaintiff next argues that the superior court erred in declining to
consider its argument that the driveway, culverts and outfall pipes were
initially constructed pursuant to a logging permit that forbade retention of the
roads and culverts in the setback area. Following remand from this court, the
parties filed memoranda with the superior court addressing the single issue
remanded: whether the town’s amendment to its zoning ordinance was
unlawful. In its memoranda, the plaintiff raised, for the first time, the issue
regarding the logging permit. This issue was never raised in the plaintiff’s
appeal to the ZBA, its motion to reconsider, its first appeal to the superior
court or its appeal to this court.
RSA 677:3, I (1996) provides that
[n]o appeal from any order or decision of the zoning board of
adjustment . . . shall be taken unless the appellant shall have
made application for rehearing . . . and, when such application
shall have been made, no ground not set forth in the application
shall be urged, relied on, or given any consideration by a court
unless the court for good cause shown shall allow the appellant to
specify additional grounds.
“The statutory scheme is based upon the principle that the local board should
have the first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its decisions so
that the court may have the benefit of the board’s judgment in hearing the
appeal.” Dziama v. City of Portsmouth, 140 N.H. 542, 544 (1995) (quotation
omitted). If a timely motion for rehearing fails to set forth all alleged errors
with respect to the ZBA’s decision on the merits, the party may not raise those
grounds in a later appeal unless the court for good cause shown orders
otherwise. See id. Because this issue was not properly raised, the superior
court did not err in refusing to consider it.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5