THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2005-604
IN THE MATTER OF JAMES J. PEIRANO AND SHARON L. LARSEN
Argued: April 3, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2007
The Legal Connection, P.C., of Concord (Michael Bedard on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Harvey & Mahoney, P.A., of Manchester (J. Campbell Harvey on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, James J. Peirano, Jr., appeals from a final
order of the Salem Family Division (Hurd, J.). The respondent, Sharon L.
Larsen, cross-appeals. We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
I. Background
The record supports the following. The petitioner and the respondent
married in May 1991 and had one child in January 1992. In August 2000, a
domestic violence final order was issued against the petitioner pursuant to RSA
chapter 173-B (2002 & Supp. 2006) based upon the respondent’s allegation
that he assaulted her on July 14, 2000, while she was attempting to leave the
house with their daughter. As a result, the petitioner was ordered to
temporarily relinquish his numerous firearms and was prohibited from
purchasing or obtaining any firearms during the pendency of the order. See
RSA 173-B:5, II (2002). The order also awarded custody of the parties’
daughter to the respondent, while providing for unsupervised visitation with
the petitioner three days a week. In November 2000, the Derry Family Division
issued an ex parte order limiting the petitioner to supervised visitation for
reasons which are unclear from the record. In conjunction with the domestic
violence order, the Derry Family Division appointed a Guardian Ad Litem (GAL)
for the parties’ daughter.
In September 2000, the petitioner filed a petition for legal separation in
the superior court, alleging that irreconcilable differences caused the
irremediable breakdown of the marriage. Following a temporary hearing in
November 2000, the court issued an interim decree ordering the respondent to
pay the petitioner $1,800 per month as temporary spousal support. The
respondent and her attorney were not present at the hearing due to a mistake
on their part regarding the date of the hearing.
On November 18, 2000, the respondent filed a cross-petition seeking a
fault-based divorce based upon the petitioner’s extreme cruelty, or, in the
alternative, the petitioner’s treatment of the respondent which injured her
health and endangered her reason. See RSA 458:7, III, V (2004). The
respondent requested: a “disparate share” of the marital estate under RSA
458:16-a, II (2004) due in part to the fault of the petitioner; and a permanent
restraining order consistent with the requirements of 18 U.S.C. § 922(d)(8)
(2000). The respondent also filed a motion requesting that the court hold a
temporary hearing to reconsider the November 13, 2000 alimony order nunc
pro tunc. Without holding a hearing, the court granted the motion to
reconsider over the petitioner’s objection. The court also transferred the matter
to the Derry Family Division, where the domestic violence proceeding was held,
at the request of the respondent.
In November 2000, the GAL filed a motion to withdraw, which was
granted by the Derry Family Division. The court then appointed Debora A.
Blake as the GAL for the parties’ daughter. It was later revealed during her
testimony that although Blake was a Massachusetts attorney, she was not
licensed to practice law in New Hampshire.
In June 2001, the petitioner’s supervised visitation rights were
terminated by the Merrimack County Supervision Center because the
petitioner failed to follow the center’s rules regarding visitation procedures.
The petitioner has not seen his daughter since then.
In September 2001, after an August 2001 restraining order had expired,
the Brentwood Family Division extended the order until August 2002.
Although the petitioner had not harassed or bothered the respondent for
2
several months, the court noted that the parties were going through a
contentious divorce and found that the respondent was in fear for her safety.
In August 2004, the respondent filed a “Motion for Immediate Ex Parte
Restraining Order.” See RSA 458:16 (2004). One day later, the Derry Family
Division granted the motion and issued a restraining order prohibiting the
petitioner from having any contact with the respondent or his daughter. On
March 23, 2005, the Salem Family Division reissued the order.
In August 2004, the Salem Family Division (Sadler, J.) held a two-day
hearing for purposes of obtaining the GAL’s testimony. Both the petitioner,
who appeared pro se, and the respondent’s counsel questioned her.
In March 2005, the Salem Family Division issued a pretrial conference
order scheduling four days of trial beginning April 29, 2005. The court
scheduled one day for the respondent, who was represented by counsel, to
present evidence; two days for the petitioner, who would appear pro se, to
present evidence; and three hours for each party on the final day for cross-
examination.
On April 29, 2005, the first day of trial, the respondent, through her
attorney, examined her five witnesses. After the direct examination of the
respondent’s first witness, the petitioner requested that he be permitted to
conduct his cross-examination. The court denied his request, informing him
that time had been scheduled on the fourth day of trial for cross-examination.
The petitioner did not cross-examine any of the respondent’s witnesses until
the scheduled time on the last day of trial.
On June 27, 2005, the court issued its final order and divorce decree.
The court granted the respondent’s cross-petition for a fault-based divorce “on
the grounds that during the marriage [the petitioner] treated her in such a
[manner] as to injure her health and endanger her reason.” See RSA 458:7, V.
The March 23, 2005 restraining order was continued in effect pending further
order of the court upon the court’s finding that “[t]he Respondent is genuinely
in fear for her safety as a result of the acts and credible threats of the
Petitioner.”
On the issues of visitation and custody, after finding that the respondent
was the primary caretaker of the parties’ daughter, the court awarded her sole
legal and physical custody, and awarded the petitioner supervised visitation
rights. The petitioner was ordered to pay the respondent $50 per month as
child support.
Finding that the respondent had the ability to pay and the petitioner had
the need for alimony, the court awarded the petitioner alimony of $1,300 per
3
month for two years. The court awarded the marital residence to the
respondent and equitably divided the parties’ remaining assets. As a part of
this division, the court ordered that all of the petitioner’s firearms and other
weapons be sold, with the proceeds being awarded to him.
The petitioner appeals, arguing: (1) the trial court denied him due
process by preventing him from cross-examining some of the respondent’s
witnesses, and not allowing cross-examination until weeks after direct
examination; (2) he was denied due process when the court granted non-
verified motions without a hearing; (3) the GAL was unqualified and appointed
in violation of RSA 458:17-a; (4) the court erred in its findings and rulings of
law on the issues of alimony, visitation, division of the assets, continuation of
the restraining order, and its fault-finding; and (5) the court erred in ordering
the sale of the petitioner’s firearms.
The respondent cross-appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in: (1)
awarding the petitioner visitation; (2) awarding the petitioner alimony; and (3)
dividing the parties’ assets.
II. Issues on Appeal
A. Due Process
Citing Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution, the
petitioner first argues that he was denied procedural due process because: (1)
he was prevented from cross-examining some witnesses, and not allowed to
cross-examine others until weeks after direct examination; and (2) the court
granted the respondent’s non-verified motion to reconsider the November 2000
alimony order nunc pro tunc without holding a hearing. The petitioner further
argues that the trial court violated Superior Court Rule 57 because the
respondent’s motion was not supported by proper affidavit, and was based
upon facts not in evidence.
To trigger a constitutional analysis on appeal, the appealing party must
raise the constitutional issue below. See State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632
(1986). A review of the record before us reveals that the petitioner did not raise
a constitutional argument before the trial court in response to its denial of his
request to cross-examine witnesses immediately following the direct
examination. Although the defendant stated that he wished to cross-examine
the respondent’s first witness “now,” when the court informed him that all
cross-examinations would take place on the last day of trial, the petitioner
acquiesced and said nothing further. See State v. Porter, 144 N.H. 96, 100
(1999) (declining to review defendant’s argument that he was precluded from
cross-examining the victim where defendant “did not object to the trial court’s
4
ruling, but rather acquiesced to it”). This single statement “was not sufficient
to put anyone on notice that he . . . meant to raise a constitutional issue.”
Appeal of Bosselait, 130 N.H. 604, 607 (1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 1011
(1989); see also Appeal of Kaplan, 153 N.H. 296, 301-02 (2006).
The record also reveals that the petitioner never raised a due process
argument before the trial court in response to the court’s grant of the
respondent’s motion to reconsider alimony nunc pro tunc. Nor is there
evidence that the petitioner raised a Superior Court Rule 57 argument before
the trial court on this issue. Although the petitioner, who was represented by
counsel at this time, filed an objection to the motion, the objection contained
no allegations that the respondent’s motion was inadequate under the court
rules or violated his due process rights. Rather, the objection merely reiterated
the petitioner’s need for alimony.
As a general rule, “issues must be raised at the earliest possible time,
because trial forums should have a full opportunity to come to sound
conclusions and to correct claimed errors in the first instance.” Bosselait, 130
N.H. at 607 (quotation and brackets omitted). As the party appealing this
issue, the petitioner has the burden of providing a sufficient record on appeal
and demonstrating that he raised his issues in the trial court. Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). Although the respondent did not
raise a preservation argument in her brief or at oral argument, we may
nonetheless consider the issue because it is a matter of compliance with our
rules regarding appeals. Id.
While we have our doubts about the procedure used by the trial court
here, we decline to consider the petitioner’s arguments on these issues because
he has failed to demonstrate that he preserved them for our review.
Blagbrough v. A & T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. ___, ___, 917 A.2d 1221, 1228-29
(2007); In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 287 (2006).
Although we recognize that the petitioner was pro se during some of the
proceedings below, “[w]e see no reason to depart from the general principle that
the rules of preservation are not relaxed for a pro se” litigant. Porter, 144 N.H.
at 100-01; see also Simpson v. Young, 153 N.H. 471, 473 (2006); DeButts v.
LaRoche, 142 N.H. 845, 847 (1998).
B. Guardian Ad Litem Qualifications
We next address the petitioner’s argument that Blake was unqualified to
be a GAL as a matter of law. The petitioner argues that pursuant to RSA
458:17-a (2004) (repealed 2005), a GAL is required to be admitted to practice
law in New Hampshire.
5
The petitioner fails to cite any language in RSA 458:17-a that requires a
GAL to be a New Hampshire attorney, and we find none. Paragraph IV of the
statute states that the court is responsible for providing “[s]tandards and
requirements for registration as a guardian ad litem.” RSA 458:17-a, IV(a).
However, the rules for GAL certification that governed the Family Division
contained no requirement that a GAL be a New Hampshire attorney. See
System-wide Guardian Ad Litem Application, Certification and Practice Rule
1.4(c); see also Family Div. R. (Domestic Relations) 15(A) (incorporating the
“State-wide guardian ad litem application, certification and practice document”
as a rule of the family division). While the Guidelines for Guardians ad Litem
prepared by the superior court in 1983 state that a GAL “shall be” an attorney
admitted to practice in New Hampshire, see Guidelines for Guardians ad Litem,
par. 1, the guidelines are “not for the purpose of imposing rules or strict
procedures,” Preface to Guidelines for Guardians ad Litem, supra, and have
not been adopted as rules of the Family Division.
Accordingly, we reject the petitioner’s argument that because Blake was
not a member of the New Hampshire bar, she was “unqualified and appointed
in violation of RSA 458:17-a.”
C. Trial Court’s Findings and Rulings
1. Alimony
Both parties appeal the trial court’s award of alimony to the petitioner.
The court awarded the petitioner $1,300 per month for two years, based upon
findings that he “does not have sufficient assets or income to support himself,”
but that he “has sufficient vocational skills to be gainfully employed in or
within two years in real estate development, construction and/or the business
of purchasing and selling antiques.” The petitioner argues that he is disabled
due to injuries suffered in a 1988 fall and an automobile accident in 1993, and
that the court’s finding that he can be gainfully employed in two years is
against the weight of the evidence. The respondent argues that: (1) the
petitioner failed to prove his need for alimony; (2) the amount of alimony
awarded is excessive; and (3) the trial court failed to adequately consider the
petitioner’s fault in awarding alimony.
RSA 458:19, I (Supp. 2005) authorizes the trial court
to award alimony if: (1) the party in need lacks
sufficient income, property, or both to provide for his
or her reasonable needs, considering the style of living
to which the parties have become accustomed during
the marriage; (2) the payor is able to continue to meet
his or her own reasonable needs, considering the style
of living to which the parties have become accustomed
6
during the marriage; and (3) the party in need cannot
be self-supporting through appropriate employment at
a standard of living that meets reasonable needs, or is
the custodian of the parties’ child, whose condition or
circumstances make it appropriate that the custodian
not seek employment outside the home.
Hampers, 154 N.H. at 283. In determining the amount of alimony, a trial court
must consider various factors enumerated in RSA 458:19, IV (2004).
Nevertheless, trial courts have broad discretion in awarding alimony. Marsh v.
Marsh, 123 N.H. 448, 451 (1983). We review the trial court’s decision under
our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Hampers, 154 N.H. at 283.
The record shows that the court considered the RSA 458:19, IV factors.
Specifically, the court stated that it considered the length of the marriage
(fourteen years), recognized that there was “conflicting evidence concerning
Petitioner’s disability and his ability to earn a living,” and noted that there was
no “current medical evidence concerning the Petitioner’s current medical
condition.” However, the court found that the petitioner had sufficient
vocational skills to be gainfully employed within two years. The court found
that the respondent had been the sole support for the family since 1991, when
the parties were married, and that the petitioner currently “does not have
sufficient assets or income to support himself.” The court’s order also
acknowledged the petitioner’s behavior throughout the marriage, which
supported its finding of a fault-based divorce. This factor, however, does not
preclude an alimony award: “In determining the amount of alimony . . . the
conduct of the guilty party is not conclusive but is an element to be considered
under all the circumstances.” Kibbee v. Kibbee, 99 N.H. 215, 216 (1954).
Additionally, the court denied the petitioner’s request for retroactive alimony
based upon the amounts already paid by the respondent prior to the final
order.
Based upon these factors and the evidence in the record, we cannot say
that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by ordering the
respondent to pay alimony to the petitioner for a period of two years. Hampers,
154 N.H. at 284.
2. Visitation
Next, we review the petitioner’s argument that the trial court’s visitation
orders were unsustainable and the respondent’s counter-argument that the
trial court erred in awarding the petitioner even limited visitation.
In the final decree, the trial court awarded the respondent sole legal and
physical custody of the parties’ daughter and awarded the petitioner supervised
7
visitation for two hours every other Sunday. The petitioner argues that there
was no reasonable basis for the visitation orders since the court found that the
petitioner did not present a danger to the parties’ daughter. The respondent
argues that: (1) visitation with the petitioner will not benefit the parties’
daughter and is not in her best interests; (2) the daughter does not wish to see
the petitioner; (3) the respondent’s right to travel under the New Hampshire
Constitution is violated by the visitation order; and (4) the trial court failed to
adequately consider the petitioner’s behavior during the marriage.
The trial court has wide discretion in matters
involving custody and visitation. That discretion
necessarily extends to matters such as assigning
weight to evidence and assessing the credibility and
demeanor of witnesses. Conflicts in the testimony,
questions about the credibility of witnesses and the
weight to be given testimony are for the trial court to
resolve. Our review is limited to determining whether
it clearly appears that the trial court engaged in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 919 A.2d 801, 806 (2007)
(citations omitted).
Before issuing its final order in June 2005, the trial judge reviewed the
recorded testimony of the GAL, who testified that:
[r]ight now it would not be in [the child’s] best
interests to have contact with [the petitioner]. . . . [The
petitioner] has a lot of work to do to deal with his own
awareness of what this situation . . . [has] done to [the
child] as well as his inappropriate communications
with [the child] during the visitation times . . . and
understanding of where [the child] is emotionally and
what her views are . . . . [I]f at any time in the future
visitation were considered, . . . [the child’s] emotional
state and her readiness and her preparedness for that
would have to be paramount. . . . I have not seen any
indication that [visitation] would benefit her in any
way at this time.
The child’s therapist, Kay Edwards, testified that the child had indicated
that if she were to see the petitioner, “she would want someone there all of the
time” to feel safe. Edwards also testified that given the child’s age (thirteen at
the time of trial), it would be proper to consider her desires regarding visitation.
Dr. Richard Shulik, a psychologist who evaluated all of the parties, testified
8
that the child spoke of the petitioner “with affection” and at one point stated
“that she wished that she could see him, but . . . only if he doesn’t make
trouble.”
In matters of visitation, the court’s overriding concern is the best
interests of the child. In the Matter of R.A. & J.M., 153 N.H. 82, 93 (2005).
“Although visitation by [a] non-custodial parent is an important right, it is one
that must yield to the greatest good of the child.” In the Matter of Lockaby &
Smith, 148 N.H. 462, 465 (2002) (quotation omitted). In making this
determination, the trial court may consider, among other things, the desires of
the child, the effect visitation will have on the child’s emotional well-being, see
Lester v. Lester, 111 N.H. 117, 119 (1971), and the recommendations of the
GAL, Choy, 154 N.H. at ___, 919 A.2d at 807. However, none of these factors is
dispositive and the recommendations of a GAL should not be afforded greater
presumptive weight than other evidence in the case. Id. at ___, 919 A.2d at
806-07.
The trial court made detailed findings and there is sufficient evidence in
the record to support its visitation orders. The court considered the
testimonies of the GAL, the child’s therapist, and the psychologist who
evaluated the parties and their daughter. The court found that the respondent
was the primary caretaker for the child, that the child is well adjusted and
desires to continue living with her mother. The court also found that the
petitioner had made threats to the respondent and accepted the psychologist’s
conclusion that he is “emotionally volatile.”
However, the court also found that the petitioner “loves his daughter and
desires to resume a relationship with her,” and that “[n]o credible evidence was
offered . . . that the Petitioner was a threat to his daughter’s safety.” Based
upon these findings and rulings, the court awarded the petitioner supervised
visitation.
Based upon the trial court’s analysis and the record before us, we cannot
say that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion in its
visitation order.
We decline to address the respondent’s constitutional claim because she
has failed to demonstrate that this issue was preserved for our review. See
Bean, 151 N.H. at 250.
3. Division of the Assets
Both parties challenge the trial court’s division of the assets as
unsupported by the evidence. The respondent also argues that the trial court
failed to adequately consider the fault of the petitioner in dividing them. The
9
trial court awarded the marital residence to the respondent, citing the fault of
the petitioner under RSA 458:7, V and further citing concern that the parties’
daughter maintain “a stable living environment” in the marital home. The
court then ruled that “an equitable division of the parties’ remaining assets is
appropriate.”
“RSA 458:16-a, II creates a presumption that equal distribution of
marital property is equitable. Absent special circumstances, the court must
make the distribution as equal as possible.” Hampers, 154 N.H. at 285
(quotation and citation omitted). The statute enumerates various factors for
the court to consider, such as the length of the marriage, the ability of the
parties to provide for their own needs, the needs of the custodial parent, the
contribution of each party during the marriage, retirement accounts, and the
fault of either party. Id.; RSA 458:16-a, II.
Additionally, the court may consider any other factor it
deems relevant in equitably distributing the parties'
assets. RSA 458:16-a, II(o). A trial court is not
precluded, however, from awarding a particular asset
in its entirety to one party.
As we afford trial courts broad discretion in
determining matters of property distribution in
fashioning a final divorce decree, we will not overturn
the trial court's decision absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. If the court's findings can
reasonably be made on the evidence presented, they
will stand.
Hampers, 154 N.H. at 285 (quotations, citations and brackets omitted). “[I]f the
court concludes that an unequal distribution of property is warranted, it
should state its reasons and make specific findings and rulings supporting its
decision.” Bursey v. Bursey, 145 N.H. 283, 286 (2000) (quotation omitted); see
RSA 458:16-a, IV (2004).
The petitioner argues that the trial court erred when it relied upon fault
grounds to award the marital home to the respondent. Under RSA 458:16-a,
II(l), the trial court may order an unequal distribution of assets if it finds that
“[t]he fault of either party as specified in RSA 458:7 . . . caused the breakdown
of the marriage and: (1) Caused substantial physical or mental pain and
suffering; or (2) Resulted in substantial economic loss to the marital estate or
the injured party.” The trial court found that the petitioner’s fault caused the
irremediable breakdown of the parties’ marriage and caused the respondent to
suffer “significant emotional distress.” As there is support in the record for
these findings, we uphold them and hold that the trial court did not err when it
10
relied upon fault grounds to award the marital home to the respondent. In
light of this conclusion, we need not address the petitioner’s alternative
assertion that there was no evidence to support a finding that his treatment of
the respondent resulted in substantial economic loss to her or to the marital
estate.
The petitioner also argues that the court unequally divided the parties’
remaining assets by awarding the respondent “her entire retirement account,
which gained well over $90,000.00 during the marriage.” The respondent
counters that the assets were divided unequally in favor of the petitioner,
considering a $48,000 debt she has paid off, which includes the parties’ joint
debt as well as debt accrued by the petitioner under the respondent’s name,
and the advances the petitioner has received during the litigation.
The respondent also argues that the court gave inadequate weight to the
petitioner’s fault in dividing the parties’ assets. The trial court found that after
the award of the marital home to the respondent, an equitable division of the
parties’ remaining assets was proper in light of the evidence before it.
Given the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard we must apply,
the appealing party must show that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his or her case. State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001). The record before us, however, does not
contain account records, property assessments or any other form of valuation
for the assets in dispute. Due to the absence of evidence that clearly shows the
asset division was inequitable, neither party has demonstrated on appeal that
the trial court’s ruling was clearly unreasonable. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250;
Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296.
The respondent further argues that the court erred in failing to reaffirm a
previous order directing that the GAL fees be paid from the parties’ joint funds,
which resulted in the respondent shouldering this entire amount and
contributed to the inequitable asset distribution. We disagree. In its final
order, the court ordered that the respondent pay the GAL expenses, and took
this into account when denying the petitioner’s request for retroactive alimony.
We cannot say, therefore, based upon the record before us, that the trial
court’s ruling on this issue was clearly unreasonable. Accordingly, we affirm
the remainder of the court’s order dividing the parties’ assets.
4. Continuation of the Restraining Order
We next address whether the trial court’s continuation of the restraining
order was unsupported by the evidence. In its final order, the trial court
incorporated the restraining order issued in March 2005 and continued it
pending further order of the court.
11
The petitioner argues that after the July 2000 incident, there was no
contact to warrant any restraint. The respondent counters that the court
justifiably found that a present threat exists. Although no statute is cited in
the order, on appeal, both parties presume it was issued under RSA 458:16.
We proceed, therefore, under the same assumption.
RSA 458:16 provides, in pertinent part:
I. After the filing of a petition for divorce, . . . the
superior court may issue orders with such conditions
and limitations as the court deems just which may, at
the discretion of the court, be made on a temporary or
permanent basis. . . . Said orders may be to the
following effect:
(a) Directing any party to refrain from
abusing or interfering in any way with the person or
liberty of the other party.
(b) Enjoining any party from entering the
premises wherein the other party resides upon a
showing that physical or emotional harm would
otherwise result.
. . . .
(d) Enjoining any party from harassing,
intimidating or threatening the other party . . . .
RSA 458:16, I.
The trial court found that “[c]redible evidence was . . . offered at trial that
on July 14, 2000 the Petitioner physically assaulted the Respondent.” The
court further found that “[t]he Respondent is genuinely in fear for her safety as
a result of the acts and credible threats of the Petitioner,” and that the
petitioner made additional threats to the respondent after the July 2000
incident.
At trial, the respondent testified to these threats and her fear of the
petitioner. Dr. Shulik also testified that he “had some concerns as to whether
[the petitioner] was trying to frighten his wife,” that the petitioner “did not
accept” the separation, and that the petitioner had admitted to him that he had
violated a previous restraining order.
12
The trial court is in the best position to assess the credibility of witnesses
and weigh the evidence before it. See Choy, 154 N.H. at ___, 919 A.2d at 806.
A review of the record reveals that the trial court reasonably could have found
that there was a continuing need for a restraining order. We cannot say that
the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
5. Fault Grounds for Divorce
We next address the petitioner’s argument that the trial court’s “finding
of fault grounds was against the clear weight of the evidence.” The petitioner
argues that “nothing happened, until the date of the parties’ separation [in July
2000],” and that there was “no further aggression thereafter.” Whether the
irremediable breakdown of the marriage was caused by irreconcilable
differences or the petitioner’s fault was a factual question for the trial court.
Hampers, 154 N.H. at 279. We will affirm the trial court’s factual findings
unless the evidence does not support them or they are legally erroneous. Id.
The trial court found that “the Respondent has proved, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the Petitioner’s treatment of the
Respondent during the course of the parties’ marriage constitutes treatment
which has endangered the Respondent’s health and reason within the meaning
of RSA 458:7[,] V.”
RSA 458:7 provides, in pertinent part, that the trial court shall grant a
divorce “in favor of the innocent party . . . [w]hen either party has so treated
the other as seriously to injure health or endanger reason.” RSA 458:7, V. The
statute does not require proof of conduct that would have affected an average
or reasonable person, but only that the health or reason of the complaining
spouse was actually affected. In the Matter of Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150 N.H.
551, 553 (2004).
In its narrative order, the trial court found that the following
conduct endangered the respondent’s health and reason:
[T]he Petitioner, during the parties’ marriage, was
possessive and controlling of the Respondent. . . .
. . . The Petitioner restricted the Respondent’s
freedom by isolating her from family and friends;
forbidding her to talk with neighbors and parents of
[the child’s] schoolmates; . . . and ordering her not to
speak with anyone at church. The Petitioner enforced
isolation on the Respondent by threatening to punish
[the parties’ child] for the Respondent’s “wrongdoing”.
When the Petitioner was angry with the Respondent,
13
he disabled her car or took her keys to prevent her
from going to work or from going out. On July 14,
2000, the Petitioner became enraged that the
Respondent was taking [the parties’ child] to a friend’s
home. He began screaming, disconnected the
telephones, barricaded doorways with his body,
grabbed the Respondent and [the child] so they could
not leave the parties[’] home, pushed the Respondent
and [the child] into a door and against a wall, causing
both the Respondent and [the child] to be physically
injured. Subsequent to the issuance of the restraining
order, the Petitioner threatened the Respondent by
telling her “that there are going to be some Sicilian
neckties around here.” . . . When the Petitioner was
angry with the Respondent, he would sit inside the
marital residence and shoot at targets in the back
yard. The Respondent was frightened of the Petitioner
throughout the marriage and feared that he was
capable of killing her. The actions of the Petitioner,
during the parties’ marriage, caused the Respondent
significant emotional distress, causing her to seek the
assistance of a Pastoral Counselor.
Additionally, in granting the parties’ specific requests for findings, the court
found that: (1) the petitioner denigrated, belittled and humiliated the
respondent and called her degrading names; (2) the petitioner cut off the
respondent financially when he was angry with her; and (3) without the
respondent’s knowledge and permission, the petitioner had the respondent’s
mail diverted to his post office box in Epsom.
All of these findings have support in the record, including the
respondent’s testimony and that of a psychologist. Among other things, the
psychologist testified that the petitioner was “emotionally volatile.” The trial
judge was in the best position to evaluate the evidence, measure its
persuasiveness and assess the credibility of witnesses. Id. at 554. Because
the record supports the trial court’s findings, we find no error in its decision to
grant a divorce on the ground that the petitioner so treated the respondent as
seriously to injure her health or endanger her reason. Id.
D. Firearms
1. RSA 458:16 and the Right to Bear Arms
Next, we address the petitioner’s argument that the trial court did not
have authority under RSA 458:16 to deprive him of his firearms and that such
14
deprivation violated his right to bear arms under the Federal Constitution and
Part I, Article 2-a of the New Hampshire Constitution.
The trial court’s final order continued the restraining order issued in
March 2005. The March 2005 order stated:
The Court, after having received Offers of Proof by
counsel for the Respondent and by the Petitioner,
rules and finds that:
(a) The Petitioner represents a credible threat to the
physical safety of the Respondent.
. . . .
Accordingly, pending final hearing, [the Petitioner]:
(a) Is restrained from interfering with the person or
liberty of [the Respondent], or [the parties’ daughter].
. . .
(e) Shall not make verbal or non-verbal threats to
[the Respondent] or [the parties’ daughter].
The restraining order also ordered the petitioner to relinquish all firearms and
deadly weapons and prohibited him from “purchasing or obtaining any
firearms . . . during the pendency of this Order.” The order did not cite an
authorizing statute and did not contain an expiration date.
The petitioner argues that the restraining order “appears only to be an
RSA 458:16 order” as opposed to an RSA chapter 173-B order. A restraining
order issued pursuant to RSA chapter 173-B must order the defendant to
relinquish his firearms for the duration of the order. RSA 173-B:5, I. RSA
458:16, however, provides no such explicit direction, although that statute
does provide that “the superior court may issue orders with such conditions
and limitations as the court deems just.” RSA 458:16, I. The petitioner argues
that “there is no authority” under RSA 458:16 for the dispossession of firearms.
We find, however, that the petitioner is bound by federal law. Title 18
U.S.C. § 922(g) (2000) provides, in pertinent part:
It shall be unlawful for any person—
. . .
15
(8) who is subject to a court order that—
(A) was issued after a hearing of which such
person received actual notice, and at which such
person had an opportunity to participate;
(B) restrains such person from harassing,
stalking, or threatening an intimate partner of such
person or child of such intimate partner or person,
or engaging in other conduct that would place an
intimate partner in reasonable fear of bodily injury
to the partner or child; and
(C) (i) includes a finding that such person
represents a credible threat to the physical
safety of such intimate partner or child; . . .
to . . . possess in or affecting commerce, any firearm or
ammunition; or to receive any firearm or ammunition
which has been shipped or transported in interstate or
foreign commerce.
18 U.S.C. § 922(g).
As used in this provision, “[t]he term ‘intimate partner’ means, with
respect to a person, the spouse of the person, a former spouse of the person,
an individual who is a parent of a child of the person, and an individual who
cohabitates or has cohabited with the person.” 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(32) (2000).
The March 2005 restraining order was issued by the trial court after
having received offers of proof from both parties. This order was continued in
the court’s final divorce order, which was preceded by four days of testimony
during which the petitioner fully participated. Further, the order prohibits the
petitioner from making “verbal or non-verbal threats” to the respondent or the
parties’ daughter. Finally, the order specifically states that “[t]he Petitioner
represents a credible threat to the physical safety of the Respondent.” As a
matter of law, therefore, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8) prohibits the petitioner from
possessing firearms and ammunition during the pendency of the restraining
order. See State v. S.A., 675 A.2d 678, 684 (N.J. Super. 1996). Accordingly,
the trial court was within its discretion to prohibit the petitioner from
possessing firearms since 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8) requires such a result.
We also find that the petitioner failed to raise his constitutional
arguments in a manner that would have afforded the trial court the
16
opportunity to consider them. State v. Howe, 145 N.H. 41, 43 (2000). The
record before us is devoid of any mention of the Second Amendment to the
Federal Constitution or Part I, Article 2-a of the New Hampshire Constitution.
The petitioner never raised his right to bear arms during trial and the record
does not contain a motion to reconsider filed by the petitioner which raises this
issue. Because we will not review on appeal constitutional issues not
presented below, we decline to review the constitutional dimension of the
petitioner's arguments. Id.
2. RSA 458:16-a
Finally, we address whether the trial court properly ordered the
petitioner to sell his firearms. In the final divorce order, the trial court ordered
“[a]ll of [the petitioner’s] firearms and other weapons shall be sold forthwith,
and the proceeds thereof shall be awarded to [the petitioner].” The petitioner
argues that under RSA 458:16-a, the trial court is authorized to distribute
marital property, but cannot “order a sale . . . just for the sake of the sale.” We
agree.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
legislature's intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. State v. MacMillan, 152 N.H. 67, 70 (2005). When examining the
language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words
used. In the Matter of Beal & Beal, 153 N.H. 349, 350 (2006). The plain
language of RSA 458:16-a authorizes trial courts to distribute marital property
between the parties. Id. The trial court’s order requiring the sale of the
firearms, however, was not for purposes of dividing the proceeds between the
parties. See Hazen v. Hazen, 122 N.H. 836, 838 (1982) (master ordered sale of
marital residence with proceeds divided between the parties). Instead, the trial
court awarded the proceeds in their entirety to the petitioner. This is beyond
the scope of the trial court’s authority under RSA 458:16-a. Cf. Beal, 153 N.H.
at 350 (holding trial court cannot order sale of assets to pay creditors). In so
holding, however, we do not foreclose any other disposition of the firearms,
necessary for the proper division of the assets, consistent with this opinion and
state and federal law. See 18 U.S.C. § 922(g). Accordingly, we reverse and
remand the portion of the trial court’s order requiring the petitioner to sell the
firearms.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
17