THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hooksett District Court
No. 2005-912
PLOURDE SAND & GRAVEL CO.
v.
JGI EASTERN, INC. f/k/a JAWORSKI GEOTECH, INC.
Argued: October 18, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 16, 2007
Hall, Morse, Anderson, Miller & Spinella, P.C., of Concord (Frank P.
Spinella, Jr. on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Donovan Hatem LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Jeffrey L. Alitz and
Adam M. Nee on the brief, and Mr. Alitz orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Plourde Sand & Gravel Co., appeals the decision
of the Hooksett District Court (LaPointe, J.) dismissing its writ. We affirm.
The plaintiff’s writ alleges the following facts. Hiltz Construction, Inc.
(Hiltz), a subcontractor for a private construction project in Pembroke, hired
the plaintiff to supply gravel for purposes of constructing the base for a
roadway. After the plaintiff supplied the gravel, Keach Nordstrom & Associates
(Keach), engineers hired by the Town of Pembroke, hired the defendant, JGI
Eastern, Inc., to test the gravel to determine whether it met town specifications.
The defendant tested the gravel, and reported to Keach that it contained
“insufficient stone content and excessive fines.” As a result, Hiltz required the
plaintiff to remove and replace the gravel at its own expense with material that
met town specifications. After doing so, the plaintiff tested the gravel and
found that it did in fact meet town specifications.
The plaintiff sued the defendant in tort. Specifically, the plaintiff
claimed:
[T]hat defendant’s negligence foreseeably injured
plaintiff in that defendant knew or should have known
that the town’s engineer would rely upon results
provided by defendant and would, if those results
showed that applicable tests were not passed, require
removal of the roadway and replacement of the base
materials; that defendant’s negligence was a proximate
cause of the harm to plaintiff, who is entitled to
recover same [sic].
The defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that the damages sought are purely
economic losses which are not recoverable in tort. Recognizing that it was
undisputed that the plaintiff’s writ alleged only economic loss damages and
that there was no contractual privity between the plaintiff and the defendant,
the court granted the defendant’s motion to dismiss.
The plaintiff appeals, arguing: (1) the economic loss doctrine does not
apply since there is no contractual privity with the defendant; or (2) section
552 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts affords an exception to the economic
loss doctrine, permitting recovery because the defendant made a negligent
misrepresentation. The defendant responds that the negligent
misrepresentation exception is not properly before us because it was not pled
in the plaintiff’s writ and was not raised in the notice of appeal.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to
dismiss, our task is to ascertain whether the
allegations [pled] in the plaintiff’s writ are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. We assume all facts [pled] in the plaintiff’s
writ are true, and we construe all reasonable
inferences drawn from those facts in the plaintiff’s
favor. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that
tests the facts in the complaint against the applicable
law.
Berry v. Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc., 152 N.H. 407, 410 (2005) (quotations
and citations omitted).
2
I. The Economic Loss Doctrine
The economic loss doctrine is a common law rule that emerged with the
advent of products liability. Farmers Alliance Mut. Ins. Co. v. Naylor, 452 F.
Supp. 2d 1167, 1172 (D.N.M. 2006). While some states generally limit its
application to products liability cases, Moransais v. Heathman, 744 So. 2d 973,
983 (Fla. 1999), many other states, including New Hampshire, have expanded
its application to other tort cases. Lempke v. Dagenais, 130 N.H. 782, 792
(1988); Farmers Alliance, 452 F. Supp. 2d at 1172-73.
The doctrine is a “judicially-created remedies principle that operates
generally to preclude contracting parties from pursuing tort recovery for purely
economic or commercial losses associated with the contract relationship.”
Tietsworth v. Harley-Davidson, Inc., 677 N.W.2d 233, 241 (Wis. 2004).
The economic loss doctrine is based on an
understanding that contract law and the law of
warranty, in particular, is better suited than tort law
for dealing with purely economic loss in the
commercial arena. If a contracting party is permitted
to sue in tort when a transaction does not work out as
expected, that party is in effect rewriting the
agreement to obtain a benefit that was not part of the
bargain.
Id. at 242 (quotations, citation and brackets omitted). Thus, where a plaintiff
may recover economic loss under a contract, generally a cause of action in tort
for purely economic loss will not lie. Cf. Ellis v. Robert C. Morris, Inc., 128
N.H. 358, 363 (1986), overruled on other grounds by Lempke, 130 N.H. 782.
However, where a duty that lies outside the terms of the contract is
owed, many states allow a plaintiff to recover economic loss in tort against the
defendant contracting party. Ellis, 128 N.H. at 363; see also Griffin Plumbing
& Heating v. Jordan, 463 S.E.2d 85, 88 (S.C. 1995); Congregation of the
Passion v. Touche Ross, 636 N.E.2d 503, 514 (Ill.), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 947
(1994). “[W]hen an independent duty exists, the economic loss rule does not
bar a tort claim because the claim is based on a recognized independent duty
of care and thus does not fall within the scope of the rule.” Farmers Alliance,
452 F. Supp. 2d at 1174 (quotations omitted). In such a case, there is privity
among the parties, yet an independent duty in tort owed by the defendant.
The analysis becomes more complicated in claims between a plaintiff and
a defendant who have no contractual relationship and hence no privity between
them. A few courts hold that since the principle behind the economic loss
doctrine is to prevent tort law’s unreasonable interference with principles of
contract law, the economic loss doctrine does not apply where there is no
3
contractual relationship, and thus no privity between the parties. See Trinity
Lutheran v. Dorschner Excavating, 710 N.W.2d 680, 683 (Wis. Ct. App. 2006);
Indemnity Ins. Co. v. American Aviation, 891 So. 2d 532, 534 (Fla. 2004).
Many courts, however, have expanded the economic loss doctrine to bar
economic recovery in tort cases where there is no contract and thus no privity.
See, e.g., Anderson Elec. v. Ledbetter Erection Corp., 503 N.E.2d 246, 249 (Ill.
1986) (“A plaintiff seeking to recover purely economic losses due to defeated
expectations of a commercial bargain cannot recover in tort, regardless of the
plaintiff’s inability to recover under an action in contract.”). The policy behind
this principle is to prevent potentially limitless liability for economic losses:
“[While] [t]he physical consequences of negligence usually have been limited,
. . . the indirect economic repercussions of negligence may be far wider, indeed
virtually open-ended.” 4 F. Harper et al., The Law of Torts § 25.18A at 623 (2d
ed. 1986).
Other courts recognize exceptions to this rule, and permit economic loss
recovery in tort despite the lack of privity where there is: (1) a “special
relationship” between the plaintiff and the defendant that creates a duty owed
by the defendant, Griffin, 463 S.E.2d at 87; or (2) a negligent misrepresentation
made by a defendant who is in the business of supplying information.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 552(1), at 126 (1976) (“Information Negligently
Supplied for the Guidance of Others”).
The plaintiff argues that we should follow the contractual relationship
analysis and decline to apply the economic loss rule because the plaintiff is not
in privity with the defendant and therefore cannot recover its economic loss in
an action for breach of contract. We have never applied this principle before
and decline to do so here.
In New Hampshire, the general rule is that “persons must refrain from
causing personal injury and property damage to third parties, but no
corresponding tort duty exists with respect to economic loss.” Ellis, 128 N.H.
at 364; see also Border Brook Terrace Condo. Assoc. v. Gladstone, 137 N.H. 11,
18 (1993) (“[A] plaintiff may not ordinarily recover in a negligence claim for
purely ‘economic loss.’”).
However, we recognize that a cause of action in tort for economic
damages may be maintained under the “special relationship” or negligent
misrepresentation exceptions to the privity rule. Spherex, Inc. v. Alexander
Grant & Co., 122 N.H. 898, 903 (1982) (“Our reluctance to apply the privity
rule has extended to allowing a proper plaintiff to recover for mere financial
loss resulting from the negligent performance of services.”). However, if the
plaintiff cannot establish at least one of these exceptions, its claim for
economic loss is barred.
4
A. Special Relationship Exception
“[A] growing number of states have refused to apply the ‘economic loss’
rule to actions against design professionals when there is a ‘special
relationship’ between the design professional and the contractor.” Griffin, 463
S.E.2d at 87. This is sometimes referred to as the “professional negligence”
exception. 4 S. Speiser et al., The American Law of Torts § 15:117, at 856-57
(1987).
Such a relationship is different from that required in a traditional
negligence claim, since the plaintiff in tort is alleging economic loss, a recovery
that is traditionally allowed only in contract. We have likened the duty owed in
such a relationship to that owed by a promisor to an intended third-party
beneficiary: “[A] third-party beneficiary relationship exists if the contract is so
expressed as to give the promisor reason to know that a benefit to a third party
is contemplated by the promisee as one of the motivating causes of his making
the contract.” Spherex, 122 N.H. at 903 (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
Whether such a duty exists must be determined on a case by case basis.
In Robinson v. Colebrook Savings Bank, 109 N.H. 382 (1969), we held
that a beneficiary may bring a negligence action for financial loss against a
bank which failed to establish a survivorship account at the request of the
depositor. We adopted the exception to the privity requirement because:
[A] relation created by contract may impose a duty to
exercise care. In general, the scope of such a duty is
limited to those in privity of contract with each other.
However[,] considerations of public policy have
prompted the recognition of exceptions to this rule, as
where the . . . risk to persons not in privity is
apparent.
Id. at 384-85 (citation omitted). We have applied this principle to attorneys,
Simpson v. Calivas, 139 N.H. 1, 4-5 (1994) (“an attorney who drafts a testator’s
will owes a duty of reasonable care to intended beneficiaries”), and insurance
investigators, Morvay v. Hanover Ins. Cos., 127 N.H. 723, 726 (1986)
(“investigators owe a duty to the insured as well as to the insurer”).
These cases hinge upon the presence of an independent duty owed to the
plaintiff because of the nature of the “special relationship” with the defendant.
They are narrow exceptions to the rule and properly so. We have declined to
extend the special relationship principle beyond the circumstances in the
above-cited cases. Indeed, in MacMillan v. Scheffy, 147 N.H. 362, 364 (2001),
we limited the liability for economic loss placed upon attorneys: “[F]or a
nonclient to succeed in a negligence action against an attorney, he must prove
that the primary purpose and intent of the attorney-client relationship itself
5
was to benefit or influence the third party.” (Quotation omitted.) See also
Sisson v. Jankowski, 148 N.H. 503, 509 (2002) (declining to impose liability on
attorney where plaintiff claimed attorney was negligent in failing to execute the
will before testator’s death).
Further, we have declined several times to extend this principle into the
construction arena to permit economic loss recovery against contractors. Ellis,
128 N.H. at 366 (finding subsequent purchasers of a home may not maintain
an action in tort for damages to their home against the original builder). In
Lempke, we permitted the subsequent purchasers’ claim for economic loss
against the defendant builder on an implied warranty theory, but held that
“[t]he policy arguments relied upon in Ellis for precluding tort recovery for
economic loss . . . remain controlling on the negligence claim.” Lempke, 130
N.H. at 784; see also Border Brook, 137 N.H. at 18 (no recovery in negligence
for economic loss against corporate owners of condominium complex).
Here, the relationship of the parties and the facts before the trial court
differ dramatically from any case that has heretofore warranted application of
an exception to the privity requirement for economic loss recovery. For
example, there is a distinct and articulable relationship between an attorney
and a will beneficiary or an insurance investigator and the insured. In those
cases, it is reasonable to allow the plaintiff to recover economic losses against
the defendant who, although hired by another party, can reasonably foresee
the effect his negligence will have on the third party. In contrast, there is no
“special relationship” between the parties in this case; indeed, there is no
relationship at all.
The defendant was hired by Keach, the engineer hired by the town to
ensure the private project complied with town specifications. The plaintiff was
hired by Hiltz, who in turn was hired by the general contractor. We reject the
plaintiff’s invitation to impose a duty on the defendant in such a situation.
Were we to do so, there is no principled limit to liability. See Ultramares
Corporation v. Touche, 174 N.E. 441, 444 (N.Y. 1931) (expressing concern that
liability could be extended to “an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate
time to an indeterminate class”).
Moreover, permitting economic loss recovery in tort here would blur the
distinction between contract and tort law. The plaintiff is essentially alleging
that the defendant negligently performed its duties under its contract with
another party and that as a result, the plaintiff has lost the benefit of its
bargain with Hiltz. See Feinman, The Economic Loss Rule and Private
Ordering, 48 Ariz. L. Rev. 813, 814 (2006) (“[Where] the defendant and its
partner have allocated the risks and benefits of performance in their contract,
. . . the court upsets that allocation when it imposes [tort] liability on the
defendant.”). This principle was the basis for denying tort liability in Anderson.
In that case, Anderson, a subcontractor for a project in which Ledbetter was
6
the contractor, filed suit against Walther, who was hired by Ledbetter in part to
inspect Anderson’s electrical work. Anderson, 503 N.E.2d at 246-47. Walther
failed to inspect the work, but reported that the work was improperly done,
resulting in Ledbetter requiring Anderson to redo the work at a loss to
Anderson. Id. at 247. Anderson sued Walther in negligence, seeking recovery
for economic damages. Id. The court affirmed the dismissal of Anderson’s
claim because Anderson sought “purely economic losses due to defeated
expectations of a commercial bargain,” which is not recoverable in tort. Id. at
249. In a special concurrence, one Justice emphasized the importance of
relying on contract law to resolve such disputes:
[A]ny expectations Anderson may have had with regard
to Walther’s inspections are rooted in its contract with
Ledbetter, and it follows that both the scope of legally
protected expectations and any remedies for the
disappointment of those expectations must also find
their roots in Anderson’s commercial agreement . . . .
Moreover, allowing Anderson to proceed in tort might
subject Walther to a higher standard of care and
greater potential liability than Walther had intended to
undertake when it entered into its contractual
relationship with Ledbetter.
Id. at 250-51 (Simon, J., concurring specially).
We apply the same principle here. As in Anderson, the plaintiff’s
expectations are rooted in its contract with Hiltz. The economic loss the
plaintiff suffered in removing and replacing the gravel arose “solely from
disappointed commercial expectations” in that the plaintiff “lost the anticipated
profits of its contract” with Hiltz. Id. at 249. Imposing a tort duty upon the
defendant in this case would disrupt the contractual relationships between and
among the various parties. This we are unwilling to do. Accordingly, we find
no “special relationship” between the plaintiff and the defendant such that the
defendant owed to the plaintiff an independent duty in tort to prevent economic
loss.
B. Negligent Misrepresentation Exception
The defendant argues that the negligent misrepresentation claim is not
properly before this court because it was not pled in the plaintiff’s writ and was
not raised in the notice of appeal. We disagree.
The plaintiff’s writ alleges that the defendant negligently inspected the
gravel and reported these results to Keach knowing that Keach would rely upon
them. Further, the plaintiff cites negligent misrepresentation cases in its
objection to the defendant’s motion to dismiss and the district court’s order
7
addresses this issue. Therefore, this issue was raised below. It was also
sufficiently raised in the notice of appeal, where the plaintiff framed one of the
questions as: “Whether purely economic loss is recoverable in tort, in the
absence of privity of contract, from a professional engineer whose negligence
foreseeably caused harm to the plaintiff.” Supreme Court Rule 16(3)(b)
provides: “The statement of a question presented will be deemed to include
every subsidiary question fairly comprised therein.” Since the plaintiff argues
that negligent misrepresentation is an exception to the economic loss doctrine,
we hold that this issue may be considered a subsidiary question. See State v.
Jimenez, 137 N.H. 450, 452 (1993). Accordingly, the plaintiff’s negligent
misrepresentation argument is properly before us.
Negligent misrepresentation is a recognized exception to the economic
loss doctrine that has been adopted by some courts. Restatement (Second) of
Torts § 552, at 126-27. Where such a claim is made, a plaintiff is permitted to
seek recovery for economic loss regardless of privity. Id.
One who, in the course of his business, profession or
employment, or in any other transaction in which he
has a pecuniary interest, supplies false information for
the guidance of others in their business transactions,
is subject to liability for pecuniary loss caused to them
by their justifiable reliance upon the information, if he
fails to exercise reasonable care or competence in
obtaining or communicating the information.
Id. § 552(1). However, a negligent misrepresentation claim in the context of the
economic loss doctrine is narrower than the traditional tort claim. Id. § 552
comment a at 127 (“When the harm that is caused is only pecuniary loss, the
courts have found it necessary to adopt a more restricted rule of liability,
because of the extent to which misinformation may be, and may be expected to
be, circulated, and the magnitude of the losses which may follow from reliance
upon it.”).
We first relied upon section 552 in Spherex, in which we affirmed the
imposition of tort liability on an accounting firm for damages suffered by the
plaintiff, a third party creditor who relied upon unaudited financial statements
prepared by the firm. Spherex, 122 N.H. 898. Focusing our analysis upon
“whether the defendant has some special reason to anticipate the reliance of
the plaintiff,” id. at 903 (quotation omitted), we observed that “section 552 of
the Restatement represents a reasoned approach to the issue of professional
liability for negligent misrepresentation.” Id. at 904.
In Demetracopoulos v. Wilson, 138 N.H. 371 (1994), another case of
alleged accountant negligence, we limited the application of section 552.
Quoting from Spherex, we reiterated that “‘[the] law must not arbitrarily extend
8
. . . liability beyond the accountant’s reasonable expectations as to whom the
information will reach.’” Demetracopoulos, 138 N.H. at 375 (quoting Spherex,
122 N.H. at 905 (brackets omitted)). We held that the defendant accountant
was not liable to the plaintiff, who had been fired after the accountant
submitted a report to his employer that the plaintiff had entered into an
unauthorized employment contract. Id. at 373, 375. Since the defendant’s
report “was not intended for the plaintiff’s ‘benefit and guidance’” and the
plaintiff “did not rely or act upon the report,” the plaintiff could not support a
claim for negligent misrepresentation under section 552. Id. at 375.
Like Demetracopoulos, this case does not give rise to a claim for
negligent misrepresentation. The defendant’s only communication regarding
the quality of the gravel was to Keach, the engineer for the town. This
information was then communicated through several additional parties before
reaching the plaintiff. While Keach may have relied upon the report made by
the defendant, the plaintiff does not claim, nor can it, that it relied upon the
report. Because there was no reliance by the plaintiff, the plaintiff cannot
maintain a claim for negligent misrepresentation. See Restatement (Second) of
Torts § 552; see also Hall v. United Parcel Service, 555 N.E.2d 273, 276 (N.Y.
1990) (“[T]he injury arose not as a result of the injured’s reliance on negligently
made statements but rather as a result of the direct impact that those
statements had on the injured party’s business and personal life.”).
We will not expand the elements of negligent misrepresentation to
include a scenario where reliance by anyone directly or indirectly involved may
be imputed to the plaintiff so as to permit the plaintiff to maintain a cause of
action. We have rejected claims for negligent misrepresentation absent reliance
before. See Tober’s Inc. v. Portsmouth Housing Auth., 116 N.H. 660, 663
(1976); see also Bronstein v. GZA GeoEnvironmental, 140 N.H. 253, 256-57
(1995) (finding no claim under section 552 where it was not reasonably
foreseeable that plaintiffs would rely upon the prepared report). Therefore, we
hold that the plaintiff has failed to establish a claim for negligent
misrepresentation.
Because the plaintiff cannot establish a valid exception to the economic
loss doctrine, the district court did not err in granting the defendant’s motion
to dismiss.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
9