THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2005-490
APPEAL OF WHITE MOUNTAIN REGIONAL SCHOOL DISTRICT
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: May 17, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 29, 2006
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward & Loughman, of Salem (Michael S. Elwell
and Jill A. Desrochers on the brief, and Mr. Elwell orally), for the appellant.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, staff attorney, NEA-New Hampshire,
by brief and orally, for the appellee, White Mountain Regional Education
Association, NEA-New Hampshire.
HICKS, J. The appellant, White Mountain Regional School District
(district), appeals a ruling of the New Hampshire Public Employee Labor
Relations Board (PELRB) that it committed an unfair labor practice under RSA
273-A:5 (1999). The PELRB ruled that the district breached its collective
bargaining agreement with the appellee, White Mountain Regional Education
Association (association), when it issued letters of renewal with reservations to
several of its teachers and required them to develop improvement plans for the
upcoming school year. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The association is the exclusive
representative of teachers employed by the district. The association and the
district were parties to a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) in effect from
July 1, 2002, to June 30, 2004. In April 2004, several tenured teachers
employed by the district were given letters of renewal with reservations by the
superintendent of schools. These letters informed the teachers that they were
renominated for employment for the upcoming school year, but with
reservations about their performance. The letters further stated that the
teachers were required to prepare improvement plans before the end of the
2003-2004 school year.
The association filed an unfair labor practice complaint with the PELRB,
alleging that the district unilaterally changed the procedures outlined in the
CBA concerning teacher evaluation and performance reviews. The association
relied upon article XVI of the CBA, entitled “Employee Evaluation,” which
details the procedures for evaluating teacher performance and providing
feedback. It provides that tenured teachers are to be observed at least once per
year, with discretion to the administration to conduct additional visits. A
written evaluation must be prepared and placed in the teacher’s file as a result
of the observation, and a copy must be provided to the teacher.
The district maintained that its actions were consistent with the terms of
the CBA, the past policies of the district, and RSA 189:14-a, III (Supp. 2005),
which requires, among other things, notice to teachers that “unsatisfactory
performance may lead to nonrenomination.” The PELRB disagreed, ruling that
the district breached the parties’ CBA by using new procedures to
communicate teacher deficiencies. It ordered the district to remove all evidence
of the letters and improvement plans from the teachers’ files. The district
redacted certain portions of the teachers’ files in accordance with the PELRB
order and filed this appeal.
On appeal, the district argues that: (1) the PELRB’s decision is contrary
to RSA 189:14-a; (2) the CBA impliedly permits it to issue such letters and to
require improvement plans; and (3) its actions constituted “managerial policy
within the exclusive prerogative of the public employer” under RSA 273-A:1, XI
(Supp. 2005).
Our review standard is governed by RSA 541:13 (1997). The PELRB’s
findings of fact are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable, and its decision
will be set aside only for errors of law or if it is shown to be unjust or
unreasonable by a clear preponderance of the evidence. Appeal of State of
N.H., 138 N.H. 716, 719 (1994).
Following submission of the briefs but prior to oral argument, the
association moved to dismiss this case as moot due to the expiration of the old
agreement. Specifically, the association asserted that the case is moot because
the teachers affected by the actions of the district were renewed and are under
a new CBA that specifically addresses improvement plans. The new CBA,
however, does not resolve whether the letters of renewal with reservations and
2
improvement plans must remain redacted from the teachers’ files. Accordingly,
we deny the appellee’s motion and address the merits of the appeal.
The district first argues that the PELRB’s decision is contrary to RSA
189:14-a, III (Supp. 2005) because this statute obligated the district to issue
renewals with reservations in order to provide notice to the teachers that they
may not be renewed. We disagree.
RSA 189:14-a, III became effective on August 29, 2003, and provides
that:
In cases of nonrenomination because of unsatisfactory
performance, the superintendent of the local school district shall
demonstrate, at the school board hearing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the teacher had received written notice that the
teacher’s unsatisfactory performance may lead to
nonrenomination, that the teacher had a reasonable opportunity to
correct such unsatisfactory performance, and that the teacher had
failed to correct such unsatisfactory performance.
RSA 189:14-a. The district asserts that this statute applied to the CBA on
August 29, 2003, and therefore the district was required to take the action it
did in order to comply with the terms of the statute in anticipation of the
eventual nonrenomination of the teachers. The association counters that the
provisions of this statute do not apply because of RSA 273-A:4 (Supp. 2005),
which addresses arbitration and other binding resolution provisions under
grievance procedures adopted under a collective bargaining agreement.
RSA 273-A:4 provides that:
Every agreement negotiated under the terms of this chapter
shall be reduced to writing and shall contain workable grievance
procedures. No grievance resulting from the failure of a teacher to
be renewed pursuant to RSA 189:14-a shall be subject to
arbitration or any other binding resolution, except as provided by
RSA 189:14-a and RSA 189:14-b. Any such provision in force as
of the effective date of this section shall be null and void upon the
expiration date of that collective bargaining agreement.
RSA 273-A:4. The “effective date of this section” was August 29, 2003. See
Laws 2003, 204:5. The association asserts that the last sentence of this
statute precluded application of RSA 189:14-a until the CBA expired on June
30, 2004.
While RSA 189:14-a is not directly applicable to this case because the
teachers were all renominated, we recognize the district’s concern that were the
3
teachers not renominated for the following school year, the renewals with
reservations policy would be evaluated to determine if it complied with the
requirements of the statute. However, we hold that the notice provisions of
RSA 189:14-a did not apply to the parties’ CBA, which was already in existence
at the time the notice provisions became effective. This dispute arose in April
2004, while the 2002-2004 CBA was in effect. An amendment to an existing
law that affects existing contract rights is presumed to operate prospectively
unless the language of the amendment or surrounding circumstances express
a contrary legislative intent. Hayes v. LeBlanc, 114 N.H. 141, 144 (1974). We
find no such language or circumstances here indicating that RSA 189:14-a was
intended to affect existing contract rights. Indeed, the companion amendment
to RSA 273-A:4 demonstrates the legislature’s intent not to affect existing
contract rights – the amendment specifically provides that its prohibition of
arbitration or other binding resolutions does not apply to existing CBAs prior to
their expiration dates. Therefore, we conclude that the language in RSA
189:14-a regarding procedures for notifying teachers of unsatisfactory
performance did not apply to the district until the expiration of the CBA in
June 2004. Accordingly, the district was under no obligation to comply with its
provisions.
Next, the district argues that the PELRB’s decision was contrary to the
parties’ CBA because letters of renewal with reservations and improvement
plans are impliedly permitted by its provisions. Article XVI of the CBA requires
tenured teachers to be observed at least once per year, allows multiple
observations at the administration’s discretion and requires a written
evaluation document to be prepared within ten days following such
observations. The district contends that because this provision does not
expressly preclude “the use of improvement plans and notices of reservations,”
it is free to utilize such measures. The PELRB disagreed, ruling that: “[W]e do
not see a negotiated right flowing to the District to unilaterally abandon the
multiple observation device and instead issuing a conditional renewal and, in
addition, adding the requirement of participation in an undefined improvement
plan that is not allowed under the terms of the CBA.” We agree with the
PELRB.
The terms of the CBA are clear regarding the procedures to be used when
evaluating teachers and communicating teacher deficiencies. When the district
issued letters of renewal with reservations and required improvement plans, it
failed to follow the procedures of the CBA, which already provided procedures
for teacher recommendations and improvement.
Once parties to a CBA have chosen to bargain over matters not otherwise
prohibited from negotiation, the parties must abide by the agreement entered
into during the term of the CBA. Appeal of Pittsfield School Dist., 144 N.H.
536, 540 (1999). In Pittsfield, we held that the Pittsfield School District was
bound to follow the ten procedures laid out in the CBA regarding teacher
4
evaluations and could not unilaterally adopt and enforce a new plan. Id. We
reach the same conclusion here because the record supports the PELRB’s
finding that the terms of the CBA did not reserve to the district the right to
implement different procedures for addressing teacher performance and
evaluations. By doing so, the district failed to follow the express provisions of
the CBA.
Similarly, the savings clause of the CBA cannot be used by the district to
support its actions. The savings clause provides that school board policies in
use as of the effective date of the CBA are applicable so long as the policies are
not restricted by provisions of the CBA. The record supports the PELRB’s
ruling that the savings clause does not apply because the CBA provides for the
procedures to be followed when addressing teacher evaluations and
performance reviews. Letters of renewal with reservations issued directly by
the Superintendent without any warning or feedback from the teachers are
contrary to the evaluation and recommendation procedures identified in the
CBA. Accordingly, we reject the district’s argument that its conduct can be
justified by past policies.
Finally, the district asserts that the letters of renewal with reservations
and required improvement plans fall within the managerial policy exception
defined in RSA 273-A:1, XI, thereby permitting the district to unilaterally
implement these procedures without negotiation. The association counters
that teacher evaluation procedures affect the terms and conditions of
employment, which is a mandatory subject of bargaining.
RSA 273-A:1, XI exempts managerial policy from mandatory negotiation.
The statute provides:
“Terms and conditions of employment” means wages, hours
and other conditions of employment other than managerial policy
within the exclusive prerogative of the public employer, or confided
exclusively to the public employer by statute or regulations
adopted pursuant to statute. The phrase “managerial policy within
the exclusive prerogative of the public employer” shall be
construed to include but shall not be limited to the functions,
programs and methods of the public employer, including the use of
technology, the public employer’s organizational structure, and the
selection, direction and number of its personnel, so as to continue
public control of governmental functions.
RSA 273-A:1, XI. In Appeal of State of N.H., we clarified the managerial policy
exception and established a three-part test to determine whether negotiation of
a proposal is mandatory, permissible or prohibited. Appeal of State of N.H.,
138 N.H. at 722. In order for a proposal to be a prohibited subject of
bargaining, and therefore fall under the managerial policy exception, the
5
subject matter of the proposal must be reserved to the exclusive managerial
authority of the public employer by the constitution, or by statute or statutorily
adopted regulation. Id.
The PELRB ruled, without discussion, that the conduct of the district
does not fall under the managerial policy exception. We agree. RSA 273-A:1,
XI does not expressly except from bargaining teacher evaluation and
performance review procedures. See Pittsfield, 144 N.H. at 539-40. The
renewals with reservations and required improvement plans do not involve
procedures for hiring teachers or the standards by which teacher improvement
will be assessed and therefore do not affect matters of managerial policy. Id. at
540. Accordingly, we reject the district’s argument that its actions are within
the “exclusive prerogative of the public employer” affecting the “selection” and
“direction” of its personnel. RSA 273-A:1, XI.
The district further argues that even if its actions are not considered
managerial policy, the procedures at issue are not mandatory subjects of
bargaining and that since the CBA is silent on the matter, the district is
permitted to implement them. The association counters that the procedures
involve “terms and conditions of employment” which are mandatory subjects of
bargaining that cannot be unilaterally implemented without negotiation.
Appeal of State of N.H., 138 N.H. at 722.
On the record before us, we decline to decide whether the procedures at
issue in this case are “terms and conditions of employment.” As we stated
above, the CBA expressly provides for teacher evaluation and performance
review procedures. By utilizing new procedures in this area, the district
breached the specific provisions of the CBA. Because the procedures at issue
are not prohibited subjects of bargaining under the managerial policy
exception, and the parties chose to negotiate in this area, they are bound by
the terms of the CBA. Pittsfield, 144 N.H. at 540. Thus, the PELRB correctly
applied applicable precedent. See id.; see also Appeal of State of N.H., 138
N.H. at 722.
Accordingly, we uphold the PELRB’s ruling that the district breached the
parties’ CBA and that the April 2004 letters of renewal with reservations and
improvement plans must be removed from the teachers’ files.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
6