THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-934
GAIL C. NADEAU 1994 TRUST & a.
v.
CITY OF PORTSMOUTH & a.
Argued: March 15, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2007
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and
Laurie A. Lacoste on the brief, and Mr. Shaines orally), and Nadeau Law
Offices, P.L.L.C., of Portsmouth (J.P. Nadeau and Justin P. Nadeau on the
brief), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Anne M. Edwards, associate attorney
general, and Laura E. B. Lombardi, assistant attorney general, on the brief,
and Ms. Edwards orally), for respondent State of New Hampshire.
BRODERICK, C.J. The State appeals an order of the Superior Court
(McHugh, J.) ruling that tax assessments made under the education property
tax, RSA 76:3 (2003), for tax years 2002, 2003 and 2004 were
unconstitutionally disproportionate. We reverse.
The petitioners own commercial and residential real estate in the City of
Portsmouth and the Town of Rye. This case consolidates four actions brought
by the petitioners appealing denials of tax abatement applications filed
pursuant to RSA 76:16 (Supp. 2006). The petitioners claimed that the
education property tax assessed pursuant to RSA 76:3 and :8 (2003 & Supp.
2007) is disproportionate in violation of Part II, Article 5 of the New Hampshire
Constitution. The trial court joined the State of New Hampshire as a
respondent pursuant to RSA 514:10 (2007) because the petitioners challenged
the constitutionality of the tax.
Following a bench trial, the court ruled that the petitioners’ tax
assessments for the 2002 tax year were unconstitutionally disproportionate
and evidenced a widespread scheme of intentional discrimination. Upon
motion by the petitioners, the trial court subsequently ruled that, based upon
the evidence regarding the assessments for tax years 2003 and 2004, the
constitutional defects in the tax as applied to tax year 2002 were present for
those tax years as well. The State appeals, arguing that the trial court: (1)
erred by ruling that the petitioners are not required to prove that they are
paying more than their proportionate share of the property tax; (2) erred in
determining that the tax, as applied to the petitioners, violated Part II, Article 5
of the State Constitution; and (3) lacked jurisdiction to declare the tax
unconstitutional.
The trial court’s order recognizes at the outset that
[t]he plaintiffs’ appeals are not conventional in the sense that
they do not claim their individual assessments are higher than
similar properties in their municipalities. In fact, they never
introduced their individual assessments into evidence.
Rather, they focused on the alleged unequal property values in
their [own] and other municipalities as resulting in their
having to pay an unfair amount of the statewide educational
property tax.
Nevertheless, the trial court found that our decision in Sirrell v. State, 146 N.H.
364 (2001), “appears to permit a collateral attack on general as well as
individual property assessments.” The trial court reasoned that because the
plaintiffs in Sirrell used the same approach as the petitioners in this case,
“namely . . . claiming that because property in several communities was
appraised at both less and more than its fair market value, and because of the
[department of revenue administration]’s fundamentally flawed equalization
process, they were forced to pay an unequal and unfair share of the statewide
property tax burden.” Accordingly, the trial court ruled that it is not a
“prerequisite of a tax abatement appeal” that a property owner present
2
“evidence of his or her own property’s fair market value and then a comparison
of that value with the municipality’s assessment.” Rather, the trial court ruled:
The property owner can in fact make the general arguments
that the plaintiffs make in this case. The burden remains with
the property owner to show actual harm. However, that harm
can be shown by proving widespread disparity in and between
municipalities. The plaintiffs are not required to meet their
burden by focusing in on the particular assessment placed on
their property.
Pursuant to RSA 76:17 (2003), the superior court in an abatement
proceeding “shall make such order thereon as justice requires.” We have
consistently held that in granting an abatement, “justice requires” more than
simply determining that a tax is unlawful, because that would merely shift the
plaintiff’s tax burden to other taxpayers. See Bretton Woods Co. v. Carroll, 84
N.H. 428, 430-31 (1930); Porter v. Town of Sandwich, 153 N.H. 175, 177
(2006). “Since Bretton Woods, we have repeatedly reaffirmed that the issue in
an abatement proceeding is whether the government has taxed the plaintiff out
of proportion to other property owners in the taxing district.” Porter, 153 N.H.
at 177. Accordingly, in order to prevail in a petition for abatement, the
petitioner must “prove that his tax was greater than it should have been with
respect to the taxes of other property owners in the taxing district.” Ainsworth
v. Claremont, 106 N.H. 85, 87 (1964). Therefore, “[t]he question to be tried is
whether the petitioner is unlawfully or unjustly taxed as between him and the
other taxpayers.” Id.
In this case, the trial court did not find that the petitioners had proved
that their “property is assessed at a higher percentage of fair market value than
the percentage at which property is generally assessed in the [State].” Porter v.
Town of Sanbornton, 150 N.H. 363, 368 (2003). Rather, the trial court found
that the petitioners had met their burden of showing disproportionality simply
by proving “a widespread disparity between the purchase price of property in
sales occurring in close proximity to April 1, 2002 in four communities and the
assessments the municipalities placed on those recently-sold properties.” The
trial court determined that a showing of general disproportionality was
sufficient based upon our decision in Sirrell that a declaratory judgment action
was available to challenge the statewide property tax upon the basis of
widespread intentional discrimination. As the trial court’s order notes,
procedurally, the only difference between this case and Sirrell “was that
whereas in Sirrell the plaintiffs sought a declaratory judgment asking the court
to find that the educational property tax was unconstitutional, the plaintiffs in
this case have chosen to attack the law through the abatement process.” This
procedural difference, however, is fatal to the petitioners’ challenge as our
decision in Sirrell did not change the burden of showing individual
3
disproportionality in an abatement proceeding. To the contrary, we have never
strayed from the rule that in abatement actions taxpayers are required to
establish that they paid more than their fair share of taxes. See, e.g.,
Sandwich, 153 N.H. at 177; Sanbornton, 150 N.H. at 367; Bretton Woods, 84
N.H. at 431; Amoskeag Mfg. Co. v. Manchester, 70 N.H. 200, 205 (1899); Edes
v. Boardman, 58 N.H. 580, 589 (1879).
We hold that the trial court erred as a matter of law in ruling in these
abatement actions that the petitioners met their burden of proof without
offering any “evidence that they are paying more than their proportional share
of taxes.” Sanbornton, 150 N.H. at 367. “[E]ven if multiple petitions are
consolidated into a single trial, each plaintiff bears the burden of
demonstrating that he or she is paying a higher amount than he or she ought
to pay.” Id. at 369. Proof that the taxpayer paid more than his or her fair
share of a tax is an essential element in any abatement case. By failing to offer
such proof, the petitioners failed to demonstrate that they were harmed by the
tax. Ainsworth, 106 N.H. at 89-90.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4