THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-176
JOHN J. GOSSELIN
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
Argued: March 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 19, 2006
John J. Gosselin, by brief, pro se, and Theodore M. Lothstein, assistant
appellate defender, of Concord, orally, for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Dianne H. Martin, attorney, on the
memorandum of law, and Andrew Livernois, assistant attorney general, orally),
for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, John J. Gosselin, appeals the decision
of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) denying his petition for writ of certiorari. The
New Hampshire Department of Corrections (DOC) is the respondent in this
case. We affirm.
The record supports the following. Gosselin is an inmate in the New
Hampshire State Prison, and was charged with disciplinary infractions seven
times from May 2003 to September 2003. The DOC’s Policy and Procedure
Directive 5.25 (PPD 5.25) sets forth the procedures for resolving such
allegations. In accordance with those procedures, Gosselin was given written
notice of and received a hearing for each of the charges against him.
At each of the hearings, Gosselin entered pleas of not guilty. After
reviewing the evidence, the hearings officer found Gosselin guilty of six of the
charges, and not guilty of one. Gosselin was “written-up” for the six offenses
and was either sanctioned with the loss of some privilege, such as canteen, or
was given various hours of extra duty. Gosselin did not receive additional
prison time or lose good time credits for the violations.
Gosselin appealed at least some of the decisions, but the prison warden
found no procedural error. Gosselin then filed a writ of certiorari in the
superior court, and the DOC moved to dismiss. Gosselin argued that PPD 5.25
should have been promulgated under RSA chapter 541-A, the Administrative
Procedures Act (APA), and that hearings conducted under PPD 5.25 are subject
to the requirements of a full adjudicative hearing under RSA 541-A:31 to :36
(1997 & Supp. 2005). The DOC responded that PPD 5.25 is not governed by
the APA and that Gosselin’s appeal rights ended with the prison warden.
The superior court agreed with the DOC. After examining the APA and
statutes governing the DOC, the court explained:
[T]he DOC Commissioner’s general authority to promulgate and
maintain PPD 5.25 derives from his/her power “to establish
written standards regarding the behavior and responsibilities of
inmates,” and to adopt “reasonable internal practices and
procedures” to deal with, among other things, “procedures for the
operation of the state prison . . . including provisions for the
humane treatment of inmates,” all by means of actions that “shall
not be considered rules subject to the provisions of RSA 541-A.”
See RSA 21-H:14 and 8, III. The Court thus concludes that the
Legislature has granted broad authority to the DOC commissioner,
outside the confines [of] the APA, to enact and maintain PPD 5.25
to deal with failures of state prison inmates to properly behave,
and to enforce inmate responsibility in that regard.
In reaching this conclusion, the superior court determined that Gosselin was
not entitled to any of the relief he sought, and accordingly denied his petition
for writ of certiorari. This appeal followed.
2
In its memorandum of law on appeal, the DOC argues that Gosselin’s
petition for writ of certiorari was untimely. We can find no indication in the
record that this argument was raised below. Accordingly, even assuming that
the petition was untimely, we consider the DOC’s argument on this issue
waived.
The test to determine whether to grant a writ of certiorari is whether the
agency has acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction, authority or observance
of the law, or has acted arbitrarily, unreasonably, capriciously, or with an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Petition of Support Enforcement Officers,
147 N.H. 1, 4 (2001); State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). On appeal, Gosselin argues
that the trial court erred as a matter of law when it determined that PPD 5.25
and the required hearings are not governed by the strictures of the APA. We
disagree.
The APA establishes the procedures by which administrative agencies
promulgate rules and regulations, as well as the procedures that govern
disputes arising under those rules. See generally RSA ch. 541-A (1997 &
Supp. 2005). The “rules” to which the APA applies include
each regulation, standard or other statement of general
applicability adopted by an agency to (a) implement, interpret, or
make specific a statute enforced or administered by such agency or
(b) prescribe or interpret an agency policy, procedure or practice
requirement binding on persons outside the agency, whether
members of the general public or personnel in other agencies.
RSA 541-A:1, XV. This definition excludes certain memoranda, pamphlets,
rulings, and forms, id., none of which is applicable here.
The APA was subsequently amended to include a section entitled
“Exemptions” that excluded certain rules and regulations, required by other
statutes, from the definition of “rule” in the APA, and accordingly from the
strictures required by that act. Laws 1974, 45:12. Until 1994, several other
exemptions were added to that list. E.g., Laws 1979, 94:1 (excluding rules
“relative to bridge weight limits”); Laws 1990, 161:9 (excluding rules “relative to
the Pease development authority”). Among these additional exemptions was
one for rules “relative to credit for good conduct of prisoners.” Laws 1982,
36:8. This exemption remains in effect, and is presently codified at RSA 541-
A:21, I(j).
3
Additionally, RSA chapter 21-H was enacted in 1983. It requires the
DOC commissioner to adopt “such reasonable internal practices and
procedures . . . as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the department
and its divisions,” as well as “written standards regarding the behavior and
responsibilities of inmates.” RSA 21-H:8, III, :14 (2000). It further states that
such practices, procedures, and standards “shall not be considered rules
subject to the provisions of RSA 541-A.” RSA 21-H:8, III, :14. The DOC argues
that when these sections in RSA chapter 21-H were enacted in 1983, they
exempted the required practices, procedures, and standards from both the
rulemaking and adjudicative hearing strictures of the APA.
However, even assuming the DOC is correct, in 1994 the legislature
repealed and recodified the APA. As part of the recodification, the new APA
stated, “This chapter shall govern all agency rulemaking procedures, hearings,
and appeals, except as specifically exempted by this chapter. Conflicts
between this chapter and prior or existing statutes shall be resolved by
following the stricter requirements.” RSA 541-A:41.
The DOC, after referencing this statute in its memorandum on appeal,
argues, “The commissioner’s existing statutory authority, and its
implementation in DOC policy 5.25 . . . are the ‘stricter requirements’ and
must prevail.” We disagree. This statute had the effect of repealing all
exemptions not expressly contained in RSA 541-A:21, which is the
recodification of the list originally established in 1974 and subsequently
amended as described above. Cf. Support Enforcement Officers, 147 N.H. at 5.
Accordingly, to the extent that RSA chapter 21-H may have exempted the
DOC’s policies, procedures, and standards from the APA prior to 1994, we hold
that it no longer does so. The issue before us, then, is whether PPD 5.25 falls
within the only applicable exemption that is contained in the APA — namely,
RSA 541-A:21, I(j), which exempts rules “relative to credit for good conduct of
prisoners.”
Included in the record is a document entitled “DISCIPLINARY RULE
INFRACTIONS” that appears to be “Attachment 2” to PPD 5.25. It describes the
kinds of infractions an inmate may be charged with, as well as the type and
level of punishment that may be levied upon the inmate. The kinds of
punishment include loss of good time, disciplinary segregation days, extra duty
hours, and suspension of privilege days. Infractions are divided into type A, B,
or C offenses, with A offenses being the most serious and C offenses the least.
Although, generally, A offenses are adjudicated in “major” hearings and B or C
offenses in “minor” hearings, each infraction type could result in any of the
listed punishments, including loss of good time. Also, “multiple or complicated
cases may be referred by the Administrator of Security to the major board even
if all the offenses are B and C offenses.”
4
Attachment 2 further explains:
Repeat offenses increase the severity of B and C offenses so
that a specific C type offense repeated within a 90 day period may
become a B offense. A repeated B offense within 90 days may
become an A offense. Repeat offenses may be increased in severity
if the person writing the report or investigating the report identifies
the earlier violation and its date from the offender’s record.
The policy of allowing multiple minor infractions to result in the loss of good
time credits is also allowed by the statutes. “Any serious act of misconduct or
insubordination, or persistent refusal to conform to prison regulations during
his confinement shall subject the prisoner to the loss of all or any portion of
such [good time] credits, at the discretion of the commissioner.” RSA 651-
A:22, IV(b) (1996).
While we do not have documentation for all of the infractions with which
Gosselin was charged, one of those in the record clearly indicates a type B
offense. We recognize that Gosselin did not lose any good time credits.
However, as the same set of rules governs both major and minor infractions,
and where even a single violation may result in the loss of good time credits,
depending upon the circumstances, the rules governing his actions could have
produced such a result.
Accordingly, we hold that PPD 5.25 falls under RSA 541-A:21, I(j) and is
therefore exempt from the rulemaking and adjudicative hearing strictures of
the APA. Although we come to this conclusion on different grounds than did
the trial court, we nonetheless affirm its dismissal of Gosselin’s petition for writ
of certiorari. Due to our resolution of this issue, we need not address the other
arguments on appeal.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5