THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Committee on Character and Fitness
No. ADM-2004-176
IN THE MATTER OF BAR APPLICANT ADM-2004-176
(Standing Committee on Character and Fitness)
Argued: June 22, 2005
Opinion Issued: August 18, 2005
Applicant ADM-2004-176, by memorandum and orally, pro se.
Janet F. DeVito, of Concord by memorandum and orally, for the
Committee on Character and Fitness.
PER CURIAM. The applicant seeks admission to the New Hampshire
Bar. The standing committee on character and fitness of the New Hampshire
Supreme Court (committee) filed two adverse reports recommending that the
applicant be denied admission. We issued an order instructing the applicant to
show cause why his application should not be denied. See Sup. Ct. R. 42(5)(k).
Thereafter, both parties were allowed to file briefs or memoranda, and oral
argument was held. We now deny the application.
Supreme Court Rule 42(5)(a) states: “All persons who desire to be
admitted to practice law shall be required to establish their moral character
and fitness to the satisfaction of the Standing Committee on Character and
Fitness of the Supreme Court of New Hampshire in advance of such
admission.” Sup. Ct. R. 42(5)(a). The burden of establishing fitness to practice
law rests upon the applicant. Application of Appell, 116 N.H. 400, 401 (1976).
The applicant must prove good moral character and fitness by clear and
convincing evidence. Application of T.J.S., 141 N.H. 697, 699 (1997); In re
Mustafa, 631 A.2d 45, 47 (D.C. 1993). Any doubt concerning character and
fitness should be resolved in favor of protecting the public by denying
admission to the applicant. T.J.S., 141 N.H. at 702-03.
As a general rule, we accord deference to a fact finder’s determination of
witness credibility and resolution of disputed questions of fact. Nevertheless,
the committee’s recommendation is advisory only and neither binds this court
nor limits our authority to take action. Id. at 699.
The applicant is married and has two children from his current marriage.
He also has two children from a former marriage. The applicant has a master’s
degree in education and a law degree. He has owned and operated his own
business for the past twenty years.
The applicant submitted his petition and questionnaire for admission to
the bar of New Hampshire on May 1, 2003. He submitted letters of
recommendation from many sources, including law school professors, friends,
physicians and even a former wife, to the committee over the course of the
proceedings. The committee interviewed the applicant on July 1, 2003. After
the interview and a follow-up investigation, the committee issued a negative
report.
The report highlighted several areas of concern, including: (1) a past due
financial obligation; (2) twelve civil matters to which the applicant has been a
party, including three divorces; (3) two monetary judgments entered against
him; (4) a judgment for past due child support; (5) eighteen motor vehicle
violations, of which fourteen had been incurred since 1991; and (6) that he had
been fired from one of his jobs. The committee also discussed an order finding
the applicant in contempt of the Windham Family Court in Vermont.
The areas of greatest concern to the committee were the applicant’s
unsubstantiated reports of his effort to fight drug addiction in Montreal and his
“apparent disdain for authority . . . that is reflected in the course of his on-
going litigation in Windham Family Court.”
The applicant requested a hearing before the committee to explain the
issues contained in the report, see Sup. Ct. R. 42(5)(j), at which he was
represented by counsel. Following the hearing, the committee voted to submit
a second negative report. It found that the applicant had not met his burden of
demonstrating the character and fitness required for admission to the bar. The
grounds for the committee’s finding included: (1) the applicant’s “willful,
deliberate and contumacious” conduct before the Windham Family Court in
Vermont; (2) the applicant’s abuse of the judicial process, including the filing of
eighteen motions in a ten-month period; and (3) the applicant’s lack of
“sufficient positive characteristics of character and fitness to practice law.”
2
The applicant contends that both negative reports of the committee
“contain numerous errors, misapprehensions and misquotations. The
conclusions of those reports are generally unsupported by substantial
evidence.”
The applicant further objects to the committee’s use of proposed
character and fitness standards that have not yet been adopted. The applicant
suggests use of the Code of Recommended Standards for Bar Examiners
promulgated by the American Bar Association (ABA Standards). American Bar
Association Section of Legal Education and Admissions to the Bar and National
Conference of Bar Examiners, Comprehensive Guide to Bar Admission
Requirements 1997-98 (1997). The committee has been making
determinations of character and fitness without the assistance of formal
standards since its inception. Although we have referred to the ABA Standards
for guidance in the past, see T.J.S., 141 N.H. at 701, “the fact is that in
reviewing an application for admission to the bar, the decision as to an
applicant’s good moral character must be made on an ad hoc basis.” Appeal of
Lane, 544 N.W.2d 367, 375 (Neb. 1996) (quotation and brackets omitted). We
shall rely upon case law and the standards governing practicing attorneys. See
id. (“What cannot be permitted in attorneys cannot be tolerated in those
applying for admission as attorneys.”).
The applicant argues that he has demonstrated a commitment to good
works. This commitment includes claims that he, among other activities,
worked as an inner city school teacher, helped organize taxi drivers in
Philadelphia to resist the Teamsters’ Union, secretly transported banned books
out of communist Czechoslovakia, forced the cleanup of an “asbestos-
contaminated area” in Brattleboro, exposed a “longstanding pattern of abuses
and gender discrimination” at the Office of Child Support and the Windham
Family Court in Vermont, and worked extensively to combat drug addiction in
Montreal.
The applicant began his frequent trips to Montreal while in law school.
On these trips, according to his testimony, he counseled young drug addicts,
passed out anti-drug literature and provided information to law enforcement
authorities. The applicant received at least three speeding tickets during trips
to and from Montreal while driving under conditions of extreme fatigue and one
ticket for a traffic violation in Montreal while trying to locate people he
suspected of being drug dealers. He presented numerous e-mails he has
written to police officers in Montreal, containing detailed information about
people he suspected of being drug dealers, including license plate and phone
numbers associated with persons he suspected of being drug dealers. He sent
multiple reports to the Solicitor General of Canada on his view of the drug
trafficking situation in general in Montreal, and one report containing
3
allegations that members of the Montreal police force were engaged in
trafficking. He also submitted two responsive e-mails from law enforcement
officials, one indicating when a particular officer would return from vacation
and one providing a contact name for future correspondence.
The applicant’s attorney represented to the committee that he had
spoken over the phone with two law enforcement officers in Montreal. One
officer confirmed to the attorney that the applicant had sent him e-mails. The
other officer simply stated that it was his office’s policy not to disclose whether
someone was working as an informant. Apart from the applicant’s testimony,
there is no other evidence in the record of any response to the applicant from
authorities in Montreal.
We begin by addressing the issue of the contempt before the Windham
Family Court in Vermont. The applicant claims the contempt was reversed,
and therefore does not reflect poorly upon his character and fitness. In
November 2001, the applicant filed a motion to modify the amount of child
support he was paying. The Vermont Office of Child Support filed a petition for
enforcement of the child support order soon thereafter. The litigation
progressed slowly, in part due to the number of motions filed and several
canceled hearings. The applicant filed a motion to recuse the first magistrate
presiding, which was granted in March 2002. He filed a third-party complaint
against the State of Vermont in October 2002, asserting that a discrepancy
between a pre-printed form and Vermont Rule of Family Procedure 4(g)(2)(D)
about the required time to file an affidavit of income and assets had caused
him economic harm. The applicant filed a motion to recuse the new magistrate
on February 28, 2003; it was denied. He also filed a complaint with the
judicial conduct committee in March 2003, which was dismissed.
On May 20, 2003, the applicant was ordered to provide his former wife,
the plaintiff, with certain financial and business records. The presiding
magistrate asked opposing counsel to draft the order. According to the
applicant, the attorney and the magistrate faxed the order back and forth to
make revisions. The final order lacked protective language which the applicant
considered vital; the applicant wanted customer information contained in the
records sealed so the plaintiff could not contact his customers and harass
them, as he claimed she had done in the past. The magistrate had agreed to
put such language in the order, but it was missing from the final order for
production of the documents. The applicant was ordered to produce the
documents by June 20, 2003.
On June 19, the applicant faxed two motions to the court. One was
another motion to recuse the magistrate; the other was a motion for a
continuance. The applicant was informed that the court did not accept faxed
4
motions, a fact which he disputes, but he filed his motions by hand on June
24, 2003.
On June 23, 2003, the plaintiff filed a motion for contempt. On July 3,
2003, the applicant filed a “continuation” of his motion for recusal of the
magistrate, in which he requested that all of the discovery orders issued by her
be quashed. The applicant turned over the requested information on July 22,
2003, at the hearing on the motion for contempt. The contempt hearing did
not conclude on July 22 and at its resumption on August 22, 2003, the
magistrate found the applicant guilty of contempt of court. The applicant was
ordered to pay the plaintiff’s attorney’s fees in the amount of $1,066.50. The
applicant filed two more motions to recuse the magistrate, one of which was
dismissed because he filed it pro se although he was represented by counsel.
The applicant appealed the finding of contempt, as well as the denials of
his repeated motions to recuse, to the Vermont Supreme Court. The Vermont
Supreme Court reversed the contempt finding, as the contempt had been
purged when the applicant produced the requested documents. The Vermont
Supreme Court, however, upheld the imposition of compensatory fines imposed
upon the applicant.
Defendant asserts that he reasonably, mistakenly, or in “good
faith” believed that his motions to recuse magistrate Gartner and
quash the discovery order relieved him of the obligation to comply
with the order. The trial court rejected the claim, finding that
defendant’s violation was wilful, deliberate, and contumacious, and
we discern nothing in defendant’s arguments or the record to
suggest that the court’s finding was clearly erroneous or an abuse
of discretion. . . . Nor does defendant’s claim that he believed the
order to be invalid because it was drafted by opposing counsel, or
involved some form of alleged ex parte communication with the
court, represent a persuasive defense. . . . Defendant also
contends that he was excused from compliance with the discovery
order because it omitted an express provision reflecting the
magistrate’s decision to seal the business records produced. The
court here correctly observed that defendant’s concerns could have
been addressed through a motion to amend the order, and did not
excuse his noncompliance.
The Vermont Supreme Court also addressed the applicant’s numerous
motions for recusal of the magistrate:
Viewed in light of these standards [of abuse of discretion],
defendant’s arguments are entirely unpersuasive. Defendant
contends that the administrative judge erred in ruling that the tape
5
of an unrelated proceeding involving magistrate Gartner was
irrelevant, but defendant offers no persuasive rationale that the
proceeding was relevant to the magistrate’s impartiality in this
proceeding. Defendant also contends that the administrative judge
erred in declining to address in any detail defendant’s claim that
the magistrate committed numerous procedural errors. The
administrative judge correctly ruled, however, that legal errors do
not demonstrate prejudice . . . and – contrary to his claim –
defendant has not proved a “pattern” of error demonstrating bias.
. . . Defendant additionally cites several questions and
comments by the magistrate at a number of hearings, suggesting
that they “were not only pointless but bizarre and possibly for
psychological effect,” as well as “gratuitous,” an improper “signal”
to opposing counsel, and proof that the magistrate was “less than
honest.” The cited questions and comments, however, do not
remotely support defendant’s claims. Finally, defendant contends
the magistrate demonstrated bias by failing to sanction opposing
counsel for drafting the discovery order without a provision sealing
the records to be disclosed, and by engaging in ex parte
communications with opposing counsel. The administrative judge
correctly noted that the alleged omission may have been a legal or
procedural error but did not demonstrate bias, and the alleged ex-
parte communication has not been demonstrated.
The applicant contends that the contempt order “was not ignored, it was
challenged. There is a difference.” We will not, however, substitute our
judgment for that of the Vermont Supreme Court. The Vermont Supreme
Court upheld the fines imposed by the lower court to the extent that they arose
from the defendant’s failure to obey the court order: “Under V.R.F.P. 16(c)(3),
the court may award a sum of money sufficient to compensate the aggrieved
party for any loss, including attorneys’ fees, ‘caused by the contempt.’” While
the applicant’s contempt was purged by July 22, 2003, he was, nonetheless, in
contempt of court from June 20, 2003, until he produced the requested
documents.
Next we turn to the applicant’s response to the committee’s finding that
he has abused the judicial process, as evidenced by the number of motions he
has filed, including several motions to recuse.
The applicant’s response to this finding is influenced by his belief that he
is fighting systematic abuses prevalent at the Windham Family Court: “Lastly
it is difficult to see how a determined effort to reform a Court can be termed
abuse of the legal system. As has been extensively documented Windham
Family Court cannot be deemed a normal part of the legal system. It is an
6
aberration.” He states: “The Committee was unwilling to entertain the
possibility that there might be ‘deeply ingrained institutional misconduct’ or
that a person might have a reasonable belief, based on the evidence of many
years, that this was true.”
It is apparent from his filings, both before this court and the Windham
Family Court, that the applicant perceives the Windham Family Court to be a
corrupt institution, and that he believes that his attempts to correct its
misconduct will have consequences: “It has been known for many years that
the neighborhood around Montreal bus station and Windham Family Court
were deleterious to the well-being of their respective communities. It ought to
be clear that any direct attempt at correcting these situations will entail the
risk of severe retaliation.”
In responding to the committee’s finding that eighteen motions were filed
in a period of less than ten months, the applicant states that three of the
eighteen motions were made by opposing counsel, and that “six of the motions
were made by [the applicant’s] lawyer . . . . This was more or less his first case
after having been admitted. It was plain to anyone with an ounce of political
sense that this entire contempt issue was for the purpose of denying [the
applicant] the right to practice law.”
The applicant is particularly troubled by the actions of the court
manager at the Windham Family Court. In September 2003, the court
manager transmitted a copy of the applicant’s file at the Windham Family
Court to the committee in response to its request. In her letter, the court
manager stated, “I would urge you to read [the applicant’s] filings carefully, as I
believe they greatly reflect upon his fitness and character.” She also informed
the committee that the applicant had been recently found in contempt of court;
a copy of the contempt order was included in the file transmitted. In August
2004, the court manager sent the committee updated filings in the litigation,
including a copy of the recent Vermont Supreme Court opinion. The court
manager included a letter summarizing the events. This package was also sent
to the Vermont Board of Bar Examiners.
The court manager’s summary of the litigation did not sway our decision.
Whether her actions were improper is not a question we need to decide. We did
not include in our analysis the applicant’s reactions to the court manager’s
actions. We need only say that, after reviewing the entire court file, we are not
convinced that the applicant’s reactions to the other perceived instances of
prejudice and misconduct were warranted by the situation. His reaction to the
contempt finding, his motions to recuse the magistrate and the overall tenor of
his pleadings are indicative of his character and fitness to practice law. They
suggest an intemperate disposition, and an unusual quickness to find fault
with others.
7
Next we address the committee’s general finding that the applicant
lacked “sufficient positive characteristics of character and fitness to practice
law.” Specifically, the committee found that:
3. [The applicant] has shown an inability to exercise the reason
and good judgment a lawyer should have and has shown a
disregard for the rights and welfare of others in that:
a. [The applicant] has a pattern of blaming others for the negative
events in his life. Those he blames include courts, judges and
allegedly corrupt police.
b. [The applicant] often creates unnecessary problems for those
he deals with in guise of solving society’s problems.
c. [The applicant] has harmed his own children, and others in his
family while attempting to fix what he feels to be a corrupt and
biased legal system.
d. [The applicant’s] conduct in litigation could be found to violate
Rules 3.1 and 3.2 of the Rules of Professional Conduct if he
were an attorney.
e. [The applicant] had difficulty focusing on the specific issues the
committee asked him to address and often rambled about
irrelevant subjects.
The applicant responds that he does not view the events at the Windham
Family Court as negative because he appreciates the opportunity to stand up
for what is right. He also challenges the committee’s finding that he is hurting
his children in his efforts for reform. In the midst of his legal struggles with his
former wife over his motion to modify child support, the contempt against him
and his many motions to recuse, the applicant filed a motion to enforce an
order for parent-child contact. He claimed that the Vermont statute requires a
hearing to be held within thirty days after such a motion is filed, but that no
such hearing has taken place.
The applicant laments this fact: “Where’s the justice, where’s the
decency, where’s the law, who protects the children?” But when questioned by
members of the committee, the applicant revealed that he has ignored his own
request to enforce the visitation order. The applicant has focused his energy
upon the contempt issue, the motions for recusal and the alleged misconduct
at the Windham Family Court. As the following excerpts from the hearing
transcript indicate, the applicant has shown more fervor in pursuing the
claimed misconduct at the Windham Family Court than he has in pursuing his
right to see his children, though he claims to be representing their interests:
8
Mr. [Willard] Martin: And in this order appointing the guardian,
the judge did not set down a date by which
the guardian was to complete his or her
work?
Applicant: No, I believe that is not – that’s the case. And
this is my criticism, that the best interests of
the children have been lost.
Mr. [Willard] Martin: But here, sir, you have been spending your
time reporting the master, or the magistrate,
to the Judicial Conduct Committee, you’ve
been filing these motions to recuse, and
you’re not asking when the guardian’s report
is due, when you’re gonna have a hearing on
visitation. It seems to me that it’s all topsy-
turvy. And I believe you when you say that
your children are very important to you, I
don’t doubt that, but it seems to me that –
you know that saying about representing
yourself . . . .
Applicant: I know. I know. I shouldn’t be representing
myself here. I can’t afford an attorney for
Vermont matters. . . .
. . . .
Mr. [Willard] Martin: I only bring up these questions, because it’s a
question of how you view your role as a
lawyer, and whether you have the fitness to
recognize what the important issue is in
moving on, and placing the interests of the
client, which would in a derivative way
include your own children at this point in
time, over the good of the general public.
Despite the clear evidence that the applicant never followed through with his
motion to enforce an order for parent-child contact, he blames the presiding
judge: “Now it is seventeen times the legal limit [since a hearing should have
been held] and Judge Hayes still has failed to schedule a hearing. Yes, [the
applicant] does hold Judge Hayes accountable and does assign blame.”
We are troubled by the applicant’s perception that relatively minor events
occur for specific, and sometimes nefarious, reasons. For example, when his
former wife’s attorney did not put the required protective language into the
order requiring him to produce certain financial and business records, the
applicant did not “believe that the omission of the vital protective order was
9
accidental.” The applicant also believes that the Vermont Supreme Court order
was written with his New Hampshire bar admission application in mind:
The original contempt finding was condemned by the Supreme
Court partially because it, “focused on punishment and not upon
compliance.” The Vermont Supreme Court was well aware that the
case had Bar Admission implications. Indeed the circumstances
indicate that the New Hampshire Committee was the intended
audience. [The applicant] suggests that the Vermont Supreme
Court’s disapproval of finding that [sic], “focus on punishment and
not upon compliance,” refers not only to the clear excessiveness of
the award, but also indicated disapproval of the use of a finding of
contempt for Bar Admission purposes as well as the extravagant
language used to achieve that result.
He also suggests that the standards proposed by the committee, but not yet
adopted, were written specifically for his case:
This is precisely the wrong time to use an unapproved standard,
written by the very [c]ommittee using it for the first time and
(apparently) drafted during the pendancy [sic] of the present case.
[The applicant] . . . has no way of knowing if the standards were
drafted with this very case in mind. The Committee’s Commentary
seems to suggest this but again, there is no way for [the applicant]
to know if this is the case.
The applicant suggests that he was initially ordered to pay damages for
items not related to his contempt because, while he knew of only a few cases of
ethical violations,
the malefactors at Windham Family Court knew about hundreds of
cases and knew that [the applicant] would press for a full State
investigation. If [the applicant] can be discredited there is less
chance for scrutiny into areas that Judge Hayes and Attorney
Annis wished to keep buried. This is why the overturned contempt
opinion was written with such vituperative language and full of
easily avoided errors of fact that were not corrected when they were
pointed out with great clarity in the Motion to Reconsider.
Judges and magistrates are people, who despite their best efforts, fall
prey to the same mistakes, oversights and misunderstandings that beset the
rest of humanity. The existence of our appellate system is an explicit
recognition that errors will occur. The applicant has shown a worrisome
tendency to treat mistakes, if any, made by magistrates, judges, court
personnel and the committee as signs of prejudice against him.
10
We are also troubled by the reasoning displayed in the applicant’s
arguments and the conclusions drawn therefrom, before this court, the
committee and the Windham Family Court. For example, in a paragraph set off
on its own in his memorandum of law, he asks, “Is it more comfortable to
believe that [the applicant] has disdain for authority, than to consider that the
lawlessness at Windham Family Court is probably the indirect cause-in-fact of
domestic violence?”
In his response to his former wife’s motion for contempt, the applicant
deduces “unethical and disingenuous” conduct from a mistake made by
opposing counsel:
3. The discovery process has been marked by conduct on the part
of Attorney Corum that appears to be unethical and
disingenuous. For example, an earlier Discovery request asked
for “all corporate records” of [the applicant’s business]. Mr.
Corum knew, or ought to have known, that [the applicant’s
business] is not and has never been a corporation.
The applicant somehow detects “unethical and disingenuous” conduct from his
former wife’s attorney’s minor error. This is not an example of such conduct.
Rather, it is an example of how the applicant tends to take small incidents and
blow them out of proportion. Similar small occurrences were behind his
motions for recusal; for example, the absence of the protective language from
the document production order led to a motion to recuse the presiding
magistrate.
The applicant also views the wrongs allegedly done to him on an
exaggerated scale. For example, he draws the following parallel to the alleged
ex parte communication, of which the Vermont Supreme Court found no
evidence, between the magistrate and his former wife’s attorney:
[The applicant] states his great-grandfather decided to leave St.
Petersburg and come to America because the Czar, under the
influence of the mesmerizing Rasputin, had decreed that Jews
could sell watches, repair watches but not both. This has given
[the applicant] blood-memory of the nature of violations of
Substantive Due Process. Over 120 years after the Czar’s edict,
[the applicant’s daughter] will have a similar blood-memory of the
nature of an ex parte communication.
He also displays a general hostility to the committee throughout his
pleadings: “Again, this is an argument so absurd that only a lawyer could
make it.”
11
Unfortunately the author [of the committee reports] was so dazzled
and blinded by the status of these individuals as Judge and Court
Employee that he abandoned all skepticism about their veracity,
even after he saw that Attorney Annis had written her curious
letter claiming that Judge Hayes had been upheld and reading the
Vermont Supreme Court opinion which held that Judge Hayes had
abused discretion in three separate areas.
In the same document he also writes:
[The applicant] is loath to be discourteous, but if the author of the
[first and second negative reports] can be this wildly inaccurate on
this point, and opposing counsel can make a blunder that is
equally embarrassing when she was present at the very meeting at
which the Chairman did not even realize that there were bi-lateral
communication [sic], why should the Court give credence to the
other conclusory assertions that are offered without a shred of
evidence?
Contrary to the applicant’s assertion, our review of the evidence indicates
that the committee’s findings are supported by evidence. The applicant
violated a court order, resulting in a finding of contempt. The applicant abused
the judicial process in an attempt to reform perceived misconduct. And the
applicant has not demonstrated sufficient positive characteristics to support
his fitness to practice law.
Abuse of legal process and violation of a court order are two factors
considered relevant by the ABA Standards. We find the reasoning of the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court in a similar case helpful:
The conduct of someone else generally is not relevant to the
exploration of the applicant’s fitness because it sheds no light on
the ultimate question: whether the applicant is fit to practice law.
Repeated, unsupported, ad hominem attacks on the ethics,
integrity, and motivations of others involved in the process do,
however, reflect adversely on the applicant’s fitness to practice law.
In re Admission to Bar of Com., 828 N.E.2d 484, 498 (Mass. 2005). Even
assuming for the purposes of argument that the alleged events at the Windham
Family Court took place, they do not rise to the level of prejudice and
misconduct that the applicant perceives. Rather, they reflect a tendency to
exaggerate on the part of the applicant. “The practice of law requires the ability
to discriminate between fact and faith, evidence and imagination, reality and
12
hallucination.” Lane, 544 N.W.2d at 375. Again we find the language of the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts helpful.
Moreover his penchant for hyperbolic and dramatic language
about what he perceives to be misconduct by others shows a
seeming lack of understanding of the seriousness of the
accusations he makes. Given all of this, coupled with the
petitioner’s mischaracterizations of other matters, we cannot say
that the petitioner has met his burden of proving that he is fit to
practice law.
In re Admission, 828 N.E.2d at 501.
In addition, “[t]urbulent, intemperate or irresponsible behavior is a
proper basis for the denial of admission to the bar.” Application of Feingold,
296 A.2d 492, 500 (Me. 1972). These characteristics are not acceptable in one
who would be a counselor and advocate in the legal system. Lane, 544 N.W.2d
at 374.
When members of the public engage attorneys, they expect that
those attorneys will conduct themselves in a professional and
businesslike manner. Attorneys who routinely exhibit abusive,
disruptive, hostile, intemperate, intimidating, irresponsible,
threatening, or turbulent behavior toward others involved in the
legal system are not worthy of such trust and confidence.
Lane, 544 N.W.2d at 375. “The public interest requires that the public be
secure in its expectation that those who are admitted to the bar are worthy of
the trust and confidence clients may reasonably place in their lawyers.” ABA
Standards, supra v.
We do not challenge the applicant’s assertion that he is a moral person.
He is committed to helping others, and expresses a deep concern for equality
and justice. We do not question these traits. It is his lack of fitness that
hinders his ability to practice law. The right to practice law is not an inherent
right of every citizen, as is the right to carry on an ordinary trade or business.
It is a peculiar privilege granted only to those who demonstrate special fitness
in intellectual attainment and character. All may aspire to it on an absolutely
equal basis, but not all will attain it. T.J.S., 141 N.H. at 702. Based upon our
review of the evidence, we hold that the applicant has not satisfied his burden
of proving by clear and convincing evidence his fitness to practice law.
Finally, we turn to the applicant’s claims that he has been denied
procedural due process. The applicant argues his due process rights have
been violated because: (1) he was not provided with the right to confront
13
witnesses against him; and (2) new “charges” against him were added in the
second negative report.
A State cannot exclude a person from the practice of law or from
any other occupation in a manner or for reasons that contravene
the Due Process or Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. . . . A State can require high standards of
qualification, such as good moral character or proficiency in its
law, before it admits an applicant to the bar, but any qualification
must have a rational connection with the applicant’s fitness or
capacity to practice law.
Schware v. Board of Bar Examiners, 353 U.S. 232, 238-39 (1957) (citations
omitted).
As to his first argument, the applicant was the only witness presenting
evidence. Our finding that the applicant has not met his burden of proving his
character and fitness to practice law is based primarily upon his own words:
his filings before the Windham Family Court, his filings with the committee, his
testimony before the committee and his filings with this court.
As to his second argument, that new charges against him were raised in
the second negative report, the applicant seems to have confused this inquiry
into his character and fitness to practice law with a criminal trial. See In re
Converse, 602 N.W.2d 500, 506-07 (Neb. 1999). It is not a trial, and the
applicant has not been charged with any crime.
This proceeding is intended to determine the applicant’s character and
fitness to practice law in New Hampshire. The applicant was aware that he
would be required to establish his character and fitness to the satisfaction of
the committee and this court. See Sup. Ct. R. 42(5)(a). The applicant was “on
notice that the content of his submissions would be an issue before this court
. . . .” In re Admission, 828 N.E.2d at 501. Indeed it was by these submissions
that he was afforded the opportunity to establish his good character and
fitness. He failed to do so.
Application denied.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY,
JJ., concurred.
14