THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2005-848
MARGARET A. SHAFF
v.
EDITH W. LEYLAND
Argued: October 18, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 6, 2006
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (David P. Eby on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Cassidy Law Office, PLLC, of Concord (James M. Cassidy on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, Edith W. Leyland, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) granting summary judgment to the petitioner,
Margaret A. Shaff, on the basis that the respondent lacked standing to enforce
a restrictive covenant contained in a warranty deed. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. In the 1960s, the respondent
acquired approximately seventy-five acres along Mont Vernon Road in Amherst,
where she lived in the only house located on the property. Beginning with the
sale of her home in 1975, the respondent sold portions of this land to
various parties. In 1985, she conveyed approximately twenty-three acres to the
petitioner by a warranty deed that contained the following restrictive covenant:
The above described premises are conveyed subject to
the restriction, which shall run with the land, that the
Grantees, their heirs and assigns shall construct on
said premises only a colonial-type residence having a
market value of at least One Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($100,000).
The respondent did not reserve a right of enforcement in the deed. In 1998,
she conveyed the last 11.6 acres of the original seventy-five acre parcel. The
respondent currently owns no real estate near the original seventy-five acre
parcel or in the town of Amherst.
The petitioner sought a declaratory judgment that the restrictive
covenant does not limit the number of homes to be built on her property. She
moved for summary judgment, requesting that the trial court determine as a
matter of law that the respondent lacks standing to object to the relief she
sought. Noting that “the respondent does not dispute that she currently owns
no land in Amherst . . . that benefits from the Restrictive Covenant,” the trial
court entered summary judgment for the petitioner because “the respondent
will suffer no legal injury” if the restrictive covenant is extinguished and thus
she lacks standing to enforce it.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Handley v. Providence
Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 153 N.H. 340, 341 (2006). “If there is no genuine issue of
material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law,
the grant of summary judgment is proper. We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo.” Id. (quotations and citation
omitted).
“One seeking to enforce a restriction in equity must have a standing
entitling him to seek equitable relief.” Rogers v. State Roads Commission, 177
A.2d 850, 852 (Md. 1962); see Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 716 (2001) (“In
evaluating whether a party has standing to sue, we focus on whether the
[party] suffered a legal injury against which the law was designed to protect.”
(quotation omitted)).
Because the issue is one of first impression in New Hampshire, the trial
court looked to the law of other jurisdictions. It applied the majority rule that
“[i]f an individual does not own the property that is benefited by th[e] restrictive
covenant, he or she has not suffered a legal injury,” and therefore does not
2
have standing to enforce the restriction. The trial court found this rule to be
“consistent with New Hampshire law concerning restrictive covenants and
standing.”
“A covenant, as used in the context regarding the use of property, is an
agreement by one person, the covenantor, to do or refrain from doing
something enforceable by another person, the covenantee. Every covenant has
a burden to the covenantor and a benefit to the covenantee.” Waikiki Malia
Hotel v. Kinkai Properties, 862 P.2d 1048, 1056 (Haw. 1993) (citation omitted).
The benefit and the burden of a covenant are subject to two general
classifications - “appurtenant” and “in gross” - which themselves are subject to
further classification as “personal” or “running with the land.” Restatement
(Third) of Property: Servitudes §1.5 comment a. at 31 (2000). “‘Appurtenant’
means that the rights or obligations of a servitude are tied to ownership or
occupancy of a particular unit or parcel of land.” Id. §1.5(1). An appurtenant
burden is created when the obligation or promise is enforceable only against
“the owner or occupier of [the] particular parcel of land” upon which the
restriction is placed. Id. comment a. at 31. An appurtenant benefit is created
when the right to “receive the performance of a covenant . . . [is] held only by
the owner or occupier of [the] particular unit or parcel” meant to be benefited
by the restriction. Id. §1.5(1). “‘In gross’ means that the benefit or burden of a
servitude is not tied to ownership or occupancy of a particular unit or parcel of
land.” Id. §1.5(2). Covenants appurtenant and covenants in gross can be
personal or can run with the land. Id. §1.5(3). “Running with the land means
that the benefit or burden passes automatically to successors . . . .” Id.
comment a. at 31. “‘Personal’ means that a servitude benefit or burden is not
transferable and does not run with land.” Id. §1.5(3).
Since the common law has not always recognized covenants in gross, it
does not distinguish between covenants appurtenant or covenants in gross
with regard to a party’s standing. Id. §8.1 comment a. at 474-75. Thus, the
common law requires that a person own land that benefits from the restriction
in order to have standing to enforce it: “Where a person no longer has any land
in the vicinity which might be affected by the disregard of a covenant, he or she
cannot enforce the restrictions.” 20 Am. Jur. 2d Covenants, Etc. § 244 (2005);
see 7 G. Thompson, Commentaries on the Modern Law of Real Property § 3172,
at 189 (1962 Replacement); 3 H. Tiffany, The Law of Real Property § 864, at
494 (1939). This principle has been adopted by many jurisdictions. See, e.g.,
Stegall v. Housing Authority of City of Charlotte, 178 S.E.2d 824, 829 (N.C.
1971); Minch v. Saymon, 233 A.2d 385, 387 (N.J. Super. Ct. Ch. Div. 1967);
Forman v. Safe Deposit & Trust Co., 80 A. 298, 300 (Md. 1911).
The petitioner urges us to affirm the common law rule relied upon by the
trial court, and rule that the respondent lacks standing to enforce the covenant
3
because she no longer owns property benefited by the restriction. The
respondent argues that we should adopt the view of the Restatement (Third) of
Property, which eliminates the requirement of an ownership interest in
benefited property in order to have standing to enforce a covenant in gross,
instead requiring only that a holder “establish a legitimate interest in enforcing
[it].” Restatement (Third) Property: Servitudes §8.1. Adoption of this view
would change the common law standing requirement for covenants in gross,
but not for covenants appurtenant. Id. comment a. at 474-75. In her brief, the
respondent assumes that the covenant at issue is held in gross and therefore
our adoption of the Restatement view would give her standing to seek
enforcement of the covenant.
The trial court did not determine which type of covenant is at issue in
this case. The petitioner asserted during oral argument that the classification
of the covenant is not properly before us. The record shows that the issue was
before the trial court and was raised in the respondent’s notice of appeal which
broadly stated the issue on appeal as: “Whether a restrictive covenant
contained in a deed can be enforced by the original grantor who created the
covenant after the grantor no longer owns any real property [benefited] by the
deed restriction.” In addition, there is no question that the interpretation of a
deed is a question of law. See Hogan v. Lebel, 95 N.H. 95, 97 (1948). Therefore,
this issue is properly before us and we may decide it on appeal.
The general rule of construction favors appurtenant servitudes over
servitudes in gross. Cf. Burcky v. Knowles, 120 N.H. 244, 248 (1980).
Further, “[r]estrictions in a deed will be regarded as for the personal benefit of
the grantor unless a contrary intention appears, and the burden of showing
that they constitute covenants running with the land is upon the party
claiming the benefit of the restriction.” Stegall, 178 S.E.2d at 828. Combining
these principles, we construe restrictive covenants as appurtenant to an
interest in land, the benefit of which is personal to the covenantee and is
enforceable only by the covenantee, unless a contrary intent is expressed in the
language of the covenant.
We determine the intent of the parties “at the time of the creation of the
covenants.” Joslin v. Pine River Dev. Corp., 116 N.H. 814, 817 (1976). The
restrictive covenant contained in the deed to the petitioner expressly states that
the burden “shall run with the land” but expresses no intent regarding the
benefit of the covenant or the type of covenant conveyed. At the time she
conveyed the twenty-three acres and created the restrictive covenant, the
respondent owned acreage in the immediate area. Applying the principles
discussed above, we conclude that the restrictive covenant was created to
personally benefit the respondent as the owner of land that benefited from
enforcement of the restriction. Had the respondent wished to hold the
covenant in gross, regardless of whether or not she owned land in the area, she
4
could have included language to that effect. Therefore, we hold that the
restrictive covenant at issue is appurtenant, and that the respondent held the
benefit personally. Accordingly, the respondent does not have standing to
enforce the covenant because she no longer owns land that benefits from it.
We recognize that adoption of the rule set forth in the Restatement
(Third) of Property: Servitudes §8.1 could permit an original covenantor to
enforce a covenant in gross regardless of the ownership of benefited land.
However, this case does not present a proper opportunity to decide whether to
adopt such a rule because it is not necessary to our decision. Even if we were
to adopt this rule, because we hold that the restrictive covenant was
appurtenant, it would still be unenforceable by the respondent.
The respondent lastly argues that she has standing to enforce the
restrictive covenant under principles of contract law. While we recognize that
a covenant constitutes an agreement between parties, Arnold v. Chandler, 121
N.H. 130, 133 (1982), this fact does not lead us to repudiate the common law’s
well-developed and widely recognized standing rules regarding the
enforceability of servitudes.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5