THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2005-268
GENERAL LINEN SERVICES, INC.
v.
ELIAS SMIRNIOUDIS
Argued: February 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 26, 2006
Hanlon & Zubkus, of Rochester (Mark D. Hanlon on the brief and orally),
for the plaintiff.
Crisp & Richmond, PLLC, of Concord (Jack P. Crisp, Jr. and Andrew M.
Mierins on the brief, and Mr. Mierins orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Elias Smirnioudis, appeals a decision
of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) awarding the plaintiff, General Linen
Services, Inc. (General Linen), damages plus interest, costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees for breach of contract. Smirnioudis challenges aspects of the
damages award. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
We recite the facts as found by the trial court. General Linen is engaged
in the business of leasing linens, clothing and other items. Smirnioudis is the
owner and operator of two restaurants, Windmill Restaurant I (Windmill I) in
east Concord, and Windmill Restaurant II (Windmill II) in Franklin. In July
2000, Smirnioudis and General Linen entered into a rental service agreement
whereby General Linen would provide the restaurants certain linens, including
cook shirts, pants, aprons, and towels. The agreement was negotiated between
Smirnioudis and John Jamrog, a General Linen sales representative.
Smirnioudis signed the documents as the customer and executed a personal
guaranty. General Linen provided linens to the restaurants until November
2000 when Smirnioudis notified General Linen that he wanted to cancel the
contract. Smirnioudis and his employees testified at trial that they had told
the delivery driver on a regular basis that the linens were substandard. Other
than the cancellation letter, however, no evidence was offered to show that any
written notification was provided to General Linen describing the poor quality
of the linens. Smirnioudis began doing business with another linen supplier,
and in May 2001, Windmill II was destroyed by fire.
General Linen filed suit against Smirnioudis for breach of contract. It
claimed that Smirnioudis failed to comply with the contract’s notice provision
concerning customer dissatisfaction and contract cancellation. Smirnioudis
argued, however, that because General Linen breached the contract by
providing inadequate linens, his cancellation of the agreement was justified.
He also claimed that his poor command of the English language obstructed his
understanding of the terms and conditions of the agreements, making the
contract voidable.
After a trial on the merits, the trial court ruled that Smirnioudis
breached the agreement. In so ruling, the trial court rejected Smirnioudis’
various arguments concerning the inadequate quality of the linens and
determined that he had the requisite understanding of the terms and
conditions of the agreement. The trial court subsequently conducted a hearing
on damages. In assessing damages, the trial court concluded that General
Linen was entitled to the average weekly rental charge for the remaining term
of the three-year contract, less costs General Linen would not incur for
servicing the contract. It rejected Smirnioudis’ claim that the doctrine of
commercial frustration limited the calculation of damages for Windmill II up to
the date it was destroyed by fire because the date of Smirnioudis’ breach
preceded the fire. The trial court awarded General Linen contract damages,
plus interest, costs and reasonable attorney’s fees under the contract. After a
motion to reconsider, the court made one alteration to the damages award but
otherwise denied the remainder of the motion. Smirnioudis appealed.
On appeal, Smirnioudis argues that the trial court erred in its calculation
of damages by: (1) not applying the doctrine of commercial frustration based
upon the destruction of Windmill II; (2) failing to properly determine the
replacement cost deduction; (3) misinterpreting evidence establishing its final
payment to General Linen; and (4) awarding damages for the three-year
contract term when the parties lacked a meeting of the minds on that term.
2
We observe that mathematical certainty is not required in computing
damages. T&M Assoc. v. Goodrich, 150 N.H. 161, 164 (2003). “The law does,
however, require an indication that the award of damages was reasonable.” Id.
We will not overturn a damage award unless it is clearly erroneous. Id.
Further, we will review all questions of law de novo and uphold all findings of
fact unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or erroneous as a matter of
law. Sherryland v. Snuffer, 150 N.H. 262, 265 (2003).
We first address Smirnioudis’ argument that the trial court erred by not
applying the doctrine of commercial frustration. He argues that the
destruction of Windmill II by fire eliminated the need for linens at that location
and thus excused his performance under the contract. Thus, Smirnioudis
contends that General Linen should only receive lost profit damages for
Windmill II up to the date of the fire. We disagree.
The doctrine of commercial frustration “assumes the possibility of literal
performance but excuses performance because supervening events have
essentially destroyed the purpose for which the contract was made.” Perry v.
Company, 101 N.H. 97, 98 (1957). Under the doctrine, “a contract is to be
considered subject to the implied condition that the parties shall be excused in
case, before breach, the state of things constituting the fundamental basis of
the contract ceases to exist without default of either of the parties.” Days Inn
of America, Inc. v. Patel, 88 F. Supp. 2d 928, 934 (C.D. Ill. 2000) (quotations
omitted; emphasis added) (applying New Jersey law); see also Johnson v.
Atkins, 127 P.2d 1027, 1028 (Cal. Dist. Ct. App. 1942). Therefore, for the
doctrine to apply, the supervening event must occur before the party seeking
its protection otherwise breaches the contract. Accordingly, because “the party
claiming the benefit of the doctrine may not already be in breach of contract at
the time of the events giving rise to the application of the doctrine,” Days Inn of
America, Inc., 88 F. Supp. 2d at 934 (quotation omitted) (applying New Jersey
law), and Smirnioudis breached the leasing agreement prior to the fire, we
conclude that the doctrine of commercial frustration does not apply to this
case. See Gen. Elec. Capital Corp. v. Charleston, 1989 WL 9363, at *7 (E.D.
Pa. Feb. 6, 1989) (party could not claim benefit of commercial frustration
doctrine when party was in breach of contract at time of hotel fire) (applying
New Jersey law).
Smirnioudis next argues that the trial court failed to properly calculate
the replacement cost of linens when deducting that cost from damages due
General Linen. Specifically, he contends that the trial court erred by deducting
the replacement cost for a single type of linen item, such as a pair of pants,
rather than accounting for his use of multiples of each type of linen item. We
conclude that the record is sufficiently confusing as to warrant remand for
reconsideration of that portion of the damages award.
3
At the trial on damages, General Linen’s witness reviewed the company’s
methodology for calculating damages. In short, to determine its anticipated
lost profit, the company calculated the average weekly rental charge, then
deducted certain costs. Specifically, it deducted those costs it would not have
to incur to service the Smirnioudis account, such as delivery and laundry
costs, since the contract was not carried out. Included in the deductions was
the replacement cost of the linens that General Linen otherwise would have
incurred to replace items as they wore out from normal usage. A trial exhibit
included on appeal appears to itemize the replacement cost for single items,
such as an apron bib and a kitchen towel. The total cost of replacing these
single items was calculated to be $65.59. The trial court used this figure when
calculating damages and does not appear to have determined how many of
each item Smirnioudis had been using. For example, while the replacement
cost for a single apron bib was $12.73, if Smirnioudis were using twenty apron
bibs, the replacement cost for that category of item presumably would have
been $254.60. Indeed, another trial exhibit included in the appellate record
suggests that Smirnioudis had been using multiples of the different linen
items.
Notably, in its brief, General Linen did not address Smirnioudis’
argument concerning the replacement cost aspect of the trial court’s
calculation of damages. At trial, General Linen acknowledged that deduction
for replacement cost was proper. Although mathematical certainty is not
required for the calculation of damages, see T&M Assoc., 150 N.H. at 164, the
record leaves us uncertain whether the trial court recognized Smirnioudis’
multiple use of linen items when calculating the replacement cost deduction.
Accordingly, we vacate that portion of the damages award and remand.
We next address Smirnioudis’ argument that the trial court
misinterpreted evidence demonstrating that his last payment to General Linen
occurred in November, not October, 2000. Thus, he contends that he should
be credited for three additional weeks that he accepted and paid for linen
deliveries. The trial court accepted General Linen’s calculation of 140 weeks
remaining on the contract to determine damages. The invoice exhibits
Smirnioudis relies upon to assert that he had accepted and paid for an
additional three weeks of deliveries show two different dates: date of invoice
and purchase order date. While the date of invoice changes and extends into
November 2000, the purchase order date is fixed on each. Further, testimony
at trial supports the calculation of 140 weeks. Because the trial court’s finding
is supported by the evidence, we will not disturb it. See Crown Paper Co. v.
City of Berlin, 142 N.H. 563, 566 (1997).
Finally, we address Smirnioudis’ argument that the parties did not have
a meeting of the minds on the duration term in the contract. He contends that
4
the General Linen representative did not verbally disclose the three-year term
of the contract and that the evidence established that he cannot read the
English language. Therefore, according to Smirnioudis, the three-year duration
term is unenforceable. We disagree.
While originally from Greece, as of 2004 Smirnioudis has been in the
United States for thirty years and in the restaurant business for thirteen years.
At trial, Smirnioudis made the global assertion that he should be excused from
the contract in its entirety because he did not understand its terms due to his
poor command of the English language. The trial court rejected his argument,
finding:
The defendant has spent a number of years in this country and he
has been owner and operator of two commercial establishments for
some time. The Court finds that he had the requisite
understanding of the terms and conditions of the agreement to
bind himself to its terms. Further, the terms and conditions were
explained to him by [the General Linen representative].
In his argument before us, Smirnioudis isolates his purported inability to
read English to nullify one term of the contract. The trial court, however,
rejected the notion that Smirnioudis had limited understanding of the English
language which encumbered his ability to understand the terms of the
contract. While a General Linen representative testified at trial that he did not
verbally discuss with Smirnioudis the duration of the contract, the trial court’s
finding that Smirnioudis had the “requisite understanding of the terms and
conditions of the agreement” was not solely based upon the verbal discussion
between the two. Because Smirnioudis makes no allegation that the contract
itself lacked clarity on its duration, and the trial court made sufficient findings
based upon the evidence that he understood the terms and conditions of the
agreement, we will not disturb the trial court’s assessment of damages for the
three-year duration of the contract. See Crown Paper Co., 142 N.H. at 566
(finding of fact upheld unless unsupported by the evidence).
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5