THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-357
DAIMLERCHRYSLER CORPORATION
v.
DARREN VICTORIA
Argued: February 22, 2006
Opinion Issued: June 14, 2006
The Rose Law Firm, PLLC, of Albany, New York (G. Christopher Gleason
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Elyse S. Alkalay, attorney, on the brief
and orally), for the State of New Hampshire New Motor Vehicle Arbitration
Board, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, DaimlerChrysler Corporation, appeals the
decision of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) affirming the new motor vehicle
arbitration board’s (board) award to the defendant, Darren Victoria (consumer),
for his defective automobile. We vacate in part and remand.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. On
December 30, 2003, the consumer purchased a 2004 Dodge Neon SXT from
Rochester Dodge in Rochester (dealer), an independent authorized
DaimlerChrysler dealer. The manufacturer’s suggested retail price of the
vehicle was $15,990. The sale of the vehicle was memorialized in an agreement
executed by both parties, commonly known as a “vehicle cash purchase
agreement” or “buyer’s order.” The vehicle cash purchase agreement indicates
that the “sale price” of the vehicle was $15,600. As part of the transaction with
the dealer, the consumer “traded in” a 1999 Dodge Caravan. The agreement
indicates that the “allowance for used car as appraised” was $4,300. At the
time of the transaction, however, the consumer owed an outstanding balance
on the trade-in vehicle in the amount of $8,096.96; thus, the trade-in vehicle
had “negative equity.” The consumer and the dealer entered into a separate
agreement concerning the financing of the transaction, entitled “Retail
Installment Contract and Security Agreement.” On the retail installment
contract, the dealer documented the value of the trade-in vehicle as $8,300.
This value, which was substantially higher than the trade-in vehicle’s
appraisal, was designed to conceal the negative equity on the trade-in vehicle
in order to enable the consumer to obtain a new loan. The dealer then inflated
the purchase price of the new vehicle and documented the inflated “vehicle
price” on the retail installment contract as $19,002.04.
On April 22, 2004, the consumer filed a demand for arbitration with the
board, pursuant to RSA chapter 357-D, requesting a refund because oil was
continually leaking into the coolant system of the vehicle, a problem that he
had attempted to have repaired by the dealer three times. The petitioner, as
vehicle manufacturer, countered that the consumer was not entitled to a
refund because he had tampered with the vehicle. After a hearing, the board
concluded that there was no tangible evidence that he had tampered with the
vehicle and that its deficiencies were “the result of a manufacturer’s defect,”
which substantially impaired the use and market value of the vehicle. The
board granted the consumer’s request for a refund and calculated the
“Purchase Price of [V]ehicle” in the amount of $19,002.04, the vehicle price
listed in the retail installment contract. The dealer was exempt from any
liability or contribution. See RSA 357-D:1, :8 (1995).
The petitioner appealed to the trial court, pursuant to RSA 357-D:6, I (c),
arguing only that the board exceeded its powers when it determined that the
purchase price of the vehicle was $19,002.04. The trial court denied the
consumer’s motion to dismiss, relying upon RSA 357-D:6, I (c) (1995) to state:
“If the Board ordered a refund that is more than the [consumer] actually paid
for the vehicle as calculated pursuant to RSA 357-D:3, V, then the Board
exceeded its powers.” The trial court eventually concluded, however, that the
petitioner did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that the board
exceeded its powers. The trial court ruled: “As a policy, the Board adopts the
manufacturer’s agent’s vehicle price listed in the retail installment contract
when calculating the full purchase price in accordance with [RSA 357-D:3]
. . . . Under the circumstances, this interpretation of the statute and the
Board’s duties is reasonable and practical.” Accordingly, the trial court denied
the petitioner’s appeal.
2
On appeal, the petitioner argues before us that the board exceeded its
powers when it: (1) adopted the purchase price of the vehicle from the retail
installment contract; and (2) refused to consider evidence as to the actual
purchase price of the vehicle. The consumer did not participate in the
proceedings before this court. The board participated by brief and orally as
amicus curiae.
We first address the petitioner’s contention that the board exceeded its
powers by ignoring RSA 357-D:3, V (1995) when it adopted the purchase price
of the vehicle from the retail installment contract. The board counters that its
practice of adopting the vehicle purchase price listed in the retail installment
contract was reasonable and practical, given its claimed inability to distinguish
between the actual purchase price and a purchase price inflated to conceal
negative equity in a trade-in vehicle.
The trial court’s review of decisions of the board is governed by RSA 357-
D:6, I, which provides, in relevant part: “The decision of the board shall be
final and shall not be modified or vacated unless, on appeal to the superior
court, a party to the arbitration proceeding proves, by clear and convincing
evidence, that . . . [t]he board exceeded its powers.” RSA 357-D:6, I (c). We will
not disturb the trial court’s decision unless it is unsupported by the evidence
or legally erroneous. Conservation Law Found. v. N.H. Wetlands Council, 150
N.H. 1, 4 (2003).
To resolve the issue on appeal, we must interpret RSA 357-D:3, V, a
provision commonly known as the “Lemon Law,” which authorizes the board to
refund a consumer’s full purchase price for a new motor vehicle that does not
conform to warranty. See RSA 357-D:1, :3 (1995). This court is the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute
considered as a whole. DeLucca v. DeLucca, 152 N.H. 100, 103 (2005). In
interpreting a statute, we first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Id. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation. Id.
RSA 357-D:3, V states, in pertinent part:
In those instances in which a refund is tendered, the manufacturer
shall refund to the consumer the full purchase price as indicated
in the purchase contract and all credits and allowances for any
trade-in or down payment, license fees, finance charges, credit
charges, registration fees, and any similar charges and incidental
and consequential damages or, in the case of leased vehicles, as
provided in paragraph IX.
3
RSA 357-D:3, V (emphasis added). Thus, RSA 357-D:3, V directs the board to
adopt the “full purchase price” as set forth in the “purchase contract.” The
petitioner argues that the “purchase contract” means “the agreement for the
sale of the vehicle which is binding upon the parties.” The board counters that
we should, consistent with its “long standing administrative interpretation,”
construe “purchase contract” to mean the “retail installment contract.” The
board does not explain how the plain language of the statute supports such a
construction. RSA chapter 357-D does not define “purchase contract,” nor has
the legislature defined that phrase in any analogous statutory context. While
the phrase “purchase contract” is also not defined by the definitional resources
commonly relied upon by this court, “purchase,” in isolation, can mean “the act
or an instance of buying,” Black’s Law Dictionary 1270 (8th ed. 2004), and
“contract” can mean “an agreement between two or more parties creating
obligations that are enforceable or otherwise recognizable at law,” id. at 341.
The legislature defined “retail installment contract,” by contrast, in RSA
chapter 361-A, governing retail installment sales of motor vehicles, to mean,
“an agreement pursuant to which the title to, the property in, or a lien upon
the motor vehicle, which is the subject matter of a retail installment
transaction, is retained or taken by a sales finance company indirectly from a
retail seller or directly from a retail buyer, as security . . . for the retail buyer’s
obligation.” RSA 361-A:1, X (Supp. 2005). As a general principle of statutory
construction, we presume that the legislature knew the meaning of the words
it chose, and that it used those words advisedly. Starr v. Governor, 151 N.H.
608, 610 (2004). Had it intended to define a “purchase contract” as a “retail
installment contract,” it could have expressly done so, especially where it
included that term in an analogous statutory context prior to the re-enactment
of RSA 357-D:3. See RSA 361-A:1, X; see also Laws 1961, 193:1.
RSA 357-D:1, entitled “intent,” also supports the petitioner’s
interpretation:
[M]anufacturers, distributors and importers of new motor vehicles
should be obligated to provide speedy and less costly resolution of
automobile warranty problems. Manufacturers should be required
to provide in as expeditious a manner as possible a refund of the
consumer’s purchase price, payments to a lessor and lessee, or a
replacement vehicle that is acceptable to the consumer whenever
the manufacturer is unable to make the vehicle conform with its
applicable warranty. New motor vehicle dealers and used motor
vehicle dealers cannot be sued under this chapter.
RSA 357-D:1 (emphasis added). RSA 357-D:1 suggests that the Lemon Law is
remedial in nature, and not punitive, as it was designed to refund “the
4
consumer’s purchase price” for a new motor vehicle that does not conform to
warranty. There is nothing in the plain language of RSA 357-D:1 that suggests
that the legislature intended for a prevailing consumer to enjoy a windfall
thereunder. Although the board’s interpretation of the statute is given some
weight, see N.H. Dep’t of Rev. Administration v. Public Emp. Lab. Rel. Bd., 117
N.H. 976, 977 (1977), its interpretation here, permitting a Lemon Law refund to
be based upon the admittedly inflated figures in the retail installment contract,
would be contrary to legislative intent as discerned from the statutory scheme,
as it could place the consumer in a significantly better position than he or she
was in prior to buying the vehicle.
The board argues, however, that it had to award the inflated vehicle price
in the retail installment contract to make the consumer “whole,” as
contemplated by RSA chapter 357-D. Specifically, it argues that “the consumer
was in the possession of a used motor vehicle before the trade-in . . . . At the
time of an arbitration refund, the manufacturer will most probably not be able
to obtain the used car the consumer tendered to the dealer as part of the
contract.” While RSA 357-D:3, V directs the board to refund to a prevailing
consumer, among other things, “the full purchase price as indicated in the
purchase contract and all credits and allowances for any trade-in or down
payment,” the statute issues no explicit directive to refund an amount
sufficient to reacquire the original trade-in vehicle. We invite the legislature to
clarify RSA chapter 357-D if our interpretation is inconsistent with its intent.
The board further contends that disregarding the retail installment
contract would be tantamount to “condoning the manufacturers’ and the
dealers’ unlawful and unfair practice[]” of improperly documenting negative
equity. It relies upon Thompson v. 10,000 R.V. Sales, Inc., 31 Cal. Rptr. 3d 18
(Ct. App. 2005), to support its position. In Thompson, a California court of
appeal upheld an injunction against an RV dealer, preventing it from including
negative equity “in the cash price of vehicles being purchased,” as the practice
violated the California Automobile Sales Finance Act, Cal. Civ. Code § 2982
(Deering 1998) and its corresponding federal regulation, 12 C.F.R. § 226.1
(2005) (revised January 1, 2006). Id. at 23, 36-37. The propriety of this
practice, however, is not before this court for review. Moreover, as the
petitioner points out, it is RSA chapter 357-C, entitled “Regulation of Business
Practices Between Motor Vehicle Manufacturers, Distributors and Dealers,”
and not the Lemon Law, that prohibits unfair and deceptive practices by
manufacturers and dealers. RSA 357-C:3 (Supp. 2005). RSA 357-D:3, V
explicitly directs the board to refund the “full purchase price,” which
necessarily contemplates only the actual amount required to purchase the
vehicle rather than an inflated value bearing no relationship to the actual cost
to the consumer.
5
Finally, the board argues: “[W]hile a consumer may be in a superior
position after a refund . . . as compared to the consumer’s position prior to the
contract, manufacturers are in the unique position to restrain their agents
(namely, the dealers) through their contractual relationships from executing
undisclosed negative equity contracts.” The petitioner counters that it has no
agency relationship with the dealer, although the record is silent on that issue.
The petitioner also contends that it is prevented by statute from attempting to
restrain its independent dealers in the manner suggested by the board because
RSA chapter 357-C strictly regulates the contractual relationships between
manufacturers and their independent authorized dealers. We need not reach
the merits of these arguments for, as addressed above, the propriety of the
financing transaction in this case is not before us. Thus, in the absence of an
explicit legislative directive, we decline the board’s request to transform the
Lemon Law into a mechanism for policing such practices between a dealer and
consenting consumer. Accordingly, we conclude that the board exceeded its
powers by adopting the inflated vehicle price as set forth in the retail
installment contract.
We next address the petitioner’s contention that the board exceeded its
powers by “refusing to consider evidence presented at the hearing as to the
actual purchase price of the vehicle.” Specifically, the petitioner argues that
the board refused to consider the vehicle price listed in the vehicle cash
purchase agreement. The record reveals, however, that the board permitted
the petitioner to introduce into evidence the vehicle cash purchase agreement.
The board did not expressly acknowledge the vehicle cash purchase agreement
in its findings of fact or rulings of law and the record is silent as to whether it
actually “considered” the vehicle cash purchase agreement. Consequently, we
vacate in part, as the board exceeded its powers by adopting the inflated
vehicle price as set forth in the retail installment contract, and remand to the
board for a determination of the “full purchase price as indicated in the
purchase contract,” RSA 357-D:3, V, in a manner consistent with this opinion.
Vacated in part and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
6