THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. LD-2003-011
COFFEY'S CASE
Argued: June 15, 2005
Opinion Issued: August 12, 2005
Law Office of Rodney L. Stark, P.A., of Manchester (Rodney L. Stark and
Sherry M. Hieber on the brief, and Mr. Stark orally), for the committee on
professional conduct.
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and Paul
McEachern on the brief, and Mr. Shaines orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. On December 29, 2003, the Supreme Court Committee on
Professional Conduct (committee) filed a petition to suspend the respondent,
John J. Coffey, from the practice of law for two years. We referred the petition
to a Judicial Referee (Manias, J.) for a hearing. The referee found by clear and
convincing evidence that the respondent violated New Hampshire Rules of
Professional Conduct 1.4(b), 1.5(a), 1.7(b), 1.8(a)(1), 1.8(b), 1.8(j), 2.1 and 8.4(a)
and recommended a two-year suspension. We adopt the referee’s findings, but
we conclude that the respondent’s conduct warrants disbarment.
The referee found, and the record supports, the following facts. On July
9, 1998, the respondent’s client, Natalie Hopkins, signed a deed conveying to
the respondent property located on Ocean Boulevard in Rye. The conveyance
was for a stated consideration of $50,000, which was based in part upon the
respondent’s estimated fee of $30,000 for handling an appeal to this court.
The property had been assessed at over $200,000.
The events leading up to this conveyance began in June 1970, when
Hopkins and her friends, John and Caroline Canty, purchased the Rye
property as joint tenants with the right of survivorship. The property passed to
Hopkins after Caroline Canty died in 1986 and John Canty died in 1991.
From 1992 to 1996, the Cantys’ son, John Canty, Jr., made various
claims in probate court concerning his father’s estate. The respondent
represented Hopkins in these proceedings and drafted her will, which
bequeathed the property to John Canty, Sr.’s grandchildren. The probate court
ruled in Hopkins’ favor and, on appeal, we summarily affirmed the probate
court’s decision. See In re Estate of John F. Canty, No. 95-874 (N.H. May 3,
1996).
Nonetheless, John Canty, Jr. continued to press his claims and sued
Hopkins in 1997, claiming to have a remainder interest in the Rye property.
The respondent, on Hopkins’ behalf, moved to dismiss the suit on res judicata
grounds. The trial court granted the motion and Canty appealed to this court.
See generally Canty v. Hopkins, 146 N.H. 151 (2001). We accepted the appeal
on April 28, 1998.
In May 1998, the respondent discussed the cost of the appeal with
Hopkins and told her that the appeal could cost more than $30,000. Hopkins
told the respondent that she did not want to dip into her liquid assets and he
proposed to take a mortgage on the Rye property as payment for her legal fees.
On June 2, 1998, the respondent sent Hopkins a letter stating that the
appeal would be “very expensive.” He noted that they had discussed “an
alternative means for payment” and that if she was no longer interested in this
alternative means, he would require a retainer of $30,000 and that his fee for
the appeal could exceed that retainer. After Hopkins indicated that she was
not interested in mortgaging the property, the respondent proposed that he
purchase the property.
The respondent recommended three law firms in the Portsmouth area
with real estate practices to draft a deed conveying the property to the
2
respondent. Hopkins selected Attorney Bernard Pelech, whom the respondent
contacted to prepare a warranty deed conveying the property to him “largely
[as] a gift, and partly for fees,” subject to a life estate for Hopkins. The
respondent paid Attorney Pelech for this service.
Hopkins signed the deed on July 9, 1998, in Attorney Pelech’s office. The
respondent was also present. Attorney Pelech testified that his understanding
was that Hopkins owed the respondent $40,000 in past legal bills and that the
conveyance would be in consideration for past and future legal services. The
respondent’s billing records indicate that Hopkins actually owed $5,305 for the
work that had been done on the appeal through May 27, 1998. Attorney
Pelech also was unaware that the property being conveyed was the subject
matter of the pending appeal.
At the time Hopkins deeded the Rye property to the respondent, she was
eighty-one years old and her mental condition was deteriorating. The referee
found “overwhelming evidence” that she was “at best, mentally impaired, and
at worst, suffering from dementia because of Alzheimer’s [disease].” The referee
also found “by clear and convincing evidence that [Ms.] Hopkins lacked the
mental capacity to make an informed decision about conveying the Rye
property to the respondent on July 9, 1998.” In reaching this conclusion, the
referee relied upon medical evidence as well as the testimony of friends,
neighbors, police and nurses who had contact with Hopkins in late 1997 and
the first half of 1998.
Hopkins’ primary care physician testified that he examined her twice in
March 1998 and determined she suffered from “early dementia, probably
Alzheimer’s disease.” She had weeping ulcers on her legs and appeared
disheveled, upset and confused. Soon after these examinations, Hopkins was
hospitalized because of the leg ulcers and confusion. On April 4, 1998, a
psychiatrist examined her and determined that her immediate recall and short-
term memory were impaired, her insight and judgment were poor and she was
suffering from dementia, most likely of the Alzheimer’s type.
Hopkins’ neighbor, Mary Lou Lannon, testified that Hopkins, who
formerly taught at Connecticut College, was very sharp and well-dressed until
September 1997. After that, Hopkins’ house was unkempt. By December
1997, Lannon visited Hopkins almost every day. She said that the house was
filled with bags, the bed was covered with things Hopkins had bought and
there were so many things in the house, a person would have to make a path
to get through it. Another neighbor said the house was filled with junk mail,
newspapers, magazines and food. Although the respondent visited Hopkins in
her home and observed her hoarding behavior, he testified that he did not see
it as a problem.
3
By spring of 1998, Hopkins was unable to use her checkbook to pay bills
so that, on some occasions, she had no lights, telephone or hot water. Hopkins
also did not bathe and became incontinent. She smelled of urine in public.
A Rye police officer responded to a number of calls at Hopkins’ residence
in the spring of 1998. He also said the house was cluttered with canned goods,
groceries and magazines. On April 13, the officer responded to a call from
Hopkins in which she reported that there were two intruders in her bedroom.
When the officer arrived at her house, Hopkins insisted that the strangers were
still there but the officer checked the bedroom and found no evidence of an
intruder.
The respondent testified that the police officer called him on April 14,
1998, regarding the call the previous day and that the officer told him that
Hopkins was “very sharp.” The officer did not remember making this call.
During this time, Hopkins was also visited by the Visiting Nurses
Association (VNA). Their records showed that in June 1998, Hopkins began
taking Aricept, a medication for patients with early signs of dementia.
Nonetheless, her condition deteriorated. She exhibited confused, rambling
speech, loose associations and “echolalia,” which causes people to repeat over
and over what they have heard. By late June, a nurse noted that Hopkins
smelled of urine and was beginning to exhibit signs of fecal incontinence.
Although the respondent and Attorney Pelech both testified that Hopkins
was mentally competent to deed her home to the respondent, the referee did
not find this testimony credible “[i]n light of the overwhelming evidence to the
contrary.” Based upon these factual findings, and others set forth below, the
referee found that the respondent had violated multiple Rules of Professional
Conduct. The referee found that the respondent violated these rules
“knowingly, as opposed to negligently and that his conduct caused injury or
potential injury to [Ms.] Hopkins.”
The referee found as aggravating factors Hopkins’ vulnerability, the
respondent’s selfish motive and his substantial experience in the practice of
law. As mitigating factors, the referee found the respondent’s unblemished
disciplinary record, his cooperation with the committee’s investigation and his
character and reputation. The referee recommends that the respondent be
suspended from the practice of law for two years.
In a lawyer discipline case, “although we defer to the referee’s factual
findings if supported by the record, we retain the ultimate authority to
determine whether, on the facts found, a violation of the rules governing
attorney conduct has occurred and, if so, the appropriate sanction.” Kersey’s
Case, 150 N.H. 585, 586, cert. denied, 125 S. Ct. 97 (2004) (quotation omitted).
4
We review the findings made by the referee to determine whether a reasonable
person could reach the same conclusion based upon the evidence presented.
Id.
The committee accepted the referee’s report but noted that the referee
had failed to address its request that the respondent be assessed the expenses
incurred in the investigation and prosecution of the petition. In his initial reply
to the referee’s report, the respondent indicated he “does not challenge the
report of the referee and he does not desire to be heard thereon.” The
respondent, however, objected to the committee’s request for assessment of
expenses. The committee argues that because the respondent initially did not
contest the referee’s finding that he violated the Rules of Professional Conduct,
the only issue before this court is the appropriate sanction.
After we ordered briefing and oral argument the respondent raised four
issues: First, whether there was sufficient evidence to support the referee’s
finding concerning Hopkins’ deteriorating mental condition and respondent’s
awareness of that condition; second, whether under Rule 1.8(j), the deed
conveyed an interest in the property that was the subject of the litigation; third,
whether the respondent’s estimate of $30,000 for handling Hopkins’ case on
appeal was clearly excessive; and fourth, whether the Rules of Professional
Conduct were used in an improper fashion to create multiple violations out of a
single fact pattern.
I. Waiver
We first address the committee’s argument that the respondent waived
his right to challenge the referee’s finding that he violated the Rules of
Professional Conduct by initially indicating that he did not challenge the
referee’s report and did not wish to be heard. In support of this argument, the
committee relies upon O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. 157, 159 (2003), and Jones’
Case, 137 N.H. 351, 357 (1993). In both cases, however, the respondent
argued only the appropriateness of the sanction and never contested the
referees’ findings concerning substantive violations of the Rules of Professional
Conduct.
Construing the respondent’s initial acquiescence in the referee’s findings
and recommendations as limiting the issues he can subsequently raise would
create a procedural trap in attorney discipline cases. It may be that the
respondent initially accepted the referee’s report in hopes that we would also
accept the report without briefing and oral argument and would not consider a
harsher sanction. The attorney’s decision to accept the substantive violations
is part of this tactical decision. To penalize the respondent for this tactical
decision would discourage other attorneys from accepting the referee’s findings
in future cases. We thus conclude that because we ordered further briefing
5
and oral argument in this case, the respondent may challenge the referee’s
findings concerning violations of the Rules of Professional Conduct as well as
the recommended sanction.
II. Hopkins’ mental condition
The respondent first challenges the referee’s findings concerning
Hopkins’ mental condition. He points to evidence suggesting that any mental
impairment was at an early stage and that Hopkins was responding positively
to Aricept. The respondent relies upon, for example, a VNA notation on July 8,
1998, that Hopkins’ “overall orientation to time and date improved, secondary
to Aricept therapy” and that on July 9, the day she signed the deed, her mental
status was recorded as alert and oriented. The respondent’s secretary testified
that Hopkins was competent when she executed a will on July 9 in the
respondent’s office and another attorney testified that Hopkins was able to
execute two powers of attorney in February 1999. Although there is some
evidence to support the respondent’s contention, there is also substantial
evidence to support the referee’s conclusion that Hopkins lacked the mental
capacity to make an informed decision about conveying the Rye property to the
respondent. We thus defer to the referee’s finding on this issue. See Kersey’s
Case, 150 N.H. at 586.
The respondent also argues that there was “substantial evidence” that
Hopkins intended to convey the Rye property to him as a gift. He argues that
Hopkins had the mental capacity to make this gift based upon the testimony of
Donna Williams, an elderly protection worker at the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services, and Attorney Pelech’s assessment
that Hopkins understood the nature of the transaction.
Although the respondent testified that Hopkins proposed to convey the
property to him as a gift, the referee found this testimony “not credible” for two
reasons. First, unlike many other conversations with Hopkins, the respondent
had no handwritten notes concerning their discussions of the cost of the
appeal and alternative methods for payment. Second, Lannon testified that
Hopkins told her the respondent wanted to buy her home. Lannon’s testimony
was corroborated by an entry in her personal journal on May 12, 1998, noting
that Hopkins told her that the respondent wanted to purchase the Rye
property. Thus, the respondent’s claim that Hopkins intended to convey the
Rye property to him as a gift is not compelled by the record.
With respect to the respondent’s knowledge of Hopkins’ condition, the
respondent argues that no one informed him of Hopkins’ mental deterioration
and that “[l]awyers are trained to perform legal services not psychological
services.” The referee found that at the time of the transaction, the respondent
had known Hopkins for twenty years and represented her for eight years, had
6
drafted her will and had a power of attorney for her. He knew Hopkins to be
bright, strong-willed and meticulous in her appearance. The referee found, and
we agree, that it is not credible that someone who had known and represented
Hopkins for this long did not notice that, by the spring of 1998, she had
mentally deteriorated to a significant degree. In addition to appearing
disheveled and dirty, Lannon testified that Hopkins could not recall why the
respondent took her to meet Attorney Pelech in July 1998 or whether she had
signed anything at that meeting. Lannon also testified that she informed the
respondent that Hopkins could not manage her checkbook and her utilities
were turned off because she failed to pay her bills.
Moreover, although there is no documentation showing that the
respondent was informed specifically that Hopkins suffered from dementia, the
evidence establishes that, at a minimum, he knew that Hopkins was admitted
to the hospital in April of 1998, that she was in a car accident on June 29,
1998, that Lannon was concerned that Hopkins was not paying her bills and
that she smelled of urine when she signed the deed in Attorney Pelech’s office.
To the extent that the respondent asserts that he was “absolutely
unaware” of Hopkins’ deteriorating mental condition, the referee found by clear
and convincing evidence that this was by choice and that the respondent
turned a “blind eye” towards Hopkins’ mental condition. Indeed, the
respondent testified, “[U]nless someone took it upon themselves to tell me that
there was something wrong with Natalie Hopkins, there was no way for me to
know it.” Although he had many opportunities to do so, the respondent made
no effort to ascertain whether she had the mental capacity to make informed
decisions. For example, when the respondent spoke with Ms. Weibold, a social
worker from the VNA, he told her that he saw no need for a case conference for
Hopkins and that he was Hopkins’ only support. Like the issue of Hopkins’
mental state, the issue of the respondent’s knowledge is a factual one. The
evidence detailed above supports the referee’s finding on this issue.
III. Rule 1.8(j)
The second issue raised by the respondent is whether he acquired “a
proprietary interest” in the litigation he was conducting for Hopkins as
prohibited by Rule 1.8(j). The respondent argues that his interest in the Rye
property was “not dependent on the outcome of the litigation in any way”
because at the time Hopkins deeded the property to the respondent, John
Canty, Jr.’s claim against the property had already been dismissed on res
judicata grounds by the superior court. The respondent apparently asks us to
conclude that because Canty’s claim was frivolous, Rule 1.8(j) does not apply.
The referee ruled that Rule 1.8(j) has no exception for frivolous claims. We
agree.
7
Rule 1.8(j) provides, in pertinent part: “A lawyer shall not acquire a
proprietary interest in the cause of action or subject matter of litigation the
lawyer is conducting for a client . . . .” Here, the subject matter of the litigation
was the Rye property and Hopkins deeded an interest in that property to the
respondent. The respondent cites no authority for his argument that if the
cause of action is frivolous, Rule 1.8(j) has no applicability. Moreover, to adopt
such an exception would create uncertainty as to the scope of Rule 1.8(j). We
therefore reject his argument.
IV. Rule 1.5(a)
The third issue raised by the respondent is whether there was sufficient
evidence to support the referee’s finding that his estimated and actual fee for
handling the appeal was “clearly excessive” under Rule 1.5(a). To prove a
violation of Rule 1.5(a), the committee “must present evidence establishing a
generally accepted, reasonable fee for the services in question.” Kelley’s Case,
137 N.H. 314, 320 (1993). “Once a reasonable fee has been determined, the
referee, and this court upon review of the referee’s findings, will be able to
measure the allegedly excessive fee against the reasonable fee to determine
whether the fee charged violated Rule 1.5(a).” Id. We thus review de novo
whether the fee was clearly excessive.
The referee relied upon the testimony of the committee’s expert, Attorney
Elizabeth Cazden, who has handled numerous appeals, including fifty-four
reported decisions. Attorney Cazden testified that a reasonable fee for the
Canty appeal would be in the “five to ten thousand dollar range” but could be
as much as $12,000. She based this opinion on several factors including that
the respondent’s fee at the superior court level was under $3,000, there was no
transcript to review because the issue was purely legal, the respondent was
already familiar with the case and, because he represented the appellee, he
only had to respond to the appellant’s arguments. Attorney Cazden also
testified that a typical State supreme court appeal would require between thirty
and seventy-five hours of work by the attorney.
Review of the respondent’s billing records showed that he billed 225
hours to write the brief, including “day after day after day of anywhere from ten
to eighteen hours,” and eighty-five hours to prepare for the oral argument.
During his two-week vacation in July 1998, the respondent billed forty-nine
hours reviewing twenty-four cases cited in the appellant’s brief while he was
out of town without access to research facilities. The respondent admitted that
his billing records reflect a combination of his hours and his paralegal’s and
secretary’s time and that all of the time was billed at the rate of $175 per hour.
Attorney Cazden concluded that both the estimated fee of $30,000 and the
actual fee of $64,242.89 charged for the appeal were clearly excessive.
8
The respondent’s brief completely ignores Attorney Cazden’s testimony.
The respondent instead relies upon the testimony of Attorney Pelech and the
respondent’s expert, Attorney John McGee. McGee testified that in his opinion,
the estimated fee of $30,000 was not unreasonable. Pelech testified that fees
for appeals vary considerably and that in one case, he charged a client $12,000
for an appeal when another firm had quoted the same client a fee of $35,000.
The respondent also relies upon the fact that he received $33,000 in 2001 as a
settlement of the fees Hopkins’ estate owed to him.
With respect to the probative value of the settlement, we note that the
settlement was for “the value of services to the decedent during her lifetime.”
Thus, the settlement included not only the fee for the appeal but other services
as well. More fundamentally, the amount of a settlement is of little probative
value on the reasonableness of a fee. See N.H. R. Ev. 408 (making inadmissible
into evidence the compromise of a claim to prove its amount).
Neither of the respondent’s witnesses squarely addressed the actual fee.
McGee testified about a $30,000 fee, which was only the estimated fee and
retainer in this case. Pelech’s comparison of his fee in one case to the fee
charged by another firm was of little probative value. We thus agree with the
referee that Attorney Cazden’s testimony was more persuasive and we adopt
his finding that the respondent’s fee was clearly excessive.
V. Rule 8.4(a)
Finally, the respondent argues that “[t]he rules of [professional] conduct
should not be used in a prosecutorial fashion to create multiple violations out
of a single fact pattern,” and that Rule 8.4(a), which states that it is
professional misconduct for a lawyer to violate any of the other Rules, is
duplicitous and “destroys professional livelihoods and reputations.” We need
not address this argument, however, because “[t]he gravity of unprofessional
conduct is not determined solely by the number of rules broken or by the
particular rules violated, but is determined largely with reference to the
attorney’s behavior.” Flint’s Case, 133 N.H. 685, 689 (1990).
We thus reject the respondent’s contention that Hopkins had the mental
capacity to deed the Rye property to him as a gift and that he did not know
that her mental condition had deteriorated at the time of the conveyance. We
adopt the referee’s findings that the respondent violated the following Rules of
Professional Conduct:
(1) Rule 1.4(b) by failing to explain to his client the legal and
practical aspects of a matter and alternative courses of action;
(2) Rule 1.5(a) by charging his client a clearly excessive fee;
9
(3) Rule 1.7(b) by allowing his representation of his client to be
materially limited by his own interests;
(4) Rule 1.8(a)(1) by knowingly acquiring an interest adverse to his
client and entering into a transaction with his client, the terms of
which were unreasonable to her;
(5) Rule 1.8(b) by using information related to the representation
of his client to her disadvantage and without her informed consent;
(6) Rule 1.8(j) by acquiring a proprietary interest in the subject
matter of litigation in which he was representing his client;
(7) Rule 2.1 by failing to exercise independent professional
judgment in rendering advice to his client; and
(8) Rule 8.4(a) by violating the Rules of Professional Conduct.
VI. Sanction
Having found that the respondent violated the Rules of Professional
Conduct noted above, we next consider the appropriate sanction. In exercising
our authority, we are mindful that discipline is not intended as a mode of
inflicting punishment for an offense. O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. at 159. Rather,
its purpose “is to protect the public, maintain public confidence in the bar,
preserve the integrity of the legal profession, and prevent similar conduct in the
future.” Id. (quotation omitted). The sanction we impose must take into
account the severity of the misconduct. Id.
Although we have not adopted the ABA Standards for Imposing Lawyer
Sanctions (1992) (Standards), we look to them for guidance. Feld’s Case, 149
N.H. 19, 28 (2002), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 815 (2003). The Standards set forth
the following factors for courts to consider in imposing sanctions: “(a) the duty
violated; (b) the lawyer’s mental state; (c) the potential or actual injury caused
by the lawyer’s misconduct; and (d) the existence of aggravating or mitigating
factors.” Standards, supra § 3.0; see Kersey’s Case, 150 N.H. at 587.
The respondent violated Rules 1.7 and 1.8 by allowing his representation
of Hopkins to be materially limited by his own interests, knowingly acquiring
an interest adverse to his client, entering into an unreasonable transaction
with his client, using information related to the representation of Hopkins to
her disadvantage and acquiring a proprietary interest in the subject matter of
the litigation. These actions resulted in a breach of the respondent’s duty to
avoid conflicts of interest. According to the Standards,
10
Disbarment is generally appropriate when a lawyer, without the
informed consent of [the client] . . . engages in representation of a
client knowing that the lawyer’s interests are adverse to the client’s
with the intent to benefit the lawyer or another, and causes serious
or potentially serious injury to the client.
Standards, supra § 4.31(a). Suspension, on the other hand, “is generally
appropriate when a lawyer knows of a conflict of interest and does not fully
disclose to a client the possible effect of that conflict, and causes injury or
potential injury to a client.” Id. § 4.32.
Here, the respondent knowingly entered into a transaction with his client
that resulted in his acquisition of an interest in Hopkins’ real property for
substantially less than the fair market value of the property. Even if there was
evidence to support the respondent’s contention that Hopkins intended to
transfer the property as a gift, the respondent failed to ensure that Hopkins
obtained detached advice from a lawyer who was fully informed of the
circumstances and could independently assess her mental condition. See N.H.
R. Prof. Conduct 1.8 ABA Model Code Comments.
Section 7.0 of the Standards addresses the appropriate sanction to be
imposed when a lawyer charges a client unreasonable or improper fees.
“Disbarment is generally appropriate when a lawyer knowingly engages in
conduct that is a violation of a duty owed as a professional with the intent to
obtain a benefit for the lawyer or another, and causes serious or potentially
serious injury to a client . . . .” Standards, supra § 7.1. As discussed above,
the respondent’s actual and estimated fees for representing Hopkins were
clearly excessive and the real estate he received in exchange for his legal
services was worth substantially more than the amount that Hopkins owed.
Thus, we find that the respondent knowingly engaged in conduct that violated
his duties as a professional with the intent to benefit himself.
We also find that the respondent’s actions caused serious injury to
Hopkins. As a result of the conveyance, the respondent received property that
was worth over $200,000 in consideration for a fee that was clearly excessive
for the legal services provided. Hopkins and her estate then engaged in a
protracted series of lawsuits in order to recover the property.
Before we determine the appropriate sanction, we must also consider
aggravating and mitigating factors. As mitigating factors, the referee found:
“(1) the respondent’s prior unblemished disciplinary record; (2) his cooperation
with the [c]ommittee’s investigation; and (3) his character and reputation.” The
referee also found the following aggravating factors: “(1) [Ms.] Hopkins’
11
vulnerability; (2) the respondent’s selfish motive; and (3) his substantial
experience in the practice of law.” See Standards, supra §§ 9.22, 9.32.
We agree with the referee that there are two mitigating factors present in
this case; however, we do not ascribe them significant weight. We acknowledge
that good character and reputation are mitigating factors. See Standards,
supra § 9.32(g). In addition, “[a]bsence of a prior disciplinary record is an
acknowledged mitigator, but it does not dispense with the necessity for
disciplinary action.” Jones’ Case, 137 N.H. at 360.
We disagree, however, with the referee’s finding that the respondent’s
level of cooperation is a mitigating factor in this case. First, “a lawyer has a
professional duty to cooperate with the committee’s investigation.” Richmond’s
Case, 152 N.H. ___, ___, 872 A.2d 1023, 1030 (2005). Second, the referee
found, and we agree, that the respondent’s testimony concerning Hopkins’
mental condition and his knowledge of her deteriorating health was not
credible. Third, the respondent has failed to acknowledge the wrongfulness of
his actions and has not shown the level of remorse that we have found to be
mitigating in other cases. Cf. O’Meara’s Case, 150 N.H. at 159; Kalil’s Case,
146 N.H. 466, 467 (2001).
With regard to aggravating factors, we agree that the respondent acted
selfishly by charging excessive fees and entering into a transaction with his
client, the terms of which were unreasonable to her. The respondent’s conduct
was particularly egregious in light of Hopkins’ vulnerability due to her declining
mental health. We agree with the referee that substantial experience in the
practice of law is an additional aggravating factor. Standards, supra §§ 9.22(d),
9.22(i); see also Richmond’s Case, 152 N.H. at ___, 872 A.2d at 1030.
Furthermore, the respondent has not accepted responsibility for his ethical
violations, but has instead maintained that he followed the proper procedure in
arranging for Hopkins to deed the Rye property to him as a gift. See
Standards, supra § 9.22(g). We find that these important aggravating factors
justify an increase in the level of sanction recommended.
In light of the serious injury suffered by Hopkins and the significant
aggravating factors present in this case, we disagree with the referee that a
two-year suspension is an adequate sanction. Rather, we conclude that
disbarment is necessary for the protection of the public and the preservation of
the integrity of the legal profession. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(13)(f) (2003; amended
2003). The conduct of a lawyer who selfishly takes advantage of an elderly,
mentally ill client by charging an exorbitant fee and then relies upon less than
forthright testimony to defend his conduct requires disbarment. Accordingly,
the respondent is hereby disbarred and is ordered to reimburse the committee
12
for all of its expenses, including legal fees, incurred in investigating and
prosecuting this matter. See Sup. Ct. R. 37(16) (2003; amended 2003).
So Ordered.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY, J., concurred; HORTON, J., retired,
specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred.
13