THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-669
BLAGBROUGH FAMILY REALTY TRUST
v.
A & T FOREST PRODUCTS, INC. & a.
Argued: November 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 28, 2007
Cleveland, Waters and Bass, P.A., of Concord (William B. Pribis on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Patricia M. Panciocco and Gregory
E. Michael on the brief, and Mr. Michael orally), for defendant A & T Forest
Products, Inc.
Fernald, Taft, Falby & Little, P.A., of Peterborough (Silas Little on the
brief and orally), for defendant Town of Wilton.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Blagbrough Family Realty Trust (Blagbrough),
and defendant A & T Forest Products (A & T) cross-appeal an opinion and order
of the Trial Court (Lynn, C.J.), on two consolidated cases: (1) an appeal from a
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) of the Town of Wilton (Town)
granting a building permit to A & T; and (2) a petition to quiet title. We affirm
in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Background
Litigation involving the parties and the land here at issue was the subject
of two previous opinions of this court. See Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v.
Town of Wilton, 153 N.H. 234 (2006); Blagbrough v. Town of Wilton, 145 N.H.
118 (2000). Here we recite the facts pertinent to this appeal as found by the
trial court.
Blagbrough owns real property located at 293 Burton Highway in Wilton,
which is identified on the Town’s tax map as Lot A-22. A & T owns an
adjoining parcel, identified on the Town’s tax map as Lot A-21, and had
obtained approval to subdivide it into two lots: Lots A-21-1 and A-21-2. Both
Lot A-22 and Lot A-21 are bounded to the north by Old Peterborough Road and
were at one time under the common ownership of John and Anne Dimeling.
A & T also owns another parcel identified as Lot A-30, which is situated north
of Old Peterborough Road.
A & T acquired Lots A-21 and A-30 on February 20, 2001, by warranty
deed from heirs of the Dimelings. Blagbrough acquired Lot A-22 from the
Dimelings by warranty deed dated September 16, 1963. The deed for the
Blagbrough parcel contains a typed paragraph indicating that the conveyance
included a canal easement with certain flowage rights therein. However, a line
was drawn through the canal easement paragraph and a handwritten notation
was inserted. It reads, “Above paragraph deleted – pertinent to land retained
by Dimelings.” The deed also grants Blagbrough an easement to use and
access a well located on land which was, at the time, retained by the Dimelings
(now Lot A-21-1). The well provided water for the house on the Blagbrough’s
parcel, but the trial court found that the well has not been used as a source of
drinking water since 1985.
On September 29, 2003, the Town’s board of selectmen (the selectmen)
voted to authorize a building permit for A & T to construct a single family home
on Lot A-30. Blagbrough appealed the selectmen’s decision to the ZBA. The
ZBA upheld the selectmen’s decision and later denied Blagbrough’s motion for
rehearing. Blagbrough then appealed to the superior court.
Blagbrough also brought a petition to quiet title in superior court,
seeking a declaration that it: (1) had acquired a portion of Lot A-21-1 through
adverse possession; (2) had certain rights to the canal easement (described
above); (3) had acquired a portion of Old Peterborough Road through adverse
possession; and (4) was entitled to damages for interference with the well and
canal easements that allegedly occurred when A & T removed timber and
2
hauled it across Lot A-21-1. In response to a motion filed by Blagbrough, the
ZBA appeal was consolidated with the quiet title petition, and both matters
became the subject of a two-day bench trial and a subsequent hearing on
damages.
When all was said and done, the trial court ruled that: (1) Blagbrough
had acquired a portion of Lot A-21-1 by adverse possession; (2) Blagbrough
had certain rights in the canal easement; (3) Blagbrough had not acquired any
portion of Old Peterborough Road through adverse possession; (4) the decision
of the ZBA was neither unlawful nor unreasonable; (5) A & T was required to
replace a portion of the pipe running from the well on Lot A-21 to the
Blagbrough property; and (6) A & T was required to repair some damage to the
canal. Blagbrough then appealed and A & T cross-appealed, placing these
rulings in dispute.
II. Adverse Possession: Lot A-21-1
The trial court found that, according to the pertinent deeds, the
boundary between Lots A-22 and A-21-1 is “a straight course running between
two granite bounds, one located on the northern side of the Burton Highway
and the other located on the southern side of the so-called ‘Old Peterborough
Road.’” Neither side challenges this finding. Accordingly, we assume its
correctness and use it as a reference point for our consideration of
Blagbrough’s adverse possession claim.
The foundation of a small boathouse is slightly to the west of the
boundary line. Crediting the testimony of Corinne Blagbrough, Kenton
Blagbrough (Corinne Blagbrough’s son), and Howard Preston, the trial court
found that the Blagbrough family engaged in activities in an area immediately
around the boathouse and that these activities were sufficient to satisfy the
criteria for adverse possession. However, the trial court also ruled that the
extent to which the Blagbroughs engaged in activity on land to the west of the
boathouse was unclear and could not satisfy the criteria for adverse
possession. It therefore concluded that Blagbrough had acquired title by
adverse possession to a portion of Lot A-21-1 which was east (i.e., in the
direction of Lot A-22) of the western-most point of the boathouse.
On appeal, Blagbrough argues that the trial court’s ruling is inconsistent
with the evidence because the evidence demonstrated that Blagbrough
acquired title by adverse possession to a significantly broader swath of Lot A-
21-1, extending all the way to a stone wall located approximately 150 feet west
of the boathouse. A & T cross-appeals, arguing that the evidence does not
support a conclusion that Blagbrough acquired title by adverse possession to
any portion of Lot A-21-1.
3
We review a trial court’s application of law to facts de novo. Tech-Built
153 v. Va. Surety Co., 153 N.H. 371, 373 (2006). We accord deference to a trial
court’s findings of historical fact, where those findings are supported by
evidence in the record. Elwood v. Bolte, 119 N.H. 508, 510 (1979).
In order to obtain title by adverse possession, the adverse possessor
must prove, by a balance of probabilities, twenty years of adverse, continuous,
and uninterrupted use of the land claimed so as to give notice to the owner
that an adverse claim is being made. Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561,
571-72 (1994). In addition, adverse use is trespassory in nature, and the
adverse possessor’s use of the land must be exclusive. See Kellison v. McIsaac,
131 N.H. 675, 679 (1989); Seward v. Loranger, 130 N.H. 570, 576-77 (1988).
The success or failure of a party claiming adverse possession is not determined
by the subjective intent or the motives of the adverse possessor. Kellison, 131
N.H. at 680. Rather the acts of the adverse possessor’s entry onto and
possession of the land should, regardless of the basis of the occupancy, alert
the true owner of the cause of action. Id. In evaluating the merits of an
adverse possession claim, courts are to construe “[e]vidence of adverse
possession of land . . . strictly.” Bellows v. Jewell, 60 N.H. 420, 422 (1880)
(citations omitted).
The trial court found that members of the Blagbrough family: (1) tore
down the boathouse in approximately 1964 or 1965 because it was dilapidated;
(2) routinely entered the parcel for walks and other recreational activities; (3)
permitted their children to play on the parcel; (4) used the parcel as a source of
Christmas trees; and (5) cut grass, removed trees, and planted some flowers on
the parcel. Accordingly, the question here is whether these activities are
sufficient to support a conclusion that Blagbrough obtained title by adverse
possession to a portion of Lot A-21-1. We hold that they are not.
The law requires more than occasional, trespassory maintenance in order
to perfect adverse title; the use must be sufficiently notorious to justify a
presumption that the owner was notified of it. Pease v. Whitney, 78 N.H. 201,
204 (1916). The act of tearing down the boathouse, although not insignificant,
was a one-time occurrence that the trial court found took place one or two
years after the Blagbroughs acquired the parcel. That act, alone, therefore
cannot be considered more than an occasional trespass. See id. Apparently
recognizing this point, both the trial court and the parties properly focused
more upon the Blagbroughs’ other activities on the subject parcel in
considering the adverse possession claim. With respect to these activities,
although testimony did indicate that the Blagbrough family engaged in some of
them “routinely,” those activities are not sufficiently notorious or exclusive to
satisfy the criteria for adverse possession. Compare Alukonis v. Kashulines, 97
N.H. 298, 299 (1952) (stating that forty years of continuous and uninterrupted
use of disputed strip to cut hay, garden, and grow crops, combined with fact
that strip visually blended in with possessor’s lot due to rudimentary boundary
4
monuments in his favor, constituted adverse possession), with Flanagan, 138
N.H. at 572 (noting occasional playing of children on tract constituted minimal
use not exclusive or sufficiently adverse); Hemon v. Rowe Chevrolet Co., 108
N.H. 11, 16-17 (1967) (stating that plaintiff’s setting off disputed boundary
strip with row of spruce trees, which grew from small to large over the twenty-
year prescriptive period, was not open and notorious use giving notice of
adverse claim); Cushing v. Miller, 62 N.H. 517, 525 (1883) (stating that
occasional cutting of timber on wild lot not sufficiently adverse), overruled on
other grounds by Dame v. Fernald, 86 N.H. 468, 471 (1934). Accordingly, even
accepting the facts as found by the trial court, we conclude that Blagbrough
has not met its burden of establishing that it acquired title to any portion of Lot
A-21-1 by adverse possession. The trial court’s conclusion to the contrary is
therefore reversed.
III. The Canal Easement
As described above, a portion of the deed from the Dimelings to
Blagbrough conveyed a canal easement, granting rights in a canal that
traversed Lots A-21 and A-22. Some of the language concerning the canal
easement – particularly the flowage rights therein – had been crossed out. The
trial court ruled that this “removal of the so-called canal easement language
[from the deed conveying Lot A-22 from the Dimelings to Blagbrough] was a
mistake and does not have the effect of extinguishing Blagbrough’s right to
flow, use and maintain the portion of the canal located on the Blagbrough
property.” On appeal, A & T argues that: (1) removal of the canal easement
language from the deed was not a mistake; and (2) easement rights in the old
canal merged under the common ownership of the Dimelings, and cannot
spring back.
With respect to the first argument, we have held that “[a] plain error in a
deed will be rejected and the deed construed reasonably to conform to the
intent of the parties.” Reney v. Hebert, 109 N.H. 74, 75 (1968). The trial court
found that “there is no dispute that a portion of the canal lays within the
Blagbrough property.” The trial court then held that since “the Dimelings
actually did include a portion of the canal in their grant to Blagbrough, the
crossed-out and penned-in language contained in the deed cannot be
construed as reflective of an intent not to convey a portion of the canal
easement to Blagbrough.” We agree.
As the trial court reasoned, the most “sensible construction [of the deed]
is that the deletion of the easement was based on the grantors’ erroneous belief
that the property conveyed to Blagbrough did not include any portion of the
canal.” After all, the crossed-out language of the deed pertains to flowage
rights in the canal and the handwritten portion evinces a belief that no portion
of the canal had been transferred. It follows that if the Dimelings had realized
5
that they were still conveying a portion of the canal to Blagbrough, they would
have retained specific language in the deed pertaining to the use of, or flowage
rights related to, the portion of the canal that was conveyed. No such language
appears in the deed. Accordingly, we reject A & T’s first argument.
As its fallback position, A & T contends that the canal easement was
extinguished by operation of the doctrine of merger. Our rules affirmatively
require the moving party to demonstrate where each question presented on
appeal was raised below. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b); Bean v. Red Oak Prop.
Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). A & T has pointed to no part of the record
indicating that it raised its merger argument before the trial court and we find
no specific reference to merger in the transcript. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(d)
(moving party’s brief shall contain statement of facts material to consideration
of questions presented “with appropriate references to the appendix or to the
record”); Sup. Ct. R. 13(2) (“The moving party shall be responsible for ensuring
that all or such portions of the record relevant and necessary for the court to
decide the questions of law presented by the case are in fact provided to the
supreme court.”). Nor did the trial court discuss the merger argument in its
decision. Where a party fails to demonstrate that it raised an issue before the
trial court, the issue is not preserved for our review. Bean, 151 N.H. at 250;
see also Broughton v. Proulx, 152 N.H. 549, 555 (2005). Accordingly, we will
not address the merger issue for the first time on appeal.
IV. Adverse Possession: Old Peterborough Road
Blagbrough asserts that it has acquired title by adverse possession to a
portion of Old Peterborough Road which abuts the northern boundary of Lot A-
22. The trial court rejected this argument, concluding that: (1) Old
Peterborough Road was a public highway; (2) Blagbrough had failed to
establish that Old Peterborough Road had been discontinued; and (3) therefore
Blagbrough could not acquire any rights in it by adverse possession. We agree
with the trial court.
A. Establishment of Public Highway
Pursuant to RSA 229:1 (1993), a public road could be created by
prescription if it had “been used . . . for public travel . . . for 20 years prior to
January 1, 1968 . . . .” See Mahoney v. Town of Canterbury, 150 N.H. 148,
150 (2003). Whether a highway is created by prescription is a finding of fact.
Id. Findings of fact by a trial court are binding upon us unless they are not
supported by the evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law. Id.
Here, the trial court found that Old Peterborough Road, sometimes called
Old County Road or Stiles Road, had been used for public travel since at least
the early 1800s. In support of this finding, the trial court noted that Old
6
Peterborough Road was: (1) referenced on the Wilton Town Plan of 1805; (2)
included in the Carrigain Map of 1816; and (3) referenced in the layout petition
for the Burton Highway filed with the Court of Common Pleas in 1840. We
have held, based upon a different road’s inclusion in the same Carrigain map,
that “the inclusion of a road on a map is competent evidence to support the
inference of use of the road . . . .” Williams v. Babcock, 116 N.H. 819, 822
(1976). Moreover, during a view, the trial court observed stone walls lining
both sides of Old Peterborough Road. Where a wall has been erected on either
or both sides of a road, its “evidentiary value is important.” Hoban v. Bucklin,
88 N.H. 73, 80 (1936). Further, the trial court expressly found that
Blagbrough had not come forward with any evidence that use of the road was
permissive. See Mahoney, 150 N.H. at 151. In Mahoney, we held that similar
evidence supported a finding that a public highway by prescription had been
established under RSA 229:1. Id. at 151-52. Similarly, here we uphold the
trial court’s determination that Old Peterborough Road was a public highway.
B. Discontinuance
Blagbrough argues that even if Old Peterborough Road was established
as a public highway, it was discontinued. Once it is shown that a road is a
public highway, the highway is presumed to exist until it is discontinued, and
discontinuance is not favored in the law. Davenhall v. Cameron, 116 N.H. 695,
696-97 (1976). “Discontinuance is a fact that must be proved and the burden
is upon the party who asserts discontinuance to prove it by clear and
satisfactory evidence. Because public roads are discontinued by town vote,
and such actions are recorded . . . , the best evidence of discontinuance is the
official record.” Id. (citations omitted); see also RSA 231:43 (Supp. 2006)
(discussing discontinuance).
Blagbrough advances several arguments for discontinuance in its brief.
First, citing State v. Canterbury, 40 N.H. 307, 312-13 (1860), Blagbrough
argues:
The Burton Highway Petition did reference the Old
Peterborough Road. However, the Petition spoke of
laying out a road (the Burton Highway) to “the Old
Road” but then in an entirely different direction.
Thus, although it references Old Peterborough Road,
the Burton Highway Petition did not have the effect of
confirming its existence. Instead, it had the effect of
discontinuing Old Peterborough Road.
(Citations omitted.) The trial court rejected Blagbrough’s argument “that the
road depicted or referenced in the various maps and other documents
introduced by A & T and the Town is some road or roads other than the same
7
Old Peterborough Road described in the Blagbrough deed and the drawing
recorded with that deed in the registry.”
We find Blagbrough’s argument unavailing. The Burton Highway
Petition describes the layout of the Burton Highway as running past markers
such as sticks, stones, stakes, birch trees, unidentified types of trees, and
beech trees, among many other types of markers. Blagbrough has not directed
us to any exhibit admitted by the trial court that clearly delineates all of these
markers and supports its position. Indeed, in the exhibits admitted by the trial
court and provided to us in connection with this appeal, we find no maps that
identify these particular trees, stones, and stakes. While a Burton Highway
layout plan is contained in A & T’s appendix, Blagbrough does not rely upon it
in its brief as a point of reference for its argument. Without such maps, which
Blagbrough (as the party appealing this issue) was responsible for providing us,
see Sup. Ct. R. 13(2), 16(3)(d), we have no way of evaluating the precise
trajectory of the Burton Highway or the implications of that trajectory on Old
Peterborough Road. Furthermore, the Burton Highway Petition describes a
layout of the Burton Highway – it does not describe a layout of the Old
Peterborough Road. Therefore, and given the strong presumption against
discontinuance, we find the Burton Highway Petition’s vague references to Old
Peterborough Road, without more, do not compel a finding that Old
Peterborough Road was discontinued.
Blagbrough also argues that the trial court erred in concluding that
discontinuance had not been established because it did not give enough weight
to: (1) the testimony of Kenton Blagbrough; (2) the testimony of the Town’s
former road agent; and (3) certain maps offered into evidence which supported
its position.
The resolution of conflicts in the evidence and
determination of issues of fact are functions of the
trier of fact. Because the proper standard of review
with respect to the weight of evidence is not whether
this court would have found differently but whether a
reasonable person could find as did the trial court, we
will not disturb the decision of the finder of fact unless
it is clearly erroneous. The trial court, acting as the
finder of fact, is not required to explain away all
inconsistencies in the evidence presented at trial.
Barrows v. Boles, 141 N.H. 382, 396-97 (1996) (brackets, citations, and
quotations omitted); see also Rancourt v. Town of Barnstead, 129 N.H. 45, 50
(1986) (“The credibility and weight to be given to a witness’ testimony is a
question of fact for the trial court. If the findings can reasonably be made on
all the evidence, they must stand.”). Our review of the record reflects that the
trial court’s factual determinations are adequately supported by the testimony
8
and other evidence presented at trial. Further, in light of the strong
presumption against discontinuance, the fact that some maps may have been
inconsistent with others in their labeling of Old Peterborough Road is not
dispositive.
C. Adverse Possession vis-à-vis a Public Highway
One cannot acquire rights in a public highway by adverse possession.
RSA 236:30 (1993). We have upheld the trial court’s determinations that: (1)
Old Peterborough Road is a public highway, within the meaning of RSA 229:1;
and (2) it was not established that Old Peterborough Road had been
discontinued. Accordingly, even assuming arguendo that Blagbrough had
successfully established the elements of adverse possession, its claim vis-à-vis
Old Peterborough Road fails.
V. The ZBA Ruling
The ZBA ruling at issue relates to Lot A-30, a 12.8-acre parcel located
north of the Blagbrough property and bounded on the south by Old
Peterborough Road. On September 29, 2003, the Town’s selectmen, after
review and comment by the planning board and town counsel, voted to
authorize a building permit pursuant to RSA 674:41, I(c) (Supp. 2002)
(amended 2004) for A & T to engage in construction on Lot A-30. Blagbrough
appealed the selectmen’s decision to the ZBA, which agreed with the selectmen.
Blagbrough then appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court, which
affirmed the ZBA.
Here, Blagbrough argues that the trial court erred by: (1) making certain
pretrial rulings relating to a protective order sought by the Town; (2)
concluding that Old Peterborough Road is a public highway; (3) ruling that Lot
A-30 was grandfathered within the meaning of the zoning ordinance; and (4)
misinterpreting RSA 674:41, I(c). We consider each argument in turn.
Our review of zoning board decisions is limited. Harrington v. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). We will uphold the trial court’s decision
unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Chester Rod
& Gun Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 580 (2005). For its part, the
trial court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie lawful and
reasonable. RSA 677:6 (1996). It may set aside a ZBA decision if it finds by
the balance of probabilities, based upon the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s
decision was unreasonable. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. at 580.
9
A. The Protective Order and Related Issues
We begin by placing Blagbrough’s challenge to the trial court’s pretrial
rulings in context. On June 2, 2004, Blagbrough moved to consolidate the
petition to quiet title and the ZBA appeal, arguing, among other things, that
“the issues and evidence presented [in both cases] . . . are likely to be
duplicative . . . .” On July 8, 2004, the Trial Court (Hicks, J.) granted the
motion to consolidate. Later, on or about September 15, 2004, Blagbrough
propounded interrogatories to the Town, seeking discoverable information
related to the ZBA appeal. In response, the Town moved for a protective order,
arguing that the superior court should rule on issues connected to the ZBA
appeal based only upon information contained in the certified record of the
ZBA proceedings, and therefore further discovery on the ZBA matter was not
necessary. The Trial Court (Lynn, C.J.) granted the Town’s motion. At trial,
the court permitted counsel for the Town to cross-examine witnesses and to
introduce or rely upon evidence not found in the certified record of the ZBA
proceedings. On appeal, Blagbrough argues that “once the Trial Court
disallowed any discovery on the plaintiff’s RSA 677:4 appeal, it was bound to
prohibit the Town from participating substantively in the evidentiary aspects of
the December 21 and 22, 2004 hearing in this matter.”
The trial court has broad discretion in managing and supervising pretrial
discovery and in ruling on the conduct of a trial. Murray v. Developmental
Servs. of Sullivan County, 149 N.H. 264, 268 (2003). We review a trial court’s
rulings on the management of discovery and the scope of cross-examination
under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See State v. Barnes,
150 N.H. 715, 719 (2004) (discovery); State v. Wellington, 150 N.H. 782, 788
(2004) (cross-examination). To establish that the trial court erred under this
standard, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its case. See id.
Especially since it was Blagbrough that sought to consolidate these two
cases, we do not find that the trial court’s rulings were untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of Blagbrough’s case. It is within the trial
court’s discretion to allow further evidence in a ZBA appeal. Peter Christian’s
v. Town of Hanover, 132 N.H. 677, 683 (1990). In granting the Town’s motion
for a protective order, the trial court apparently concluded that it understood
the materials upon which the ZBA relied and that further evidence would not
aid in its decision or be necessary to complete the record; therefore, additional
discovery on issues pertaining to the ZBA appeal would not be necessary. See
Estabrooks v. Town of Jefferson, 134 N.H. 367, 369 (1991) (explaining the
admission of additional evidence by the superior court in a ZBA appeal). Later,
at trial, when Blagbrough elicited testimony from witnesses concerning issues
germane to the ZBA appeal, the Town was entitled to cross-examine those
witnesses through questioning and the use of exhibits. Appeal of Sutton, 141
N.H. 348, 351 (1996) (“In any proceeding, cross-examination, almost by
10
definition, is a review of direct examination in order to determine the veracity,
accuracy and depth of knowledge of the witness.” (quotation omitted)). To hold
otherwise would result in one litigant being able to embark on a wide-ranging
evidentiary inquiry, while the other (who opposed consolidation presumably to
avoid precisely the type of predicament at issue here) is forced to stand by
silently. Accordingly, we reject Blagbrough’s first assignment of error on the
ZBA appeal.
B. Old Peterborough Road
Blagbrough’s second argument is that the trial court erred in concluding
that Old Peterborough Road is a public highway. For the reasons articulated
earlier in this opinion, we reject this argument.
C. Grandfathering of Lot A-30
Lot A-30 is located in an area of the Town zoned as a watershed district.
Section 14.3.2 of the Wilton Zoning Ordinance requires each lot in the
Watershed District to have a minimum of 300 feet of frontage on a class V or
better road. It is undisputed that Lot A-30 does not have 300 feet of frontage.
In affirming the selectmen’s decision to grant the building permit, the ZBA
concluded, and the trial court agreed, that section 17.2 of the ordinance
excused A & T from having to comply with section 14.3.2. Blagbrough
contends that both the ZBA and the trial court misinterpreted section 17.2 and
that therefore, absent a variance, A & T could not obtain a building permit on a
lot that did not satisfy the ordinance’s frontage requirements.
The interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Town of Warner, 152 N.H. at 79. Because the traditional rules
of statutory construction generally govern our review, we construe the words
and phrases of an ordinance according to the common and approved usage of
the language. Id. When the language of an ordinance is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance itself for further
indications of legislative intent. Id. Moreover, we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words that they did not
see fit to include. Id.
Section 17.2 of the ordinance provides in pertinent part:
[A] lot of record at the time of the effective date of this
Ordinance [which] has less area and/or frontage than
herein required in the District in which it is
located . . . may be used for a single family dwelling if
permitted in that district subject to New Hampshire
water supply and pollution control division approval
and subject to all district regulations applicable to lots
11
within the district wherein the lot is located with the
exception of lot size and/or frontage.
In order for section 17.2 to apply, the subject lot must be a “lot of record”
at the time of the effective date of the ordinance. Section 3.1.19 of the
ordinance defines a “lot of record” as “[l]and designated as a separate and
distinct parcel in a legally-recorded deed filed in the record of Hillsborough
County, New Hampshire.” While acknowledging that Lot A-30 and Lot A-21
had been in common ownership under the Dimelings, the trial court ruled that
Lot A-30 was a “lot of record” within the meaning of section 17.2 because Lot
A-30 was located on the opposite side of Old Peterborough Road from Lot A-21
and had been described separately from Lot A-21 in the deeds in the Dimeling
chain.
Blagbrough contends that Lot A-30 does not satisfy the definition of “lot
of record” both because there was no separate deed for Lot A-30 at the time of
the Dimelings’ ownership and because a requirement that the lot be “buildable”
should be read into the definition of “lot of record.” Blagbrough also argues
that the “Ordinance should not be interpreted to allow development in the
Watershed District with no frontage whatsoever and the Trial Court erred when
it allowed such interpretation.” We find these arguments unavailing.
First, the plain language of section 3.1.19 does not require a “lot of
record” to be described in a separate deed. Rather, it simply requires that
within any deed conveying the lot, the lot must be described separately. The
trial court found that such a separate description was contained in the deeds
in the Dimeling chain, and Blagbrough has pointed to no persuasive evidence
which would undermine this finding.
Second, the word “buildable” does not appear anywhere in the definition
of “lot of record.” We will not guess what the drafters of the ordinance might
have intended, or add words that they did not see fit to include. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. at 79.
Third, we decline Blagbrough’s invitation to hold that a lot with no
frontage somehow materially differs from a lot with little frontage for purposes
of section 17.2. The plain language of the ordinance applies anytime a lot has
“less” frontage. Lot A-30 has less frontage than is required (it has none).
Accordingly, section 17.2 applies and we reject Blagbrough’s arguments
concerning the trial court’s interpretation of the ordinance. If the Town wishes
to change the words or terms of its ordinance, it is of course free to do so.
D. RSA 674:41, I(c)
Blagbrough’s final assignment of error pertaining to the ZBA appeal is
that both the ZBA and the trial court misinterpreted RSA 674:41, I(c).
12
Blagbrough contends that RSA 674:41, I(c) does not authorize selectmen to
issue building permits to individual landowners.
RSA 674:41, I(c) provides, in pertinent part:
[N]o building shall be erected on any lot within any
part of the municipality nor shall a building permit be
issued for the erection of a building unless the street
giving access to the lot upon which such building is
proposed to be placed:
. . .
(c) Is a class VI highway, provided that:
(1) The local governing body after review and
comment by the planning board has voted to authorize
the issuance of building permits for the erection of
buildings on said class VI highway or a portion
thereof; and
(2) The municipality neither assumes
responsibility for maintenance of said class VI highway
nor liability for any damages resulting from the use
thereof; and
(3) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the
applicant shall produce evidence that notice of the
limits of municipal responsibility and liability has been
recorded in the county registry of deeds . . . .
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. ___, ___ (decided Nov. 2, 2006).
When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
words that the legislature did not include. Id.
We agree with the trial court’s reasoning that there is
no merit in Blagbrough’s suggestion that RSA 674:41,
I(c) does not permit the local governing body to grant
building permits on an individual, case by case basis,
for properties that fall within the purview of the
statute. The mere fact that the statute uses the plural
13
terms “permits” and “buildings” does not compel the
conclusion that the selectmen must grant such
approval en gross, i.e., either on a road-wide or
municipality-wide basis. On the contrary, the statute
specifically indicates that approvals can be granted
“for said class VI highway or a portion thereof.”
(Emphasis added.) These terms support the view that
the statute contemplates a case by case determination
by the selectmen as to whether to grant approval for
building on a particular lot or lots.
Blagbrough disputes the trial court’s reasoning by citing RSA 674:41, II,
which provides:
Whenever the enforcement of the provisions of this
section would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship, and when the circumstances of the case do
not require the building, structure or part thereof to be
related to existing or proposed streets, the applicant
for such permit may appeal from the decision of the
administrative officer having charge of the issuance of
permits to the zoning board of adjustment in any
municipality which has adopted zoning
regulations . . . .
Blagbrough argues that RSA 674:41, II requires individual lot owners to seek
building permits from the local zoning board of adjustment.
We do not construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to do so in
harmony with the overall statutory scheme. Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski
Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005). When interpreting two statutes that deal
with a similar subject matter, we construe them so that they do not contradict
each other, and so that they will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the
legislative purpose of the statutes. Id.
RSA 674:41, II provides a method for an applicant suffering from
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship – the conditions needed to trigger
that provision – to appeal a decision of a local administrative officer. RSA
674:41, I(c) does not conflict with RSA 674:41, II. Rather, it simply sets forth
the procedure to be followed by those applicants who cannot, choose not, or
need not, demonstrate a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.
Accordingly, discerning no error, we uphold the trial court’s interpretation of
the statutory scheme.
14
VI. Damages
Blagbrough’s final two arguments are that the trial court erred in: (1)
ruling that A & T was not required to comply with RSA 231:40-:42 when it
placed a timber road over Lot A-21-1; and (2) fashioning the remedy for damage
caused to its well easement. We first provide some factual background, and
then analyze Blagbrough’s contentions.
The well easement is described earlier in this opinion. It contains an
approximately 900-foot water line that runs from the well head on A & T’s
property to the residence on Blagbrough’s property. The trial court credited the
testimony of Alan Stevens, the principal of A & T, that this water line was
broken accidentally because it was entangled in the roots of a tree that was
removed during the construction of a road across Lot A-21. The road across
Lot A-21 was constructed to facilitate tree removal and to provide access to
Lots A-21-1, A-21-2 and A-30.
A. RSA 231:40-:42
Blagbrough argues that RSA 231:40-:42 (1993) required A & T to petition
the selectmen before it created a right-of-way to remove timber via the road. In
short, Blagbrough’s position seems to be that the well easement operated to
give it standing to privately enforce the provisions of RSA 231:40-:42. The trial
court ruled that the requirements of RSA 231:40-:42 were not triggered
because those statutes “cannot be read to require defendant to obtain a right-
of-way from the selectmen to remove timber from his own land merely because
plaintiff may have an easement to obtain well water from defendant’s property.”
RSA 231:40 provides:
Upon petition, when it becomes necessary for the
convenient removal of lumber, wood or other material,
to pass through the lands of a person other than the
owner of the land from which such lumber, wood or
other material is to be removed, the selectmen of the
town within which said lands are situated, in their
discretion, may lay out a right-of-way through the land
of any person for the purposes aforesaid, and, upon
notice to and hearing of the owner of the lands, shall
determine the necessity for and assess the damages
occasioned by the laying out of such right-of-way, and
such damages shall be paid by the person applying for
such right-of-way before the same shall be open for
use. Any person aggrieved by the action hereunder of
the selectmen shall have the same right of appeal as
provided by this chapter.
15
RSA 231:41, in turn, sets forth the conditions under which such a right-of-way
may be used and discontinued. RSA 231:42 then sets forth the notice and
hearing requirements that must be followed before the selectmen may lay out
such a right-of-way, discontinue it, or award damages arising out of its use.
We hold that RSA 231:40-:42 do not provide a basis upon which
Blagbrough may prevail here. Although RSA 231:40 provides an appeal
mechanism for a “person aggrieved” by a decision of a board of selectmen
laying out such a right-of-way, we have been provided with no such decision by
the selectmen in this case. To the extent that Blagbrough seeks damages
based upon an asserted violation of RSA 231:40-:42, it has not directed us to
any statutory or other legal authority establishing a private right of action to
seek both a declaration that RSA 231:40-:42 have been violated and damages.
Nor does Blagbrough make any argument as to why we should find an implicit,
private right to seek such a declaration and damages. Where there is no
explicit or implicit private right of action to seek a declaration of the statute’s
violation, we will conclude that the statute does not do so. Cross v. Brown,
148 N.H. 485, 487 (2002).
B. Nature of Relief Granted
Blagbrough’s final argument is that the trial court erred in requiring
A & T to repair the portion of the well line that traverses A & T’s property rather
than ordering A & T to pay $3,260 in damages, an amount representing the
cost of repairing the entire well line. Blagbrough contends that the trial court’s
decision constituted an improper award of equitable relief where an adequate
legal remedy existed.
The propriety of affording equitable relief rests in the sound discretion of
the trial court to be exercised according to the circumstances and exigencies of
the case. Gutbier v. Hannaford Bros. Co., 150 N.H. 540, 541 (2004). Because
the separation between law and equity is not sharp, courts in New Hampshire
have broad discretion in exercising equity jurisdiction. Thurston Enters., Inc.
v. Baldi, 128 N.H. 760, 764 (1986). We will uphold a trial court’s equitable
order unless its decision constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Gutbier, 150 N.H. at 541-42.
Several circumstances undermine Blagbrough’s challenge to the trial
court’s exercise of discretion. For example, the damaged portion of the well line
was located on A & T’s property and the well line had not been used as a
source of drinking water for the residence on Blagbrough’s property since
1985. Further, the trial court found that the “water line was very old and was
not in particularly good condition at the time it was accidentally broken by
defendant.” The trial court also found that “[t]he line consisted of lead piping,
which is no longer in use, and was not buried deep enough under ground to
16
conform with modern practice.” It also bears noting that during trial and at
the hearing on damages, Blagbrough took the position that this was an equity
case – not a law suit for damages. Under these circumstances, we cannot
conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in ordering
A & T to replace the portion of the line lying on its property rather than paying
the amount it would cost to replace the entire 900-foot line.
VII. A & T’s Cross-Appeal
Finally, we observe that A & T raised four issues in the notice of its
cross-appeal but essentially argued only two in its brief. In its brief, A & T
argued that the trial court erred in awarding a portion of Lot A-21-1 to
Blagbrough by operation of the doctrine of adverse possession and in ruling
that the Dimelings made a mistake in striking the canal easement paragraph
from the deed to the Blagbroughs, arguments we already have addressed. To
the extent that A & T’s notice of appeal raises issues not addressed in this
opinion, we deem those issues waived. See Colla v. Town of Hanover, 153 N.H.
206, 210 (2006) (“We . . . deem an issue waived when it is raised in a notice of
appeal, but is not briefed.”).
VIII. Conclusion
Because we hold that Blagbrough did not satisfy the criteria to acquire a
portion of Lot A-21-1 by adverse possession, we remand to the trial court for
the entry of an order consistent with that determination. In all other respects,
we affirm.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
17