THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2005-505
MARK HOUNSELL & a.
v.
NORTH CONWAY WATER PRECINCT
Argued: March 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 1, 2006
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of North Conway (Robert Upton, II on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C, of Manchester (Kathleen C. Peahl on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, Mark Hounsell and Joseph Smith, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) denying their request for disclosure
of certain documents under the control of the respondent, North Conway Water
Precinct (precinct). We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts were found by the trial court or appear on the record.
In June 2003, the precinct, which is governed by a three-member board of
commissioners, retained Municipal Resources, Inc. (MRI) to investigate the
alleged mismanagement of the precinct. The precinct disclosed the resulting
MRI report to the public. In November 2003, the New Hampshire Attorney
General initiated an investigation concerning allegations of criminal behavior
described in the MRI report to determine “whether the conduct of any public
official or employee of [the precinct] warranted the commencement of criminal
charges for theft, public corruption, or witness tampering.”
In July 2004, an employee of the precinct alleged that he had been
threatened and harassed by a co-worker, petitioner Smith. The precinct,
through its legal counsel, Andrea Johnstone, retained Jack Hunt and John
Alfano to investigate the complaint of harassment. Hunt and Alfano conducted
interviews of each precinct employee as part of their investigation. During the
investigation, the precinct placed Smith on paid leave. While some employees
were reluctant to participate in the investigation, Commissioner James
Umberger advised them and their union representative, Brian Mitchell, that
there would be no retaliation for their participation, and he encouraged them to
tell Hunt and Alfano “whatever was on their minds.” The precinct permitted
Mitchell to be present during the interviews. It also permitted petitioner
Hounsell and another individual, Ted Sares, neither of whom were employees
or agents of the precinct, to be present during some of the interviews at the
request of the employees.
Following the conclusion of the interviews, Hunt and Alfano prepared a
report in which they summarized the investigation and made findings and
recommendations (Hunt-Alfano report). The record does not indicate the date
of the report. Johnstone instructed them to release the report only to her; she,
in turn, provided the report to the commissioners. Without the knowledge or
authorization of the commissioners, and contrary to Johnstone’s instructions,
Alfano permitted Mitchell to review a copy of the Hunt-Alfano report. The
precinct took no disciplinary action against Smith or any other employee as a
result of the investigation and the Hunt-Alfano report, and the commissioners
subsequently issued a press release reporting that decision.
On February 23, 2005, the attorney general released her report to the
public, concluding that there was insufficient evidence to commence a criminal
prosecution.
2
The petitioners repeatedly requested a copy of the Hunt-Alfano report.
On April 7, 2005, the precinct issued an official denial of their request, stating
that the report was a “confidential personnel document,” exempt from
disclosure under RSA chapter 91-A. On April 25, 2005, the petitioners filed in
the trial court a petition seeking access to the Hunt-Alfano report, all notes and
transcripts recorded in connection with the report, and all minutes of non-
public sessions at which the commissioners discussed the report, as well as an
award of costs and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 91-A:8. After a hearing, at
which the parties made offers of proof, the trial court denied the petition.
On appeal, the petitioners contend that the trial court erred by
concluding that the report was exempt from disclosure under RSA 91-A:5, IV
and by refusing to award attorney’s fees under RSA 91-A:8. They also argue
that the precinct was “estopped” from asserting the RSA 91-A:5, IV exemption.
II. Right-to-Know Law
We first examine whether the trial court erred by concluding that the
Hunt-Alfano report was exempt from public disclosure under RSA chapter 91-
A, the Right-to-Know Law. Because the interpretation of a statute is ultimately
a question of law for this court, we review the trial court’s interpretation de
novo. Prof’l Firefighters of N.H. v. HealthTrust, 151 N.H. 501, 503 (2004). The
Right-to-Know Law provides that “[e]very citizen . . . has the right to inspect all
public records, including minutes of meetings of the bodies or agencies . . .
except as otherwise prohibited by statute or RSA 91-A:5.” RSA 91-A:4, I (Supp.
2005). It is undisputed that the precinct is a public body subject to the Right-
to-Know Law. Among other things, however, RSA 91-A:5, IV (Supp. 2005)
exempts from disclosure “[r]ecords pertaining to internal personnel practices.”
We have recognized that the traditional balancing test employed in Right-to-
Know cases, see, e.g., Chambers v. Gregg, 135 N.H. 478, 481 (1992), is not
necessary where “the legislature has plainly made its own determination that
certain documents are categorically exempt.” Union Leader Corp. v. Fenniman,
136 N.H. 624, 627 (1993). However, we generally interpret the exemptions in
RSA chapter 91-A restrictively to further the purposes of the Right-to-Know
Law. Id. at 626.
The trial court concluded that the investigation that generated the Hunt-
Alfano report concerned an “internal personnel practice,” and, thus, exempted
the report from disclosure under RSA 91-A:5, IV. The trial court, relying upon
Fenniman, reasoned that “[h]ad Smith not been cleared as a result of the
investigation, the [precinct] would likely have taken disciplinary action against
him.” In Fenniman, we reviewed whether the trial court properly granted the
Union Leader’s petition, under RSA chapter 91-A, for access to certain
investigatory documents under the control of the Dover Police Department. Id.
at 625. The department had previously released to the newspaper its “Internal
3
Investigation Disposition Forms,” detailing general facts underlying the internal
investigation of whether a department lieutenant made harassing phone calls.
See id. at 625-26. The newspaper, however, sought additional access to the
department’s “internal police investigatory files,” which included the
department’s memoranda and other records compiled during the internal
investigation. Id. at 626. We concluded that such files pertained to “internal
personnel practices” because “they document[ed] procedures leading up to
internal personnel discipline, a quintessential example of an internal personnel
practice.” As such, we held that the files were exempt from disclosure
pursuant to RSA 91-A:5, IV. Id. at 627.
We agree with the trial court that the Hunt-Alfano report concerned
“internal personnel practices.” It is undisputed that the precinct retained Hunt
and Alfano to investigate a complaint that Smith had threatened and harassed
a co-worker. During the investigation, the precinct placed Smith on paid leave,
and the investigation could have resulted in disciplinary action. Thus, as in
Fenniman, the Hunt-Alfano report, which was generated in the course of an
investigation of claimed employee misconduct, was a record pertaining to
“internal personnel practices.”
The petitioners argue that this case is distinguishable from Fenniman
upon several grounds. Specifically, they contend that in Fenniman, the
“public’s right-to-know” was already largely satisfied by the prior release of
“Internal Investigation Disposition Forms,” where here, the precinct conveyed
little information in its press release. We did not suggest in Fenniman,
however, that the prior release of some information concerning the
investigation affected our decision to reverse the trial court’s disclosure of the
investigatory files. Furthermore, with the exception of the description of the
nature of the complaint, the information set forth in the precinct’s press release
was similar to the information contained in the disposition forms in Fenniman,
136 N.H. at 625-26, including the name of the charged employee and the
outcome of the investigation.
In addition, the petitioners argue that the Hunt-Alfano report was not an
“internal police investigatory file,” as in Fenniman, where exemption was
premised upon “encourag[ing] thorough investigation and discipline of
dishonest or abusive police officers.” Id. at 627 (quotation omitted). Although
the petitioners are factually correct, this distinction has little relevance to the
issue before us. Nothing in the plain language of RSA 91-A:5, IV suggests that
the legislature intended to exempt “records pertaining to internal personnel
practices” only in the context of internal police investigations. The precinct
also counters that public policy supports the investigation of complaints of
misconduct by all public employees so that public bodies and agencies can
take appropriate remedial action, especially where such a complaint alleges
harassment or intimidation of another employee. It argues that the disclosure
4
of records underlying, or arising from, internal personnel investigations would
deter the reporting of misconduct by public employees, or participation in such
investigations, for fear of public embarrassment, humiliation, or even
retaliation. We find that the disclosure of the Hunt-Alfano report would
implicate policy concerns similar to those underlying the disclosure of an
“internal police investigatory file,” and we reject the petitioners’ reliance upon
this narrow factual distinction.
The petitioners further contend that the investigation lost its “internal
status” because: (1) the precinct contracted with outside investigators; (2) it
permitted Mitchell, Hounsell, and Sares to observe the interviews, at the
request of the employees, without a stipulation of confidentiality; (3) Alfano
allowed Mitchell to review the report; and (4) the employees were allegedly
encouraged to use the interviews as an opportunity to discuss the MRI report.
Such arguments are unpersuasive, however, because nothing in the plain
language of RSA 91-A:5, IV restricts a public body or agency from asserting an
exemption under these circumstances, and the petitioners have presented no
legal authority in support of their contentions. Moreover, while the trial court
acknowledged a dispute concerning whether the employees were encouraged to
discuss the MRI report in the investigation into the allegations against Smith,
it, nevertheless, concluded that “discussion about the MRI report in the course
of the investigation [would] not alleviate the concerns giving rise to the
exclusion of internal personnel practice records from RSA 91-A.” We agree.
Although the trial court would have been within its discretion to conduct
an in camera review to determine whether any portion of the requested
documents concerned the MRI report and was, arguably, subject to public
disclosure, see HealthTrust, 151 N.H. at 506, neither party made this request
below and the trial court applied the RSA 91-A:5, IV exemption based upon the
parties’ offers of proof. Furthermore, the petitioners never requested a partial
disclosure of the materials; they argued only that the presence of any
information concerning the MRI report removed the entire Hunt-Alfano report,
including the information concerning the Smith investigation therein, from
exemption under RSA 91-A:5, IV. We reject the petitioners’ zero-sum approach
and, accordingly, conclude that the trial court did not err by determining that
the Hunt-Alfano report was exempt from public disclosure.
III. Estoppel
We next examine whether the precinct was “estopped” from asserting the
exemption. The petitioners argue that, regardless of the application of RSA 91-
A:5, IV, the precinct was estopped from refusing to disclose the Hunt-Alfano
report by its “prior release of the MRI Report and Attorney General’s Report.”
They claim that all three reports were prepared in the same manner and
contained essentially the same content. As this inquiry concerns only the prior
5
disclosures made by the precinct, we need not consider the disclosure of the
attorney general’s report, as it is undisputed that it was the attorney general
who released that report.
Although municipal corporations may be subject to estoppel, the law
does not favor its application against municipalities. Hansel v. City of Keene,
138 N.H. 99, 102 (1993). “This is especially true when a valuable public
interest may be jeopardized by applying the doctrine of estoppel against the
municipality.” Id. The party asserting estoppel bears the burden of proof. City
of Concord v. Tompkins, 124 N.H. 463, 467 (1984). Even assuming without
deciding that the petitioners could meet their burden of demonstrating the four
essential elements of municipal estoppel, id. at 468, they cannot demonstrate,
under these facts, that “the public interest in preventing the government from
capriciously dealing with its citizens [outweighs] the risk, posed by estoppel, of
undermining important government interests.” Id. at 472; see also Hansel, 138
N.H. at 102.
The petitioners concede that the non-disclosure of records pertaining to
internal personnel practices is an important government interest. They argue,
however, that the precinct has ignored that interest by invoking RSA 91-A:5, IV
to exempt records in an arbitrary fashion, and that the public interest in
preventing the precinct commissioners from engaging in such conduct
outweighs the important government interest at stake. Even though the trial
court did not explicitly address this issue, the record supports a clear
distinction between the substance of the MRI report, which primarily
concerned the mismanagement of the precinct, and the Hunt-Alfano report,
which was generated in the course of an investigation of alleged employee
misconduct, pertained to “internal personnel practices,” and, thus, was exempt
from disclosure pursuant to RSA 91-A:5, IV. As the petitioners have failed to
demonstrate that the precinct acted in an arbitrary fashion by disclosing the
MRI report and exempting the Hunt-Alfano report, we need not weigh the
petitioners’ construction of the “public interest” against the precinct’s interest
in non-disclosure. We, thus, reject the petitioners’ claim that the precinct was
estopped from asserting the RSA 91-A:5, IV exemption.
IV. Attorney’s Fees
Finally, we address whether the trial court erred by refusing to award the
petitioners their attorney’s fees under RSA 91-A:8. Having concluded that the
trial court properly denied their petition for disclosure, we need not address the
merits of their request for attorney’s fees.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6