THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2005-726
MICHAEL CORCORAN & a.
v.
CRAIG W. HARMON
Submitted: September 13, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 28, 2006
Hall Stewart, P.A., of Manchester (Francis G. Murphy on the brief), for
the plaintiffs.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Debbie Lorusso
Makris on the brief), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Craig W. Harmon, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) denying his motion to confirm an arbitration
decision pursuant to RSA 542:8 (1997). We reverse and remand.
The following facts appear in the record. The plaintiffs, Michael and
Michelle Corcoran, and the defendant submitted their dispute concerning
liability for an automobile collision to arbitration. Each side selected an
arbitrator and agreed to a neutral third. The arbitration occurred on May 12,
2005. On May 18, 2005, the plaintiffs learned of a possible conflict of interest
on the part of the neutral arbitrator. The arbitration panel decided in favor of
the defendant on May 27, 2005. Nearly a month later, on June 23, 2005, the
plaintiffs’ attorney wrote to the potentially disqualified arbitrator to inform him
of the alleged conflict of interest. A draft motion seeking withdrawal of the
arbitration panel’s decision was included with this letter. The plaintiffs’
attorney sent a second letter on June 29, 2005, detailing another possible
basis for a conflict of interest on the part of the neutral arbitrator. The
arbitration panel withdrew its decision on July 7, 2005. On July 11, 2005, the
potentially disqualified neutral arbitrator wrote to the parties explaining the
arbitration panel’s decision to withdraw, stating that although he did not
believe that the initial issue raised by the plaintiffs created a disqualifying
situation, the second alleged conflict created an appearance of impropriety that
justified withdrawal of the decision even though he was unaware of the alleged
conflict when the panel heard the case.
The defendant sought confirmation of the original arbitration decision
under RSA 542:8. The trial court denied the motion, ruling that “[b]ecause the
decision has been withdrawn, there is no decision for the Court to act on.” The
trial court denied reconsideration. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred when it determined that
the withdrawal by the arbitration panel precluded review of the decision. The
plaintiffs counter that the trial court correctly interpreted the plain meaning of
RSA 542:8 when it ruled that the statute did not restrict the arbitration panel’s
discretion to withdraw a decision after concluding there was an appearance of
impropriety.
The plaintiffs also argue that we should decline to decide whether the
arbitration panel may withdraw a decision because the trial court did not
consider this issue. In essence, the plaintiffs assert that the defendant has not
preserved this issue for review because he only asked the trial court to confirm
the earlier decision in the defendant’s favor and did not ask the trial court to
vacate the decision to withdraw. We consider the issue sufficiently preserved
because implicit in the request to confirm the withdrawn decision is a request
that the trial court vacate the panel’s decision to withdraw it.
Thus, the issue before us is whether RSA 542:8 allows the superior court
to review the decision of an arbitration panel to withdraw an award. We are
the final arbiter of the meaning of a statute as expressed in the words of the
statute itself. Greene v. Town of Deering, 151 N.H. 795, 798 (2005). When
construing the meaning of a statute, we first examine its language and, where
possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used. Id. When
the language used in the statute is clear and unambiguous, its meaning is not
subject to modification by judicial construction. Id.
RSA 542:8 states in pertinent part:
At any time within one year after the award is made any
party to the arbitration may apply to the superior court for an
2
order confirming the award, correcting or modifying the award
for plain mistake, or vacating the award for fraud, corruption, or
misconduct by the parties or by the arbitrators, or on the ground
that the arbitrators have exceeded their powers.
The plain language of RSA 542:8 allows the trial court to, among other things,
vacate an award “for fraud, corruption, or misconduct by the parties or by the
arbitrators, or on the ground that the arbitrators have exceeded their powers.”
In this case, because there are allegations of an appearance of impropriety
lodged against the arbitrators and a question of whether “the arbitrators have
exceeded their powers” by withdrawing their decision, review by the trial court
pursuant to RSA 542:8 is the only means of reviewing the issues.
While the language of RSA 542:8 is couched in terms of the superior
court’s review of an “award,” a decision of an arbitration panel to withdraw the
award would still be reviewable under the statute. The plain meaning of the
noun “award” includes “a judgment, sentence, or final decision [especially] the
decision of arbitrators in a case submitted to them.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 152 (unabridged ed. 2002). Similarly, Black’s Law
Dictionary defines award as “a final judgment or decision, [especially] one by
an arbitrator or by a jury assessing damages.” Black’s Law Dictionary 147 (8th
ed. 1999); see Ballentine’s Law Dictionary 116 (3d ed. 1969) (“the decision,
decree, or judgment of arbitrators”); Elkouri and Elkouri: How Arbitration
Works 383 (M. M. Volz & E. P. Goggin eds., 5th ed. 1997) (“The award is the
arbitrator’s decision of the case”).
In this case, the decision to withdraw the award was a “final decision . . .
of arbitrators in a case submitted to them.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary, supra at 152. Therefore, the trial court has jurisdiction under RSA
542:8.
The plaintiffs argue that judicial review of the decision by an arbitration
panel to withdraw its earlier decision is inconsistent with the deference the
court usually accords an arbitrator’s decision. See Merrill Lynch Futures v.
Sands, 143 N.H. 507, 509 (1999). We disagree. Under RSA 542:8, judicial
review may be had of any final arbitration decision. The statute does not
contain any limiting language with respect to the kind of decision that may be
reviewed, other than requiring that the decision be an “award,” which means a
final decision. The plain language of the statute mandates judicial deference to
the arbitrator’s decision by precluding the court from correcting or modifying
the decision except for “plain mistake” and from vacating the decision except
for “fraud, corruption or misconduct by the parties or by the arbitrators, or on
the ground that the arbitrators . . . exceeded their powers.” RSA 542:8.
For the above reasons, we hold that the trial court erred in denying the
motion to confirm the award for want of an award to confirm. RSA 542:8
3
empowers the superior court to review decisions of the arbitration panel,
including a decision to withdraw an award.
The defendant argues that RSA 542:8 does not authorize the arbitration
panel to vacate its own decisions. He also argues that if the arbitration panel
does have the power to withdraw its decision, it is not free to do so without
sufficient reason. The plaintiffs counter that arbitrators fill a quasi-judicial
role and must be able to recuse themselves upon an allegation of an
appearance of impropriety. These issues may be considered by the trial court
upon remand.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
4