THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2005-207
SIMPSON DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
v.
CITY OF LEBANON
Argued: February 22, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 17, 2006
Schuster, Buttrey & Wing, P.A., of Lebanon (Barry C. Schuster on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Gardner Fulton & Waugh, P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (H. Bernard Waugh, Jr.
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Simpson Development Corporation (Simpson),
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Houran, J.) affirming a decision of the
City of Lebanon Planning Board (the board) revoking its conditional approval of
an amendment to Simpson’s cluster subdivision plan. We affirm.
The trial court’s order sets forth the following facts, which are supported
by the record. On November 22, 1999, the board granted Simpson approval for
a fifty-seven lot cluster subdivision containing fifty-three single-family homes in
the City of Lebanon (city). The approval was conditioned upon, among other
things, the creation of an open space area that included all land not
encompassed by the curtilage for the subdivided lots within the developed
portion of the property.
On January 13, 2003, Simpson sought to amend its cluster subdivision
plan to add nine lots. On June 9, 2003, the board approved the amendment
with conditions. The city’s attorney informed the board that it had no
authority to permit the amendment because the additional nine lots would be
sited in the designated open space area. As a result, on October 14, 2003, the
board voted to void its conditional approval of the amendment.
Simpson appealed to the superior court pursuant to RSA 677:15 (Supp.
2000). Following a hearing on the merits, the trial court affirmed the board’s
decision. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Simpson argues that the trial court erred: (1) in ruling that
although the board’s June 9, 2003 decision was final for purposes of appeal, it
was not a final approval; (2) by ruling that the June 9, 2003 decision was not a
final judgment that barred the board’s October 14, 2003 action; (3) in ruling
that because Simpson had not satisfied all of the conditions precedent, the
board’s decision was not final; (4) in ruling that pending the city’s completion of
those administrative conditions, the merits of the planning board’s decision
were open for further review; and (5) in failing to rule that any challenge to the
legality of a planning board’s approval must be brought within thirty days of
the planning board’s vote.
We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is not supported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous. Star Vector Corp. v. Town of Windham, 146
N.H. 490, 493 (2001). We look to whether a reasonable person could have
reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the evidence before it.
Id.
Simpson argues that the trial court erred in ruling that “although the
June 9, 2003 decision was final for purposes of appeal, it was not a final
approval.” Specifically, Simpson contends that the trial court “mistakenly
concluded that an approval with conditions under RSA 676:4, I(i) is only an
interim step in the board’s process of consideration.” We disagree.
RSA 676:4, I(i) (1996) provides in part:
A planning board may grant conditional approval of a plat or
application, which approval shall become final without further
public hearing, upon certification to the board by its designee or
based upon evidence submitted by the applicant of satisfactory
compliance with the conditions imposed.
(Emphasis added.)
2
New Hampshire law specifically authorizes planning boards to grant
conditional approvals as the planning board did here in its June 9, 2003
decision. See RSA 676:4, I(i). The record reveals that not all of the conditions
precedent set by the June 9, 2003 decision had been satisfied.
The June 9, 2003 approval contained conditions subsequent and
conditions precedent. Three of these conditions, set out in paragraphs three,
nine and ten of the June 9, 2003 approval, are conditions precedent, which
had to be met before the approval would become final. On July 14, 2003, the
board amended its June 9, 2003 approval to add the following language:
“When the Planning Office is notified that Conditions 3, 9 & 10 above have
occurred, this approval shall become FINAL APPROVAL and the Notice of
Action and Subdivision Agreement shall be prepared and signed by the
Chairperson as provided in Sections 6.13, 6.25 and 7.4(f) of the Subdivision
Regulations.”
The conditional approval never became final because not all of the
conditions precedent were satisfied before the conditional approval was
revoked. Condition ten required Simpson to: “submit for review and
approval of the Planning Office any amended declarations of covenants
and restrictions that will govern the homeowner’s association.” Pursuant
to the city’s zoning ordinance, review by the city attorney was required. Zoning
ordinance sections 502.3(J)(3) and 502.3(J)(5) provide that:
All agreements, deed restrictions, organizational provisions for a
Homeowners’ Association, and any other method of management of
the common land, shall be approved by the Planning Board after
review by the City Attorney. Adequate provisions shall be made to
assure that common open spaces always remain undeveloped.
. . . .
No portion of the common open land shall be conveyed in a
manner which would result in non-compliance with this section.
Lebanon, N.H., Zoning Ordinance #2 art. v, § 502.3(J)(3), (5).
The city attorney reviewed Simpson’s proposal and advised the planning
board that pursuant to section 502.3(J) and RSA 674:21-a (Supp. 2005), the
board did not have the legal authority to approve Simpson’s proposed plan
amendment. Both New Hampshire land use statutes and the city’s zoning
ordinance prohibit development in the designated open space area of cluster
subdivisions. See RSA 674:21-a; see also Lebanon, N.H., Zoning Ordinance #2
art. v, § 502.3(J).
3
RSA 674:21-a provides:
Any open space designation or other development restriction
which is part of a cluster development, planned unit development,
village plan alternate subdivision, or other proposal approved
under innovative land use controls, or which is lawfully imposed
by a local land use board as a condition of subdivision, site plan,
variance, or other type of approval, and which has been filed in the
records of the local land use board in accordance with its
established procedure, shall be deemed to create a conservation
restriction as defined in RSA 477:45, I, which shall run with the
land, and shall be enforceable by the municipality, or by the owner
of any property which would be specially damaged by the violation
of such restriction, regardless of whether any deed or other
instrument conveying such restriction has been executed or
recorded. For purposes of this section, an applicant’s statement of
intent to restrict development, submitted with or contained in an
application which is subsequently approved, shall be deemed a
condition of the approval.
Section 502.3(J) provides in relevant part:
In a cluster subdivision, open space, outdoor recreational
areas, and enclosed recreational facilities shall be held in common
use under the following requirements:
1. The areas of any such cluster subdivision not used
for individual lots, construction of buildings and roads and other
areas for vehicular traffic shall be permanently maintained as
common land for the purposes of recreation, conservation, park or
public easements, or agriculture.
As a result, Simpson did not receive the approval required by condition
10 of the June 9, 2003 approval. Thus, because a condition precedent set by
the board in its June 9, 2003 approval was not met, that approval never
became final. Because the June 9, 2003 conditional approval was not final,
the board was not barred from reviewing the decision, as it did on October 14,
2003, and voting to void the June 9, 2003 approval. The purpose of allowing
conditional approvals is to avoid requiring that any impediment to full approval
result in formal disapproval and the wasteful necessity of starting all over
again. Sklar Realty v. Town of Merrimack, 125 N.H. 321, 327 (1984) (decided
under prior law). Conditional approval is only an interim step in the process of
the board’s consideration. Id. For a valid, final approval under the statute,
there must be no unfulfilled conditions precedent. Id.
4
In light of our finding that the board’s approval was conditional, we need
not reach the merits of Simpson’s remaining arguments. See DHB v. Town of
Pembroke, 152 N.H. 314, 323 (2005). Accordingly, we conclude that, based
upon the record before us, a reasonable person could have come to the same
conclusion as did the trial court in upholding the board’s determination that
the approval was conditional and would have become final only if the
conditions precedent were satisfied.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5