THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-706
ELDERTRUST OF FLORIDA, INC.
v.
TOWN OF EPSOM
Argued: October 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 18, 2007
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (William L. Chapman and Jessica E. Storey
on the brief, and Mr. Chapman orally), for the plaintiff.
Soltani/Mosca, PLLC, of Epsom (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Town of Epsom (Town), appeals a
recommendation of the Special Master (Manias, J.), approved by the Superior
Court (Fitzgerald, J.), granting a charitable tax exemption on properties owned
by the plaintiff, ElderTrust of Florida, Inc. (ElderTrust). We affirm.
I. Background
The trial court found the following facts. National Health Investors (NHI)
is a real estate investment trust that held mortgages on Epsom Manor and
Heartland Place (collectively, the facilities), both of which are located in Epsom.
Epsom Manor is a skilled nursing facility and Heartland Place is an assisted
living facility. In 1999, NHI foreclosed on the mortgages for both facilities, took
over their operation, and later contracted with National HealthCare Corporation
(NHC) to manage them.
ElderTrust is a Tennessee non-profit corporation. Pursuant to its articles
of incorporation, ElderTrust was “organized, and at all times thereafter
operated, exclusively for public charitable uses and purposes within the
meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, to establish,
acquire, own, maintain, and operate hospitals, nursing homes and related
health care facilities, including retirement housing for elderly persons.”
In 2001, CFN Manchester/North, LLC (CFN), a subsidiary of ElderTrust,
initiated efforts to acquire the facilities. ElderTrust acted through CFN because
it believed that such an operational arrangement would facilitate its efforts to
obtain funding from the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) to finance the acquisition. However, HUD denied CFN’s
application for financing in 2001, so ElderTrust purchased the facilities
through a mortgage financed by NHI, and contracted with NHC to manage the
facilities for a fixed fee.
Thereafter, ElderTrust sought a tax exemption on the facilities under
RSA 72:23, V for the 2002 tax year. The Town denied ElderTrust’s application
and assessed a tax totaling $104,774.90 on both facilities, which ElderTrust
paid. ElderTrust appealed to the superior court, which ruled that the tax
exemption should have been granted. The Town then appealed to this court.
Here, the Town argues the trial court erred in granting the tax exemption
and in concluding that ElderTrust: (1) was established and administered for
the purpose of performing some service of public good or welfare; (2) provided
no pecuniary profit or benefit to its officers or members; and (3) owned, used or
occupied its property for charitable purposes.
II. Standard of Review
Resolution of this appeal requires us to consider the interpretation and
application of RSA 72:23, V (2003) and RSA 72:23-l (2003). See E. Coast Conf.
of the Evangelical Covenant Church of America v. Town of Swanzey, 146 N.H.
658, 661 (2001). The interpretation and application of statutes present
questions of law, which we review de novo. See, e.g., Town of Hinsdale v. Town
of Chesterfield, 153 N.H. 70, 72 (2005); see also Hattiesburg Area Senior
Servs., Inc. v. Lamar County, 633 So.2d 440, 444 (Miss. 1994) (de novo review
of charitable tax exemption cases); Iowa Methodist Hosp. v. Bd. of Review, 252
N.W.2d 390, 391 (Iowa 1977) (de novo review of charitable tax exemption
2
cases). In conducting our review, we accord deference to the trial court’s
findings of historical fact, where those findings are supported by evidence in
the record. Elwood v. Bolte, 119 N.H. 508, 510 (1979).
III. Discussion
The Town contends, in essence, that the trial court misinterpreted and
misapplied RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l. We first interpret the statutes, and
then consider their application.
RSA 72:23, V provides an exemption from taxation for:
[t]he buildings, lands and personal property of
charitable organizations and societies organized,
incorporated, or legally doing business in this state,
owned, used and occupied by them directly for the
purposes for which they are established, provided that
none of the income or profits thereof is used for any
other purpose than the purpose for which they are
established.
Pursuant to RSA 72:23-l,
[t]he term “charitable” as used to describe a
corporation, society or other organization within the
scope of this chapter, including RSA 72:23 and 72:23-
k, shall mean a corporation, society or organization
established and administered for the purpose of
performing, and obligated, by its charter or otherwise,
to perform some service of public good or welfare
advancing the spiritual, physical, intellectual, social or
economic well-being of the general public or a
substantial and indefinite segment of the general
public that includes residents of the state of New
Hampshire, with no pecuniary profit or benefit to its
officers or members, or any restrictions which confine
its benefits or services to such officers or members, or
those of any related organization. The fact that an
organization’s activities are not conducted for profit
shall not in itself be sufficient to render the
organization “charitable” for purposes of this chapter,
nor shall the organization’s treatment under the
United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended. This section is not intended to abrogate the
3
meaning of “charitable” under the common law of New
Hampshire.
RSA 72:23-l (emphasis added); see also The Housing Partnership v. Town of
Rollinsford, 141 N.H. 239, 241 (1996) (RSA 72:23-l “is consistent with the
common law definition of charitable organization.”).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Town of Hinsdale, 153 N.H. at 72. When examining the language of the
statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Appeal
of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. ___, ___ (decided Nov. 2, 2006). We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id.
We have interpreted and applied both RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l on
a number of previous occasions. See, e.g., Appeal of Town of Wolfeboro, 152
N.H. 455, 458-59 (2005); Appeal of City of Franklin, 137 N.H. 622, 624-25
(1993); Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. at 240-41; Town of Swanzey, 146 N.H. at
661-62. In most of our past cases, we have conducted a narrow analysis to
ascertain whether a particular portion of the charitable tax exemption statutory
scheme was satisfied. We have not yet been presented with an opportunity to
synthesize our previous holdings and to delineate a clear, multipartite inquiry,
grounded in the statutory language, as to when a charitable tax exemption
should be granted under RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l. We now take the
opportunity to join a number of other courts, see, e.g., Methodist Old Peoples
Home v. Korzen, 233 N.E.2d 537, 541-42 (Ill. 1968); Clark v. Marian Park, Inc.,
400 N.E.2d 661, 664 (Ill. App. Ct. 1980); Hospital Utilization Project v.
Commonwealth, 487 A.2d 1306, 1317 (Pa. 1985), in articulating a discrete set
of factors against which a charitable tax exemption application must be
evaluated.
We hold that the plain language of RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l
requires the institution to satisfy each of the following four factors; namely,
whether: (1) the institution or organization was established and is
administered for a charitable purpose; (2) an obligation exists to perform the
organization’s stated purpose to the public rather than simply to members of
the organization; (3) the land, in addition to being owned by the organization, is
occupied by it and used directly for the stated charitable purposes; and (4) any
of the organization’s income or profits are used for any purpose other than the
purpose for which the organization was established. Under the fourth factor,
the organization’s officers or members may not derive any pecuniary profit or
benefit. See RSA 72:23, V; RSA 72:23-l. Although these four factors are
anchored in the plain language of the statutes, they also have firm moorings in
4
our case law. See, e.g., Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. at 241-42; Society of
Cincinnati v. Town of Exeter, 92 N.H. 348, 352 (1943).
While not in the precise form we articulated above, the record
demonstrates that the trial court gave consideration to each of these four
factors. Accordingly, we turn to the Town’s argument that the trial court
misapplied the statutory charitable tax exemption scheme, keeping in mind
that “[t]he burden of demonstrating the applicability of any exemption [is] upon
the claimant.” RSA 72:23-m (2003).
As to the first factor, the Town advances essentially two contentions.
First, it contends that the wording of ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation is
not sufficiently indicative of a charitable purpose. The trial court ruled that
ElderTrust’s “articles of incorporation demonstrate that it was established . . .
to perform a service of public good, namely providing skilled nursing and
assisted living facilities for the elderly.” We agree with the trial court. The
language of ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation required it to be “operated,
exclusively for public charitable uses and purposes within the meaning of
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, to establish, acquire, own,
maintain, and operate hospitals, nursing homes, and related health care
facilities, including retirement housing for elderly persons.”
Second, the Town contends that the types of housing referenced in
ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation do not assist “worthy aged people” and
therefore ElderTrust was not established for a charitable purpose. On at least
three occasions, we have discussed whether particular housing arrangements
for the elderly fulfill the charitable purpose requirement of the statute. See
Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. at 459-62 (discussing charitable tax exemptions
for elderly housing). Consistent with other jurisdictions, we have held that
under our State’s statutory scheme, a provider of elderly housing must do more
than simply offer rental units in order to be eligible for a charitable tax
exemption on a given parcel of property. See id.; see also City of Franklin, 137
N.H. at 626 (homes for the aged are not per se tax exempt organizations);
Riverview Place, Inc. v. Cass County, 448 N.W.2d 635, 642 (N.D. 1989)
(charitable tax exemption “requires something more than merely providing an
aggregate-living facility for the elderly in order to qualify as a charitable use of
property”); 71 Am. Jur. 2d State and Local Taxation §§ 327, 328, at 623-26
(2001).
Here, with the possible exception of basic retirement housing, see Town
of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. at 459-62, ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation
describe facilities that provide a level of care or services above that of mere
apartment or rental units. To the extent the Town argues that a particular
facility is not used directly for a charitable purpose, we address that argument
under our analysis of the third factor. Thus, under the current statutory
5
scheme, we uphold the trial court’s conclusion that ElderTrust was established
for a stated charitable purpose.
In terms of the second factor, we have held that
the public service which [the applicant] is to render
must be obligatory so as to enable the Attorney
General or other public officer to enforce this right
against it if the service is not performed. It follows
that if the public benefit is limited to that which the
plaintiff sees fit to provide at its option or in its
uncontrolled discretion the requirements of RSA 72:23
V are not satisfied.
City of Franklin, 137 N.H. at 625 (quotation omitted). The purpose of the
obligation requirement is to prevent organizations, even if they operate for
charitable purposes, from obtaining the benefits of a tax exemption without
providing some service of public good. Id. at 626.
In challenging the trial court’s conclusions on the second factor, the
Town preliminarily argues that “[t]he trial court did not specify what portion of
the articles of incorporation it had in mind” in holding that ElderTrust was
under an enforceable obligation to perform a service of public good or welfare.
However, on the first page of its order, the trial court quoted the portion of
ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation cited above upon which it relied in
reaching its decision.
The Town’s substantive argument regarding the second factor is that
ElderTrust did not operate under an enforceable obligation to fulfill a charitable
purpose. In reaching its conclusion that an enforceable obligation to operate
with a charitable purpose did exist, the trial court examined ElderTrust’s
articles of incorporation, among other documents or evidence. Examining such
documents is consistent with our approach to the obligation inquiry in
previous charitable tax exemption cases. See, e.g., Nature Conservancy v.
Nelson, 107 N.H. 316, 319-20 (1966). The language of a particular
organization’s articles of incorporation, at least to some extent, may alleviate a
concern that an organization would provide no more services than what it
“might at its option and in its uncontrolled discretion see fit to furnish.” City of
Franklin, 137 N.H. at 625 (quotation omitted).
By the express language of its articles of incorporation, ElderTrust was
required to be “operated[ ] exclusively for public charitable uses and purposes.”
(Emphasis added.) In context, the use of the word “exclusively” places a
significant and enforceable limitation on ElderTrust’s operation. Moreover,
although the Town contends that enforcement of a charitable purpose is
6
compromised by the fact that ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation do not
expressly reference elderly persons with “low and moderate income,” the
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has reasoned that “[a]n organization
does not necessarily have to serve the poor or the needy in order to qualify for
the charitable exemption.” Western Mass. Lifecare v. Bd. of Assessors, 747
N.E.2d 97, 104 (Mass. 2001) (holding that elderly living facility did not qualify
for exemption because its admissions process depended upon financial status
of applicants); accord Eden Retirement Center, Inc. v. Dep’t of Revenue, 821
N.E.2d 240, 251 (Ill. 2004) (“[C]harging fees and dispensing benefits to other
than those who are poverty stricken does not cause an institution to lose its
charitable character.” (quotation omitted)). We find this reasoning persuasive
and thus reject the Town’s argument that ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation
could not create an enforceable charitable obligation unless they specified a
particular income level for residents of or applicants to the facilities. In short,
ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation sufficiently circumscribe its discretion
and define an enforceable charitable obligation even without an express
reference to persons of “low and moderate income.” We note, however, that the
actual provision of services to such persons may be an important consideration
in analyzing how an entity carries out its obligation under the third factor of
our analysis. Accordingly, we hold that ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation
sufficiently define a charitable purpose such that the purpose could be
enforced. ElderTrust is not left with an impermissible level of discretion. See
Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. at 241.
In terms of the third factor, we have held that in order “[t]o qualify for an
exemption, the land, in addition to being owned by the association, would have
to be occupied by the association and used directly by the association for its
charitable purposes.” Id. at 242 (quotation and brackets omitted). An analysis
of the third factor may overlap with that of the first because these two factors
are interdependent – that is, the third factor primarily asks whether the
charitable purpose identified under the first factor is being carried out on the
particular parcel of property for which the exemption is being sought. By
inquiring beyond simply who owns a particular parcel, the third factor
accounts for charitable institutions that do not necessarily use all of their
properties to directly advance a charitable mission. Riverview Place, 448
N.W.2d at 640 (“The ownership of the property in question by an institution of
public charity does not, by that fact alone, exempt the property from
taxation.”); see also Appalachian Mountain Club v. Meredith, 103 N.H. 5, 9-10
(1960).
In order for a residence to satisfy the third prong, the occupancy of the
property must be reasonably necessary for the charitable organization to carry
out its mission. Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. at 242. When the use is slight,
negligible or insignificant, or not in the performance of the public purpose, the
applicant is not entitled to a tax exemption. Id. A determination of whether an
7
organization performs a charitable purpose depends upon the particular facts
of the case. See 84 C.J.S. Taxation § 323, at 391-92 (2001) (“[E]ach case must
be decided on its own peculiar, or particular, facts or circumstances, and an
organization or institution, in order to have its property exempt, must come,
and stay, within the bounds prescribed by the constitution or statute.”).
Here, the record supports the trial court’s conclusion that Epsom Manor,
as a skilled nursing facility, and Heartland Place, as an assisted living facility,
provided more services than would be provided at a mere aggregate living
facility and were occupied and used directly to advance ElderTrust’s charitable
purpose. For example, Epsom Manor provided nursing and other care to its
occupants as part and parcel of their residency there. We have been directed
to no evidence that Epsom Manor residents were required to pay extra fees in
order to obtain certain of these services. With respect to Heartland Place, we
have previously distinguished between assisted living facilities and
independent living facilities, with the former generally providing more services
to its residents. See Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. at 457. This distinction
applies here insofar as the residents of Heartland Place were, as found by the
trial court, entitled to 24-hour nursing care, housekeeping and administration
of medicine, among other services.
The Town argues that since these services were not provided for free,
Heartland Place and Epsom Manor were not owned, used, or occupied directly
for a charitable purpose. We have held that charging fees to residents of
elderly housing does not alone preclude an organization from obtaining a
charitable tax exemption, as long as the fees “directly fulfill the organization’s
charitable purpose, or are necessary for the organization to accomplish its
purpose.” Senior Citizens Housing Dev. Corp. v. City of Claremont, 122 N.H.
1104, 1108 (1982); see also Appeal of City of Laconia, 146 N.H. 725, 728-29
(2001); 71 Am. Jur. 2d State and Local Taxation § 308 (2001). Here, the fees
charged to live in Epsom Manor and Heartland Place are reasonably necessary
for ElderTrust to carry out its mission of providing hospitals, nursing homes,
and related health care facilities and services for the elderly in southern New
Hampshire. See Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. at 243 (“[T]he specially adapted
nature of elderly . . . housing . . . is often modified to accommodate the needs
of the residents and the occupancy of such housing is necessary in order for
elderly and disabled tenants to receive the special benefits this housing
provides.” (citations omitted)). Considering that both facilities operated at a
financial loss, it is not surprising that we have been directed to no evidence
that the charged fees were equal to, or exceeded, the value or cost of the
benefits provided.
The Town also takes issue with the facilities’ policies on the fees
collected. The Town correctly notes that a number of patients were “private
pays” and that ElderTrust required would-be residents to sign an admission
8
agreement that permitted ElderTrust to discharge a patient for failure to pay.
The Town argues that these two facts undermine the extent to which
ElderTrust operated the facilities directly for its charitable purpose. However,
at the hearing before the trial court, there was testimony that: (1) a patient’s
ability to pay was not a prerequisite for admission; (2) Epsom Manor and
Heartland Place operated at a financial loss; (3) patients were accepted in
some cases before ElderTrust knew whether the patient would receive
Medicaid; and (4) representatives of ElderTrust negotiated with patients in
financial difficulty in order to find a lower rate at which the patient could afford
to make payments. Indeed, some residents remained at the facility for ten
months without paying. Cf. Brattleboro Retreat v. Town of Brattleboro, 173 A.
209, 212-13 (Vt. 1934) (declaring facility eligible for tax exemption, despite the
fact that there was no written policy of accepting patients for charity, in part
because the facility supported a large number of patients even if the patient
suffered from an inability to pay as promised). Moreover, when a patient’s
Medicare coverage or other sources of funds ran out, both facilities permitted
the resident to retain the same room, even if that room had a market value
higher than the resident could afford to pay. See 71 Am. Jur. 2d State and
Local Taxation § 308, at 596 (2001) (“Where everyone must pay the same rate
regardless of one’s ability to pay, that is evidence that the organization is not
operating as a charity.”). Permitting an individual to remain in a particular
bed, even if that individual cannot pay the cost of services rendered, makes it
less likely that he or she will become a burden on governmental coffers. Thus,
although ElderTrust does require a resident to sign the admissions agreement,
the evidence of its actual practices shows that it allowed people to remain at
the facilities despite an inability to pay. ElderTrust’s actual practices are
crucial to our conclusion concerning whether the facilities are occupied and
used directly for a stated charitable purpose.
In addition, other evidence tends to demonstrate that the provision of
services was charitable in nature, including evidence that a number of patients
or residents paid substantially below the advertised rate for the
accommodations and services they received at the facilities. For example, at
Heartland Place, some residents paid $25 on rooms valued at $60. There was
also testimony that a number of Medicaid patients, whose monthly payments
were also substantially below the published rate, were accepted. In fact, some
70% of the days billed at Epsom Manor were at Medicaid rates, and the trial
court found that Medicaid payments did not cover the entire cost of the
services provided. Accordingly, it follows that the facilities provided care and
services, which cost more than the fees charged, to a portion of the population
who otherwise would have imposed a burden upon the government. The record
also reflects that ElderTrust used profits generated at other of its facilities in
order to keep Epsom Manor and Heartland Place in operation and to advance
its charitable mission. Thus, we hold that ElderTrust operated both facilities
directly for a charitable purpose within the meaning of the statute.
9
Finally we turn to the fourth factor. Under this factor, it must be
determined whether the organization’s income or profits are used for any
purpose other than the purpose for which the organization was established.
RSA 72:23, V. We also consider, as part of this inquiry, whether ElderTrust
offers a “pecuniary profit or benefit to its officers or members, or any
restrictions which confine its benefits or services to such officers or members,
or those of any related organization.” RSA 72:23-l; see also Town of Exeter, 92
N.H. at 352.
The Town argues that since ElderTrust pays a substantial amount of its
earnings to NHC and NHI, two for-profit entities, and since two members of
ElderTrust’s board hold stock in NHC and/or NHI, ElderTrust is both: (1)
using its income or profits for purposes other than that for which it was
established; and (2) offering pecuniary profit or benefit to some of its members
and related organizations.
The trial court found that “[t]here is no evidence to suggest that
[ElderTrust] is so intertwined with the affairs of either NHC or NHI such that
[it] is run for the benefit of either for-profit corporation.” The Town contends
that this finding indicates that the trial court violated RSA 72:23-m by
impermissibly shifting the burden of proof from the applicant to the Town to
offer evidence on this prong of the charitable tax exemption inquiry. The Town
misreads the trial court’s order. Reading this finding in the context of the trial
court’s whole order, we conclude that the trial court did not shift the burden to
the Town. Instead, the trial court simply noted that, upon review of the many
financial and related documents in the record, it did not find evidence of a use
of income or profits that would contravene the statute. We refuse to consider
phrases from the trial court’s order out of context.
The trial court also found that: (1) “NHC was chosen to manage the
facilities because, after completing due diligence, [ElderTrust] found that NHC
had substantial experience running charitable healthcare facilities and had
submitted the best bid for operating the facilities”; (2) ElderTrust’s “choice to
contract with NHC for the management of the property does not evidence any
intent to use [ElderTrust] purely as a means to benefit NHC”; (3) ElderTrust’s
purchase of the facilities “from NHI was not structured in such a way as to
demonstrate that [ElderTrust] intended to benefit NHI” especially in light of the
interest rate it offered to ElderTrust; and (4) “[t]he mortgage with NHI and the
contract with NHC are the products of arm’s length negotiations and do not
establish that [ElderTrust] exists for the benefit of NHI or NHC.” We also note
that: (1) ElderTrust’s articles of incorporation contain provisions prohibiting
distributions of net earnings and other profits to officers, directors, or other
private citizens; and (2) one of the overlapping shareholders left the room on at
least some occasions when the NHC contract or NHI mortgage were discussed.
10
These findings support the trial court’s conclusion that ElderTrust was not
using its profits for purposes other than that for which it was established.
The Town argues that the evidence in the record is not sufficient to
support some of these findings. On appeal, we review sufficiency of the
evidence claims as a matter of law, and uphold the findings and rulings of the
trial court unless they are lacking in evidential support or tainted by error of
law. Fichtner v. Pittsley, 146 N.H. 512, 515 (2001). We accord considerable
weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the
weight to be given testimony. Id.
The Town first argues that there was no evidence that ElderTrust acted
“to solicit competitive bids” for the services provided by NHC and, therefore,
ElderTrust was improperly using its funds to make NHC more profitable.
However, the minutes from a meeting of ElderTrust’s board of directors indicate
that the chairman discussed with the board “his efforts to obtain management
contract and working capital proposals from 4 different operators including Life
Care Centers of America, Beverly Enterprises, Inc., HCR ManorCare and
[NHC].” The chairman also spoke by telephone with officials from at least two
of these companies, and attempted to speak with a third, to discuss the
submission of a bid to manage the ElderTrust facilities. NHC was selected after
these efforts. ElderTrust’s board based its selection of NHC upon a number of
factors, including: (1) NHC had managed both facilities before ElderTrust took
over ownership, so it was familiar with the facilities in a way that other
management companies arguably might not have been; and (2) NHC had
offered terms which were more favorable financially than those contained in the
proposal submitted by Beverly Enterprises. Ultimately, NHC was paid fixed
fees of $20,000 per month to manage Epsom Manor and $4,000 per month to
manage Heartland Place.
With respect to ElderTrust’s mortgage from NHI, the Town contends that
“there is no evidentiary support for the trial court’s finding that the mortgage
[rate offered to ElderTrust] was ‘at below market rates.’” The trial court heard
testimony, which it credited, that ElderTrust received a 6.9% rate on its
mortgage with NHI, reduced from 10.8%. At trial, NHI’s senior vice president
for finance described this interest rate as “way below the market[,]” and the
court credited this testimony as well.
The Town also contends that there is no evidence of any negotiation
between ElderTrust and NHI. However, the trial court received testimony that
ElderTrust was able to negotiate a deal whereby “in lieu of payments to [NHI],
. . . [ElderTrust] [would] pay monies into a capital improvements account” that
would be used solely to advance the company’s charitable mission. Further,
ElderTrust had negotiated with NHI that the total amount of the mortgage
would be the lesser of either the HUD valuation or the pre-existing NHI
11
investment in the properties. (As stated above, NHI held the mortgage on the
property under the prior owner.) These terms were more favorable than those
contained in any of the fifty to seventy mortgages that NHI had granted to other
health care facilities. Accordingly, based upon our review of the record, we
hold that the trial court’s findings concerning whether ElderTrust was using its
income or profits for purposes other than that for which it was established are
supported by the evidence.
As to whether ElderTrust operated to provide pecuniary profit or benefit
to its officers or members, see RSA 72:23-l, the record demonstrates that
William Richmond, the president of ElderTrust and chairman of its board,
owned 14,000 to 15,000 shares of stock in NHI and 8,000 to 10,000 shares of
stock in NHC. Michael Neal, a member of ElderTrust’s board and a senior
regional vice president of NHC, also held stock in NHC. There is no evidence in
the record that any other members of ElderTrust’s board had any financial
interest in NHI or NHC. Further, Richmond testified that no member of
ElderTrust’s board served as a board member of NHI or NHC. An individual
who held the title of senior vice president of finance for both NHI and NHC
presented both companies’ proposals to the ElderTrust board; however, he
never served as a director of ElderTrust. Thus, the question is whether the
interests of Richmond and Neal are sufficient to deprive ElderTrust of the
benefit of a tax exemption.
In responding to this query, we make two preliminary observations: (1)
ElderTrust is one client of these two companies, and as such, it pays each
company for services rendered; and (2) the Town has not pointed to any legal
authority indicating a bright-line rule that tax exempt charitable organizations
may never enter into agreements with for-profit entities that happen to have
links or connections with members of the charitable organization’s board. See
26 U.S.C. § 503(b)(6) (2000) (limiting but not precluding transactions involving
charitable organizations and other entities with overlapping interests).
We harbor some concern about the overlapping interests of the
participants to the transactions at issue. See id. However, based upon the
record in this case, we are unable to conclude that the statutory scheme has
been violated. For example, the Town does not point to, nor do we find, any
portion of the record indicating that Epsom Manor or Heartland Place
generated profits for excessive salaries to ElderTrust’s members or that the
financial losses at either facility were markedly improving such that a net
generation of revenue was likely. No director of ElderTrust received more than
$750 for his services (to ElderTrust) in 2002. Cf. Couriers-Susquehanna, Inc.
v. County of Dauphin, 645 A.2d 290, 294 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1994) (describing
large salaries for directors where there was no evidence of actual work
performed or time spent at the institution); 26 U.S.C. § 503(b)(6) (requiring the
12
individual or entity holding the overlapping interests to own a particular
percentage of shares or interests before transaction is prohibited).
In addition, the Town has not pointed to any evidence clearly indicating
that the value of Richmond’s or Neal’s stock necessarily or automatically
increased due to the transactions with ElderTrust particularly. Indeed,
although Richmond testified on cross-examination that the value of his stock
would improve to the extent that NHI was profitable, such a profit was
speculative and not clearly linked to the relationship with ElderTrust in
particular. Nor has the Town pointed to any evidence clearly indicating that
Neal’s salary as regional vice-president of NHC increased as a result of
ElderTrust’s management contract with that company. Furthermore, we have
upheld the trial court’s findings concerning the relationship between the three
organizations and the formation thereof. Accordingly, under these
circumstances, we conclude that the record supports the trial court’s findings
and rulings concerning whether ElderTrust operated to provide pecuniary profit
or benefit to its officers or members.
IV. Conclusion
In sum, we uphold the trial court’s determination that ElderTrust met its
burden with respect to each of the four factors. See RSA 72:23-m. However,
we regard this as a particularly close case, especially with respect to the second
and fourth factors. While we are bound to apply the statute as written,
Whitcomb v. Town of Carroll, 141 N.H. 402, 412 (1996), the legislature is of
course free to amend the statutory scheme, should it disagree with the result
we reach today. See In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. ___, ___
(decided Oct. 31, 2006); Town of Derry v. Adams, 121 N.H. 473, 480 (1981).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
13