THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2005-686
GLORIA JEAN LACASSE
v.
SPAULDING YOUTH CENTER
Argued: July 20, 2006
Opinion Issued: October 13, 2006
Normandin, Cheney & O'Neil, PLLC, of Laconia (James F. Lafrance and
James W. Kennedy on the brief, and Mr. Lafrance orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Mark T. Broth and
Nancy E. Boudreau on the brief, and Mr. Broth orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Gloria Jean Lacasse, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendant,
Spaulding Youth Center (Spaulding), in this wrongful discharge action. We
affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
The trial court relied upon the following facts, as alleged by the plaintiff.
Spaulding is a non-profit residential facility for emotionally-impaired and
autistic children. The plaintiff was employed by Spaulding as assistant food
service director, where she worked directly under the food service director,
Christine Couto, and filled in as director in Couto’s absence. Also employed in
the kitchen were Couto’s daughters, Wendy and Michelle.
From the commencement of her employment in September 1999 through
August 2001, the plaintiff had an excellent relationship with Spaulding and
Couto and good working relations with the other kitchen staff. On August 24,
2001, while filling in for Couto, the plaintiff refused to submit time sheets to
payroll because she questioned Michelle and Wendy Couto’s hours. Instead,
she left the task for Couto’s return on August 27, 2001.
On September 4, the plaintiff noticed that Michelle’s time sheet had been
filled out, in her view, inaccurately. The plaintiff voiced her concerns to Couto.
That same day, Couto “yelled at the plaintiff for making a peanut butter
sandwich wrong,” and gave her the cold shoulder.
The next day, Couto’s treatment of the plaintiff returned to normal. On
September 6, however, the plaintiff relayed to Couto a concern about Wendy
taking food home from the kitchen. Couto again treated the plaintiff gruffly for
the next two days and failed to provide her with specific work assignments.
Thereafter, Couto chastised the plaintiff while she was serving food to residents
and employees and yelled at her “for several minutes” about a snack she had
served.
On September 17, 2001, the plaintiff received her annual performance
review from Couto. Couto was critical of the plaintiff’s job performance, and
her written review was less satisfactory than it had been in previous years. In
addition, Couto told the plaintiff she could no longer leave early on Friday
afternoons. The next day, another employee told the plaintiff that Couto had
disclosed her performance evaluation to Wendy.
The plaintiff informed Spaulding’s human resources department on
September 18 that she was having a problem with Couto, and filed a complaint
the next day. On September 20, Darnell Pestana, the director of human
resources, informed the plaintiff that an investigation was underway. The
plaintiff also consulted a doctor that day regarding various physical symptoms
she attributed to stress.
On October 1, the plaintiff tendered her letter of resignation, giving two
weeks notice. The next day, Pestana called the plaintiff and asked her to
reconsider resigning and give Spaulding a chance to investigate her complaint.
Pestana told the plaintiff she could take two weeks paid administrative leave
and that additional time might be available. She also informed the plaintiff
that an investigation could take longer than two weeks. The plaintiff took the
two-week paid leave.
On October 12, the plaintiff informed Spaulding that she had hired an
attorney and would not return to work. Her attorney then asked Spaulding to
2
stay the plaintiff’s resignation, with or without pay, pending investigation of her
claims and clarification regarding her state of health. Spaulding agreed, giving
the plaintiff until October 26, 2001, to rescind her resignation, but requiring
her to provide a medical release as a condition of returning to work. On
October 26, the plaintiff informed Spaulding that her resignation would be
effective immediately because her doctor had advised her not to return to work.
The plaintiff sued for, among other things, wrongful discharge and
negligent supervision. Spaulding moved for summary judgment. The court
granted summary judgment on the wrongful discharge claim, finding that the
incidents of mistreatment alleged by the plaintiff “do not rise to the level of
constructive discharge.” The court also granted summary judgment on the
negligent supervision claim, finding it barred by the workers’ compensation
statute. See RSA 281-A:8 (Supp. 2005). The plaintiff appeals.
Our standard of review is well established:
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. If our review of the evidence does not reveal a
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s
decision. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo.
White v. Asplundh Tree Expert Co., 151 N.H. 544, 547 (2004) (citations
omitted).
We first address the plaintiff’s wrongful discharge claim. To succeed on
such a claim, a plaintiff must prove: “(1) [that] the termination of employment
was motivated by bad faith, retaliation or malice; and (2) that she was
terminated for performing an act that public policy would encourage or for
refusing to do something that public policy would condemn.” Karch v.
BayBank FSB, 147 N.H. 525, 536 (2002). The termination element of the claim
may be satisfied by proof of a constructive discharge, see id., which “occurs
when an employer renders an employee’s working conditions so difficult and
intolerable that a reasonable person would feel forced to resign,” id. (quotation
omitted). Constructive discharge is not established by showing “[r]elatively
minor abuse of an employee[;] . . . [r]ather, the adverse working conditions
must generally be ongoing, repetitive, pervasive, and severe.” Porter v. City of
Manchester, 151 N.H. 30, 42 (2004) (quotations omitted).
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in ruling as a matter of law
that no reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position would have felt compelled
3
to resign from Spaulding. Although she cites a number of alleged errors in the
court’s analysis of the evidence, we need only address one; namely, that the
court “failed to address or even mention important evidence similar in nature
to the veiled threat that was identified by the [Supreme] Court as an element of
the constructive discharge found in Porter.” See id. (plaintiff’s superior said
“We’ll see how long you last” after plaintiff expressed concerns about her to
human resources (quotation omitted)).
In the case before us, the plaintiff testified that Couto told her, during
her interview for the job, that “with everybody she hires, she let’s [sic] them
know right away that if she comes across anything she dislikes about the . . .
person or persons, she makes it miserable enough for them to quit, that she
does not fire anyone.” Moreover, that comment was Couto’s response to the
plaintiff’s inquiry as to why the prior assistant director had left the position.
While working at Spaulding, the plaintiff heard about other employees who had
resigned due to their treatment by Couto. Pestana, during her investigation of
the plaintiff’s complaint, spoke to a former kitchen employee who said she left
the kitchen because of Couto’s mistreatment and who named others she
claimed had been driven out by Couto. The trial court’s order fails to mention
this evidence.
The court concluded that “[w]hile the working conditions faced by [the
plaintiff] were not ideal, being ignored by one’s supervisor and being yelled at
three times in two weeks does not rise to the level of creating an intolerable
working condition that would force a reasonable person in the same position to
resign.” Viewed in light of Couto’s threat to “make[] it miserable enough for [an
employee] to quit,” however, these incidents could have greater significance. A
reasonable jury might find that a reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position
would conclude that Couto was trying to drive her out, and that the relatively
short period of mistreatment was only the beginning of a campaign of abuse
that would continue until she quit. A jury could further find that a reasonable
person would resign at that point rather than endure the continued
mistreatment.
The trial court also appears to have based its ruling upon Spaulding’s
response to the plaintiff’s complaint, stating:
[Spaulding] took [the plaintiff’s] claims seriously when she
contacted human resources immediately after her negative
performance review. Notwithstanding [Spaulding’s] receptiveness
to her claim, the plaintiff resigned eight business days later. At the
time, [the plaintiff] had reported that the more abusive behaviors
had stopped and that Ms. Couto was now ignoring her completely.
4
In addition, the court noted the plaintiff was informed, prior to her resignation,
that Couto “had been counseled regarding the allegations,” without the
disclosure of the plaintiff’s name.
However, a reasonable jury could conclude from the evidence that
Couto’s behavior did not change appreciably. Contrary to the trial court’s
characterization that “[f]ollowing the intervention of [Spaulding’s]
administration, Ms. Couto was no longer hostile toward [the plaintiff],” the
plaintiff’s dayminder continued to note, in the days following her complaint to
Pestana, “still harsh remarks,” “[c]old shoulder and sharp tongue all day,”
“[b]ad day, negative attitude, and I did nothing right in [Couto’s] eyes.”
We conclude that in apparently failing to consider Couto’s prior behavior,
particularly her alleged comment about forcing employees to quit by making
things miserable for them, the trial court failed to “consider the evidence in the
light most favorable to the party opposing the motion [for summary judgment],
giving that party the benefit of all favorable inferences that may be reasonably
drawn from the evidence.” Iannelli v. Burger King Corp., 145 N.H. 190, 193
(2000) (quotation omitted). Because we cannot say as a matter of law that no
reasonable person in the plaintiff’s position would feel compelled to resign from
Spaulding, we reverse the grant of summary judgment on the claim of wrongful
discharge.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court erred in ruling that her
negligent supervision claim was barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the
workers’ compensation statute, RSA 281-A:8. Specifically, she argues that the
claim was permitted under paragraph III of that section.
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. We first examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to the words used.” Portsmouth Country Club v. Town of
Greenland, 152 N.H. 617, 620 (2005) (quotation omitted). RSA 281-A:8
provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
I. An employee of an employer subject to this chapter shall
be conclusively presumed to have accepted the provisions of this
chapter and, on behalf of the employee or the employee’s personal
or legal representatives, to have waived all rights of action whether
at common law or by statute or provided under the laws of any
other state or otherwise:
(a) Against the employer . . .
. . . .
III. Nothing in this chapter shall derogate from any rights a
former employee may have under common law or other statute to
5
recover damages for wrongful termination of, or constructive
discharge from, employment. However, if a former employee
makes a claim under this chapter for compensation for injuries
allegedly caused by such wrongful termination or constructive
discharge, the employee shall be deemed to have elected the
remedies of this chapter, and to have waived rights to recover
damages for such wrongful termination or constructive discharge
under common law or other statute. Similarly, if a former
employee brings an action under common law or other statute to
recover damages for such wrongful termination or constructive
discharge, the employee shall be deemed to have waived claims
under this chapter for compensation allegedly caused by such
termination or discharge.
The trial court held that the claim for negligent supervision was not a
wrongful termination claim and therefore was barred under RSA 281-A:8. We
agree.
The plain language of RSA 281-A:8, III removes the workers’
compensation bar from an action to “recover damages for wrongful
termination of, or constructive discharge from, employment,” should the
former employee elect to pursue such a claim instead of a workers’
compensation claim. Thus, the plaintiff’s claim for wrongful discharge is not
barred. The plaintiff’s separate claim for negligent supervision, however, is not
a claim for constructive discharge. Thus, it is barred by RSA 281-A:8, I(a).
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6