THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-170
VENISE THERESA GONYA & a.
v.
COMMISSIONER, NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE DEPARTMENT
Argued: January 19, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 18, 2006
Watson & Lemire, P.A., of Portsmouth (Thomas R. Watson and Jennifer
A. Lemire on the brief), and Baron & Budd, P.C., of Dallas, Texas (Alan Rich
and Stephen Blackburn on the brief, and Mr. Rich orally), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and J. Christopher Marshall, attorney, orally),
for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioners, Venise Theresa Gonya and Roxane S.
Scaife, appeal an order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) denying their
petition to declare RSA 402-C:40, I (1998) unconstitutional and enjoin its
enforcement. We affirm.
The record reflects the following undisputed facts. Each petitioner
represents the estate of a deceased tort claimant. Among the defendants in the
tort cases are two corporations that were insured under excess liability policies
issued by The Home Insurance Company (Home), a New Hampshire insurance
company. On June 13, 2003, the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) placed Home in
liquidation and appointed the defendant, the Commissioner of the New
Hampshire Insurance Department (Commissioner), as liquidator of Home.
The liquidation proceedings are being conducted pursuant to the New
Hampshire Insurers Rehabilitation and Liquidation Act, RSA chapter 402-C
(1998 & Supp. 2005). RSA 402-C:40, I, provides that the petitioners, as third
parties asserting claims against an insured of Home, may file claims directly
with the Commissioner, as the liquidator of Home. However, the statute
conditions the filing of a claim in the liquidation proceeding upon the third
party releasing the insured from a certain degree of liability on the claim. Id.
Neither petitioner has filed a claim with the Commissioner. Instead, the
petitioners, purporting to represent all persons with existing or potential claims
against Home, sought declaratory and injunctive relief in the superior court,
requesting the court to rule that RSA 402-C:40, I, insofar as it “forces a
claimant to give up a common-law cause of action without procedural
safeguards or meaningful access to information,” is unconstitutional on its
face. After jointly filing a stipulation of facts, the parties moved for summary
judgment on all claims. The trial court granted the Commissioner’s motion
and denied the petitioners’ cross-motion.
On appeal, the petitioners first argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, violates the
doctrine of unconstitutional conditions because it conditions the potential third
party claimant’s ability to file a claim in the liquidation upon the
relinquishment of that claimant’s cause of action against the insured, thus
infringing upon the claimant’s constitutional right to the redress of his
actionable injuries, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 14. Second, they argue that
RSA 402-C:40, I, violates the equal protection rights of potential third party
claimants by treating them differently from similarly situated potential
plaintiffs. Finally, they argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, violates the due process
rights of potential third party claimants by requiring them to choose between
filing a claim in liquidation and pursuing their cause of action against the
insured without allowing them “to obtain enough information to make a
reasoned, intelligent and voluntary choice.”
In reviewing a statute, we presume it to be constitutional and we will not
declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds. Baines v. N.H. Senate
President, 152 N.H. 124, 133 (2005). “The constitutionality of a statute
involves a question of law, which we review de novo.” Hughes v. N.H. Div. of
Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 34 (2005). We address each of the petitioners’
arguments in turn. Because the petitioners rely solely upon the State
2
Constitution, we base our decision upon it alone, using federal cases only to
aid in our analysis. See State v. Grey, 148 N.H. 666, 668 (2002).
I. The Doctrine of Unconstitutional Conditions
The New Hampshire Insurers Rehabilitation and Liquidation Act (the
Act), RSA chapter 402-C, contains procedures for the liquidation of insolvent or
otherwise financially troubled insurance companies. See RSA 402-C:20 (1998).
Among its stated purposes are the “[e]nhanced efficiency and economy of
liquidation” and the “[e]quitable apportionment of any unavoidable loss.” RSA
402-C:1, IV(c)-(d) (1998). The Act is to be “liberally construed” to effect its
stated purposes. RSA 402-C:1, III (1998).
RSA 402-C:40, I and II (1998) provide that when a cause of action is
asserted by a third party against an insured of the insurance company in
liquidation, both the third party and the insured have the option to file a claim
with the liquidator on that cause of action. RSA 402-C:40, I, further provides,
however, that the filing of a claim by the third party
shall release the insured’s liability to the third party on that cause
of action in the amount of the applicable policy limit, but the
liquidator shall also insert in any form used for the filing of third
party claims appropriate language to constitute such a release.
The release shall be void if the insurance coverage is avoided by
the liquidator.
The petitioners first argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, places an
unconstitutional condition upon their ability to file claims directly against
Home in liquidation by requiring them to relinquish their causes of action
against the insureds, thus infringing upon their State constitutional right to
the redress of their actionable injuries. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 14.
Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution states:
Every subject of this state is entitled to a certain remedy, by having
recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive in his person,
property, or character; to obtain right and justice freely, without
being obliged to purchase it; completely, and without any denial;
promptly, and without delay; conformably to the laws.
This provision provides that all citizens have a right to the redress of their
actionable injuries. Gould v. Concord Hospital, 126 N.H. 405, 409 (1985). It
makes civil remedies readily available and guards against arbitrary and
discriminatory infringements on access to the courts. City of Dover v. Imperial
3
Cas. & Indemn. Co., 133 N.H. 109, 116 (1990). Although the right to recover
for one’s injuries is not a fundamental right, id., it is “an important substantive
right,” Carson v. Maurer, 120 N.H. 925, 931-32 (1980), and is “accorded
solicitous protection,” Gould, 126 N.H. at 409.
Had the legislature simply required that all tort claimants with claims
against persons insured by an insolvent insurer release the insured of liability
up to the applicable policy limits, rather than conditioning the right to file a
claim in liquidation upon their agreeing to do so, we have no doubt that it
would have been a violation of the claimants’ constitutional rights. See Petition
of Abbott, 139 N.H. 412, 416 (1995) (to justify the complete abolition of the
right of any class of persons to recover damages for their injuries, there must
be a satisfactory substitute for the right). However, the issue presented in this
case is whether a statute can condition the grant of a benefit – here, the ability
to file a claim directly against the insurer in liquidation – upon the waiver of
the right to recover damages from the insured to the extent of the applicable
policy limits.
We first note that we are not convinced that the doctrine of
unconstitutional conditions is applicable to this case. As Justice Stevens
explained in his dissenting opinion in Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374,
407 n.12 (1994) (citations omitted), “Although it has a long history, the
‘unconstitutional conditions’ doctrine has for just as long suffered from
notoriously inconsistent application; it has never been an overarching principle
of constitutional law that operates with equal force regardless of the nature of
the rights and powers in question.” Furthermore, while we have applied a
similar constitutional analysis in a context different from the one before us
today, see J.E.D. Assoc’s, Inc. v. Town of Atkinson, 121 N.H. 581, 584-85
(1981) (discussing “unconstitutional exactions and requirements” placed upon
developers by municipalities), overruled on other grounds by Town of Auburn
v. McEvoy, 131 N.H. 383, 388 (1988), we have never expressly adopted the
doctrine of unconstitutional conditions or applied it under the State
Constitution. Nevertheless, we will assume, for the purposes of this case only,
that the doctrine is applicable to this situation.
The doctrine of unconstitutional conditions “bars government from
arbitrarily conditioning the grant of a benefit on the surrender of a
constitutional right, regardless of the fact that the government appropriately
might have refused to grant the benefit at all.” National Amusements, Inc. v.
Town of Dedham, 43 F.3d 731, 747 (1st Cir. 1995), cert. denied, 515 U.S. 1103
(1995). However, not all conditions are prohibited. Id. If a condition is
“sufficiently related” to the benefit, then it may validly be imposed. Id.
The Commissioner does not dispute that the ability to file a claim in
liquidation is the type of government benefit contemplated by the doctrine of
4
unconstitutional conditions. Assuming, then, that the right to the redress of
actionable injuries is a constitutional right that is afforded protection by the
doctrine of unconstitutional conditions, but see Sullivan, Unconstitutional
Conditions, 102 Harv. L. Rev. 1413, 1427 (1989) (indicating that the doctrine
protects only “preferred right[s] normally protected by strict judicial review”),
we must consider whether the benefit in this case is conditioned on the
surrender of the constitutional right at issue, and, if so, whether the condition
is sufficiently related to the benefit. See National Amusements, Inc., 43 F.3d at
747.
The Commissioner contends that although the filing of a claim in the
liquidation is contingent upon the release of the insured from liability up to the
applicable policy limits, it is not conditioned upon the “surrender” of the third
party claimant’s constitutional right to the redress of his actionable injuries.
He argues that the third party claimant is still exercising his right to the
redress of his injuries because his claim is submitted to the superior court,
which has the ultimate authority to allow or disallow claims in liquidation, and,
if the claim is allowed, he receives the opportunity to be compensated through
the liquidation proceeding as an alternative to the usual legal proceeding
against the insured. See Ramos v. Jackson, 510 So. 2d 1241, 1241-42 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1987) (holding that similar statute did not amount to a denial of
Florida constitutional right of access to the courts because “the injured party
has a right to either seek relief against alleged tortfeasors or waive same and
seek relief from the receiver of the insolvent insurer”).
However, in arguing that the pursuit of a claim in liquidation is
essentially an equivalent alternative means of exercising one’s right to the
redress of his actionable injuries, the Commissioner ignores his own
concessions that “[u]ncertainty over liquidation recovery is inherent in the fact
of the insurer’s insolvency” and “it is apparent that [third party claimants] are
unlikely to receive payment in full in [a] liquidation.” At least to some extent,
the third party who files a claim in the liquidation is surrendering his ability to
receive full compensation for his actionable injuries. Thus, the release of the
insured from liability up to the applicable policy limits arguably amounts to a
partial surrender of a constitutional right. See Trovato v. DeVeau, 143 N.H.
523, 525 (1999) (Part I, Article 14 does not guarantee that all injured persons
will receive full compensation for their injuries, but does require a remedy that
conforms to the statutory and common law rights applicable at the time of the
injury).
Assuming, without deciding, that the condition involves the surrender of
a constitutional right, we next consider whether the condition in this case is
sufficiently related to the benefit. See National Amusements, Inc., 43 F.3d at
747. As stated above, if a condition is “sufficiently related” to the benefit, then
it may be validly imposed under the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions.
5
Id. The parties disagree, however, over the applicable test for determining
whether the condition is “sufficiently related” to the benefit.
The Commissioner, citing National Amusements, Inc., 43 F.3d at 747,
contends that the condition is sufficiently related to the benefit so long as it is
“germane” to the legitimate state interests underlying its imposition. The
petitioners argue that we must apply the test that we articulated in J.E.D.
Associates, Inc. v. Town of Atkinson, 121 N.H. at 584-85, where we held that a
city could not condition the issuance of a land use permit upon the
relinquishment of property rights without violating Part I, Article 12 of the
State Constitution unless the condition is specifically attributable to the
benefit.
The petitioners rely upon the reasoning of the United States Supreme
Court in Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. at 386, 388-91, to argue that the test
articulated in J.E.D Associates is applicable to an analysis under the doctrine
of unconstitutional conditions. In Dolan, the Court applied the doctrine of
unconstitutional conditions to consider the constitutionality of a land use
regulation that conditioned approval of a building permit upon the dedication
of a portion of the applicant’s property to flood control and traffic
improvements. Id. at 377, 385. In its analysis, the Court asked first whether
there is an “essential nexus” between the “legitimate state interest” and the
condition imposed. Id. at 386. Finding that a nexus did exist, the Court then
asked “whether the degree of the exactions demanded by the city’s permit
conditions bears the required relationship to the projected impact of
petitioner’s proposed development.” Id. at 388. After discussing various state
court standards for the adequacy of this relationship, including the J.E.D.
Associates standard, id. at 389-91, 389 n.7, the Court adopted a “rough
proportionality” test, which it found “best encapsulates what we hold to be the
requirement of the Fifth Amendment.” Id. at 391 (emphasis added). Thus, the
petitioners in this case argue that the J.E.D. Associates specifically attributable
test must be incorporated into the Dolan analysis as a requirement of our State
Constitution. They then argue that we must apply this modified Dolan
analysis in determining the constitutionality of RSA 402-C:40, I. Accordingly,
they argue that we must apply the same standards in determining the
constitutionality of RSA 402-C:40, I, as we would for a land use regulation that
conditions a benefit upon the relinquishment of an individual’s Fifth
Amendment right to just compensation for the taking of his property.
We are not persuaded that the standard applied in land use regulation
cases such as Dolan and J.E.D. Associates applies here. Cf. Monterey v. Del
Monte Dunes at Monterey, Ltd., 526 U.S. 687, 702 (1999) (noting that the
Supreme Court has not extended the Dolan “rough proportionality” test beyond
the context of exactions under the Takings Clause). Nothing compels the State
to provide the petitioners with the right to file a claim in the liquidation; rather,
6
the ability to file a claim is a purely gratuitous benefit offered by the
government to third party claimants. By contrast, in Dolan and other land use
regulation cases, the benefit of a building permit is not purely gratuitous, but
is actually compelled by constitutional standards. See Nollan v. California
Coastal Comm’n, 483 U.S. 825, 834 (1987). A land use regulation that
empowers a municipality to deny a building permit may, in and of itself,
constitute a taking if it does not “substantially advance legitimate state
interests” or if it “den[ies] an owner economically viable use of his land.” Id.
(quotations omitted). It is this principle that gave rise to the unconstitutional
condition analysis employed in land use regulation cases, such that “a permit
condition that serves the same legitimate [state interest] as a refusal to issue
the permit should not be found to be a taking if the refusal to issue the permit
would not constitute a taking.” Id. at 836. Thus, the standard to be applied
where the issuance of a building permit is conditioned on the waiver of a
constitutional right may be more stringent than that applied where the
granting of a purely gratuitous benefit is conditioned on the waiver of a
constitutional right. Furthermore, the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions
does not require that the same standards be applied in every case to which the
doctrine applies, regardless of the nature of the constitutional right at issue.
See, e.g., Vance v. Barrett, 345 F.3d 1083, 1092 (9th Cir. 2003) (acknowledging
that standards for analyzing an unconstitutional condition in the context of
Fifth Amendment takings claim may not be the same as in the context of a
procedural due process claim); Philip Morris, Inc. v. Reilly, 312 F.3d 24, 46 (1st
Cir. 2002) (noting that, under the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions,
“different inquiries have developed which apply to different types of property” in
the context of Fifth Amendment takings claims; when dealing with intellectual
property, the condition need only be “rationally related to a legitimate
Government interest” (quotation omitted)); Louisiana Pacific v. Beazer Materials
& Services, 842 F. Supp. 1243, 1251 n.18 (E.D. Cal. 1994) (noting that “[t]he
Supreme Court has, either explicitly or implicitly, resolved unconstitutional
conditions claims by an examination of the standards applicable to claims of
direct violation of the underlying constitutional right”).
Having relied solely upon Dolan and J.E.D. Associates as presenting the
relevant test, which we have rejected, the petitioners do not articulate on
appeal any alternative test or case for us to apply in our analysis of the
unconstitutional condition issue. Although in the trial court the petitioners
urged application of a middle-tier analysis, relying upon Carson, 120 N.H. at
932, they make no such argument in their brief to this court. Accordingly, we
will not address it. See Appeal of AlphaDirections, 152 N.H. 477, 483-84
(2005).
The Commissioner contends that the relevant inquiry is merely whether
the condition is “germane” to the legitimate state interests underlying its
imposition. The Commissioner has not provided us with a workable definition
7
of “germane” in the context of this inquiry, but the petitioners defined it for the
trial court as requiring that the statute not be unreasonable or arbitrary. In
line with this definition, the Commissioner argues that the condition in this
case is germane to the legitimate legislative objectives of the statute, and is
thus constitutional, because the condition “directly serves the legislative
objective of protecting policyholders and apportioning unavoidable loss.” In
response, the petitioners argue that, even under this standard, RSA 402-C:40,
I, is unconstitutional. We disagree.
The petitioners advance three arguments in support of their position.
First they contend that because New Hampshire is “one of only six states” with
a condition like that imposed by RSA 402-C:40, I, while “forty-four other states
are able to administer insurance liquidations without a release provision,”
there can be no connection between the condition in RSA 402-C:40, I, and the
legislative objectives of RSA chapter 402-C. The petitioners argue that allowing
third party claimants to file a claim in the liquidation without simultaneously
requiring them to release the insured of any liability would not defeat the
legislative objectives and, thus, the release provision is arbitrary and does not
achieve the legislative goals.
We acknowledge that, in drafting RSA 402-C:40, I, the legislature could
have employed any of a number of solutions to the problem of equitably
apportioning unavoidable loss. The popularity of the legislature’s choice is not
for us to consider; whether a statute is reflective of a majority or minority
position, or even whether we favor one position over the other, is not
determinative of whether the statute is constitutional. Furthermore, cases
cited by the petitioners have not declared unconstitutional statutes that impose
a condition similar to that imposed by RSA 402-C:40, I. See, e.g., Ramos, 510
So. 2d at 1241-42 (holding that similar provision did not amount to a denial of
access to the courts under state constitution); see also Koken v. Reliance Ins.
Co., 841 A.2d 588, 591-93 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 2004), rev’d, 893 A.2d 70 (Pa.
2006).
The petitioners next argue that by conditioning the filing of claims in the
liquidation upon the third party releasing the insured of liability up to the
policy limits, RSA 402-C:40, I, not only fails to serve the legislative objective of
protecting policyholders, but actually defeats that objective by discouraging the
filing of claims in the liquidation and encouraging increased litigation against
policyholders in the form of actions for prejudgment attachment. The
argument, however, overlooks the fact that an inquiry into whether a statute is
reasonable or arbitrary does not require that, where the legislative objective is
to protect certain individuals, those individuals must be provided with the
maximum possible degree of protection. While there may be ways to further
reduce litigation against policyholders, it is apparent that the release provision
in RSA 402-C:40, I, provides policyholders at least some degree of protection.
8
Furthermore, permitting third parties to unconditionally file claims in the
liquidation would arguably provide no greater protection to policyholders than
the current liquidation scheme. The Act protects policyholders by, among
other things, allowing them to file claims in liquidation on their own behalf
when they are sued by a third party. See RSA 402-C:40, II. Any resulting
recovery received by the policyholders in the liquidation offsets any judgment
against them in the underlying suit. See RSA 402-C:40, III (1998). This
avenue of access to liquidation proceeds provides policyholders with some
degree of protection, although they remain liable for the balance of the
judgment. Allowing potential third party claimants to file claims directly in the
liquidation, even when filing is conditioned upon a release, encourages at least
some potential third party claimants to file, thus relieving those policyholders
of the burdens of litigation and liability for the balance of any judgment that
could have been levied against them. While eliminating the condition may
encourage even more potential third party claimants to file claims directly in
the liquidation, doing so would provide policyholders less protection, leaving
them open to liability for any amount within the policy limits that is not paid
out to the third party claimant in the liquidation.
Finally, the petitioners argue that the burden imposed upon potential
third party claimants by RSA 402-C:40, I, so outweighs the benefits conferred
upon the public that the statute is unreasonable. Specifically, they contend
that the statute overburdens potential third party claimants by: (1) precluding
access to an insured’s potential excess insurance coverage available through
other solvent insurers; (2) precluding third party claimants from becoming
post-judgment creditors of the insolvent insurer; and (3) forcing third party
claimants to decide whether to file a claim in the liquidation without providing
them with adequate information upon which to base that decision.
With respect to the first contention, the petitioners argue that, where the
policy directly affected by the liquidation is a primary insurance policy, which it
is not in this case, an “excess insurer’s responsibility to pay for claims in
excess of the [primary] policy limit is triggered by legal liability of the insured in
excess of primary policy limits.” Thus, the petitioners argue that, if a claim is
allowed in the liquidation in the full amount of the primary policy limits, the
excess coverage will not be triggered because the actual payment from the
liquidation will be less than the full amount allowed. The Commissioner
argues that it would be unreasonable for an excess insurer to contend that the
release has such an effect, and the possibility of that happening is speculative
and hypothetical. We agree that the petitioners’ concern is based upon nothing
more than speculation. The petitioners have pointed to no authority indicating
that releasing an insured of liability up to the policy limits of a primary policy
will automatically preclude access to the insured’s excess insurance coverage
for any liability that exceeds the limits of the policy issued by the insurer in
9
liquidation. Nor have the petitioners cited any instances in which this result
has occurred. The mere possibility that an excess insurer could attempt to
deny coverage as a result of the release is insufficient to render the statute
unreasonable.
With respect to their second contention, the petitioners argue that by
choosing not to file a claim in the liquidation and instead choosing to initiate a
lawsuit against the insured, third party claimants lose “the ability to proceed
against the [insolvent] insurance company as a judgment creditor after having
successfully prevailed against [the] insured,” who may be or become insolvent.
However, the petitioners have pointed to nothing in RSA 402-C:40, I, that
would preclude them from filing a claim in the liquidation after receiving a
judgment against the insured. The Commissioner argues that the only
provision in the Act that may create such a bar is RSA 402-C:37 (1998), which
establishes claim filing deadlines applicable to all of the insolvent insurer’s
creditors. Although the petitioners have not articulated any constitutional
challenge to that provision, we note that nothing therein treats third party
claimants, whether filing as post-judgment creditors or otherwise, differently
from any other claimants.
With respect to their final contention, the petitioners argue that RSA
402-C:40, I, forces potential third party claimants to elect one of two options,
where “[n]either [option] is certain to result in a recovery and the State will not
provide [them] with any needed information upon which [their] decision can be
made.” They argue that it is grossly unfair to ask them to make this decision
without the information needed in order to ascertain whether the insured is
solvent or otherwise insured and whether the liquidation might yield a larger
recovery for them than would a direct action against the insured. While the
imposition of this choice may surely be viewed as a burden on the potential
third party claimant, it is not so burdensome as to render RSA 402-C:40, I,
unreasonable. As is acknowledged in the petitioners’ own argument, risk of
little, or even no, recovery is inherent in any litigation. Every potential plaintiff
is faced with the task of assessing the viability of recovery against a potential
defendant. The option to file a claim in the liquidation of an insolvent insurer
may provide for some plaintiffs a means of recovery not otherwise available
against the potential defendant. As the Commissioner argues in his brief, “To
the extent such a choice could be considered a burden, it is simply a
legislative[ly] allocated consequence of the insurer’s insolvency.”
We thus conclude that RSA 402-C:40, I, does not violate the doctrine of
unconstitutional conditions because the condition is germane to the legitimate
legislative objectives of the statute. Any burden on the rights of potential third
party claimants imposed by RSA 402-C:40, I, is not unreasonable or arbitrary.
“The Act poses a difficult decision for a [potential] third party [claimant], [but
that is] a difficulty made necessary by the unfortunate and uncontrollable fact
10
of the insolvency, a fact which affects the [potential third party claimant] and
the insured alike.” Koken v. Reliance Ins. Co., 893 A.2d 70, 85 (Pa. 2006).
II. Equal Protection
The petitioners argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, violates the equal protection
provisions of the State Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 2, 12, 14.
They assert that these provisions are implicated because the statute treats
potential third party claimants differently from other potential plaintiffs who
have potential claims against uninsured individuals or individuals insured by
insurers not in liquidation.
The equal protection guarantee is “essentially a direction that all persons
similarly situated should be treated alike.” In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 637
(2004) (quotation omitted). Thus, two basic prerequisites of the equal
protection inquiry are the existence of a classification and the differing
treatment of persons so classified. See Silveira v. Lockyer, 312 F.3d 1052,
1088 (9th Cir. 2002) (“in order for a state action to trigger equal protection
review at all, that action must treat similarly situated persons disparately”
(emphasis added)), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 1046 (2003); Phelps v. Phelps, 446
S.E.2d 17, 20 (N.C. 1994) (“[w]ithout some type of ‘classification’ . . . there is no
equal protection claim”).
The petitioners urge that RSA 402-C:40, I, treats the class of potential
third party claimants differently from other potential plaintiffs because it
implicates only the potential third party claimants’ right to a remedy
guaranteed by Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution. We disagree,
however, because RSA 402-C:40, I, does nothing to restrict the statutory and
common law rights available to potential third party claimants at the time of
the injury. See Trovato, 143 N.H. at 525 (Article 14 only requires a remedy
that conforms to the statutory and common law rights applicable at the time of
the injury). All potential third party claimants maintain the right to pursue
their statutory and common law claims against their potential defendants,
regardless of whether those defendants are insured by an insurer in
liquidation. A third party claimant’s right to pursue a potential defendant is
not lost by the mere existence of RSA 402-C:40, I.
The petitioners further argue that by choosing not to file a claim in the
liquidation and instead choosing to pursue their claims against the insured,
potential third party claimants lose their right to recover from the insurer as a
post-judgment creditor. Essentially, they argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, requires
that third party claimants waive part of their claim in order to collect from the
insurer, while plaintiffs with claims against defendants insured by an insurer
not in liquidation need not do so. The Commissioner contends that plaintiffs in
11
general do not have a right to recover directly from their defendant’s insurer,
except in limited circumstances as provided by statute. Both parties
acknowledge that we have yet to directly address this issue. We need not do so
now.
Even assuming that all plaintiffs have a common law right to recover
from their defendant’s insurer as a post-judgment creditor, any impact that
RSA 402-C:40, I, has on that right does not result in a violation of the equal
protection provisions of the State Constitution. Our middle-tier scrutiny test
requires that legislative classifications of the right to recover for personal
injuries “must be reasonable, not arbitrary, and must rest upon some ground
of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of the
legislation in order to satisfy State equal protection guarantees.” Gould, 126
N.H. at 408-09 (quotation omitted). The classification created by RSA 402-
C:40, I, is based upon the fact of the insurer’s insolvency. For the same
reasons upon which we base our decision regarding the petitioners’ claim
under the doctrine of unconstitutional conditions, this classification is
reasonable, not arbitrary, and fairly and substantially relates to the legislative
objectives of protecting policyholders and apportioning unavoidable loss.
It is only after a potential third party claimant chooses to file a claim in
the liquidation that he or she must release the insured of liability up to the
policy limits, and is thus treated differently from similarly situated persons,
i.e., other potential third party claimants who choose not to file a claim in the
liquidation. However, the petitioners make no argument as to this
classification, except to urge that we not examine it. Therefore, we will not
address it.
We recognize that there is an overlap between our rational basis and
intermediate or middle-tier scrutiny tests in that both tests include the terms
"reasonable" and "arbitrary." Compare, e.g., LeClair v. LeClair, 137 N.H. 213,
223 (1993), with Gould, 126 N.H. at 408-09. However, neither party has asked
us to, and we will not in this case, address the elusive nature of our middle-tier
scrutiny test as it necessitates further briefing and argument.
III. Due Process
The petitioners contend that if the State may condition a benefit upon
the relinquishment of a constitutional right, it cannot do so without
incorporating procedural due process safeguards into the decision-making
process to ensure that potential third party claimants are able to make a
knowing, voluntary and intelligent choice whether to file a claim in the
liquidation. In essence, the petitioners argue that RSA 402-C:40, I, provides
inadequate notice of the consequences of participation in the statutory scheme
12
through the filing of a claim in liquidation, and thus deprives the third party
claimant of his right of action against the insured without due process of law.
When the government seeks to take action that will deprive a citizen of a
property or liberty interest, due process requires that the citizen receive
meaningful notice of the government’s action. City of Claremont v. Truell, 126
N.H. 30, 36 (1985). Here, RSA 402-C:40, I, and the proof of claim form that is
signed by the third party claimant, both provide notice that the filing of a claim
will result in the release of the insured of liability up to the applicable policy
limits. To the extent that due process requires that third party claimants
receive notice of the consequences of filing a claim, that requirement is
satisfied by the notice contained in the proof of claim form. Cf. Truell, 126
N.H. at 38-39 (requiring that summons issued by court to parents of a child
who is the subject of a CHINS petition must include notice of potential liability
for expenses incurred by the government in connection therewith). The
petitioners cite no authority, and we found none, to indicate that due process
requires actual forecasts of potential liability or a pre-determination of the
actual extent of any monetary “loss.”
Furthermore, were the Commissioner to make predictions about the
extent of a potential third party claimant’s recovery in the liquidation, such
predictions would be wholly speculative and unreliable, as no reasonable
prediction of recovery can be made until the Commissioner knows the final cost
of the administration of the liquidation as well as the size of every claim filed in
the liquidation by every third party claimant. See generally RSA 402-C:44
(Supp. 2005). The imposition of such a burden upon the liquidator or the
Commissioner would be unreasonable in light of the near impossibility of
making the predictions that the petitioners seek, and any benefit that the
petitioners would receive as a result of the prediction would be minimal given
the unreliability of the prediction and the inherent uncertainty of any creditor’s
recovery in a liquidation. Cf. Truell, 126 N.H. at 39.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J., concurred
specially.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurring specially. I concur with the affirmance,
and write separately to further explain the overlap between our rational basis
and intermediate or middle-tier scrutiny tests.
We first adopted an intermediate scrutiny approach to constitutional
review in Carson v. Maurer, 120 N.H. 925 (1980), when we examined the
constitutionality of RSA chapter 507-C, which created various classifications
for medical injury actions. After determining that the right to recover for
13
personal injuries is not a “fundamental right,” and therefore did not require
that we apply strict scrutiny, we nevertheless held that it was an “important
substantive right” protected by the State Constitution. Carson, 120 N.H. at
931-32. We therefore held that the right was “sufficiently important to require
that the restrictions imposed on those rights be subjected to a more rigorous
judicial scrutiny than allowed under the rational basis test.” Id. at 932.
“Middle-tier equal protection scrutiny thus entered the jurisprudence of the
State Constitution . . . .” City of Dover v. Imperial Cas. & Indemn. Co., 133
N.H. 109, 121 (1990) (Souter, J., dissenting). This new level of scrutiny
required that legislation be “reasonable, not arbitrary, and must rest upon
some ground of difference having a fair and substantial relation to the object of
the legislation.” Carson, 120 N.H. at 932 (citing State v. Scoville, 113 N.H. 161,
163 (1973), in turn quoting F.S. Royster Guano Co. v. Virginia, 253 U.S. 412,
415 (1920)).
Justice Souter, while still a member of this court, examined our holding
in Carson in his dissent in Dover. He noted that the Carson intermediate test
“suffers from a proven susceptibility to confusion with other standards of equal
protection review, a failing perhaps portended by the derivation of Carson’s
language from F.S. Royster.” Dover, 133 N.H. at 121 (Souter, J., dissenting).
He first explained that the test applied in Royster, although using the term “fair
and substantial,” was in fact “what we today would call the first-tier, rational
basis test.” Id. at 122 (Souter, J., dissenting). He continued, “Although the
federal judiciary, like this court, has subsequently tried to use Royster’s
formulation to provide ‘somewhat heightened’ middle-tier scrutiny, the very
opinions cited in Carson as so applying it have reverted to type, as it were, by
lapsing into rational basis terminology.” Id. (Souter, J., dissenting) (quoting
City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 441 (1985)) (citation
omitted).
Justice Souter continued his critique of the intermediate standard by
questioning whether legislation examined under that test should receive the
same high level of deference it does under rational basis review. Id. at 122-23
(Souter, J., dissenting). The test as articulated in Carson only required that
the legislation be related to a “legitimate legislative objective.” Carson, 120
N.H. at 933. He explained:
This pledge of deference is a shaky one, however, thanks to
uncertainty over the meaning of the second segment of the
standard derived from Royster, requiring a “fair and substantial”
relationship between the chosen classification and the legitimate
legislative objective. This uncertainty must be seen as a further
condition not only facilitating the identification (or
misidentification) of the Carson standard with the rational basis
test, as we have seen, but also placing temptation in the way of
14
those inclined to impose a far stricter standard in the name of
intermediate scrutiny . . . .
Dover, 133 N.H. at 123 (Souter, J., dissenting). That is, where intermediate
scrutiny professes to impose a higher standard on the government to justify its
action, the government should have to prove more than that its ends are
merely “legitimate.” Indeed, the federal intermediate scrutiny standard that
Carson purportedly adopted requires not that an individual’s substantive right
be important, but rather that the governmental objective be important. See,
e.g., Craig v. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 197 (1976) (equal protection requires that
certain classifications “must serve important governmental objectives and must
be substantially related to achievement of those objectives”); United States v.
Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 533 (1996) (same).
After explaining the problems inherent in Carson and the intermediate
scrutiny test it articulated, Justice Souter stated, “[T]he task confronting the
court is to identify the requisite degree of efficiency, or fit, that intermediate
scrutiny demands.” Dover, 133 N.H. at 123-24 (Souter, J., dissenting). He
then encouraged “both advocates before the court and members of the court
itself [to] confront the difficulty in the earliest possible case, for until the job is
attempted, the intermediate nature of the scrutiny will remain elusive.” Id. at
124 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Justice Souter concluded his dissent by arguing that the court in Dover
had misapplied the purported middle-tier test set forth in Carson. He felt that
the standard was not only wrongly adopted, but also that the Dover court in
fact applied strict scrutiny under the label of an intermediate analysis:
And so the “fair and substantial” relation test is
metamorphosed yet again. A formulation that began its juridical
life as a rational basis test, and was ostensibly adopted by this
court as a standard of intermediate review, is now being applied by
a majority of the court to impose the strictest scrutiny known to
equal protection analysis. There could be no more striking
argument for the need to reexamine the Carson test and the
conceptual basis underlying what passes for intermediate review.
Id. at 127 (Souter, J., dissenting).
One year after Dover was decided, we appeared to take on this challenge.
In Brannigan v. Usitalo, 134 N.H. 50 (1991), we were asked to reverse Carson
on the grounds that its “legal antecedents [were] questionable and its
scholarship unsound.” Brannigan, 134 N.H. at 54 (quotation omitted). After
determining that “Carson was well-reasoned and considered with special care,
was the product of a unanimous court, and has been repeatedly and
15
consistently accepted and applied by this court,” id. at 57 (quotation and
ellipses omitted), we upheld its articulation of the intermediate scrutiny test as
inquiring: (1) whether the statute has a fair and substantial relation to a
legitimate legislative objective; and (2) whether it imposes unreasonable
restrictions on private rights, id. at 56.
I agree with Brannigan to the extent that the court there reaffirmed the
conclusion that certain substantive rights “are sufficiently important to require
that the restrictions imposed on those rights be subjected to a more rigorous
judicial scrutiny than allowed under the rational basis test.” Carson, 120 N.H.
932. Further, I do not suggest that intermediate scrutiny should no longer be
applied in certain equal protection situations, as this case demonstrates. See
also Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H. 121, 124-25 (2002). I believe,
however, that the Brannigan court failed to recognize and resolve the confusion
existent in our intermediate scrutiny test. Indeed, as Justice Souter
acknowledged, and the Brannigan court ignored, even post-Carson we have
“recogniz[ed] candidly that the rational basis test and the test derived from
Royster have in some instances been treated as interchangeable.” Dover, 133
N.H. at 122 (Souter, J., dissenting) (citing State v. Deflorio, 128 N.H. 309, 315
(1986) (fair and substantial relation test “assumed to be equivalent to rational
basis test”)).
This confusion can also be seen in our other levels of scrutiny — namely,
rational basis review and strict scrutiny. Both use some form of the terms
“reasonable,” “arbitrary,” or “unduly restrictive.” Our rational basis test
requires that legislation be rationally related to a legitimate governmental
interest. See Taylor v. Town of Plaistow, 152 N.H. 142, 145 (2005). However,
under that standard we have additionally inquired into the “reasonableness of
a particular zoning provision,” id., and required that legislation challenged
under the rational basis test “not unduly restrict fundamental rights,” Dow,
148 N.H. at 124 (quotation omitted). Our strict scrutiny test requires that
restrictions on fundamental rights must be necessary to achieve a compelling
governmental interest. Seabrook Police Assoc. v. Town of Seabrook, 138 N.H.
177, 179 (1993). However, the Seabrook court also declared that a “regulation
[must be] reasonably related to its objective and [must] not unduly restrict the
fundamental right in question.” Id. at 179.
It is because of the confusion in our standards of constitutional review
that I join the majority in recognizing the overlap between our rational basis
and intermediate or middle-tier scrutiny standards. I agree that this is not the
case to address these issues, as they are not raised by the record or the
parties. However, like Justice Souter, I encourage future litigants to confront
the elusive nature of the intermediate standard. Specifically, I believe that we
must address: (1) whether the terms “reasonable” and “arbitrary” should
continue to be part of our intermediate test, compare, e.g., LeClair v. LeClair,
16
137 N.H. 213, 223 (1993), with Carson, 120 N.H. at 932-33; and (2) whether
the governmental objective required by the test should be merely “legitimate” as
in rational basis review, or whether we should require an “important” objective
due to the “fair and substantial” prong of the intermediate scrutiny test,
compare Brannigan, 134 N.H. at 56, with Craig, 429 U.S. at 197, and Virginia,
518 U.S. at 533.
A new articulation of this test is necessary to bring it into conformity
with our other levels of constitutional review. An intermediate scrutiny
standard should require more scrutiny than the rational basis test — namely,
that legislation merely be rationally related to a legitimate governmental
interest — but a less exacting examination than our strict scrutiny test —
namely, that legislation be necessary to achieve a compelling governmental
interest and narrowly tailored to meet that end. As currently articulated, it is
not clear whether our intermediate scrutiny test does so.
17