THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-903
CRAIG HARTLEY
v.
ELECTRIC INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: September 21, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 17, 2007
Moquin & Daley, P.A., of Manchester (Richard C. Moquin on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Russell F. Hilliard & a. on the brief,
and Mr. Hilliard orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, Craig Hartley, appeals an order of the Trial
Court (Fitzgerald, J.) ruling that he was not entitled to uninsured motorist
coverage under his automobile insurance policy issued by the respondent,
Electric Insurance Company (EIC). We reverse and remand.
The parties submitted a stipulation of facts for the purpose of resolving
the coverage issue. It provided that the petitioner “was involved in an incident
while within the scope of his employment” driving a large truck. When an
unidentified vehicle failed to yield the right of way to the petitioner, he was
forced “to jam on his brakes,” which caused the straps holding a box saw in his
truck to break and the saw to shift. The petitioner thought he had been struck
by the vehicle behind him and stopped his truck. When he observed that the
saw had shifted and was now leaning over the gate of the truck, he pulled the
truck to the side of the road to reposition it. He then saw gasoline pouring
from the saw onto the roadway. When he attempted to move the saw to
resecure it, he suffered injuries for which he sought coverage under the
uninsured motorist provision of his policy.
The petitioner’s policy provided that EIC “will pay compensatory damages
which an ‘insured’ is legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of
‘an uninsured motor vehicle’ because of ‘bodily injury’ . . . caused by an
accident.” The sole issue before us is whether the petitioner suffered a bodily
injury caused by an accident and hence was entitled to coverage under the
policy.
Our review in this case is limited to the interpretation and application of
the petitioner’s insurance contract. See State Farm Mut. Ins. Co. v. Pitman,
148 N.H. 499, 501 (2002). The interpretation of insurance policy language is a
question of law that we review de novo. EnergyNorth Natural Gas v.
Continental Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 156, 159 (2001). We construe the language as
would a reasonable person in the position of the insured based upon a more
than casual reading of the policy as a whole. Godbout v. Lloyd’s Ins.
Syndicates, 150 N.H. 103, 105 (2003). Policy terms are construed objectively;
where the terms are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its
natural and ordinary meaning. Id.
In this case, the trial court concluded that the petitioner was not injured
as a result of an accident, but rather as the result of an intentional act by the
insured that broke the chain of causation. We have previously held that
“accident” is reasonably understood to mean “an undesigned contingency, . . .
a happening by chance, something out of the usual course of things, unusual,
fortuitous, not anticipated, and not naturally to be expected.” Marikar v.
Peerless Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 395, 398 (2004). As EIC correctly states, the
accident occurred in this case “when the phantom vehicle allegedly failed to
yield the right of way to Hartley causing him to jam on his brakes and cut to
the left to avoid striking that vehicle.” We then must determine whether the
accident caused the injury for coverage purposes.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 356 (unabridged ed. 2002)
defines to “cause” as “to serve as cause or occasion of: bring into existence:
make.” The parties have cited no cases and we have found none in which we
have previously addressed whether the policy language “injury caused by an
accident” requires that the causal relationship between the accident and the
injury must be a direct proximate cause. See 8A L. Russ & a., Couch on
Insurance 3d, 119:29, at 119-46 (Thomson/West 2005). In Akerley v. Hartford
Ins. Group, 136 N.H. 433, 439 (1992), we were asked to determine whether
2
insurance coverage existed where the policy provided that the injury “must
result from” the use of the uninsured motor vehicle. We noted that generally a
causal connection must exist between the resulting harm and the use of the
vehicle to invoke coverage. Id. Although proximate causation was not required
to establish coverage under New Hampshire law, a tenuous connection was
insufficient. Id.
In this case, the actions of the unidentified driver resulted in a series of
events not naturally to be expected that brought into existence the plaintiff’s
injury. While the plaintiff did not observe the gasoline leaking from the saw
until he had moved the truck to the side of the road, he concluded that it posed
a continuing danger to the public that required his immediate attention. The
shift in the saw’s position was directly attributable to the actions of the
unidentified driver. We conclude that the facts establish that the actions of the
unidentified vehicle resulted in an accident that caused the injuries of the
petitioner triggering coverage under the policy. Accordingly, we reverse the
trial court’s ruling to the contrary, and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3