THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-687
MICHELLE J. ROBINSON
v.
TOWN OF HUDSON
Argued: September 13, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2006
Denis O. Robinson, of Bedford, on the brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Hodes, Buckley, McGrath & LeFevre, P.A., of Manchester (David E.
LeFevre on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Michelle J. Robinson, appeals the order of
the Superior Court (Hampsey, J.) affirming the decision of the Town of Hudson
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) granting with conditions her request for a
variance from the 150-foot frontage requirement applicable to her property. We
affirm.
This is the second time this case has reached us on appeal, see Robinson
v. Town of Hudson, 149 N.H. 255 (2003), and we summarize the facts detailed
in our previous opinion. The petitioner and her brother are owners of an
undeveloped lot (the property) located on Mark Street in Hudson. Id. at 256.
The property is part of a six-lot subdivision that was approved by the
respondent, the Town of Hudson (Town), in 1970. Id. at 256. The subdivision
plan provided that Mark Street would be extended from its existing cul-de-sac
via the Mark Street Extension to Wason Road. Id. The Mark Street Extension
was roughed out and graded but never paved. Id. Consequently, the parties
often refer to Mark Street Extension as a “paper street.” Only two of the six
lots have frontage on actual, paved streets. Id. The petitioner’s lot has
approximately fifty feet of frontage on Wason Road. Id.
In July 2000, the petitioner submitted a request for “zoning
determinations” to the Town’s building inspector. Id. Her plan was to
construct a single-family residence on the property, with a driveway that would
partially utilize the Mark Street Extension to gain access to Wason Road. She
was told that a variance would be necessary because the lot lacked the
required 150 feet of frontage on Wason Road, the only existing road abutting
the property. Id. The petitioner thereafter submitted an application for a
variance from the frontage requirement. Id. The ZBA denied the application.
Id. The petitioner appealed to the superior court, which dismissed the appeal.
Id. We reversed the superior court’s dismissal and remanded for further
proceedings. Id. at 259. On remand, the superior court vacated the ZBA’s
decision and remanded the case to the ZBA for a de novo hearing.
The ZBA held a public hearing on December 9, 2004, to consider the
petitioner’s variance application. After much discussion, the ZBA voted to
grant the petitioner’s variance with the following conditions:
1. If and when Mark Street [Extension] is built, the property owner
of record shall pay a pro rata share of the cost of constructing
Mark Street [Extension].
2. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the property owner of
record shall furnish a septic approval permit or similar permit
or approval from [the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services].
3. The house shall be set back 30 feet from Mark Street, as shown
on the plan of land . . . .
4. The Town of Hudson neither assumes responsibility for
maintenance of Mark Street, nor liability for any damages
resulting from the use of Mark Street. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, the property owner of record shall produce
evidence that notice of the limits of municipal responsibility and
liability has been recorded in the Hillsborough County Registry
of Deeds.
The petitioner filed a motion for rehearing in which she challenged the
lawfulness of the first and the fourth conditions. The ZBA denied the motion
for rehearing.
2
The petitioner appealed to the superior court, arguing that: (1) the first
condition, referred to as the “cost condition,” is arbitrary and unreasonable
because the terms “pro rata share,” “cost” and “built” are all undefined terms
that make it impossible to ascertain the future liability of the owner of the
property; (2) the cost condition is unreasonable because the petitioner is the
only lot owner required to contribute to the cost of developing Mark Street
Extension; (3) the ZBA exceeded its authority in imposing the cost condition
because it applies to the owner of the land and does not relate to the use of the
land; and (4) the fourth condition, referred to as the “liability condition,” is
unreasonable.
The superior court affirmed the ZBA’s decision. The court found that the
petitioner’s first argument was not preserved for appeal because she did not
address it in her motion for rehearing before the ZBA. With respect to the
petitioner’s other arguments pertaining to the cost condition, the court
concluded that the condition was “neither unreasonable nor arbitrary.” The
court stated:
A review of the ZBA minutes makes it clear that the ZBA was
concerned about potential safety issues should Mark Street
Extension never be constructed. Instead of accessing their lots by
way of a completed Mark Street Extension, the other lot owners
would be able to use the petitioner’s driveway to access the
unfinished “paper street” that leads to their lots. The ZBA had
safety concerns about the use of the driveway and the “paper
street” by all of the lot owners. The ZBA resolved the safety issue
by requiring the owner of the [s]ubject [p]roperty to pay a pro rata
share for construction of the road. The imposition of this condition
was intended to encourage the lot owners to build Mark Street
Extension.
The court found that “the requirement that the lot owner pay its pro rata share
of construction of the road relates to the land and not to the person who
receives the variance.” Further, the superior court concluded that the liability
condition was lawful, and pointed out that the fourth condition is “remarkably
similar” to one of the conditions upheld in Wentworth Hotel, Inc. v. New Castle,
112 N.H. 21, 28 (1972). The petitioner appealed.
Our review of zoning board decisions is limited. Harrington v. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). We will uphold the trial court’s decision
unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Chester Rod
& Gun Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 580 (2005). For its part, the
trial court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie lawful and
reasonable. RSA 677:6 (1996). It may set aside a ZBA decision if it finds by
3
the balance of probabilities, based upon the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s
decision was unreasonable. Chester Rod & Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 580.
I. Cost Condition
The petitioner’s arguments on appeal are virtually identical to the
arguments she raised in the superior court. First we address whether the
superior court erred by refusing to consider her vagueness argument
concerning the cost condition because she did not raise it in her motion for
rehearing before the ZBA. In her motion for rehearing, the petitioner alleged
the following with respect to the cost condition:
Condition 1 imposes a substantial but unspecified contingent
penalty against the Lot owner, where Mark Street Extension is
approximately nine hundred feet long. As such, the Lot will be
burdened by this contingent penalty, and no reasonable person
would purchase or finance the Lot for residential construction.
The petitioner focuses on the word “unspecified,” and argues that although her
motion for rehearing does not state each and every way the cost condition is
imprecise or lacking in detail, her motion does indicate that the cost condition
lacks specificity, and thus is sufficient to preserve the issue for superior court
review.
The Town argues that in her motion for rehearing, the petitioner was
alleging that the cost condition was a “penalty,” and that “no reasonable person
would purchase or finance the Lot for residential construction.” The Town
asserts that the petitioner never claimed in her motion for rehearing that she
did not understand the cost condition or that she believed it was vague. The
Town contends that since she did not include this argument in her motion for
rehearing, it was proper for the superior court to refuse to consider it.
RSA 677:3, I (1996) requires that a motion for rehearing to a zoning
board “shall set forth fully every ground upon which it is claimed that the
decision or order complained of is unlawful or unreasonable.” It further
provides that a party may not appeal a zoning board decision:
unless the appellant shall have made application for
rehearing . . . and, when such application shall have been made,
no ground not set forth in the application shall be urged, relied on,
or given any consideration by a court unless the court for good
cause shown shall allow the appellant to specify additional
grounds.
Id.
4
“The statutory scheme is based upon the principle that the local board
should have the first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its
decisions so that the court may have the benefit of the board’s judgment in
hearing the appeal.” Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. Town of Wilton, 153
N.H. 234, 238-39 (2006) (quotation omitted). Thus, a motion for rehearing
must put the zoning board on notice of an alleged error in order to satisfy the
requirements of RSA 677:3. See Colla v. Town of Hanover, 153 N.H. 206, 208-
09 (2006). If a timely motion for rehearing fails to set forth all alleged errors
with respect to the ZBA’s decision on the merits, the party may not raise those
grounds in a later appeal unless the court for good cause shown orders
otherwise. Blagbrough, 153 N.H. at 239.
We conclude that the petitioner’s motion for rehearing does not set forth
her claim that the terms of the cost condition were vague. Contrary to the
petitioner’s position, arguing that the condition imposes a “substantial but
unspecified contingent penalty against the lot owner” is not the same as
arguing that the specific terms used in the condition are vague. The thrust of
the petitioner’s argument in her motion for rehearing was that because the cost
of constructing Mark Street Extension is presently unknown, no reasonable
person would purchase or finance the property for residential construction,
and thus the condition functions as a penalty against the lot owner. It would
have been simple for the petitioner to clearly articulate her position that the
specific terms “pro rata,” “built” and “cost” are vague and undefined, yet she
did not do so. Instead, she impermissibly raised this argument for the first
time on appeal to the superior court.
This case is distinguishable from Colla v. Town of Hanover, where on
appeal the plaintiffs submitted to the superior court the identical questions
that were raised in their motion for reconsideration of the ZBA’s denial of their
permit. See Colla, 153 N.H. at 207. Here, because the plaintiff did not raise
her vagueness argument in her motion for rehearing, the argument was not
preserved for appeal. It was proper for the superior court to decline to consider
it, and, likewise, we refuse to address it here.
We now turn to the petitioner’s remaining arguments pertaining to the
cost condition. While there is no express statutory provision permitting a
zoning board to place conditions on the granting of a variance, we have
previously held that a board’s extensive powers include the authority to attach
reasonable conditions where they are necessary to preserve the spirit of the
ordinance. See Vlahos Realty Co. v. Little Boar’s Head District, 101 N.H. 460,
463 (1958); Wentworth Hotel, Inc., 112 N.H. at 27; see also 3 K. Young,
Anderson’s American Law of Zoning § 20.63, at 636 (4th ed. 1996) (“Absent
some specific provision of the enabling statutes or the ordinance empowering
the board of adjustment to impose conditions, such authority may be inferred
5
from more general language.”). A condition will not be upheld if it is
unreasonable or arbitrary. Vlahos, 101 N.H. at 463. Conditions are
reasonable when they relate to the use of the land and not to the person by
whom such use is to be exercised. Id.
The petitioner first argues that the cost condition is arbitrary and
unreasonable because she alone is required to pay a pro rata share of the cost
of constructing Mark Street Extension, and none of the other owners of lots in
the subdivision are required to contribute toward the cost, should either the
Town or any of the other lot owners decide to complete it. The Town urges us
to reject this argument, explaining that since the petitioner’s property is
located in a subdivision, she gains the benefit of owning a separate buildable
lot, but must share the burden of constructing the road to access the separate
buildable lots. The Town argues that the cost condition is fair, because it does
not impose a greater or lesser burden upon the property compared with any of
the other properties located in the subdivision. Further, the Town asserts that
the condition is reasonable because it is aimed at the ultimate completion of
Mark Street Extension, which will create frontage for all of the lots in the
subdivision and eliminate their nonconformity.
It should be emphasized that the petitioner is not obligated to pay for the
whole road, just her pro rata share of the costs. Further, it was reasonable for
the ZBA to consider the fact that the petitioner’s property is part of a six-lot
subdivision, and that four of the six lots have no road frontage and are
presently unbuildable. Given that the petitioner’s lot is part of the subdivision,
and that but for the variance the petitioner would not have adequate frontage
unless Mark Street Extension were completed, it is reasonable to require the
petitioner to pay a pro rata share of the cost of completing Mark Street
Extension.
Moreover, the petitioner’s proposed driveway will, in fact, partially utilize
Mark Street Extension in order to provide access to the planned residence. As
the superior court found, “Instead of accessing their lots by way of a completed
Mark Street Extension, the other lot owners would be able to use the
petitioner’s driveway to access the unfinished ‘paper street’ that leads to their
lots.” Concerned about the potential hazards of the situation, the ZBA’s
reasonable solution was to require the petitioner – or a future owner of the
property – to pay a pro rata share of the cost to complete construction of Mark
Street Extension. In light of this concern, we do not find the cost condition to
be arbitrary or unreasonable.
The petitioner’s second argument is that the cost condition imposes an
unknown and undefined financial obligation on the owner of the property. The
petitioner contends that the cost of constructing Mark Street Extension is likely
to be substantial, and therefore no reasonable person would want to purchase,
6
develop or finance the property. In response, the Town asserts that the
petitioner’s argument must fail because there was no evidence submitted to the
ZBA that the cost condition rendered the property worthless, nor was there any
evidence showing that the cost condition drastically reduced the possible sale
price of the property such that it would not be feasible to sell.
The record demonstrates that prior to granting the variance, the
petitioner’s property was not a buildable lot. Presumably after the variance
was granted, the property’s value increased significantly. Although the
property might be worth even more without the cost condition, as the Town
correctly points out, there is no evidence suggesting that the cost condition
renders the property unsalable. Accordingly, we reject the petitioner’s
argument and reiterate our conclusion that the cost condition is reasonable.
Finally, the petitioner argues that the cost condition is unlawful and
unreasonable because it regulates the owner of the land, not the land or its
use. She asserts that the ZBA acted beyond its authority when it imposed the
cost condition, “since it is a monetary penalty not aimed at regulating the use
of the land but at the owner of the Lot.” We disagree.
In Vlahos, 101 N.H. at 463, we held that conditions imposed by a zoning
board in connection with a variance application must relate to the use of the
land and not to the person exercising such use. In that case, the zoning board
of adjustment granted a conditional variance to permit an ice cream stand in a
residentially zoned district. Id. at 462-63. The conditions included “the
requirement of an annual permit, which was also revocable and
nontransferable because limited to the specific owner or lessee who was
operating the premises for that particular year.” Id. at 463. We concluded that
the condition was unreasonable because it was specific to a person and not a
condition applicable to the premises. Id. at 463-64.
Here, the cost condition requires the property owner of record to pay a
pro rata share of the construction of Mark Street Extension. The condition
does not focus on a specific person. Rather, it runs with the land since it
applies to the owner of the lot at the time the road is constructed, whether the
owner is the petitioner or another individual. Based on the foregoing, we affirm
the superior court’s conclusion that the cost condition is neither arbitrary nor
unreasonable.
II. Liability Condition
As stated above, the petitioner challenges the liability condition, which
releases the Town from liability arising from the maintenance, repair or use of
Mark Street Extension. She argues that this condition “has no logical basis for
application to a proposed driveway from a public street that [the Town]
7
maintains.” The Town argues that the liability condition is reasonable because
it mirrors the requirements of RSA 674:41, I(c) (Supp. 2006), and further, that
the condition is nearly identical to the variance condition upheld in Wentworth
Hotel, Inc., 112 N.H. at 28, requiring the hotel to assume liability for all
policing and maintenance of the buildings and premises, and “save the town
harmless” for any expense resulting from its failure to do so.
We find this condition to be reasonable. At the time the ZBA granted the
variance, it could have reasonably concluded that, since the other lot owners in
the subdivision would be able to use the petitioner’s driveway to access the
unfinished Mark Street Extension in order to reach their lots, the Town faced
potential liability in the event of an accident. As the superior court noted, “The
ZBA had safety concerns about the use of the driveway and the ‘paper street’
by all of the lot owners.” The liability condition protects the Town in the face of
this possibility.
We recognize that circumstances may change in the event that Mark
Street Extension is completed. We express no opinion, however, as to whether
the condition would continue to be reasonable under such circumstances.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
8