THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-067
MORTGAGE SPECIALISTS, INC.
v.
JOSEPH C. DAVEY, IV & a.
Argued: March 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 26, 2006
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Alexander J. Walker, Jr.
and Danielle L. Pacik on the brief, and Mr. Walker orally), and Shaheen &
Gordon, P.A., of Concord (Arpiar G. Saunders, Jr. on the brief), for the plaintiff.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Christopher Cole
and Robert R. Lucic on the brief, and Mr. Cole orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Mortgage Specialists, Inc., appeals: (1) an
order of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) denying its motion to set aside the jury
verdict on its claim for misappropriation of trade secrets, see RSA ch. 350-B
(1995); and (2) a pretrial order of the Superior Court (Coffey, J.) dismissing its
other claims. The defendants, Joseph C. Davey, IV, Team Mortgage, LLC,
Steven Michael Carbone, and Signature Mortgage Group, LLC, cross-appeal a
post-trial order of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) assessing sanctions against
them. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
I. Background
Mortgage Specialists is a mortgage brokerage and lending company with
offices in Massachusetts and New Hampshire. Defendants Davey and Carbone
worked as loan originators for Mortgage Specialists. In July 2002, both left
Mortgage Specialists to work for a competitor, Mortgage Partners. When they
left, each took with him copies of customer information retained in the course
of his work. The most important piece of information was the customer’s
current interest rate, from which a competitor could learn whether refinancing
would benefit the customer.
Davey and Carbone subsequently started their own mortgage businesses.
Davey, who worked at Carteret Mortgage for a short time after leaving Mortgage
Partners, is the owner of defendant Team Mortgage, LLC. Carbone is the owner
of defendant Signature Mortgage Group, LLC. Since leaving Mortgage
Specialists, Davey and Carbone have both closed loans, with their subsequent
employers and with their own businesses, for customers with whom they had
previously worked at Mortgage Specialists.
When Mortgage Specialists learned that Mortgage Partners had contacted
its former customers, it initiated suit against Mortgage Partners for
misappropriation of trade secrets. Davey and Carbone were both deposed in
November 2002 in connection with that litigation, and both acknowledged that
they had taken copies of customer information with them when they left
Mortgage Specialists. Mortgage Specialists brought this suit in 2003, alleging a
variety of claims and seeking injunctive relief and damages.
The trial court dismissed all of Mortgage Specialists’ claims except for its
claim that the defendants misappropriated its trade secrets. It also issued a
preliminary injunction prohibiting the defendants from misappropriating or
disclosing Mortgage Specialists’ customer information and prohibiting them
from contacting or communicating with any of Mortgage Specialists’ current or
former customers, with some limited exceptions.
A jury trial was held in September 2004 on the trade secrets claim. The
jury returned a verdict in favor of the defendants. The trial court subsequently
imposed sanctions upon the defendants for their conduct prior to and during
trial.
2
II. The Trade Secrets Claim
Mortgage Specialists filed a motion to set aside the jury’s verdict. It
asserted that the jury’s verdict was “against the great weight of the evidence
presented at trial” and “[n]o reasonable jury could have reached the verdict it
did in this case in the face of such overwhelming evidence.” The trial court
denied Mortgage Specialists’ motion, finding that a reasonable jury could have
concluded that the alleged confidential information underlying its claims was
not a trade secret because “Mortgage Specialists’ customer information was not
subject to reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy under the circumstances.”
See RSA 350-B:1, IV(b). We agree.
A reasonable jury could have found the following facts: Davey and
Carbone began working as loan originators for Mortgage Specialists in 1999.
Both were hired as independent contractors. Upon hiring, they were neither
asked to sign a non-disclosure or confidentiality agreement, nor told that
Mortgage Specialists’ documents or customer information was confidential or
constituted trade secrets. Despite a relatively high turnover among its loan
originators and the tendency of loan originators to stay in the mortgage
business after leaving Mortgage Specialists, throughout the time during which
Davey and Carbone worked for Mortgage Specialists, the company had no
written policy regarding confidentiality or document destruction and no
employee handbook. Although Mortgage Specialists created a confidentiality
and non-disclosure agreement by 1999, only some of its loan originators
actually signed it between 1999 and 2001. Davey and Carbone deny having
seen or heard about the agreement before July 2002, when Mortgage
Specialists asked all of its loan originators to sign it. Neither Davey nor
Carbone signed the agreement, and each terminated his relationship with
Mortgage Specialists shortly thereafter. Prior to being presented with the
agreement, neither Davey nor Carbone had been told that customer
information belonged to Mortgage Specialists or that they were prohibited from
copying or maintaining copies of customer information. Mortgage Specialists
did not ask either Davey or Carbone to return or destroy customer information
before leaving the company.
While Davey and Carbone were working at Mortgage Specialists, it
collected and stored customer information and disseminated it to its employees
and independent contractors in various formats. Lists of potential new
customers and lists of potential repeat customers were distributed regularly to
Mortgage Specialists’ telemarketers. The lists of potential repeat customers
were not marked as trade secrets or as confidential. Nevertheless, access to
the lists of potential repeat customers, which contained information about each
customer’s loan amount, loan type, and interest rate, was restricted.
Supervisors gave telemarketers only a limited number of pages from these lists
during a given shift. The telemarketers were not permitted to photocopy the
3
pages, and were required to return all pages of the list to the supervisor at the
end of the shift. Davey and Carbone did not have access to these lists, and
Mortgage Specialists has not alleged that they took copies of these lists when
they left.
As telemarketers contacted individuals interested in doing business with
Mortgage Specialists, including both new and repeat customers, the
telemarketers created “lead sheets” to be passed on to loan originators such as
Davey and Carbone. The lead sheets often included the name and phone
number of the individual, and sometimes included the individual’s current
interest rate. The lead sheets were not marked as trade secrets or as
confidential. Neither Davey nor Carbone was ever instructed to destroy the
lead sheets or to return them to a particular individual or department.
As loan originators met with customers, the loan originators gathered all
of the information needed to complete a standard residential loan application.
Known as a Form 1003, the application consisted of several pages and required
the applicant to disclose a great deal of personal information, including a social
security number, detailed information regarding income, bank accounts, and
credit history, and the interest rate on the existing mortgage. When meeting
with a customer, Davey and Carbone both typically took notes on the back of
the lead sheet and filled out the application by hand. The loan application was
accompanied by a privacy policy disclosure, indicating that the customer’s
information would not be disclosed to third parties.
After the loan application was completed, the application package was
returned to Mortgage Specialists for processing. Davey and Carbone often
retained copies of the lead sheet or the first page of the application. Carbone
testified that some loan originators retained this information so that they could
keep in touch with the customer throughout the loan application process.
After the completed application was given to the loan processors at
Mortgage Specialists, all application information was entered into Mortgage
Specialists’ computerized database, which could be accessed by the processors.
While loans were in process, lists of all open loan applications were regularly
generated from this database and distributed to all of Mortgage Specialists’
loan originators. These lists, referred to as “pipeline reports,” contained basic
information about each customer’s loan, including the customer’s last name,
the type of loan, and the interest rate. The pipeline reports were not marked as
trade secrets or as confidential. Loan originators were not instructed to
destroy the pipeline reports or to return them to a particular individual or
department.
4
After the loan was closed, the electronically-stored customer information
was transferred into a password-protected database, accessible only by one of
the owners and the office manager. If a loan originator needed access to an
application after the loan was closed, he could obtain a computer printout of
the application information from the individuals who had access to the
database. The printout was not marked as a trade secret or as confidential,
and loan originators were not instructed to return it or to refrain from copying
it.
While Davey and Carbone were working at Mortgage Specialists, the hard
copies of customers’ closed loan files were stored in the attic of Mortgage
Specialists’ Plaistow office. Access to the attic was through an unlocked door
and was not restricted. Davey and Carbone sometimes entered the attic and
retrieved old files from storage when they wanted to review or copy information.
After leaving Mortgage Specialists, Davey and Carbone both worked as
loan originators at Mortgage Partners. Carbone gave a telemarketer at
Mortgage Partners a bag filled with copies of loan applications that he had
taken with him from Mortgage Specialists and she was instructed to contact all
of his former customers to let them know that he was now working at Mortgage
Partners. One of the former customers, when contacted by Mortgage Partners,
was angered by the fact that Mortgage Partners had access to his personal
information and complained about the situation to Mortgage Specialists in
August 2002. The customer spoke to several employees at Mortgage
Specialists, and ultimately met with its president. Despite Mortgage
Specialists’ apparent knowledge that Mortgage Partners had access to its
customer information, it took no steps to retrieve the customer information
from Mortgage Partners’ possession.
On appeal, Mortgage Specialists contends that there was overwhelming
evidence that the defendants misappropriated its trade secrets within the
meaning of the New Hampshire Uniform Trade Secrets Act, RSA chapter 350-B.
It argues that the trial court erred in denying its motion to set aside the jury
verdict, claiming that no reasonable juror could have found that its efforts to
maintain the secrecy of its customer information were not reasonable under
the circumstances.
A jury’s verdict may only be set aside if it is conclusively against the
weight of the evidence or if it is the result of mistake, partiality, or corruption.
PMC Corp. v. Houston Wire & Cable Co., 147 N.H. 685, 692 (2002).
“Conclusively against the weight of the evidence” means that the verdict was
one no reasonable jury could return. Id. As the plaintiff argues only that the
5
jury verdict was against the weight of the evidence, we limit our review to that
issue. We will not overturn the trial court’s denial of Mortgage Specialists’
motion to set aside the jury verdict unless it is an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See Babb v. Clark, 150 N.H. 98, 100 (2003).
For information to be a trade secret, the information must, among other
things, be “the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the circumstances
to maintain its secrecy.” RSA 350-B:1, IV(b). Mortgage Specialists argues that
the measures it took to maintain the secrecy of its customer information were
“reasonable under the circumstances because they clearly put the loan
originators on notice that [the] type of information contained in the Form 1003s
is confidential . . . and should not be disclosed.” We disagree.
As the trial court indicated in its order, the jury heard testimony that the
documents containing customer information, including customers’ current
interest rates, “were never marked confidential or trade secret,” that those
documents “were kept in an attic for many years,” and that “the loan
originators were not consistently and uniformly given instructions as to the
proper treatment of the information as confidential and/or proprietary.” While
there was evidence that Mortgage Specialists took specific steps to maintain the
secrecy of its lists of potential repeat customers, lists to which the defendants
did not have access and did not copy, there was conflicting testimony as to
whether Mortgage Specialists took any steps at all to maintain the secrecy of
customer information that was stored and disseminated to its employees and
independent contractors in other forms. Although Mortgage Specialists
provided all of its customers with a privacy policy acknowledgement indicating
that it would not disclose the customer’s nonpublic personal information to
nonaffiliated third parties, and it placed shredders around its office, these
efforts could have been found by the jury only to demonstrate a need to protect
customers from the sale of their personal information or from the risk of
identity theft, rather than an intent to prevent Mortgage Specialists’ employees
from misappropriating customer information. While access to the electronic
copies of old loan applications was restricted by a password, there was
testimony at trial indicating that any loan originator could request that a copy
of that information be printed and given to him, and that any loan originator
could enter the attic storage area to access a hard copy of the closed file. While
Mortgage Specialists took some steps to maintain the secrecy of its customer
information, the jury could have found that its efforts were inconsistent.
The trial court’s decision not to set aside the jury verdict was not an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, as a reasonable jury could conclude from
the evidence presented at trial that Mortgage Specialists’ customer information
was not subject to reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy under the
circumstances, and, accordingly, was not a trade secret.
6
III. Preemption of Other Claims
Mortgage Specialists asserted the following claims against the
defendants: misappropriation of trade secrets, see RSA ch. 350-B; conversion;
tortious interference with advantageous relations; violation of the New
Hampshire Consumer Protection Act (CPA), see RSA ch. 358-A (1995 & Supp.
2005); and breach of fiduciary duty. However, the trial court granted, in part,
the defendants’ motion to dismiss, allowing Mortgage Specialists to proceed on
the trade secrets claim alone. We affirm this decision of the trial court to the
extent that it dismissed the claims for conversion and breach of fiduciary duty,
but vacate it to the extent that it dismissed the claims for tortious interference
with advantageous relations and violation of the CPA.
Mortgage Specialists alleged the following relevant facts in its writ: While
Davey and Carbone were working for Mortgage Specialists, each retained copies
of documentation containing confidential information about Mortgage
Specialists’ customers and their mortgages. While Davey and Carbone were
working for Mortgage Partners, Mortgage Specialists received reports from
customers that Mortgage Partners “had been contacting them, discussing
confidential information with them, reporting that Mortgage Specialists had no
license and was in trouble in New Hampshire, and luring them to do business
with Mortgage Partners.” Carbone admitted that he “informed Mortgage
Specialists’ customers that Mortgage Specialists was operating without the
proper New Hampshire licensing.” Since leaving Mortgage Specialists, both
Davey and Carbone have used confidential information taken from Mortgage
Specialists to contact Mortgage Specialists’ customers and solicit business on
behalf of Mortgage Partners. The defendants have also solicited Mortgage
Specialists’ employees.
Prior to trial, the defendants moved to dismiss Mortgage Specialists’
claims, arguing in part that the New Hampshire Uniform Trade Secrets Act, see
RSA ch. 350-B (NHUTSA), preempted Mortgage Specialists’ claims for
conversion, tortious interference with advantageous relations, violation of the
CPA, and breach of fiduciary duty. See RSA 350-B:7. The trial court
construed RSA 350-B:7 as providing that any of Mortgage Specialists’ claims
that are “based upon the [defendants’] alleged misappropriation of [Mortgage
Specialists’] trade secrets are preempted” by the NHUTSA. Finding that the
common law and CPA claims were not “supported by facts other than the
misappropriation or misuse of trade secrets . . . and/or confidential
information,” the trial court concluded that the claims were preempted by the
NHUTSA. In response to Mortgage Specialists’ argument that dismissal of the
common law and CPA claims would be premature, given that the parties
continued to dispute whether the confidential information at issue was in fact a
trade secret within the meaning of the NHUTSA, the trial court ruled that RSA
7
chapter 350-B “displaces . . . claims that rely on the misappropriation of trade
secrets, regardless of whether [Mortgage Specialists] successfully demonstrates
that the information in question qualifies as a trade secret” within the meaning
of the NHUTSA.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our task is to
ascertain whether the allegations pled by Mortgage Specialists are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. See Berry v.
Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc., 152 N.H. 407, 410 (2005). We assume that all
facts pled are true, and we construe all reasonable inferences drawn from those
facts in Mortgage Specialists’ favor. See id. We then engage in a threshold
inquiry that tests those facts against the applicable law. Id. The issue raised
here also involves the interpretation of a statute, which is a question of law
that we review de novo. See Woodview Dev. Corp. v. Town of Pelham, 152 N.H.
114, 116 (2005).
On appeal, Mortgage Specialists argues that preemption pursuant to RSA
350-B:7 is contingent upon the information at issue qualifying as a trade secret
within the meaning of the NHUTSA, see RSA 350-B:1, IV. Accordingly, it
argues that the trial court prematurely dismissed the common law and CPA
claims because the parties disputed whether the misappropriated information
was a “trade secret” within the meaning of the NHUTSA. Alternatively,
Mortgage Specialists argues that, even if preemption is not contingent upon the
finding of a statutory trade secret, the claims were not preempted because they
were not based solely upon the defendants’ alleged misappropriation of
statutory trade secrets, but also upon the defendants’ alleged misappropriation
of confidential information and goodwill and improper competition for
customers.
The defendants argue that, pursuant to RSA 350-B:7, the NHUTSA
preempts all “other remedies and theories of recovery in which liability is
premised upon misappropriation of ‘confidential information and trade secrets’”
because all such remedies conflict with the NHUTSA. Accordingly, they argue
that because “every one of [Mortgage Specialists’] claims [is] based entirely on
the alleged misappropriation of alleged ‘trade secrets’ or ‘confidential and
proprietary’ information,” each of the common law and CPA claims is
preempted by the NHUTSA.
We begin our review by interpreting RSA 350-B:7. In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Woodview Dev.
Corp., 152 N.H. at 116. We examine the language of the statute, ascribing to
its words their plain and ordinary meanings, and interpret it in the context of
the overall legislative scheme and not in isolation. In the Matter of Jerome &
Jerome, 150 N.H. 626, 628-29 (2004). The NHUTSA, which is New
8
Hampshire’s codification of the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA) (amended
1985), 14 U.L.A. 536-659 (2005), must be construed “to effectuate its general
purpose to make uniform the law with respect to the subject of [the NHUTSA]
among states enacting it.” RSA 350-B:8. Therefore, opinions rendered by
courts interpreting the UTSA’s preemption provision inform our analysis. See
id.
RSA 350-B:7, entitled “Effect on Other Law,” states:
I. Except as provided in paragraph II, this chapter displaces
conflicting tort, restitutionary, and other law of this state providing
civil remedies for misappropriation of a trade secret.
II. This chapter shall not affect:
(a) Contractual remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret;
(b) Other civil remedies that are not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret; or
(c) Criminal remedies, whether or not based upon
misappropriation of a trade secret.
This provision of the NHUTSA is identical to section seven of the UTSA. See 14
U.L.A. 651. Hereinafter, we refer to the two provisions interchangeably as “the
preemption provision.”
Mortgage Specialists urges us to construe the preemption provision to
provide that no claim is preempted unless and until a determination is made
that there has been a misappropriation of trade secrets in violation of the
NHUTSA. We acknowledge that, if read in isolation, the plain language of RSA
350-B:7, I, appears to support Mortgage Specialists’ argument because it
explicitly preempts only remedies for “misappropriation of a trade secret.”
(Emphasis added.) However, such a narrow construction of the preemption
provision ignores not only the overall legislative scheme reflected in the
NHUTSA, but also the statutory directive that we must construe the NHUTSA
“to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law with respect to the
subject of [the NHUTSA] among states enacting it,” RSA 350-B:8. Thus, in
construing the language of the preemption provision, we must consider the
purpose of the UTSA as well as the construction that other courts have given to
the same provision.
Prior to enactment of the UTSA, the Patent Section of the American Bar
Association began considering the need for “enactment of a uniform state law
to protect against the wrongful disclosure or wrongful appropriation of trade
secrets, know-how or other information maintained in confidence by another.”
UTSA, 14 U.L.A. 531-32 prefatory note (emphases added; quotation omitted).
9
The UTSA arose out of concerns that development of law on the subject had
been “uneven” and that there was “undue uncertainty concerning the
parameters of trade secret protection, and the appropriate remedies for
misappropriation of a trade secret.” Id. at 531. The drafters explained that
“[t]he contribution of the [UTSA] is substitution of unitary definitions of trade
secret and trade secret misappropriation, and a single statute of limitations for
the various . . . theories of noncontractual liability utilized at common law.” Id.
(emphases added).
The UTSA “also arose to create a uniform business environment that
created more certain standards for protection of commercially valuable
information.” Auto Channel, Inc. v. Speedvision Network, LLC, 144 F. Supp.
2d 784, 789 (W.D. Ky. 2001). “[T]he purpose of the preemption provision is to
preserve a single tort action under state law for misappropriation of a trade
secret as defined in the statute and thus to eliminate other tort causes of
action founded on allegations of misappropriation of information that may not
meet the statutory standard for a trade secret.” Burbank Grease Services, LLC
v. Sokolowski, 693 N.W.2d 89, 98 (Wis. Ct. App. 2005) (hereinafter Burbank
Grease I), rev'd in part, ___ N.W.2d ___, ___, 2006 WL 1911997, at *3-*8 (Wis.
July 13, 2006). As such, the UTSA “was meant to codify all the various
common law remedies for theft of ideas.” Thomas & Betts Corp. v. Panduit
Corp., 108 F. Supp. 2d 968, 971 (N.D. Ill. 2000) (quotation omitted); see also
Bliss Clearing Niagara v. Midwest Brake Bond, 270 F. Supp. 2d 943, 948 (W.D.
Mich. 2003). With the enactment of the UTSA, confidential information not
rising to the level of a statutory trade secret was left largely unprotected by the
law. See RSA 350-B:7, I.
Mortgage Specialists urges us to adopt the position of a minority of
courts that have held that common law and statutory claims are not preempted
by the UTSA if they involve information that does not meet the statutory
definition of a trade secret. See, e.g., Callaway Golf v. Dunlop Slazenger Group
Americas, 295 F. Supp. 2d 430, 437 (D. Del. 2003); Stone Castle v. Friedman,
Billings, Ramsey & Co., 191 F. Supp. 2d 652, 659 (E.D. Va. 2002); Combined
Metals of Chicago Ltd. v. Airtek, Inc., 985 F. Supp. 827, 830 (N.D. Ill. 1997);
see also Burbank Grease Services, LLC v. Sokolowski, ___ N.W.2d ___, ___,
2006 WL 1911997, at *3-*8 (Wis. July 13, 2006) (hereinafter Burbank Grease
II). We do not find these cases persuasive, however, and the weight of
authority among courts that have considered the preemption provision is that
the history, purpose, and interpretation of the statutory scheme, as discussed
above, do not support Mortgage Specialists’ position. See, e.g., Weins v.
Sporleder, 605 N.W.2d 488, 491-92 (S.D.), cert. denied, 531 U.S. 821 (2000);
Ethypharm S.A. France v. Bentley Pharmaceuticals, 388 F. Supp. 2d 426, 433
(D. Del. 2005); see also, e.g., Burbank Grease II, ___ N.W.2d at ___, 2006 WL
1911997, at *12-*17 (Bradley, J., dissenting); Savor, Inc. v. FMR Corp., 812
A.2d 894, 898 (Del. 2002) (rejecting argument that preemption is contingent
10
upon finding of statutory trade secret); Bliss Clearing Niagara, 270 F. Supp. 2d
at 948-49 (same); Auto Channel, 144 F. Supp. 2d at 788-89 (same); Thomas &
Betts, 108 F. Supp. 2d at 972-73 (same). “If a common law claim for
unauthorized use of information that did not meet the statutory definition of a
trade secret were permitted, the result ‘would undermine the uniformity and
clarity that motivated the creation and passage of the [UTSA].’” Burbank
Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at 99 (quoting Auto Channel, 144 F. Supp. 2d at 789).
Although we rely upon the opinion of the Court of Appeals of Wisconsin
in Burbank Grease Services, LLC v. Sokolowski, we acknowledge that the
Wisconsin Supreme Court recently reversed the portion of that opinion which
is relevant to the issue presented here. See Burbank Grease II, ___ N.W.2d at
___, 2006 WL 1911997, at *3-*8. There, the supreme court held that
Wisconsin's version of the UTSA does not preempt civil remedies for the
misappropriation of information “if the information does not meet the statutory
definition of a trade secret.” Id. at ___, 2006 WL 1911997, at *1. As noted
above, while other courts have agreed with the Wisconsin Supreme Court, we
do not find that position persuasive. Rather, we believe that the opinion of the
Court of Appeals of Wisconsin in Burbank Grease I is well-reasoned,
particularly for its adherence to the principles of uniformity and clarity that
motivated the creation of the UTSA, in light of the legislative directive that the
UTSA be construed to make uniform the law among the jurisdictions enacting
it. See Burbank Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at 97-102; see also Burbank Grease II,
___ N.W.2d at ___, 2006 WL 1911997, at *12-*17 (Bradley, J., dissenting). We
find the opinion of the Wisconsin Court of Appeals persuasive. See Burbank
Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at 97-102.
We conclude that RSA 350-B:7, viewed in the context of the overall
legislative scheme and construed in a manner that effectuates the purpose of
making uniform the law among States that have adopted the UTSA, provides
that the NHUTSA preempts claims that are based upon the unauthorized use
of information, regardless of whether that information meets the statutory
definition of a trade secret. Thus, except as otherwise provided in RSA 350-
B:7, II, the NHUTSA essentially creates a system in which “information is
classified only as either a protected ‘trade secret’ or unprotected ‘general . . .
knowledge.’” Unikel, Bridging the “Trade Secret” Gap: Protecting “Confidential
Information” not Rising to the Level of Trade Secrets, 29 Loy. U. Chi. L.J. 841,
867-68 (1998). Although this result may seem harsh, we note that RSA 350-
B:7, II(a) continues to permit individuals and corporate entities to protect their
valuable commercial information contractually, regardless of whether such
information meets the statutory definition of “trade secret” in the NHUTSA.
11
Accordingly, we agree with the trial court’s conclusion that the
preemption provision did not require that it make a determination of whether
the information at issue constituted a trade secret under the NHUTSA prior to
determining whether any of Mortgage Specialists’ common law or CPA claims
was preempted by the NHUTSA.
Our review, however, does not end here. As noted above, Mortgage
Specialists argues that, even if preemption is not contingent upon the finding
of a statutory trade secret, its claims were not preempted because they were
not based solely upon the defendants’ alleged misappropriation of customer
information, but also upon the defendants’ alleged misappropriation of goodwill
and improper competition for customers. It also argues that, to the extent that
any one of its claims is based solely upon the misappropriation of customer
information, the “confidential” nature of that customer information entitles it to
special protection under New Hampshire law, independent of the NHUTSA.
The defendants, however, argue that Mortgage Specialists’ “claims for
conversion, tortious interference, unfair trade practices and breach of fiduciary
duty based on the alleged misuse of confidential information are no longer
available in New Hampshire,” by virtue of the preemption provision of the
NHUTSA. We are not persuaded that the preemption provision should be
applied this broadly.
Whether a particular claim is preempted by the NHUTSA turns on
whether the claim “conflicts” with the NHUTSA. See RSA 350-B:7, I. The
majority of courts that have examined this issue have not relied upon the label
attached to the claim, but have examined the facts underlying the claim to
determine whether it is preempted by the UTSA. Burbank Grease I, 693
N.W.2d at 99; see also Weins, 605 N.W.2d at 491; Bliss Clearing Niagara, 270
F. Supp. 2d at 946-47.
Some courts have stated that all claims that are factually related to the
misappropriation of information are preempted. See Powell Products, Inc. v.
Marks, 948 F. Supp. 1469, 1474 (D. Colo. 1996) (discussing cases in which
courts have done so). However, we disagree with those courts. “The
preemption provisions can be somewhat worrisome if they are applied
mechanistically or overly conceptually. Our common law is richly flexible in
redressing wrongs for improper conduct which in full or in part involves the
use of information derived from the plaintiff.” 1 R. Milgrim, Milgrim on Trade
Secrets § 1.01[3][a] at 1-128.3 (2002). “It is neither necessary nor prudent to
preclude all common law claims that are connected with the misappropriation
of what a plaintiff claims are trade secrets.” Powell Products, 948 F. Supp. at
1474.
12
In determining whether a claim “conflicts” with the UTSA, we agree with
the majority of courts, which have looked to the facts alleged or proved in
support of the claim and have found that the claim is preempted when it is
“based solely on, or to the extent [that it is] based on, the allegations or the
factual showings of unauthorized use of . . . information or misappropriation of
a trade secret.” Burbank Grease I, 693 N.W.2d at 100 n.12; see, e.g., Savor,
812 A.2d at 898; Frantz v. Johnson, 999 P.2d 351, 357 & n.3 (Nev. 2000);
Weins, 605 N.W.2d at 492; Ethypharm, 388 F. Supp. 2d at 433; Bliss Clearing
Niagara, 270 F. Supp. 2d at 946; Auto Channel, 144 F. Supp. 2d at 789. We
also agree with courts that have concluded that a claim is not preempted where
the elements of the claim require some allegation or factual showing in addition
to that which forms the basis for a claim of misappropriation of a trade secret.
See, e.g., Weins, 605 N.W.2d at 492; Ethypharm, 388 F. Supp. 2d at 434-35;
Powell Products, 948 F. Supp. at 1474; see also Burbank Grease I, 693 N.W.2d
at 100 n.12.
Mortgage Specialists contends that, despite the foregoing, its claims are
not preempted by the NHUTSA, even to the extent that they rely upon
allegations of misappropriation of customer information. It argues first that we
have “long recognized a distinction between a claim for the misappropriation of
trade secrets and the misappropriation of confidential information,” citing
Vigitron, Inc. v. Ferguson, 120 N.H. 626, 631-32 (1980). It also argues that we
have “indicated that among the panoply of legitimate interests of an employer
which may be protected from competition is ‘confidential information
communicated by the employer to the employee, but not involving trade
secrets,’” quoting National Employment Service Corporation v. Olsten Staffing
Service, Inc., 145 N.H. 158, 160 (2000). However, the language relied upon by
Mortgage Specialists from both Vigitron and Olsten Staffing is not as broad as
it contends.
In Vigitron, the defendants formed a partnership to sell products that
would compete with the plaintiff’s products and attempted to sell one of the
competing products, all while at least one of the defendants was employed by
the plaintiff. Vigitron, 120 N.H. at 631. We held that, although the defendants
may not have disclosed the plaintiff’s trade secrets, the plaintiff’s right to
injunctive relief arose from the defendants’ breach of a confidential relationship
with the plaintiff, and not from the use or disclosure of any trade secrets. Id.
at 631-32. There, it was not the defendants’ misappropriation of confidential
information that gave rise to the action, but rather their breach of the
confidential relationship they had with their employer while still employed by
that employer. Here, the defendants were no longer employed by Mortgage
Specialists when they allegedly misappropriated its confidential information.
Furthermore, we note that Vigitron was decided prior to New Hampshire’s
enactment of the NHUTSA. Thus, to the extent that Vigitron could be read to
13
create a distinct cause of action for the misuse of confidential information not
rising to the level of a trade secret, it has since been preempted by the NHUTSA
for the reasons discussed above – the common law no longer protects
confidential information from mere misuse unless it is a statutory trade secret.
In Olsten Staffing, we examined the validity of a restrictive covenant
contained in a contract between an employer and its employees. Olsten
Staffing, 145 N.H. at 160-61. We noted that a covenant between an employer
and employee is valid only to the extent that it protects legitimate interests of
an employer, which interests include maintaining the confidentiality of the
employer’s confidential information. Id. at 160. While this language provides
that an employer may protect his or her confidential information through
contracts with employees, it does not recognize an independent cause of action
for misappropriation of confidential information. Furthermore, the NHUTSA
preemption provision explicitly exempts contractual claims from preemption,
regardless of whether the information involved is a statutory trade secret. RSA
350-B:7, II(a).
We conclude that, to determine whether a plaintiff’s claims are
preempted by the NHUTSA, a court must examine the facts alleged in support
of each claim to determine the extent to which the claim is based upon the
misappropriation of trade secrets or other information. Accordingly, we will
examine Mortgage Specialists’ common law and CPA claims and the facts
alleged in support of each to determine whether each claim is based solely
upon the misappropriation of Mortgage Specialists’ customer information.
Mortgage Specialists’ writ claims that Davey and Carbone are liable for
conversion because they “have exercised dominion and control over Mortgage
Specialists’ property and assets so as to deprive Mortgage Specialists of
dominion and control of same.” The only factual allegations supporting the
conversion claim, however, are that Davey and Carbone took Mortgage
Specialists’ customer information. Even if there are sufficient factual
allegations in the writ to support a claim for conversion, the claim is preempted
by the NHUTSA because it is based entirely upon the misappropriation of
customer information.
Mortgage Specialists’ writ next claims that the defendants are liable for
tortious interference with advantageous relations because: (1) “Mortgage
Specialists has advantageous, economic, business and contractual relations
with its customers”; (2) “[d]efendants are aware of those relationships”; and (3)
“[d]efendants . . . [have] taken action to induce the disruption or termination of
such economic, business and/or contractual relations.” Unlike Mortgage
Specialists’ conversion claim, this claim is not based solely upon the
defendants’ alleged misuse of Mortgage Specialists’ customer information. This
claim is supported by the allegation that the defendants intentionally contacted
14
Mortgage Specialists’ customers, with whom it claimed to have advantageous
relations, and persuaded them to do business with the defendants. The claim
is also supported by the allegation that Carbone informed Mortgage Specialists’
customers that it was not properly licensed in the State, as well as the
allegation that the defendants solicited Mortgage Specialists’ employees. Thus,
to the extent that the tortious interference claim is supported by more than the
mere misuse of Mortgage Specialists’ customer information, it is not
preempted. See, e.g., Ethypharm, 388 F. Supp. 2d at 434-35 (finding claim for
intentional interference with actual and prospective business relationships not
preempted by UTSA); Bliss Clearing Niagara, 270 F. Supp. 2d at 949-50
(finding claim for tortious interference not preempted by UTSA).
Next, Mortgage Specialists’ writ claims that the defendants are liable for
violation of the CPA because “[t]he actions of [the] defendants constitute unfair
trade practices within the meaning of [the CPA].” The CPA prohibits the “use
[of] any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice
in the conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” RSA 358-A:2
(Supp. 2005). Such conduct includes, but is not limited to, the specific acts
listed in RSA 358-A:2, I-XIV, including “[d]isparaging the goods, services, or
business of another by false or misleading representation of fact.” RSA 358-
A:2, VIII. Like Mortgage Specialists’ tortious interference claim, its claim for
violation of the CPA is not based solely upon the defendants’ alleged misuse of
Mortgage Specialists’ customer information. This claim is supported by the
allegation that Carbone informed Mortgage Specialists’ customers that it was
not properly licensed in the State. Thus, to the extent that the CPA claim is
supported by more than the mere misuse of customer information, it is not
preempted.
Finally, Mortgage Specialists’ writ claims that Davey and Carbone are
liable for breach of fiduciary duty because Mortgage Specialists entrusted them
with confidential customer information, that trust gave rise to a fiduciary duty
in them, and, “through their conduct,” they breached that duty to Mortgage
Specialists. The only factual allegations supporting the fiduciary duty claim,
however, are that Davey and Carbone took and used Mortgage Specialists’
customer information. Mortgage Specialists contends in its brief that there was
evidence at trial “that the defendants conspired . . . with . . . Mortgage Partners
during their employment at Mortgage Specialists, and that Carbone acquired a
substantial amount of Form 1003s during his last days of employment for the
sole purpose of providing this information to Mortgage Partners.” However, we
note that even if these facts were sufficient to overcome a motion to dismiss,
such facts were not alleged in Mortgage Specialists’ writ, and thus we cannot
consider them in our review of the trial court’s grant of the defendants’ motion
to dismiss. Therefore, because the factual allegations in Mortgage Specialists’
writ involve only the misappropriation of customer information, the claim is
preempted by the NHUTSA.
15
The defendants’ remaining arguments on this issue are without merit
and do not warrant further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322
(1993). We thus vacate the trial court’s dismissal of Mortgage Specialists’
claims for tortious interference and violation of the CPA, and remand to the
trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
IV. Sanctions
The defendants cross-appeal the trial court’s post-trial order assessing
sanctions against them for: (1) the destruction of the copies of the loan
applications that they had taken when they departed from Mortgage
Specialists; (2) the origination and closing of loans in violation of the trial
court’s preliminary injunction order; and (3) the failure to produce client lists
in violation of the trial court’s discovery order. For the reasons discussed
below, we vacate the trial court’s order on the motion to reconsider with respect
to the sanctions for destruction of documents as well as the order with respect
to the sanction for the violation of the preliminary injunction, and remand.
The record reflects the following facts relevant to the trial court’s
imposition of sanctions: When Davey and Carbone left Mortgage Specialists in
July 2002, both took copies of an unknown number of documents that
contained information about Mortgage Specialists’ customers. In November
2002, during their depositions in the Mortgage Partners litigation, Davey and
Carbone admitted to having the copies in their possession. Neither Davey nor
Carbone was asked or ordered to return or secure the copies before, during, or
after the deposition.
Sometime after the November 2002 deposition, Davey and Carbone each
destroyed the copies that he had in his possession. Davey testified that he
shredded his copies shortly after the deposition. Carbone testified that he had
his copies destroyed by a document destruction company sometime prior to
April 2003. However, one of Carbone’s former employees testified that
Carbone’s copies were stored at the Signature Mortgage office until June 2003.
The employee testified that Carbone told him in June 2003 that the documents
had been shredded the previous night because the documents “got a little too
hot to have around.” Carbone denied the employee’s allegations.
Mortgage Specialists’ suit against the defendants was filed in February
2003. On April 16, 2003, the trial court issued a preliminary injunction order
enjoining the “[d]efendants, and their employees, agents and affiliates, or
anyone acting by or through them” from, among other things, “contacting,
soliciting or otherwise communicating with any customers or former customers
of [Mortgage Specialists]” except in limited circumstances. Davey and Carbone
both originated and closed loans in violation of the court’s order.
16
On September 15, 2004, in response to a motion for contempt filed by
Mortgage Specialists in relation to an earlier discovery order, the trial court
ordered the defendants to allow Mortgage Specialists’ counsel to inspect the
defendants’ computers for customer lists. The next day, Mortgage Specialists
filed a supplemental motion for contempt, entry of default judgment and
sanctions. In that motion, Mortgage Specialists alleged that the defendants
had engaged in discovery abuse by falsely claiming that they could not produce
customer lists from their computers, and asked the trial court to impose
sanctions. Mortgage Specialists also alleged that the customer lists retrieved
from the defendants’ computers confirmed that the defendants had been
violating the trial court’s preliminary injunction order by closing loans for
Mortgage Specialists’ customers after the date of the order, and asked the trial
court to impose sanctions for this conduct as well. The record on appeal does
not include any hearing transcripts or orders regarding this motion, and the
post-trial order on sanctions indicates only that the trial court “withheld
judgment on the issue of sanctions until after hearing the testimony presented
at trial.”
The trial commenced on September 20, 2004. The trial court heard
testimony regarding the violations of the preliminary injunction, as well as
testimony regarding the defendants’ destruction of their copies of documents
containing information about Mortgage Specialists’ customers. The trial
concluded on September 28, 2004.
On October 6, 2004, Mortgage Specialists filed a motion for sanctions
and other relief, which restated the allegations contained in its supplemental
motion for contempt and further alleged that the defendants had “intentionally
destroyed evidence” relating to Mortgage Specialists’ claim. Mortgage
Specialists asked the trial court to “[e]nter a default judgment against [the]
defendants as [a] sanction for the destruction of evidence,” to “[h]old [the]
defendants in contempt” of the discovery order and preliminary injunction
order, to award Mortgage Specialists “its costs and attorneys’ fees” resulting
from violation of the discovery order, to sanction the defendants in an amount
equal to the profits received by the defendants on each loan closed in violation
of the preliminary injunction order “plus an appropriate sanction for the
defendants’ utter disregard” for the same order, and to award Mortgage
Specialists damages in an amount “appropriate for these flagrant violations” of
the trial court’s orders and the discovery process.
The trial court held a hearing on the motion for sanctions on October 7,
2004. At the hearing, counsel for Mortgage Specialists emphasized the need to
protect and vindicate the integrity of the court, stating that “these issues go to
the heart of the process and the Court’s integrity in the litigation process and
the requirement for the parties in the litigation to play by the rules and to obey
the orders of the court.” Counsel further argued that violation of the
17
preliminary injunction “goes to the very heart of the integrity of the process”
and amounted to the defendants’ “thumbing of their noses at [the trial] court’s
authority and the integrity of the process.” Counsel concluded by arguing that
the trial court should “send a message to [the defendants] that the integrity of
the process has been violated.” In the defendants’ post-hearing objection to the
motion for sanctions, filed October 12, 2004, they acknowledged Mortgage
Specialists’ emphasis on the integrity of the trial court, but contended that the
“post-verdict attack on the Defendants is, respectfully, one founded in the
interest of revenge, and not in vindicating the dignity of the Court.”
The trial court ultimately sanctioned the defendants for the destruction
of documents, violation of the preliminary injunction order, and violation of the
discovery order. With respect to the destruction of documents, the trial court
ruled as follows:
Although the destruction of the documents caused no prejudice to
the outcome of the case, the court finds the documents were
destroyed in an effort to conceal information from the court and to
thwart [Mortgage Specialists’] prosecution of its case. To make
matters worse both Davey and Carbone lied under oath about the
timing of the destruction of the documents. Based on all this, the
court finds that both men and their companies acted in bad faith,
caused the plaintiff to expend time and money to recreate the
information, and most significantly injured the integrity of court
proceedings. As a sanction, the court orders Davey and Carbone
to reimburse the plaintiff $10,000 each for attorneys’ fees and
expenses. Additionally, because the defendants’ actions jeopardize
and undermine the integrity of the legal process, the court imposes
fines of $20,000 against Davey and Team Mortgage and $40,000
against Carbone and Signature Mortgage. Carbone’s fine is greater
because the court finds his actions more egregious.
With respect to the violation of the preliminary injunction order, the trial court
found that Davey and Carbone both violated the order and ruled as follows:
Closing on loans originated after April 16, whether done in bad
faith or through negligent policing procedures, was in violation of
Judge Coffey’s injunctive order and undermines the very
foundation of our legal system. Accordingly, the court finds Davey
and Carbone in contempt. Thus, in order to vindicate the integrity
of the court, Davey [and Carbone are each] required to pay the
court five times the “gross profit” on each of the loans that [he or
his company originated and closed in violation of the preliminary
injunction order].
18
Finally, the trial court sanctioned the defendants for their failure to comply
with its discovery order to produce the customer lists, ordering them to pay
Mortgage Specialists’ reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
The defendants moved for reconsideration of the trial court’s order on
sanctions. They argued, for the first time, that the sanctions were improper
and that the process had been flawed because the sanctions were for criminal,
rather than civil, contempt. They also argued that the sanctions were
excessive. The trial court reconsidered only the portion of its order relating to
the violation of the preliminary injunction, reducing the sanctions from five to
three times the defendants’ gross profits on loans closed in violation thereof.
The trial court rejected the argument that the sanctions were criminal in
nature, but found that, even if the sanctions were criminal in nature, the
defendants had not been denied due process. Nevertheless, the trial court also
found “beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendants knowingly violated [the
trial] court’s injunction.”
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court’s imposition of fines
and attorney’s fees for the destruction of documents and for the violation of the
preliminary injunction order constituted findings of criminal, rather than civil,
contempt. They contend that the trial court found them in criminal contempt
of court without adhering to the substantive and procedural requirements
attendant to a finding of criminal contempt. Before we reach the merits of the
defendants’ argument, however, we must address Mortgage Specialists’
argument that the defendants failed to preserve this issue for appellate review.
See State v. Blomquist, 153 N.H. ___, ___, 891 A.2d 469, 470-71 (2006).
Mortgage Specialists argues that the defendants were aware of the nature of
the sanctions sought by Mortgage Specialists prior to trial and failed to
preserve the issue regarding the propriety of criminal contempt sanctions
because they raised it for the first time in their motion for reconsideration.
We have recognized that “parties may not have judicial review of matters
not raised at the earliest possible time.” State v. Tselios, 134 N.H. 405, 407
(1991). “[T]he rationale behind the rule is that trial forums should have an
opportunity to rule on issues and to correct errors before they are presented to
the appellate court.” Id. Accordingly, we have held that where an issue is
raised for the first time in a motion for reconsideration and failure to raise the
issue earlier did not deprive the trial court of a full opportunity to correct its
error, the issue has been preserved for our review. See, e.g., Gammans v. FHP
Constructors, 146 N.H. 702, 704 (2001); Moulton-Garland v. Cabletron
Systems, 143 N.H. 540, 544 (1999); Tselios, 134 N.H. at 407. If, however, the
trial court exercises its discretion to refuse to entertain the issue on
19
reconsideration due to the party’s failure to raise it at an earlier time, we will
uphold that decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Mt. Valley
Mall Assocs. v. Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642, 654-55 (2000); cf. State
v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard).
The defendants did not argue that the sanctions proceedings were
criminal in nature prior to or during the hearing on the motion for sanctions.
They did, however, in their motion for reconsideration of the trial court’s order
on sanctions, argue that the trial court had failed to adhere to the requisite
procedural and substantive formalities when it sanctioned the defendants for
both the violation of the preliminary injunction and for the destruction of
documents.
The trial court, at the hearing on the motion for reconsideration, opened
by asking counsel for the defendants, “You are appealing all these decisions in
the Mortgage Specialists versus Davey?” When counsel responded in the
affirmative, the trial court stated, “All right. So I will hear you only on the
violation of the . . . injunctive order, at this time.” Throughout the remainder
of the hearing, no mention was made of the sanctions with respect to the
destruction of documents.
In its order on the motion for reconsideration, the trial court noted, “I
earlier assessed sanctions against the defendants for destroying evidence,
violating an injunction, and discovery abuses. The defendant[s] moved for
reconsideration, and I agreed only to reconsider my order regarding the
defendants’ violation of this court’s restraining order.” (Citation omitted.) The
remainder of the order addressed only the defendants’ claim that the sanctions
for violation of the preliminary injunction were improper. The trial court
neither granted nor denied the defendants’ motion for reconsideration with
respect to the sanctions for the destruction of documents.
From this review of the record, we conclude that the trial court was
accorded an opportunity to rule on the propriety of the sanctions with respect
to both the violation of the preliminary injunction and the destruction of
documents. Therefore, because the trial court did not refuse to rule on the
propriety of the sanctions with respect to the violation of the preliminary
injunction, this issue was properly preserved for appellate review. See Tselios,
134 N.H. at 407; compare id. with Mt. Valley Mall Assocs., 144 N.H. at 655.
However, because we conclude from our review of the record that the trial court
refused to entertain the same issue with respect to the destruction of
documents, we review only whether the trial court’s refusal to entertain the
issue on reconsideration was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Mt.
Valley Mall Assocs., 144 N.H. at 654-55. Thus, we will reach the merits of the
defendants’ arguments that the trial court’s imposition of sanctions amounted
20
to a finding of criminal contempt to determine, first, whether the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in refusing to entertain the criminal
contempt issues with respect to the destruction of documents on
reconsideration, and second, whether the trial court erred by making a finding
of criminal contempt for the violation of the preliminary injunction without
adhering to the requisite substantive and procedural formalities.
In response to the defendants’ arguments regarding the criminal nature
of the trial court’s imposition of sanctions, Mortgage Specialists first argues
that the sanctions were for civil, rather than criminal, contempt, and thus the
trial court was not required to adhere to the procedural formalities argued by
the defendants. Whether a sanction amounts to a finding of indirect criminal
contempt is a question of law, which we review de novo. See Rogowicz v.
O’Connell, 147 N.H. 270, 272 (2001). Mortgage Specialists also argues that
even if the sanctions were for criminal contempt, the trial court provided the
defendants with all of the requisite procedural protections. Whether the trial
court adhered to the requisite procedures in a criminal contempt proceeding is
also a question of law, which we review de novo. See id. But cf. State v. Lieber,
146 N.H. 105, 106 (2001) (where trial court bypasses certain procedural
formalities and instead utilizes summary contempt procedures, as is permitted
in specific situations involving direct criminal contempt, its decision to do so
will be upheld absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion).
The two classes of contempt, civil and criminal, are distinguishable by
the character and purpose of the punishment imposed. Bonser v. Courtney,
124 N.H. 796, 808 (1984). In civil contempt, the purpose of the punishment is
remedial, coercive, and for the benefit of the plaintiff. Id. The purpose of
criminal contempt, however, is punitive and to vindicate the “authority and
dignity” of the court. Id. (quotation omitted). To be punished for criminal
contempt, the defendant must have intentionally failed to comply with a valid
order, of which the defendant had knowledge. State v. Wallace, 136 N.H. 267,
270-71 (1992).
Contempt is either direct or indirect. Bonser, 124 N.H. at 808. A direct
contempt is one committed in the presence of the court and in its immediate
view. Id. All elements of the contempt must be personally observable by the
judge. Id. An indirect contempt is committed outside the presence of the court
and without the judge having full personal knowledge of every element of the
contempt. Id. Thus, indirect contempt arises from events of which the
presiding judge could not take judicial