THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-251
RICHARD K. BENDETSON & a.
v.
KILLARNEY, INC. & a.
Argued: July 20, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2006
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Daniel E. Will on the
brief) and Seegel Lipshutz & Wilchins, P.C., of Wellesley, Massachusetts
(Jeffrey P. Allen and Eric B. Goldberg on the brief, and Mr. Allen orally), for the
petitioners.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief) and
DiMento & Sullivan, of Boston, Massachusetts (Francis J. DiMento and Jason
A. Kosow on the brief, and Mr. DiMento orally), for the respondents.
BRODERICK, C.J. This case involves the breakdown of a business
relationship between petitioner Richard K. Bendetson (Bendetson) and
respondent Robert E. Buonato, Jr. (Buonato), and the resulting judicial
dissolution of Killarney, Inc. (Killarney), a closely held New Hampshire
corporation the two established to engage in the business of real estate
development and management. The petitioners are Bendetson, individually
and as treasurer of Killarney; Eric Slifka and Robert R. Bendetson, as trustees
of the Richard K. Bendetson Dynasty Trust; and Robert Curcio. The
respondents include Killarney; Buonato, individually and as president of
Killarney; New Killarney Limited Partnership (New Killarney); and Wellesley
Companies, Inc. (Wellesley). The respondents appeal a decision of the Superior
Court (Morrill, J.) setting aside Buonato’s election to purchase Bendetson’s
shares of Killarney, see RSA 293-A:14.34 (1999), and its subsequent order
dissolving Killarney, see RSA 293-A:14.30 (1999). We affirm.
I
The essential facts are drawn from various court orders or are otherwise
evident in the record. Bendetson and Buonato have known each other since
the mid-1970s when Buonato was about eleven years old. In 1974, Buonato’s
father and Bendetson began engaging in business dealings together and
developed a personal friendship. In the late 1980s, when Buonato was about
twenty-five years old, he went to work for Bendetson. Later, Buonato and
Bendetson dealt in real estate ventures together. In 1994, they formed
Killarney as equal shareholders and served as the company’s sole officers and
directors. Buonato was president and secretary, and Bendetson was treasurer.
Contemporaneously, they formed New Killarney, a New Hampshire limited
partnership, and designated Killarney as its sole, controlling general partner
with a one percent interest. Buonato and Bendetson each effectively controlled
49.5 percent of the partnership. New Killarney purchased a residential
apartment complex in Northfield. By agreement, Buonato used Wellesley, his
own management company, to manage the apartment complex. At some point,
the relationship between Buonato and Bendetson soured. They last met as
Killarney shareholders on July 30, 2001, but were unable to elect successors to
the board of directors. Indeed, at that special shareholders’ meeting,
Bendetson moved for a vote to elect directors, and Buonato, the only other
shareholder, would not second the motion. Since then, they have been unable
to schedule or hold another shareholders’ meeting.
In November 2001, the petitioners filed a petition in the superior court
seeking, among other relief, the judicial dissolution of Killarney and New
Killarney. Concerning Killarney, they alleged that the directors were
deadlocked in the management of corporate affairs and that the shareholders
were unable to break the deadlock. See RSA 293-A:14.30(b). They also
claimed that irreparable injury was threatened or being suffered, and that the
business affairs of the corporation no longer could be conducted to the
advantage of the shareholders generally or in furtherance of Killarney’s purpose
as the general partner of New Killarney. See id. Regarding New Killarney, the
petitioners alleged that it was not reasonably practicable to carry on its
business in conformity with the limited partnership agreement given the
director and shareholder deadlock at Killarney, the sole general partner of New
Killarney. See RSA 304-B:45 (2005). In January 2002, Buonato filed an
2
election to purchase, at fair value, all shares in Killarney owned by Bendetson.
See RSA 293-A:14.34(a). Thereafter, the parties attempted, without success, to
negotiate a price for the sale of Bendetson’s shares.
The petitioners subsequently filed a motion to appoint a custodian and
remove Buonato as president of Killarney; for their part, the respondents filed a
motion to stay the judicial dissolution proceeding so the trial court could
determine the fair value of Bendetson’s shares in Killarney. The Superior
Court (Hollman, J.) denied the petitioners’ motion, finding that “contrary to
[their] allegations, Buonato has properly and productively managed the
business and affairs of Killarney.” The trial court also granted the respondents’
motion to stay the judicial dissolution proceeding “so that a determination may
be made as to the fair value of Bendetson’s shares in Killarney which
respondents are electing to buy.” The Superior Court (Coffey, J.) thereafter
scheduled a structuring conference and the valuation proceeding.
In February 2004, the parties attended the valuation proceeding, and the
hearing began with a colloquy between the court and counsel concerning the
history and status of the dispute. The court noted that dissolution of the
limited partnership, New Killarney, was pending and that Buonato’s full
ownership of Killarney through election would effectively grant him complete
control over New Killarney as well. Over the respondents’ objection, the court
set aside Buonato’s election to purchase Bendetson’s shares in Killarney and
scheduled a hearing on the dissolution of New Killarney and Killarney. In
February 2005, the trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing, at the
conclusion of which the petitioners withdrew their request for the dissolution of
New Killarney. The trial court subsequently ordered the dissolution of
Killarney. This appeal followed.
The respondents make three arguments. First, they argue that the trial
court erroneously interpreted RSA 293-A:14.34(a) as permitting it to exercise
discretion to set aside Buonato’s election to purchase Bendetson’s shares in
Killarney when Buonato, the electing shareholder, did not seek to revoke his
right to elect. Second, they contend that even if the court had the discretion to
set aside Buonato’s election, it unsustainably exercised that discretion. Third,
they argue that the trial court erred when it concluded that the evidence
established sufficient grounds for judicial dissolution of Killarney. We address
each argument in turn.
II
The respondents first argue that the trial court lacked the authority
under RSA 293-A:14.34(a) to set aside Buonato’s election to purchase
Bendetson’s shares in Killarney. They contend that shareholders are entitled
to elect to purchase a petitioning shareholder’s shares and thus avoid the
3
dissolution of the corporation, and that the election statute forbids revocation
of the election by the elector without permission of the court. According to the
respondents, the trial court’s authority to exercise its equitable power to set
aside a timely filed election to purchase is triggered only when the electing
shareholder seeks to rescind the otherwise irrevocable election, and there is no
authority under the statute for the trial court to exercise its discretionary
authority until the electing shareholder seeks permission to set the election
aside. The petitioners contend, however, that the election statute empowers
the trial court to set aside a stock purchase election whenever it is equitable to
do so, and that the trial court’s exercise of equitable authority is not triggered
solely by an electing party’s request to revoke an election.
This court is the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent regarding the
meaning of a statute considered as a whole, and our review of the trial court’s
statutory interpretation is de novo. In the Matter of Giacomini & Giacomini,
151 N.H. 775, 776 (2005). We first examine the language of the statute, and
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Id. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we refuse to consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to incorporate in the statute. Id. at 776-77. Finally, we interpret a
statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. In
the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55, 58 (2005).
Once a shareholder seeks judicial dissolution of a corporation under
RSA 293-A:14.30(b), the corporation or other shareholders may elect to
purchase all of the shares of the petitioning shareholder. Specifically:
In a proceeding under RSA 293-A:14.30(b) to dissolve a
corporation that has no shares listed on a national securities
exchange or regularly traded in a market maintained by one
or more members of a national or affiliated securities
association, the corporation may elect or, if it fails to elect one
or more shareholders may elect to purchase all shares owned
by the petitioning shareholder at the fair value of the shares.
An election pursuant to this section shall be irrevocable,
unless the court determines that it is equitable to set aside or
modify the election.
RSA 293-A:14.34(a). An election may be filed at any time within ninety days
after the filing of the judicial dissolution petition “or at such later time as the
court in its discretion may allow.” RSA 293-A:14.34(b) (1999). Therefore, if an
election is filed beyond the ninety-day time period, the court may exercise
discretion and determine whether to allow the delayed election. Otherwise, a
timely filed election is subject only to the specific provision in dispute here:
4
“An election pursuant to this section shall be irrevocable, unless the court
determines that it is equitable to set aside or modify the election.” RSA 293-
A:14.34(a) (election irrevocability provision).
An election, however, does not effect an automatic stay upon the judicial
dissolution proceeding. Rather,
[a]fter an election has been filed by the corporation or one or
more shareholders the proceeding under RSA 293-A:14.30(b)
shall not be discontinued or settled, nor may the petitioning
shareholder sell or otherwise dispose of his shares, unless the
court determines that it would be equitable to the corporation
and the shareholders other than the petitioner to permit such
discontinuance, settlement, sale, or other disposition.
RSA 293-A:14.34(b). The parties have sixty days to “reach [an] agreement as to
the fair value and terms of purchase of the petitioner’s shares.” RSA 293-
A:14.34(c) (1999). If they fail to do so, either party may petition the court to
stay the dissolution proceedings and determine the fair value of the petitioner’s
shares. RSA 293-A:14.34(d) (1999).
The respondents contend that election is a matter of right when filed
within ninety days of the filing of the judicial dissolution petition. Within the
election irrevocability provision, the respondents target the term “irrevocable,”
which is not defined by the statute, and argue that the common meaning of
“revoke” connotes that the party asserting a particular action is attempting to
recall, withdraw or reverse it. Thus, according to the respondents, an election
remains irrevocable by the electing party, and only if that party seeks to recall
it may the trial court exercise its equitable power to set aside the election.
They contend that the irrevocable nature of an election does not permit the
trial court to exercise equitable power to set an election aside either sua sponte
or at the request of the party who petitioned for judicial dissolution. We do not
agree with the respondents’ narrow reading of the statute.
The election irrevocability provision contains two clauses. The first
clause mandates that election is irrevocable: “An election pursuant to this
section shall be irrevocable.” RSA 293-A:14.34(a). The second clause qualifies
the first such that election remains irrevocable “unless the court determines
that it is equitable to set aside or modify the election.” Id. The second clause
essentially creates an exception to an otherwise “irrevocable” election, and the
meaning of the term “irrevocable” guides the applicability of that exception.
“Irrevocable” means “incapable of being recalled or revoked : past recall :
UNALTERABLE,” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1196
(unabridged ed. 2002); and also “committed beyond recall,” Black’s Law
5
Dictionary 848 (eighth ed. 2004). “Revoke” means “to bring or call back,”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 1944, and “recall”
means “to call back . . . or cause to return,” id. at 1893. We agree with the
respondents to the extent that the term “irrevocable” commonly describes the
relationship between an actor and an action initiated by that actor. Thus,
generally speaking, if an action is irrevocable, the actor who initiated the action
may not withdraw it, alter it, or otherwise call it back. While the dictionary
definition provides us with guidance, we also consider the meaning of the term
within the context of the dissolution and election provisions, as well as the
policy underlying them. See Donovan, 152 N.H. at 58; see also Nashua School
Dist. v. State, 140 N.H. 457, 458 (1995).
Our election statute is nearly identical to the like provision in the Model
Business Corporation Act, see Model Bus. Corp. Act Annotated § 14.34 (3d ed.
2005), and thus, we look to the official comments of the model act for guidance
on the intended meaning of the election statute, cf. State v. Donohue, 150 N.H.
180, 183 (2003) (reviewing official comments of Model Penal Code for guidance
to interpret analogous New Hampshire statute). One comment states, in
pertinent part:
The election to purchase is wholly voluntary, but it can
be made as a matter of right within 90 days after the filing
of the petition under section 14.30(2). After 90 days, leave
of court is required. Once an election is filed:
(i) the election is irrevocable and may not be set
aside or modified (as to one or more parties)
unless the court determines it is equitable to do
so; and
(ii) the dissolution proceeding under section 14.30(2)
may not be discontinued or settled and the
petitioning shareholder may not dispose of his
shares without court approval.
Model Bus. Corp. Act Annotated § 14.34 cmt. 2, at 14-148. The comment
explains that by restricting the parties’ ability to thwart either the dissolution
process or an election to purchase, the dissolution and election provisions were
designed “to reduce the risk that either the dissolution proceeding or the
buyout election will be used for strategic purposes.” Id. Election is described
as a “matter of right,” such that a petitioning shareholder’s “shares are, in
effect, subject to a ‘call’ for 90 days after commencement of the [judicial
dissolution] proceeding.” Id. Thus, once an election is filed, the petitioning
shareholder “becomes irrevocably committed to sell his shares,” id., and may
not discontinue the dissolution proceeding, or otherwise dispose of the shares,
6
without the court’s permission, id. Conversely, while election does not
automatically stay the dissolution proceedings, RSA 293-A:14.34(b), the
electing party becomes irrevocably committed to buying the petitioner’s shares
absent court permission to revoke the election, Model Bus. Corp. Act Annotated
§ 14.34 cmt. 2, at 14-148; RSA 293-A:14.34(b). Accordingly, the election
irrevocability provision, specifically the term “irrevocable,” was intended to bind
both the petitioning shareholder to sell his shares and the electing party to buy
them, and it does not refer exclusively to the electing party’s ability to opt out
of his election. No language within the election irrevocability provision
conditions the trial court’s exercise of its equitable power to set aside the
election upon one party’s request to revoke an election, and we will not read
language into the statute that it does not contain. See Giacomini, 151 N.H. at
777.
We acknowledge that the official comment refers to election as a “matter
of right” when filed within ninety days of the dissolution petition. This right is
not unqualified, however. The comment also states that “[o]nce an election is
filed, it may be set aside or modified . . . for reasons that the court finds
equitable.” Model Bus. Corp. Act Annotated § 14.34 cmt. 2, at 14-149. Even
though the comment does not speak explicitly to the question of whether a trial
court’s exercise of equitable authority is contingent upon the electing party’s
motion to revoke the election, it does underscore the intended design of the
dissolution and election provisions to reduce strategic maneuvers between the
parties. See RSA 293-A:14.34(b). Interpreting the election irrevocability
provision in a manner that would effectively bar the trial court from addressing
the equities of a particular case absent a request to revoke initiated by the
electing party would contravene this intended design of the provision.
We acknowledge that generally speaking, because of dissolution’s
“adverse effects on shareholders, employees, and others who may have an
interest in the continuation of the business,” election is often favored over
judicial dissolution as a remedy. Model Bus. Corp. Act Annotated § 14.34, at
14-147. This policy is supported in part by the presumption that “the rights of
the petitioning shareholder are fully protected by liquidating only his interest
and paying the fair value of his shares while permitting the remaining
shareholders to continue the business.” Id. In the event that election would
provide an unfair advantage to the electing party, however, the electing party is
not likely to seek to withdraw the election, and the legislature did not intend to
constrain the trial court from addressing the equities in such a case.
Our reading of the irrevocability provision comports with RSA 293-
A:14.34(b), which precludes an automatic stay of the underlying dissolution
proceedings while protecting an electing party’s ability to purchase the shares
of the petitioning party. This provision bars the petitioning shareholder from
disposing of his shares “unless the court determines that it would be equitable
7
to the corporation and the shareholders other than the petitioner to permit
such discontinuance, settlement, sale, or other disposition.” RSA 293-
A:14.34(b). Again, the legislature expressly incorporated the trial court’s
authority to consider the equities at play in a particular case. Explicit
reference to the court’s equitable powers in both RSA 293-A:14.34(a) and (b)
indicates that the legislature intended to empower the court to enforce
principles of fair play in a situation that is often rife with tension and ill-will.
Further, subsection (b) directs the trial court to consider the perspectives
of certain parties, “the corporation and the shareholders other than the
petitioner,” while the election irrevocability provision does not contain a
similar restriction. Compare RSA 293-A:14.34(b) with RSA 293-A:14.34(a).
This suggests that the legislature intended for the trial court to review the
equities from all parties’ perspectives when a party elects to purchase the
petitioning shareholder’s stock. This comprehensive frame of reference is
consistent with the trial court’s authority to address the equities of election in
a particular case without the contingency of one particular party, the electing
shareholder, invoking the trial court’s discretion.
The respondents rely upon a provision in the judicial dissolution statute
to assert that shareholders are entitled to avoid dissolution by election.
Specifically, RSA 293-A:14.31(d) (1999) (notice provision), provides:
Within 10 days of the commencement of a proceeding
under RSA 293-A:14.30(b), to dissolve a corporation that has
no shares listed on a national securities exchange or
regularly traded in a market maintained by one or more
members of a national securities exchange, the corporation
shall send to all shareholders, other than the petitioner, a
notice stating that the shareholders are entitled to avoid the
dissolution of the corporation by electing to purchase the
petitioner’s shares under RSA 293-A:14.34 and accompanied
by a copy of RSA 293-A:14.34.
(Emphasis added.) The respondents assert that the “entitled to avoid” phrase
demonstrates that electing parties have a right to purchase the petitioning
shareholder’s stock and that such election when timely made is irrevocable
absent the electing party requesting the court to set aside the election. We
disagree.
In some sense, an election to purchase may be considered a right or an
entitlement because unlike a petition for judicial dissolution, the election
provision contains no specific substantive elements or factors for an electing
party to affirmatively prove in order to pursue an election. Compare RSA 293-
A:14.30 with RSA 293-A:14.34(a). Nothing in the notice provision, however,
8
grants the electing party an unassailable right to elect. Rather, it simply
informs shareholders of whatever election rights exist under RSA 293-
A:14.34(a), and we have concluded that the election provision renders the
electing party’s right to elect subject to the trial court’s authority to set aside
the election when equity so requires.
Finally, our interpretation is supported by foreign case law. In Giulietti
v. Giulietti, 784 A.2d 905, 943 (Conn. App. Ct. 2001), the electing party argued
that the trial court improperly refused to stay the judicial dissolution
proceedings so as to allow him to pursue his election to purchase the shares of
the petitioning party. Interpreting statutory election provisions nearly identical
to those contained in our election statute, RSA 293-A:14.34(a) and (b), the
appellate court concluded that “[t]he plain language of the statute . . . gives
the court the discretion both to discontinue the corporate dissolution
proceedings and to revoke a shareholder’s election to purchase the shares of
the petitioner when in the court’s judgment it would be equitable to do so.”
Giulietti, 784 A.2d at 943. Notably, the Giulietti court used the term “revoke”
to extend to the court’s authority to revoke election, and did not limit the term
to the electing party’s attempt to recall the election. Because the Giulietti court
interpreted the plain language of the statute as permitting the trial court to set
aside election over the electing party’s objection, it declined to adopt the
electing party’s reading of the statute and enforce election. Id. Though the
Giulietti court’s statutory analysis may be considered dicta, it is supportive of
and consistent with our interpretation of RSA 293-A:14:34(a). Should the
legislature disagree with our construction of the election irrevocability
provision, it is free to amend it. Marceau v. Concord Heritage Life Ins. Co., 149
N.H. 216, 221 (2003).
III
The respondents argue, in the alternative, that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion under RSA 293-A:14.34(a) when it set
aside Buonato’s election to purchase Bendetson’s shares in Killarney. They
contend that one presiding judge should not have overruled the decision of
another presiding judge, that the trial court failed to hold an evidentiary
hearing to support its decision, and that the trial court “turned the statutory
procedure on its head [by] forcing the Respondents to first prove that the
venture should not be dissolved before it would value the Petitioner’s shares so
that Respondents could exercise their irrevocable, matter-of-right election.”
The respondents also contend that no objective basis exists on the record to
sustain the trial court’s decision.
When we determine whether a ruling made by the trial court is a proper
exercise of judicial discretion, we are really deciding whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the court’s discretionary
9
judgment. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001). The trial court has
wide latitude in rendering decisions in equity according to the circumstances of
a particular case, and we will uphold its decision unless it is unsupported by
the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. See Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’
Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 576-77 (2004) (reviewing decision on
equitable doctrine of laches).
In 2002, the superior court granted the respondents’ motion to stay the
judicial dissolution proceeding and scheduled a merits hearing to determine
the fair value of Bendetson’s Killarney shares to carry out Buonato’s election to
purchase them. The petitioners requested an interlocutory appeal from the
ruling and a stay of the scheduled valuation proceedings, which was denied. In
2004, the trial court, with a different presiding judge, commenced the valuation
hearing and initiated a colloquy concerning the propriety of conducting a
valuation hearing. Ultimately, the trial court declined to permit Buonato to
elect to purchase Bendetson’s shares, essentially reversing the decision of the
earlier presiding judge. Because the superior court has the discretion to review
its orders at any time prior to final judgment, see Fastrack Crushing Servs. v.
Abatement Int’l/Advatex Assocs., 149 N.H. 661, 664 (2003), we discern no legal
error in the process of this case.
We also reject the respondents’ challenge to the lack of an evidentiary
hearing. The trial court engaged in a full colloquy with counsel about the
posture of the case. Counsel for both parties proffered undisputed facts
concerning the ownership structure of Killarney and New Killarney. The
dispute focused upon whether election would impart an unfair advantage to
Buonato concerning the control of New Killarney. The respondents do not
point to a statutory provision or to other legal authority requiring an
evidentiary hearing in this context, do not direct us to any portion of the record
in which they requested an evidentiary hearing and identify no additional facts
that an evidentiary hearing would have uncovered.
In addition, the respondents’ argument that the trial court somehow
turned the statutory process “on its head” lacks merit. The trial court was
following the process permitted by the statute by reviewing the equities of the
case and ultimately deciding to set aside the election. Further, the trial court
did not, as the respondents contend, require them “to first prove that the
venture should not be dissolved before it would value [Bendetson’s] shares.”
There appears to be one occasion during the 2004 hearing when the court
misspoke about the burden of proof, making a passing comment to which no
one objected. At the dissolution merits hearing in 2005, however, the record
reveals that the petitioning parties bore the burden of proof.
Finally, we conclude that the respondents have failed to establish that no
objective basis exists in the record to support the trial court’s equitable
10
decision to set aside the election. During the 2004 hearing, the court focused
upon the ownership structure of Killarney and New Killarney, the impact the
election ultimately might have on this structure, and the pending litigation
involving dissolution of the limited partnership. Because Killarney was the sole
general partner of the limited partnership, the court anticipated that Buonato’s
purchase of Bendetson’s Killarney stock would give Buonato full ownership of
Killarney, New Killarney’s sole general partner, and thus place Buonato in full
control of New Killarney. The trial court also was concerned that disrupting
Bendetson’s control in New Killarney potentially would interfere with his ability
to seek dissolution of the limited partnership. The trial court expressed
concern that the limited partnership agreement was in effect until 2044, and
while Bendetson would retain his 49.5 percent ownership of New Killarney, he
would “have no control.” The respondents acknowledged the potential practical
implications of election when counsel stated that “once we control the general
partner, the case falls completely and there’s not going to be a liquidation
hearing [for the partnership] because they can’t satisfy the terms of the
partnership.” The trial court ultimately determined that it would not be
equitable to decide valuation of Bendetson’s Killarney shares and essentially
give Buonato a “leg up” in the ongoing limited partnership. Accordingly, we
conclude that the respondents have failed to establish that the trial court’s
equitable decision to set aside Buonato’s stock purchase election is
unsupported by the record.
IV
Finally, the respondents argue that the evidence does not establish
sufficient grounds for judicial dissolution of Killarney. The petitioners sought
judicial dissolution under RSA 293-A:14.30, and after conducting an
evidentiary hearing, the trial court concluded that the evidence supported
dissolution under both RSA 293-A:14.30(b)(i) and (ii). We will sustain a trial
court’s findings and conclusions unless they are lacking in evidentiary support
or are tainted by error of law. Appeal of State of N.H., 147 N.H. 426, 429
(2002). Because we conclude that the record supports the trial court’s
conclusion that Bendetson established all the necessary elements under
subsection (b)(ii), we do not address the propriety of its conclusions under
subsection (b)(i).
For the superior court to dissolve a corporation under RSA 293-
A:14.30(b)(ii), the petitioning shareholder must establish that “[t]he
shareholders are deadlocked in voting power and have failed, for a period that
includes at least 2 consecutive annual meeting dates, to elect successors to
directors whose terms have expired.” RSA 293-A:14.30(b)(ii). The respondents
challenge the trial court’s finding that the term for the Killarney directors
expired. They contend that the evidence failed to establish the manner in
which Killarney directors are installed, other than the procedure described in
11
the Incorporator Action by Unanimous Written Consent document signed by
Buonato and Bendetson when they first incorporated Killarney. That
document specifies that “[t]he number of directors of the Corporation, until
changed in accordance with the By-Laws, is fixed at two (2) and that the
following persons are hereby elected Directors to serve in accordance with the
By-Laws as the initial directors,” and it names Buonato and Bendetson. The
respondents argue that because the evidence does not establish a director’s
“term of office [or] its expiration,” the current directors’ terms have never
expired, and thus, the trial court’s conclusion that the shareholders failed to
elect successors to directors whose terms have expired is clearly erroneous.
We conclude, however, that the respondents fail to demonstrate trial court
error.
The Killarney by-laws require an annual meeting of shareholders to
occur each March, and if an election of directors is not held at the annual
meeting, the directors must cause the election to occur at a special meeting of
the shareholders “as soon thereafter as convenient.” As found by the trial
court, Buonato and Bendetson, Killarney’s sole shareholders, were unable to
elect successors to the Killarney directors at a special meeting of the Killarney
shareholders on July 30, 2001. Indeed, the trial court found that this meeting
was the last that occurred between the shareholders, about three and one-half
years prior to the dissolution trial, and further found that “the parties are so
hopelessly deadlocked that they have not been able to schedule or hold a
shareholders’ meeting since 2001.” The trial court determined that under the
by-laws, the current directors’ one-year terms had expired, though Buonato
and Bendetson continued to lawfully serve in a holdover capacity. Accordingly,
the trial court concluded that all elements were established for judicial
dissolution of Killarney under RSA 293-A:14.30(b)(ii).
Under the Killarney by-laws, Article First, Section 4,
[t]he term of office of a Director elected at the annual meeting of
the Stockholders shall be one year, provided, however, that he
shall hold his office until his successor shall be elected and
qualified. A Director elected by the Stockholders or elected by
the Directors shall hold office until the next annual meeting of
Stockholders and the election and qualification of his successor.
By their plain language, the by-laws provide that each director serves a one-
year term. If successors are not in place at the conclusion of that term, the by-
laws permit the predecessor directors to remain serving in a holdover capacity.
We agree with the trial court’s reading of this by-law: “The fact that a director
may continue to serve lawfully in a holdover capacity after his term has expired
does not mean that the length of his term is infinite.” Thus, the trial court
committed no error when it concluded that the term of the Killarney directors
12
expired with the passage of one year from their election, despite their holdover
status.
The respondents rely upon Levine v. Beem, 608 So. 2d 373, 374-75 (Ala.
1992), to support their position. Although they provide no analysis of the case,
they parenthetically aver that the Levine court “affirm[ed] [the] denial of
dissolution under [an] MBCA provision identical to RSA 293-A:14.30(b)(ii).” We
conclude, however, that the Levine case provides no guidance here. The Levine
court rejected the petitioning shareholder’s contention that the shareholders’
deadlock had prevented an election of directors because evidence showed that
the shareholders made no attempt to elect directors for fifteen to twenty years
and that the petitioning shareholder refused to attend meetings. Levine, 608
So. 2d at 375. The court concluded that the evidence established “nothing
more than a possibility of future shareholder deadlock preventing the election
of directors,” and thus “the extreme remedy of dissolution [was] not
warranted.” Id. By contrast, the undisputed evidence in this case shows that
Bendetson not only attended the July 30, 2001 special shareholder meeting
but expressly moved for a vote to elect directors, and Buonato, the only other
shareholder, would not second the motion. The differing facts of Levine make
the decision in that case inapposite to the circumstances before us.
Finally, we decline to address the merits of the respondents’ argument
that the trial court erred in a particular conclusion of law determining that the
failure to hold annual meetings is a basis for judicial dissolution. Even
assuming this single conclusion of law constituted legal error, it is clear from
the face of the trial court’s order that it based its decision for judicial
dissolution under RSA 293-A:14.30(b)(ii) upon the existence of all necessary
legal elements provided in the statute. The respondents have failed to establish
that the trial court erred in ordering the dissolution of Killarney under RSA
293-A:14.30(b)(ii).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
13