THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-412
DANA VANDEMARK
v.
MCDONALD'S CORPORATION
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 21, 2006
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III and
Benjamin T. King on the brief, and Mr. King orally), for the plaintiff.
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (John C.
Kissinger, Jr. and Catherine B. Cosgrove on the brief, and Mr. Kissinger orally),
for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Dana VanDeMark, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (McGuire, J.) granting summary judgment for the defendant,
McDonald’s Corporation. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts were found by the trial court or appear on the record.
In or around December 1989, the defendant and Colley/McCoy Management
Company, LLC (Colley/McCoy) entered into a series of agreements to establish
a franchise for a McDonald’s restaurant on Fisherville Road in Concord,
including a franchise letter agreement, a license agreement, and an operator’s
lease. The defendant is the franchiser and owner of the building in which
Colley/McCoy, as franchisee, operates the restaurant. The license agreement
provided, in relevant part:
Licensee not an Agent of Licensor. Licensee shall have no
authority, expressed or implied, to act as agent of Licensor,
McDonald’s . . . . Licensee is, and shall remain, an independent
contractor responsible for all obligations and liabilities of, and for
all loss or damage to, the Restaurant and its business . . . .
The operator’s lease also provided:
No Agency Created: Lessee shall have no authority, express or
implied, to act as agent of Lessor, or any of its affiliates for any
purpose. Lessee is, and shall remain, an independent contractor
responsible for all obligations and liabilities of, and for all loss or
damage to, the Restaurant and its business . . . .
Colley/McCoy operates as a separate entity, independent of McDonald’s
Corporation. It is responsible for the cost of purchasing equipment for the
restaurant, and paying for the fixtures, food products, advertising,
maintenance, utilities, and insurance. It hires and trains its own employees.
The license agreement provided that the defendant could hold Colley/McCoy in
“Material Breach” and terminate the agreement if Colley/McCoy failed, among
other things, to “maintain and operate the Restaurant in a good, clean,
wholesome manner and in compliance with the standards prescribed by the
McDonald’s System.”
In its role as franchiser of McDonald’s restaurants, the defendant
published an operations and training (O & T) manual, which addressed a
number of issues related to the operations of McDonald’s restaurants,
including safety and security procedures. However, the O & T manual
provided:
McOpCo employees should consider the rules and regulations
contained in this chapter as company policy. Independent
owner/operators are encouraged to adopt appropriate policies for
their restaurant.
A “McOpCo” is a restaurant that is owned and operated by the defendant itself.
The defendant employed field consultants to monitor McDonald’s
restaurants. In early 2001, Christine Perrault assumed the role as field
2
consultant for the Colley/McCoy restaurant. In January 2002, the defendant
published a “Quality, Service, Cleanliness (QSC) Play Book” for field
consultants to use in evaluating its restaurants and recommending
improvements. On June 25, 2002, Perrault conducted a “restaurant systems
review” of the restaurant and found deficiencies concerning shift management,
food safety, and production. She requested that Colley/McCoy develop an
“action plan” to rectify such deficiencies. Perrault also found several
deficiencies in the restaurant’s execution of the “Safety and Security” system.
She did not request the development of any action plan in response to these
deficiencies.
The plaintiff began working at the restaurant in the late 1990’s as an
overnight custodian. His shift was from midnight until 8:00 a.m. The
restaurant was closed during that time and the plaintiff worked alone. On
February 6, 2003, at approximately 3:00 a.m., two intruders attacked the
plaintiff while he was taking a break outside of the restaurant. One of the
intruders carried a baseball bat and ordered the plaintiff inside the building.
Once inside, the intruders tied up the plaintiff and beat him with another pipe-
like instrument. The intruders demanded that the plaintiff give them the
combination to the safe. When he insisted that he did not know it, they beat
him again until he lost consciousness. When the plaintiff awoke, he was face
down on the restaurant floor. He remained motionless until the intruders left.
At that point, he managed to untie himself and make his way to the
restaurant’s panic button. After pressing the button, the plaintiff lost
consciousness again. He alleges that the panic button was broken and did not
alert the Concord police. At approximately 4:45 a.m., an employee reporting
for work found the plaintiff unconscious and dialed 911. The plaintiff was
transported to Concord Hospital where he was treated for multiple injuries.
The plaintiff brought claims for negligence and vicarious liability against
the defendant as a result of injuries he suffered as an employee of
Colley/McCoy. The trial court granted the defendant’s motion for summary
judgment concerning both claims, finding that: (1) no genuine issues of
material fact exist; (2) the defendant did not assume a duty to ensure that
Colley/McCoy would follow its security measures designed to protect
employees; and (3) the defendant did not retain sufficient control over
Colley/McCoy’s security policy so as to subject it to vicarious liability.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment on his negligence and vicarious liability claims by: (1)
ignoring evidence in the record that the defendant assumed and breached
duties to provide adequate security at the restaurant; and (2) ignoring evidence
in the record that Colley/McCoy was an agent of the defendant.
3
II. Standard of Review
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Sintros v. Hamon, 148
N.H. 478, 480 (2002). If our review of the evidence does not reveal any genuine
issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. An issue of fact is
“material” for purposes of summary judgment if it affects the outcome of the
litigation under the applicable substantive law. Sandford v. Town of Wolfeboro,
143 N.H. 481, 484 (1999).
III. Negligence
We first review whether the trial court erred in granting the defendant
summary judgment on the plaintiff’s negligence claim. The trial court
concluded that the defendant “did not assume a duty to ensure that
Colley/McCoy would follow several of its security measures designed to protect
employees.” To prevail on his negligence claim against the defendant, the
plaintiff had to show that: (1) the defendant owed him a duty; (2) the
defendant breached this duty; and (3) the breach proximately caused his
injuries. See Dupont v. Aavid Thermal Technologies, 147 N.H. 706, 709 (2002).
The plaintiff argues that the defendant “voluntarily assumed such a duty
by adopting the ‘QSC Play Book,’ a year before [the plaintiff] suffered his
attack.” Whether the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty is a question of law.
Id. We have not addressed what constitutes a franchiser’s voluntary
assumption of a duty to ensure the safety of a franchisee’s employees. We
have, however, addressed a similar issue concerning a landlord’s voluntary
assumption of a duty to protect tenants from criminal attack. See Walls v.
Oxford Management Co., 137 N.H. 653, 658 (1993). As a general principle,
landlords have no duty to protect others from criminal attack. Id. We
recognized in Walls, however, that consistent with the Restatement (Second) of
Torts § 323 (1965):
[A] landlord who undertakes, either gratuitously or by contract, to
provide security will thereafter have a duty to act with reasonable
care. Where, however, a landlord has made no affirmative attempt
to provide security, and is not responsible for a physical defect that
enhances the risk of crime, we will not find such a duty.
Walls, 137 N.H. at 659. Breach of such a voluntarily assumed duty can create
liability to third parties as well. Restatement (Second) of Torts § 324 A (1965).
Section 324 A provides:
4
One who undertakes, gratuitously or for consideration, to render
services to another which he should recognize as necessary for the
protection of a third person or his things, is subject to liability to
the third person for physical harm resulting from his failure to
exercise reasonable care to protect his undertaking, if
(a) his failure to exercise reasonable care increases the risk of such
harm, or
(b) he has undertaken to perform a duty owed by the other to the
third person, or
(c) the harm is suffered because of reliance of the other or the third
person upon the undertaking.
Id.
We must, therefore, examine whether the trial court erred by concluding
that the defendant made no affirmative attempt to provide security to the
employees at the Colley/McCoy franchise, and, consequently, assumed no
such duty to the plaintiff. In reaching this conclusion, the trial court relied
upon the plain language of the O & T manual, providing: “McOpCo employees
should consider the rules and regulations contained in this chapter as
company policy. Independent owner/operators [franchisees] are encouraged to
adopt appropriate policies for their restaurant.” (Emphasis added.) The trial
court, thus, found that Colley/McCoy, as a franchisee, was not required to
implement the defendant’s security recommendations. The trial court also
relied upon the deposition testimony of Johnny Webb, McDonald’s divisional
security manager, who testified that franchisees like Colley/McCoy were not
required to follow the defendant’s security policies, and Christine Perrault,
McDonald’s field consultant for the restaurant, who testified that her role was
only to recommend and not mandate compliance with security procedures.
The trial court also considered the affidavit of John Loftus, Vice President of
Colley/McCoy, who stated that Colley/McCoy, and not the defendant, was
responsible for security at the restaurant.
The plaintiff did not counter with affidavits or other contradictory
evidence under oath to establish that the defendant required Colley/McCoy to
follow its security procedures. He argues, however, that the trial court
unreasonably ignored the plain text of the QSC Play Book in finding that the
security procedures set forth therein were mandatory only for McOpCo
restaurants. The plaintiff references the front page of the QSC Play Book,
which indicates that the information therein is directed to “Operations
Consultants and Owners/Operators, as well as all McOpCo personnel.” The
5
QSC Play Book instructs the field consultant that subsequent to conducting
the “restaurant systems review,” he or she should “discuss the impact of
missing key success factors . . . [t]o gain Owner/Operator or McOpCo
Supervisor commitment to put missing key success factors in place.”
(Emphasis added.) Specifically, the plaintiff contends that, through such
language, the defendant undertook, in relevant part, to evaluate franchisee
compliance with the McDonald’s “Safety and Security” system, and to correct
franchisee deviation by gaining a commitment to cure any violations and come
into full compliance.
We do not find that language, in itself, to impose an explicit mandate
upon the franchisee to implement the defendant’s security policies, and the
plaintiff has not highlighted any additional language in the QSC Play Book that
classifies franchisee non-compliance as grounds for termination of the
franchise relationship. Nor has the plaintiff provided any supporting evidence
for his contention that the defendant’s adoption of the QSC Play Book nullified
any pre-existing policy, set forth in the O & T manual, specifically delegating
responsibility for security issues to franchisees. While the plaintiff asserts that
the defendant had discretion to terminate the license agreement if a franchisee
failed to comply with “the standards prescribed by the McDonald’s System,” he
presented no supporting evidence that the defendant could terminate the
license agreement if a franchisee failed to meet specific security and safety
standards set forth in the QSC Play Book.
In the absence of such evidence, the plaintiff urges the court to rely upon
Martin v. McDonald’s Corp., 572 N.E.2d 1073 (Ill. Ct. App. 1991), in support of
his position. In Martin, an Illinois appellate court affirmed a damages award
against McDonald’s for injuries suffered by employees of a franchisee during a
robbery of the restaurant. Id. at 1082-83. The court held that “there [wa]s
ample support in case law and the facts . . . to support a determination that
McDonald’s Corporation voluntarily assumed a duty to provide security to
plaintiffs and protect them from harm.” Id. at 1078. In Martin, however, the
McDonald’s regional security manager “acted directly as security supervisor for
the newly acquired [restaurant] . . . . Since [the franchisee] had neither an
operations manager nor a security supervisor, these positions were handled by
. . . two executives from defendant McDonald’s Corporation.” Id. at 1077. The
Martin court also found that the McDonald’s executives “undertook not only
the obligation to check for security problems, but also to communicate to the
store management what the security policies were and to ‘follow up’ to be
certain that the problems had been corrected and the ‘recommended’ security
procedures ‘followed.’” Id.
The trial court found that the “actions of [the defendant] regarding
security in the present case [fell] far short of those described in Martin.” We
agree. Colley/McCoy hires its own executives and employees. While in Martin
6
the regional security manager and operations manager conducted security
checks, which “included changing locks, and ordering a new security window
and alarm system for the back door,” id., there is no evidence in this case that
any executive or employee of the defendant participated in implementing a
security system at the restaurant. Furthermore, Webb and Perrault testified
that they recommended, but did not require, that franchisees like
Colley/McCoy follow the defendant’s security policies and procedures.
In the absence of evidence in the record to the contrary, we conclude that
the trial court did not err by finding that “no genuine issues of material fact
exist and that [the defendant] did not assume a duty to ensure that
Colley/McCoy would follow several of its security measures designed to protect
employees.”
Next, the plaintiff, citing Iannelli v. Burger King Corp., 145 N.H. 190
(2002), argues that the trial court erred by granting summary judgment on his
negligence claim because “landowners (like McDonald’s) bear liability for
criminal attacks occurring on their premises where ‘the opportunity for
criminal misconduct is brought about by the actions or inactions of the owner
or where overriding foreseeability of such criminal activity exists.’” Specifically,
he contends that the defendant created “the opportunity for criminal
misconduct by [its] inaction in allowing [the plaintiff] to continue to work alone
through the night in a profitable restaurant shrouded by darkness.” The trial
court did not explicitly address whether the defendant, as landowner, “created
the opportunity for criminal misconduct.”
We have specifically rejected liability for criminal attacks “based solely on
the landlord-tenant relationship or on a doctrine of overriding foreseeability.”
Walls, 137 N.H. at 659. We recognized in Walls, however, that special
circumstances can impose a duty where a landlord created, or was responsible
for, “a known defective condition on a premises that foreseeably enhanced the
risk of criminal attack.” Id. (emphasis added). In Iannelli, the plaintiffs
brought a negligence action against Burger King Corporation for injuries
sustained as a result of an assault by teenagers at the restaurant. Iannelli,
145 N.H. at 190. The evidence supported a finding that the restaurant was
aware of the teenagers’ threatening conduct towards the plaintiffs and other
customers. Id. at 194-95. We, thus, concluded that the restaurant owed a
duty to the plaintiffs to protect them from the assault as “the teenagers’
behavior in the restaurant created a foreseeable risk of harm that the
[restaurant] unreasonably failed to alleviate.” Id. at 195. Unlike the plaintiffs
in Iannelli, however, the plaintiff here has both: (1) failed to submit supporting
evidence that the defendant knew, or should have known, that the restaurant
was “shrouded by darkness” during the nighttime hours; or (2) failed to claim
that the defendant knew, or should have known, of the impending actions of
those who assaulted him. We, thus, conclude that the trial court did not err
7
by rejecting a duty premised upon special circumstances and by granting the
defendant’s motion for summary judgment on the plaintiff’s negligence claim.
IV. Vicarious Liability
Next, we review whether the trial court erred by granting summary
judgment to the defendant on the plaintiff’s vicarious liability claim on the
basis that no agency relationship existed between the defendant and
Colley/McCoy.
Whether an agency relationship has been established is a question of
fact. Herman v. Monadnock PR-24 Training Council, 147 N.H. 754, 758
(2002). “An agency relationship, or lack thereof, does not turn solely upon the
parties’ belief that they have or have not created one.” Id. Rather, the
necessary factual elements to establish agency involve: (1) authorization from
the principal that the agent shall act for him or her; (2) the agent’s consent to
so act; and (3) the understanding that the principal is to exert some control
over the agent’s actions. Id.
The trial court concluded that “the record, viewed in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, does not support a finding that an agency relationship
exists.” The trial court relied upon the absence of evidence that the defendant
retained any control over Colley/McCoy security procedures, as well as the
license agreement and operator’s lease which, as noted above, provided that
there was no agency relationship between Colley/McCoy and the defendant.
The plaintiff argues that the presence of the relevant document
provisions does “nothing to change the reality of agency.” He contends that by
executing the license agreement, “Colley McCoy obtained McDonald’s
authorization to act for McDonald’s as a purveyor of the ‘McDonald’s System,’
and Colley McCoy consented to act.” He further contends that:
McDonald’s has maintained a continuous prescription of what
Colley McCoy shall and shall not do. McDonald’s mandates
compliance with the “McDonald’s System.” McDonald’s mandates
particular methods for preparing foods, as well as food preparation
and service times. McDonald’s mandates through the “QSC Play
Book” that franchisee restaurants such as Colley McCoy
implement “key success factors” in their restaurants. Moreover,
McDonald’s sends out field consultants such as Ms. Perrault to
Colley McCoy to ensure that McDonald’s specifications are met.
8
We have yet to address the issue of the vicarious liability of a franchiser
for the security breaches of its franchisee. The trial court correctly recognized,
however, that although case law in other jurisdictions is not uniform, the
weight of authority construes franchiser liability narrowly, finding that absent
a showing of control over security measures employed by the franchisee, the
franchiser cannot be vicariously liable for the security breach. See, e.g.,
Folsom v. Burger King, 958 P.2d 301, 309 (Wash. 1998) (en banc) (concluding
that while Burger King reserved the right to enforce its standards and required
that franchisees comply with the guidelines in Burger King’s manual, it had not
“retained control over the security of the franchise restaurant”); Helmchen v.
White Hen Pantry, Inc., 685 N.E.2d 180, 182-83 (Ind. Ct. App. 1997)
(concluding that although the franchiser published a security manual and
engaged in efforts to “heighten awareness” and “offer suggestions” concerning
security to franchisees, it was not vicariously liable for the alleged negligence of
its franchisee as it did not “specifically mandate any security measures”);
Hoffnagle v. McDonald’s Corp., 522 N.W.2d 808, 814-15 (Iowa 1994)
(concluding that even though McDonald’s required its franchisees to use its
business manuals and attend training programs, its authority was “no more
than the authority to insure ‘the uniformity and standardization of products
and services offered by a [franchiser’s] restaurant’” and, thus, McDonald’s was
not vicariously liable for the criminal assault by a third party at the franchisee
restaurant).
In analyzing this issue, the trial court relied primarily upon Wendy Hong
Wu v. Dunkin’ Donuts, Inc., 105 F. Supp. 2d 83 (E.D.N.Y. 2000), in which the
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York surveyed
extensive state and federal case law concerning the vicarious liability of a
franchiser for the security breaches of its franchisee. In Wendy Hong Wu, an
employee of a Dunkin’ Donuts’ franchisee brought a vicarious liability claim
against Dunkin’ Donuts after she was raped and assaulted while working the
night shift. Id. at 86-87. The court specifically examined whether Dunkin’
Donuts had control over the alleged “instrumentality” that caused the harm.
See id. at 87-88. The court held that since there was no evidence that Dunkin’
Donuts actually mandated specific security equipment or otherwise controlled
the steps taken by its franchisees in general to protect employees, it was not
vicariously liable for the alleged lapse in security. Id. at 94. The court
reasoned that the franchise agreement was “primarily designed to maintain
uniform appearance among its franchisees and uniform quality among their
products and services to protect and enhance the value of the Dunkin’ Donuts
trademark. [The franchisee] remain[ed] solely responsible for hiring, firing, and
training its employees and for making all day-to-day decisions necessary to run
the business.” Id. at 91. In addition to finding a lack of control over security
matters within the franchise agreement, the court stated that “the undisputed
evidence in the record demonstrates that [Dunkin’ Donuts] merely made
9
security equipment available for purchase and suggested that alarm systems
and other burglary prevention techniques were important[.]” Id.
The plaintiff urges the court to rely instead upon Butler v. McDonald’s
Corp., 110 F. Supp. 2d 62 (D.R.I. 2000), a case not addressed by the trial
court. In Butler, the plaintiff brought suit against McDonald’s for injuries he
sustained when the door of a franchisee restaurant shattered on his entry. Id.
at 64. The plaintiff claimed that the injury was caused by the franchisee’s
negligent failure to repair the premises but sought to hold McDonald’s
vicariously liable pursuant to an agency relationship between McDonald’s and
its franchisee. Id. McDonald’s argued that there was no agency relationship
based upon the plain language of the franchise license agreement, which
explicitly stated that “no agency had been created,” and an affidavit from a
corporate officer of McDonald’s, stating that it did “not own, operate, or have a
right to control the franchise restaurant.” Id. at 67. The plaintiff countered
that McDonald’s exercised a right to control through its requirement that the
franchisee conform to “the McDonald’s ‘comprehensive’ system, the frequent
and detailed inspections of the premises and its operations, the taking of
profits, and the right of defendant to terminate the agreement for material
breach.” Id. The United States District Court for the District of Rhode Island
concluded that the plaintiff offered sufficient evidence to demonstrate
McDonald’s requisite right to control the franchise restaurant, and that a
reasonable jury could have found the existence of an agency relationship. Id.
at 67-68.
We find the reasoning employed by the Wendy Hong Wu court, which
examined facts similar to those here, more persuasive than that in Butler, as
we believe that this issue turns narrowly upon the defendant’s level of control
over the alleged “instrumentality” which caused the harm. Wendy Hong Wu,
105 F. Supp. 2d at 87-88. The Butler court, by contrast, found an agency
relationship based upon indicia of general control, see Butler, 110 F. Supp. 2d
at 67; it did not determine whether McDonald’s specifically maintained a right
to control repairs to the premises.
We agree with the trial court that the evidence demonstrates that
although the defendant maintained authority to insure the uniformity and
standardization of products and services offered by the Colley/McCoy
restaurant, such authority did not extend to the control of security operations.
See Hoffnagle, 522 N.W.2d at 814. Thus, there was no genuine issue of
material fact as to whether the defendant exercised control over the relevant
security policies at the restaurant through adopting the QSC Play Book.
Because we conclude that the defendant did not retain sufficient control
over Colley/McCoy’s security policies so as to subject it to vicarious liability, we
10
hold that the trial court did not err in granting the defendant’s motion for
summary judgment on the plaintiff’s vicarious liability claim.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11