THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-071
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KARL MATEY
Argued: January 11, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 15, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, and Thomas D. Ralph, attorney, on the brief, and Mr. Ralph
orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Karl Matey, appeals a ruling of the Superior
Court (Lynn, C.J.) finding him chargeable on multiple probation violations. On
appeal, he contends that the trial court erred in extending his original term of
probation, and by admitting evidence of a statement allegedly obtained in
violation of his right to counsel. We vacate the defendant’s sentence only to the
extent that the defendant’s term of probation exceeds five years, and remand to
the trial court for resentencing in accordance with this opinion. In all other
respects, we affirm.
The trial court could have found the following facts. On May 2, 2003, the
defendant entered a plea of guilty to one count of possession of a controlled
drug. See RSA 318-B:2 (2004). The Trial Court (Hicks, J.) sentenced the
defendant to three and one-half to seven years in State Prison, which sentence
was deferred for two years. The defendant was also placed on probation for
four years, beginning immediately. The trial court added in its sentencing
order that “[v]iolation of probation or any of the terms of this sentence may
result in revocation of probation and imposition of any sentence within the
legal limits for the underlying offense.”
While on probation, the defendant was jointly supervised by a New
Hampshire probation officer, Trisha Ford, and a Massachusetts probation
officer, Patricia Gleason. On June 11, 2003, the defendant failed a drug test in
New Hampshire, testing positive for marijuana. He subsequently failed drug
tests in Massachusetts on four occasions, testing positive for marijuana on
October 14, 2003, May 18, 2004, and August 24, 2004, and for both marijuana
and cocaine on September 8, 2004. Whenever the defendant failed a drug test,
Gleason discussed his drug use with him and “he was very forthcoming and
[admitted] that he had some problems. He had difficulty sleeping. He used
marijuana to help.” Specifically, on July 13, 2004, the defendant admitted to
having smoked marijuana a few weeks earlier.
On September 20, 2004, Ford filed a Violation of Probation alleging that
the defendant, among other things, violated Rule 10 of the Rules of Probation
by failing drug tests on five occasions and admitting to smoking marijuana on
one occasion. The defendant was appointed counsel for the probation
violations and was ordered to appear for a hearing on December 7, 2004.
Upon agreement of the parties, the December 7, 2004 hearing was
continued. The defendant, who was late for the hearing, arrived only after the
trial court had granted the continuance. Later that day, Ford called the
defendant to find out why he had not been in court that morning, to ask him
about his recent drug use, and to order him to report to her in New Hampshire
on December 9, 2004. During this telephone conversation, Ford asked the
defendant about a December 1 drug test, which was not the subject of the
Violation of Probation. The defendant admitted that, around the time of the
December 1 drug test, he had been smoking marijuana and snorting cocaine.
On December 9, 2004, the defendant failed to report to Ford as directed.
On December 13, 2004, Ford filed a Supplemental Violation of Probation,
alleging that the defendant failed to report to probation as directed on
December 9 and that he had admitted to smoking marijuana and snorting
cocaine.
2
The Trial Court (Lynn, C.J.) held a consolidated hearing on the Violation
of Probation and Supplemental Violation of Probation on January 4 and 10,
2005. The court found the defendant chargeable on several counts, including
the counts in the Violation of Probation and the Supplemental Violation of
Probation alleging that the defendant used controlled substances in violation of
Rule 10. The court sentenced the defendant to serve twelve months in the
House of Correction, and three years of probation upon release. The court also
ordered that the balance of the defendant’s prison term be suspended upon his
admission into a residential drug treatment program and the Nashua Academy
Program.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by extending
his initial term of probation and by admitting into evidence at the probation
violation hearing his December 7, 2004 admission to Ford, which he contends
was obtained in violation of his right to counsel. We address each argument in
turn.
I. Extension of Probation
The defendant argues that the trial court, after finding him in violation of
his probation, illegally extended his term of probation beyond the four years
initially imposed. The defendant concedes, however, that he failed to object to
the extension of the term of probation at the time it was imposed. Therefore,
the issue has not been preserved for our review. See State v. Blackmer, 149
N.H. 47, 48 (2003). Nevertheless, the defendant argues that we should review
his sentence under the plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
The plain error rule allows us to consider errors not brought to the
attention of the trial court. Id. However, “[t]he rule should be used sparingly,
its use limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would
otherwise result.” State v. MacInnes, 151 N.H. 732, 736-37 (2005). For us to
find error under the rule: “(1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be
plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must
seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Id. at 737.
At the time of sentencing on the probation violation, the defendant had
already served one year, eight months, and eight days of the initial four-year
term of probation. The defendant represented at oral argument that he was
then incarcerated for nine months before he was released in September 2005,
at which time he commenced serving the three-year term of probation imposed
by the court for the probation violation. Thus, at the earliest, the defendant
will complete his term of probation in September 2008, which is one year and
3
four months later than he had expected when he was originally sentenced on
the underlying charges.
The defendant first contends that his actual term of probation is
approximately five years and four months, which extends his probation beyond
the maximum five-year term of probation permitted by statute for his crime, a
class B felony. See RSA 651:2, V(a) (Supp. 2005). The State argues that the
term of probation was effectively tolled for the nine-month period during which
the defendant was incarcerated, and thus his actual term of probation is only
four years, eight months, and eight days. The defendant argues that probation
continued throughout the nine-month period during which he was
incarcerated. Neither the defendant nor the State has pointed to anything in
the record to support their positions. However, the State does concede that, if
the term of probation exceeds the five-year maximum allowable under RSA
651:2, V(a), it is illegal and plain error. In light of this concession, we hold
that, to the extent that the trial court sentenced the defendant to a term of
probation exceeding five years, that sentence was error, and the error was
plainly evident from the plain language of RSA 651:2, V(a). Because the
sentence is illegal to the extent that it imposes a term of probation exceeding
five years, the third and fourth elements of the plain error rule have been
satisfied. See State v. Taylor, 152 N.H. ___, ___, 886 A.2d 1012, 1014 (2005).
The defendant next argues that the trial court also committed plain error
by extending his probation beyond the four years initially imposed at
sentencing on the underlying charge, even if that extension ultimately results
in the defendant serving no more than five years probation. The State, citing
State v. White, 131 N.H. 555 (1989), argues that the extension of the
defendant’s term of probation is permissible so long as it is within the five-year
limit prescribed by the legislature for the underlying crime. In response, the
defendant contends that the State’s reliance on White is misplaced, and
instead argues that the extension of probation is tantamount to an
impermissible increase in the time period during which the maximum sentence
for the defendant’s underlying crime may be “called forward,” citing State v.
Ingerson, 130 N.H. 112 (1987).
In White, 131 N.H. at 557-58, 559-60, we held that, where a defendant
violates the terms of his probation, the imposition of a term of imprisonment
within the statutory limits for the underlying offense is not illegal, even where
the original sentencing order does not contain a suspended sentence. The
defendant in that case had entered a plea of guilty to a class B felony and the
trial court had sentenced him to twelve months incarceration and two years of
probation to begin upon his release. Id. at 556, 558. After the defendant
completed his term of incarceration and began his term of probation, the trial
court found him chargeable on several probation violations and revoked his
4
probation, sentencing him to incarceration for two and one-half to five years.
Id. at 557.
However, unlike the defendant in this case, the defendant in White did
not receive an additional term of probation. Thus, White did not address
whether a defendant may be sentenced to an additional or increased term of
probation as the result of a probation violation. Nevertheless, the State argues
that we must conclude that, under White, a defendant who violates his
probation may legally be given any sentence within the statutory limits for the
underlying offense, including not only a term of incarceration, but also an
additional term of probation.
The defendant concedes that if the rule in White were the only rule
applicable to this case, then the State would prevail. However, he argues that
White must be interpreted and applied in light of Ingerson.
In Ingerson, 130 N.H. at 113, the defendant had entered a plea of no
contest to two misdemeanor charges. The trial court sentenced her to sixty
days incarceration on the first charge, suspended indefinitely on condition of
good behavior, and continued the second charge for sentencing indefinitely. Id.
Two years and nine months later, the defendant was indicted for welfare fraud.
Id. The trial court found that she had violated the condition of good behavior,
and called forward the conviction and sentence on the two misdemeanors. Id.
at 113-14. We held that the trial court erred in calling forward those sentences
because the defendant was entitled, at the time of sentencing on the
misdemeanors, to be informed about the time period during which the trial
court may exercise its authority to call forward either her conviction or her
sentence. Id. at 116-17; see also Stapleford v. Perrin, 122 N.H. 1083, 1087
(1982) (requiring that a defendant know “in plain and certain terms” the extent
to which the court retains discretion to impose punishment at a later date). We
noted that “[a] sentence that can be called forward indefinitely, depending on
what the trial court considers to be a reasonable period, does not provide the
defendant or society with a sentence in ‘plain and certain terms.’” Id. at 116
(emphasis added).
However, in this case, the defendant’s original sentence has not been
deferred indefinitely, nor has he been placed on probation indefinitely. Thus,
Ingerson is distinguishable on its facts.
The defendant contends that his sentence was definite at the time of
sentencing and his probation was clearly set to terminate after four years. As
such, he argues that under Ingerson and White, we must conclude that a
subsequent increase in his probation effectuated an illegal increase in the call
forward period for the underlying sentence of imprisonment, which may be
imposed for any violation of the terms of his probation. However, the State
5
argues that under White and pursuant to the language of the original
sentencing order, the defendant knew or should have known at the time of
sentencing that he could face probation for up to five years, and thus, under
Ingerson, his call forward period was not indefinite, but was set at a maximum
of five years. We have never addressed this issue. “Generally, when the law is
not clear at the time of trial, and remains unsettled at the time of appeal, a
decision by the trial court cannot be plain error.” State v. Emery, 152 N.H. ___,
___, 887 A.2d 123, 126 (2005). Thus, we cannot say that the trial court’s
failure to apply Ingerson and White in the manner advocated by the defendant
was plain error. Cf. id. at ___, 887 A.2d at 127.
II. Defendant’s Right to Counsel
The defendant argues that Ford’s questioning of him on December 7,
2004, regarding his drug use violated his right to counsel under the Sixth
Amendment to the Federal Constitution and Part I, Article 15 of the State
Constitution, and, as a result, evidence of his admission on that day should
have been excluded at his probation revocation hearing. “When reviewing a
trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept the trial court’s factual
findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. Our
review of the trial court’s legal conclusions, however, is de novo.” State v. Plch,
149 N.H. 608, 613 (2003) (quotation omitted).
We have recognized that a defendant has a due process right under the
State Constitution to be represented by counsel when commitment may be the
sanction for a probation violation. Stapleford, 122 N.H. at 1088; see also State
v. LeCouffe, 152 N.H. 148, 152 (2005) (adopting the Stapleford due process
protections under the State Constitution). We have not, however, defined the
scope of this right to counsel in probation revocation proceedings.
The State argues that “a defendant’s right to counsel at informal
probation revocation proceedings is significantly less expansive than the
offense-specific constitutional right to counsel enjoyed by defendants facing
criminal charges.” Citing Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 489 (1972), the
State contends that “[a] probationer who has already been afforded the full
panoply of constitutional rights at his trial is not entitled to the full scope of
those rights at his subsequent probation revocation proceeding.” However, the
State has not suggested how or to what extent we should limit the scope of the
constitutional right to counsel at such proceedings. We thus leave for another
day determination of the scope of the State constitutional right to counsel at
probation revocation proceedings.
The State contends that we need not determine the scope of the right to
counsel in probation revocation proceedings in order to render a decision in
6
this case. The State argues that even if the State constitutional right to
counsel at probation revocation proceedings is as expansive as the federal
constitutional right to counsel at criminal trials under the Sixth Amendment,
as the defendant suggests it should be, the defendant’s December 7, 2004
admission was not obtained in violation of Sixth Amendment right to counsel
principles. Given the State’s position, we assume, for purposes of this case
only, that the right to counsel at probation revocation proceedings is
coextensive with the right to counsel at criminal trials under the Sixth
Amendment. Cf. State v. Cote, 143 N.H. 368, 379 (1999).
We now turn to the question of whether the defendant’s December 7
admission was obtained in violation of his right to counsel. The defendant
contends that his right to counsel attached upon the filing of the first Violation
of Probation, on September 20, 2004, at which time he requested and received
appointed counsel to assist him. This contention is consistent with the
principle that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches “at or after the
time that adversary judicial proceedings have been initiated against a
defendant.” State v. Chaisson, 123 N.H. 17, 28 (1983). Thus, “[a]ny
government interrogation of [the defendant] after [the filing of the first violation
of probation], in the absence of counsel, would . . . be improper unless [he] had
waived his right to counsel.” State v. Scarborough, 124 N.H. 363, 368-69
(1983).
However, the defendant concedes that “the fact that a defendant has
counsel on one matter does not necessarily preclude his interrogation on all
other matters.” The United States Supreme Court has made clear that “the
Sixth Amendment right [to counsel] is ‘offense specific.’” Texas v. Cobb, 532
U.S. 162, 164 (2001). “[A] defendant’s statements regarding offenses for which
he [has] not been charged [are] admissible notwithstanding the attachment of
his Sixth Amendment right to counsel on other charged offenses.” Id. at 168.
Nevertheless, when the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches, it
encompasses offenses that, even if not formally charged, would be considered
the “same offense” in the double jeopardy context. United States v. Coker, 433
F.3d 39, 44 (1st Cir. 2005); see also Cobb, 532 U.S. at 172-73. Thus, the
relevant inquiry in this case is whether, on December 7, 2004, Ford
interrogated the defendant regarding the “same offense” to which his Sixth
Amendment right to counsel had already attached.
The defendant argues that his right to counsel was violated because the
Rule 10 violation alleged in the Supplemental Violation of Probation was
“intertwined” with the Rule 10 violations alleged in the first Violation of
Probation, in that both allegations concerned a violation of the same rule for
using the same types of drugs. The State urges us to reject the defendant’s
argument as “a vague and unworkable definition of the point at which the right
to counsel attached for the uncharged violation.” The State notes that the Rule
7
10 violation alleged in the Supplemental Violation of Probation, dealing only
with the defendant’s drug use on or around December 1, 2004, was wholly
separate from the violations alleged in the first Violation of Probation, dealing
with the defendant’s drug use prior to, and on, September 8, 2004.
In Cobb, 532 U.S. at 168, the United States Supreme Court declined to
adopt a “factually related crimes” exception to the offense-specific Sixth
Amendment right to counsel. The Court reasoned that, even where violations
of two distinct statutory provisions arise out of the same act or transaction, the
two violations may or may not be the “same offense” for double jeopardy
purposes, and thus may or may not be the “same offense” for right to counsel
purposes. Id. at 172-73. To determine whether two violations are the “same
offense,” the Court adopted the double jeopardy test announced in Blockburger
v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932), that “where the same act or
transaction constitutes a violation of two distinct statutory provisions, the test
to be applied to determine whether there are two offenses or only one, is
whether each provision requires proof of a fact which the other does not.”
Cobb, 532 U.S. at 173 (quotation omitted).
In this case, the first Violation of Probation alleged drug use or an
admission of drug use by the defendant on six specific dates: June 11, 2003,
October 14, 2003, May 18, 2004, July 13, 2004, August 24, 2004, and
September 8, 2004. The Supplemental Violation of Probation also alleged an
admission of drug use by the defendant on a specific date: December 1, 2004.
Although the alleged drug use violated the same rule of probation on each
occasion, the violations were separate and distinct and occurred on different
dates. For double jeopardy purposes, the two violations cannot be the “same
offense,” as they do not even meet the threshold requirement of the
Blockburger test that the violations arise out of the “same act or transaction.”
See Cobb, 532 U.S. at 173; Blockburger, 284 U.S. at 304. Thus, because the
two violations are not the “same offense” for double jeopardy purposes, they are
not the “same offense” for right to counsel purposes. Cf. Cobb, 532 U.S. at
172-73; Coker, 433 F.3d at 44. Therefore, even if Ford’s questioning of the
defendant constituted interrogation, it was interrogation regarding an
uncharged offense to which the right to counsel had not yet attached.
We hold that, in this case, the defendant’s right to counsel was not
violated, and his statements to Ford on December 7, 2004, were admissible at
his probation revocation proceeding. Having addressed the defendant’s claim
under the State Constitution, we must now address his claim under the
Federal Constitution. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231, 233 (1983). However,
the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than does
the State Constitution under these circumstances. Stapleford, 122 N.H. at
1088; Gagnon v. Scarpelli, 411 U.S. 778, 790 (1973). Accordingly, we reach
8
the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
For all of the reasons stated above, we vacate the defendant’s sentence
only to the extent that his term of probation exceeds five years, and remand
this case to the trial court for further orders consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
remanded for resentencing.
DALIANIS, J., concurred; BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under
RSA 490:3, concurred.
9