THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough – northern judicial district
No. 2005-002
IN THE MATTER OF
KATHLEEN QUIGLEY BERG AND EUGENE E. BERG
Argued: July 13, 2005
Opinion Issued: October 18, 2005
Harvey & Mahoney, P.A., of Manchester (J. Campbell Harvey on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (L. Jonathan Ross and Elizabeth M.
Leonard on the brief, and Ms. Leonard orally), for the respondent.
Judith A. Roman, of Concord, by brief, as guardian ad litem for the
minor children.
DUGGAN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from an order of the
Superior Court (Mangones, J.), approving the recommendation of the Marital
Master (Leonard S. Green, Esq.), denying the guardian ad litem’s (GAL) motion
to seal the therapy records of the parties’ children. We reverse and remand.
We accept the facts as presented in this interlocutory transfer and
additional facts that are undisputed by the parties. The petitioner-mother,
Kathleen Quigley Berg, and the respondent-father, Eugene E. Berg, are
divorced. Pursuant to the final divorce decree, they have joint legal custody of
their four children, whose ages range from eleven to seventeen. The mother
has primary physical custody, while the father has specific custodial time with
the children.
After entry of the final divorce decree, the children at times did not visit
the father as scheduled, because either they refused to do so or they were not
made available for visitation by the mother. The children reported to the
mother instances of alleged inappropriate conduct by the father and their
reasons for not wanting to visit. As a result, the mother arranged for individual
counseling to address each child’s resistance to visitation and his relationship
with the father. Three children remain in regular individual counseling. Each
child’s therapist has invited the parents to participate in the counseling.
The father filed a contempt motion, alleging that the mother has
interfered with his relationship with the children and has alienated them from
him. The mother filed a cross-motion to modify the visitation schedule. A GAL
was appointed to represent the children’s interests. In connection with the
contempt motion, the father requested that the children’s therapists produce
their records and notes for his inspection, arguing that he would find evidence
of the mother’s alleged interference with visitation. The children’s therapists
refused, contending that disclosure of the records is not in the best interests of
the children.
The GAL moved to seal the children’s records. The mother assented, but
the father objected. The superior court denied the motion, ruling that the legal
right of a custodial parent to access his children’s medical records overrides
the children’s privacy rights, even if the father’s assertion of his rights “might
objectively be looked upon as harmful to the children.” The GAL’s motion for
reconsideration was also denied. This interlocutory appeal followed. The
superior court transferred the following questions:
1. Do children have a right to privacy for their medical records and
communications?
2. Does the court have the authority to seal the therapy records of the
parties’ minor children when one parent demands access to the
records for purposes of litigation?
3. Should the court have the authority to seal the therapy records of
minor children when the parents are in conflict about the release and
access to such records?
The father urges us to answer all questions presented in the negative,
arguing that: (1) a parent’s fundamental right to raise his or her children is
paramount to the privacy rights minor children may have in their medical
records; (2) minor children are not protected by the therapist-client privilege or,
2
if they are, the privilege is conferred exclusively upon their parents; (3) the
mother waived her right to object to disclosure of the records when she raised
the matter of the importance of the therapists’ testimony; (4) the father’s
constitutionally protected right to confront and cross-examine adverse
witnesses compels disclosure of the records; and (5) federal regulations
regarding the privacy of individually identifiable health information prohibit
denying a parent access to his or her children’s personal health information.
We answer all three questions in the affirmative.
I. The Rights of the Parent
The trial court denied the motion to seal without specifically deciding
whether the records were protected by the therapist-client privilege. Instead,
the trial court denied the motion based solely upon the father’s constitutional
right as a parent to have access to the records. Because this issue poses a
question of constitutional law, we review it de novo. State v. McLellan, 149
N.H. 237, 240 (2003).
The father argues that his fundamental right to raise his children, as
provided by the State and Federal Constitutions, overrides any rights his
children may have in the privacy of their own therapy records. We first address
the father’s claim under the State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The right of biological parents to raise and care for their children is a
fundamental liberty interest protected by Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire
Constitution. In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545, 547 (2003).
Similarly, the United States Supreme Court has recognized that “the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects the fundamental right of
parents to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their
children.” Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 66 (2000) (plurality opinion).
The State, however, does have “a competing interest in the welfare of
children within its jurisdiction, and may, as parens patriae, intervene in the
family milieu if a child’s welfare is at stake.” Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36,
40 (1990). “[P]arental rights are not absolute, but are subordinate to the
State’s parens patriae power, and must yield to the welfare of the child.” Id.
Particularly in the context of divorce and custody litigation, the superior court
often must weigh the rights of parents against the best interests of the
children. See RSA 458:17, II, V, VI (2004), repealed and replaced by RSA 461-
A:6 (Supp. 2005). Thus, the superior court has the authority to determine
whether it is in the best interests of a child involved in a custody dispute to
have confidential and privileged therapy records revealed to his or her parents.
3
Accordingly, we reject the father’s argument that the child’s privacy interests
automatically yield to a parent’s right to raise and care for his or her children.
The Federal Constitution offers the father no greater protection than does
the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Preston, 133 N.H. at
40; Parham v. J. R., 442 U.S. 584, 602-04 (1979). Accordingly, we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
II. The Rights of the Children
The father argues that minor children are not protected by the therapist-
client privilege, as codified in RSA 330-A:32 (2004), because the statute does
not expressly confer the privilege upon them. “In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole.” State v. Kidder, 150 N.H. 600,
602 (2004). We construe the statute’s language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. Remington Invs. v. Howard, 150 N.H. 653, 654 (2004).
RSA 330-A:32 provides, in pertinent part: “The confidential relations and
communications between any [licensed mental health practitioner] and such
licensee’s client are placed on the same basis as those provided by law between
attorney and client . . . .” “Client” is defined as “a person who seeks or obtains
psychotherapy.” RSA 330-A:2, III (2004). The statute does not define the term
“person.” See RSA 330-A:2. However, the plain meaning of “person” does not
exclude minors. See Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1686
(unabridged ed. 2002). We also note that the statute does not use the word
“adult.” See RSA 330-A:2, :32. “Adult” is defined in RSA 21:44 (2000) as
“those persons who have attained the age of 18 years.” We therefore reject the
father’s argument that, on its face, the statute excludes minors from its
protection.
The father next argues that, absent language expressly conferring the
therapist-client privilege upon minor children, we must conclude that the
privilege is conferred exclusively upon the minor child’s parents based upon
their status as natural guardians, and thus only a parent may assert or waive
the privilege on the child’s behalf.
The statute does not identify who may claim the privilege on behalf of the
client. See RSA 330-A:32. However, the statute places the therapist-client
privilege upon the same basis as the lawyer-client privilege. Id.; see also N.H.
R. Ev. 503(b). New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 502, which governs the
lawyer-client privilege, specifically identifies who may claim the privilege. Rule
502(c) states that the lawyer-client privilege may be claimed on behalf of the
4
client by, among others, the client himself, the client’s guardian or conservator,
or the client’s lawyer. Similarly, we conclude that the therapist-client privilege
may be claimed by, among others, the client, the client’s guardian or the
client’s therapist.
We agree that a natural parent or parent who has legal custody of a child
would qualify as the child’s guardian, and thus could claim or waive the
privilege on behalf of the child. However, the father’s argument that the
parents have the exclusive right to assert or waive the privilege assumes that a
parent will act solely with the child’s best interests in mind. Unfortunately,
this assumption may not always be warranted in the context of divorce and
custody proceedings.
Society expects that a mother and father are the ones most likely
to be concerned with the best interests and well-being of their child
and, under normal circumstances, this is true. However, when
custody of the child becomes the subject of a bitter contest
between mother and father, the personal interests of the
contestants in almost all cases obliterate that which is in the best
interests of the child. It is at this point that it can be said the
interests of both parents become potentially, if not actually,
adverse to the child’s interests.
Bond v. Bond, 887 S.W.2d 558, 560 (Ky. Ct. App. 1994). In the context of a
custody dispute, “it is patent that [a] custodial parent has a conflict of interest
in acting on behalf of the child in asserting or waiving the privilege of
nondisclosure.” Nagle v. Hooks, 460 A.2d 49, 51 (Md. 1983); see also Attorney
ad Litem v. Parents of D.K., 780 So. 2d 301, 306 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2001).
Where, as here, a parent is waiving or claiming the privilege on behalf of his or
her child in the context of a child custody dispute, there is a distinct possibility
that one, or even both, of the parents will exercise the power to waive or assert
the child’s privilege “for reasons unconnected to the polestar rule of ‘the best
interests of the child.’” Nagle, 460 A.2d at 51. “Where the privilege is claimed
on behalf of the parent rather than that of the child, or where the welfare and
interest of the minor will not be protected, a parent should not be permitted to
either claim the privilege or, for that matter, to waive it.” In re M.P.S., 342
S.W.2d 277, 283 (Mo. Ct. App. 1961) (citation omitted), quoted in State ex rel.
Wilfong v. Schaeperkoetter, 933 S.W.2d 407, 409 (Mo. 1996).
We recognize the tension in these cases between the rights and
responsibilities of parents and the rights of children. Parents are often involved
in nearly every aspect of their children’s lives. However, there are situations in
which the parents are the source of a child’s distress, particularly in the
divorce and custody context. Allowing parents unfettered access to their
children’s therapy records under all circumstances “may inhibit the child from
5
seeking or succeeding in treatment,” Parents of D.K., 780 So. 2d at 310, or,
even worse, result in “substantial emotional harm to the child from a forced
disclosure,” In re Daniel C.H., 269 Cal. Rptr. 624, 631 (Ct. App. 1990).
Furthermore, denying a minor the opportunity to at least object to the
involuntary disclosure of his or her therapy records in the context of a child
custody dispute “can only have a negative effect on the minor’s relationship
with . . . the therapist . . . and would often taint the minor’s perception of the
fairness of the legal process.” S.C. v. Guardian ad Litem, 845 So. 2d 953, 960
(Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2003).
Although New Hampshire’s therapist-client privilege statute is modeled
on the attorney-client privilege, there are separate and distinct policy
considerations underpinning the therapist-client privilege. The New Jersey
Supreme Court highlighted these differences in analyzing its own psychologist-
patient privilege statute, also modeled on the attorney-client privilege.
[T]he public policy behind the psychologist-patient privilege is in
some respects even more compelling. . . . The psychologist-patient
privilege . . . serves to protect an individual’s privacy interest in
communications that will frequently be even more personal,
potentially embarrassing, and more often readily misconstrued
than those between attorney and client. Made public and taken
out of context, the disclosure of notes from therapy sessions could
have devastating personal consequences for the patient and his or
her family . . . . Especially in the context of matrimonial litigation,
the value of the therapist-patient relationship and of the patient’s
privacy is intertwined with one of the most important concerns of
the courts – the safety and well-being of the children and families.
Kinsella v. Kinsella, 696 A.2d 556, 584 (N.J. 1997).
Indeed, the public policy behind the therapist-client privilege may be
even more compelling than that behind the usual physician-patient privilege.
Treatment by a physician for physical ailments can often proceed
successfully on the basis of a physical examination, objective
information supplied by the patient, and the results of diagnostic
tests. Effective psychotherapy, by contrast, depends upon an
atmosphere of confidence and trust in which the patient is willing
to make a frank and complete disclosure of facts, emotions,
memories, and fears.
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1, 10 (1996). “Many physical ailments might be
treated with some degree of effectiveness by a doctor whom the patient did not
trust, but a psychiatrist must have his patient’s confidence or he cannot help
6
him.” In re Brenda H., 119 N.H. 382, 386 (1979) (quotation omitted),
superseded on other grounds as recognized by In re Tracy M., 137 N.H. 119,
123-24 (1993).
By fostering productive relationships between therapists and their
clients, the therapist-client privilege “[advances] the public good accomplished
when individuals are able to seek effective mental health counseling and
treatment.” Kinsella, 696 A.2d at 566. There is a serious risk that permitting
parents unconditional access to the therapy records of their children would
have a chilling effect on the therapist-client relationship, thus denying the
children access to productive and effective therapeutic treatment. “[T]he mere
possibility of disclosure may impede development of the confidential
relationship necessary for successful treatment. . . . [It is] difficult if not
impossible for [a psychotherapist] to function without being able to assure . . .
patients of confidentiality and, indeed, privileged communication.” Jaffee, 518
U.S. at 10 (quotation omitted).
The weight of authority in other jurisdictions supports protection for the
therapy records of children who are at the center of a custody dispute or whose
interests may be in conflict with those of their natural guardians. See, e.g.,
Attorney ad Litem v. Parents of D.K., 780 So. 2d 301 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2001)
(seventeen-year-old child could assert privilege over her parents’ joint waiver in
child custody dispute); Bond v. Bond, 887 S.W.2d 558, 560-61 (Ky. Ct. App.
1994) (in child custody dispute, neither parent may assert the privilege on the
child’s behalf, and the court may interview the therapist or appoint a guardian
ad litem for the sole purpose of recommending whether and to what extent the
privilege should be waived); Nagle v. Hooks, 460 A.2d 49 (Md. 1983) (parents
involved in a custody dispute cannot agree or refuse to waive the privilege on a
minor child’s behalf, and the court must appoint a guardian to act, guided by
the best interests of the child); cf. In re Daniel C.H., 269 Cal. Rptr. 624, 629-33
(Ct. App. 1990) (in dependency proceeding, where parent was accused of
molesting his minor child, policy considerations regarding parental conflict of
interest and potential harm to the child as a result of disclosure prevented
parent from waiving the privilege on behalf of the minor child); S.C. v.
Guardian ad Litem, 845 So. 2d 953, 956-60 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2003) (in
dependency proceeding, minor child could assert the privilege against guardian
ad litem); In re Adoption of Diane, 508 N.E.2d 837, 840 (Mass. 1987) (in
adoption proceeding, where the parent and child had potentially conflicting
interests and there was uncertainty concerning the parent’s ability to further
the child’s best interests, parent was not allowed to exercise the privilege on
the child’s behalf, although a neutral guardian could assert or waive it); In re
M.P.S., 342 S.W.2d 277, 283 (Mo. Ct. App. 1961) (in neglect proceeding,
accused parent could not claim child’s physician-patient privilege to prevent
child’s doctor from testifying regarding child’s injuries).
7
We conclude that parents do not have the exclusive right to assert or
waive the privilege on their child’s behalf. The trial court has the authority and
discretion to determine whether assertion or waiver of the privilege is in the
child’s best interests. We refrain from establishing a detailed procedure
through which the privilege should be waived or asserted, and instead leave
that determination to the sound discretion of the trial court. However, when a
privilege issue arises, the trial court must engage in fact-finding to determine
whether waiver or assertion of the privilege is in the best interests of the child,
with particular emphasis on preservation of the child’s ability to engage in open
and productive therapeutic treatment. The attempted assertion or waiver of
the child’s privilege by anyone, including the child, the child’s parent or
guardian, the child’s guardian ad litem, or the child’s therapist, will not be
determinative.
The trial court may, within its sound discretion, find that a child is of
sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment about the assertion or waiver of
his therapist-client privilege. See Attorney ad Litem v. Parents of D.K., 780 So.
2d 301, 308 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2001); cf. Butterick v. Butterick, 127 N.H. 731,
735 (1986) (regarding maturity of a minor to make a sound judgment about his
proper custody). Age alone is not determinative of this ability. Cf. Butterick,
127 N.H. at 735. In finding that the child is sufficiently mature to make a
sound judgment, the trial judge must consider the following factors: (1) the
child’s age, intelligence, and maturity; (2) the intensity with which the child
advances his preference; and (3) whether the preference is based upon
undesirable or improper influences. Cf. id. at 734-35. Based on this finding,
the judge may then give substantial weight to the preference of the mature
minor to either waive or assert his privilege. Cf. id. at 735.
This is consistent with the legislative recognition that there are
circumstances in which a minor may make decisions without the involvement
of his or her parents. See, e.g., RSA 318-B:12-a (2004) (authorizing any minor
twelve years of age or older to enter drug rehabilitation without the consent of a
parent). “[M]inors do have rights which they can assert themselves in their
own best interest” without the involvement of their parents. Parents of D.K.,
780 So. 2d at 305. Even if the parents and the guardian ad litem agree that
the child’s privilege should be waived, the child has a separate interest that the
court must consider, and if the minor is mature enough to assert the privilege
personally, that assertion may be given substantial weight. Cf. Butterick, 127
N.H. at 735.
The trial court may also, within its sound discretion, appoint a guardian
ad litem, regardless of the child’s maturity, for the purpose of determining
whether the privilege should be asserted. To that end, the court may rely upon
the existing guardian ad litem, or appoint an independent guardian ad litem to
address only the privilege issue.
8
In the case at hand, the GAL has asserted the children’s therapist-client
privilege on their behalf. The GAL has done so without having had access to
the actual records. We recognize that in some cases, a guardian ad litem may
be unable to make an informed decision regarding assertion or waiver of the
therapist-client privilege without viewing the child’s therapy records. In such a
case, it is within the trial court’s discretion to grant a guardian ad litem access
to the records solely for the purpose of determining whether waiver or assertion
of the therapist-client privilege is in the best interests of the child. It is also
within the discretion of the trial court to conduct an ex parte, in camera review
of the records for the same purpose.
The father argues that, if the GAL obtains access to the children’s
therapy records for any reason, those records would then be open to discovery
by both parties pursuant to Ross v. Gadwah, 131 N.H. 391 (1988). However,
our decision in Ross was limited to the guardian ad litem’s role in custody
determinations and the parent’s right to confront the guardian ad litem
regarding the basis for his or her custodial recommendations. To the extent
that a guardian ad litem may assist the court solely regarding the waiver or
assertion of a child’s therapist-client privilege, as opposed to broader questions
of custody and visitation, Ross is inapplicable. If the trial court is concerned
that viewing the therapy records may taint a previously-appointed guardian ad
litem’s ultimate recommendation regarding custody or visitation, it may choose
to appoint an independent guardian ad litem solely for the purpose of
representing the child’s best interests with regard to the therapist-client
privilege. See RSA 461-A:16 (Supp. 2005); RSA 464-A:41 (Supp. 2005).
III. Waiver
The father argues that the mother waived her right to object to disclosure
of the records because she initially raised the importance of the testimony of
the children’s therapists in her motion for modification. As explained above,
neither parent is in a position to assert or waive the children’s right to
confidentiality of their records. Therefore, even if the mother has waived her
own right, as a litigant, to object to disclosure, she has not effected a waiver of
the GAL’s right to object on behalf of the children.
IV. Right of Confrontation
The father argues that he has a constitutionally protected right to
confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses in the pending proceedings,
specifically the therapists and the GAL. However, unless and until any of the
therapists testifies in this case or the GAL obtains access to the records at
9
issue and relies upon them in making recommendations regarding custody and
visitation, the issue of confrontation and cross-examination is not ripe for
review. See Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Fischer), 152 N.H. 205, ___, 876
A.2d 232, 237 (2005).
V. The HIPAA Privacy Rules
The United States Department of Health and Human Services has
promulgated rules regarding the privacy of individually identifiable health
information, pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996). 45 C.F.R.
§§ 164.500-.534 (HIPAA Privacy Rules). The father argues in his brief that
section 164.502(g) of the HIPAA Privacy Rules prohibits denying a parent
access to his children’s personal health information. We disagree.
Section 164.502(a)(2) of the HIPAA Privacy Rules requires a health care
provider to disclose protected health information to the health care recipient at
the health care recipient’s request. In certain circumstances, the health care
provider is also required to disclose such information to the personal
representative of the health care recipient at the personal representative’s
request. See id. § 164.502(g)(1) (requiring the health care provider to treat the
personal representative of a health care recipient as the recipient for the
purpose of obtaining information and records).
For an unemancipated minor, a parent, among others, must be treated
as the minor’s personal representative, so long as the parent, under applicable
law, has the authority to act on behalf of the minor in making decisions related
to health care. Id. § 164.502(g)(3)(i). However, the health care provider may
not disclose or provide access to protected health information about an
unemancipated minor to a parent if doing so is “prohibited by an applicable
provision of State or other law, including applicable case law.” Id.
§ 164.502(g)(3)(ii)(B). In the context of this case, the therapist-client privilege
statute prohibits the father from obtaining access to his children’s therapy
records absent court order.
Furthermore, section 164.502(g) permits the health care provider to
withhold information from a parent, even where the disclosure of such
information is not prohibited by state law, if the health care provider, “in the
exercise of professional judgment, decides that it is not in the best interest of
the [health care recipient] to treat the [parent] as the [health care recipient’s]
personal representative.” Id. § 164.502(g)(5)(ii). Therefore, section 164.502(g)
of the HIPAA Privacy Rules does not create an absolute right in the father to
access his children’s therapy records.
10
VI. Need for Disclosure
The father argues that even if we hold that the children’s therapy records
are not discoverable, we must articulate a standard to protect his
constitutional interests. However, the trial court made no findings on this
point and it was not one of the questions transferred from the trial court in the
interlocutory appeal. Therefore, we do not address it.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and NADEAU, DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
11