THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-634
IN THE MATTER OF JENNIFER SARVELA AND BRIAN D. SARVELA
Argued: September 13, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 29, 2006
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Jennifer Sarvela, appeals and the
respondent, Brian D. Sarvela, cross-appeals the final decree entered by the
Superior Court (Abramson, J.) in the parties’ divorce. The petitioner challenges
the trial court’s equitable distribution of the parties’ assets and its failure to
award her a fault-based divorce. The respondent also contests the trial court’s
equitable distribution of assets and disputes the court’s calculation of his child
support obligation. We affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
The following facts either appear in the record or are undisputed on
appeal. The parties married in August 1998 and have two children.
Approximately five years after they married, the petitioner filed for divorce,
alleging the fault ground of habitual drunkenness because of the respondent’s
abuse of prescription drugs. See RSA 458:7, VII (2004). Following a two-day
hearing, the trial court denied the petitioner’s request for a fault-based divorce,
and granted the parties a divorce on the grounds of irreconcilable differences
leading to the irremediable breakdown of the marriage. RSA 458:7-a (2004).
The trial court determined that a nearly equal distribution of assets was
equitable. Although the court awarded the marital home to the petitioner, it
required her to pay the respondent fifty percent of the equity in the home, less
$10,000, which the court found she invested in the home from her own funds
before the marriage. The court ordered that the respondent’s share of equity in
the marital home be placed in an escrow account to secure child support
payments. In addition, the court issued a uniform support order. Based upon
its finding that the respondent was voluntarily underemployed, the court
imputed income of $72,449 per year to him to calculate his child support
obligation.
In her appeal, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred when it: (1)
failed to award her a fault-based divorce based upon the respondent’s
prescription drug abuse during the marriage; and (2) awarded the parties a
near equal distribution of the marital assets when the marriage lasted only five
years and was thus, in the words of the court, “short term.” In his cross-
appeal, the respondent contends that the trial court erroneously: (1) found
that he was voluntarily underemployed; (2) imputed income to him based upon
what he earned in 2003, two years before the divorce hearing; (3) ordered him
to place his share of the proceeds from the sale of the marital home in an
escrow account absent evidence of egregious nonpayment of child support; and
(4) did not award him a “[m]ore [e]ven [h]alf” of the marital estate. We first
address the petitioner’s appeal.
I. Petitioner’s Appeal
A. Fault-Based Divorce
The trial court ruled that the petitioner was not entitled to a divorce
based upon the fault ground of habitual drunkenness because: (1) the term
“habitual drunkenness” means “habitual excessive use of alcohol”; and (2)
there was insufficient evidence that the respondent’s use of alcohol led to the
breakdown of the marriage. See RSA 458:7, VII. The court rejected the
petitioner’s assertion that the respondent’s abuse of prescription drugs
constituted habitual drunkenness.
The petitioner argues that the trial court erred by limiting the term
“habitual drunkenness” to intoxication by alcohol. She asserts that the plain
language of RSA 458:7, VII refers to “an habitual drunkard,” and that a
drunkard is one who is “intoxicated.” She contends that the respondent
2
became “intoxicated” when he ingested prescription drugs and, therefore, he
was “an habitual drunkard” under the statute.
Resolving this issue requires that we interpret RSA 458:7, VII, which
permits a party to obtain a fault-based divorce “[w]hen either party is an
habitual drunkard, and has been such for 2 years together.” The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). We are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as
a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. When the
language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to
modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will
neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did
not see fit to include. Id.
The plain meaning of “drunkard” is “one who habitually becomes
drunk[;] one suffering from or subject to acute or chronic alcoholism.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 696 (unabridged ed. 2002). To be
“drunk” is to be “in a condition caused by alcoholic drink in which control of
the faculties is impaired and inhibitions are broken and in later stages of which
one tends toward or reaches insensibility.” Id. These definitions do not
encompass one who habitually abuses or is impaired because of prescription
drugs.
“We also note that a law means what it meant to its framers and its mere
repassage does not alter that meaning.” In the Matter of Blanchflower &
Blanchflower, 150 N.H. 226, 227 (2003) (quotation and brackets omitted). The
provision now codified as RSA 458:7 first appeared in the Revised Statutes of
1842. Id. at 227-28; see RS 148:3 (1842). The statute did not define the word
“drunkard”; however, a dictionary from that time defined the word “drunkard”
as “[o]ne addicted to drunkenness” and the word “drunken” as “[i]ntoxicated
with liquor.” J. Worcester, A Universal and Critical Dictionary of the English
Language 227 (1846). Based upon the foregoing, we conclude that the phrase
“habitual drunkard” does not refer to one who habitually abuses prescription
drugs.
B. Equitable Division of Assets
In dividing the parties’ assets, the court enforced their partial permanent
stipulation with respect to motor vehicles, health insurance, life insurance,
charges against the estate and allocation of debt. The court awarded the
parties the personal property in their possession. The court awarded the
marital residence to the petitioner, but required her to pay the respondent fifty
percent of the equity in the home, less $10,000. The court ordered the
3
petitioner to refinance the house within one year of the decree to remove the
respondent from the note and mortgage. Additionally, the court ordered that
the proceeds from the sale of the parties’ Vermont home be divided equally.
The petitioner asserts that because the parties had a short-term
marriage, and because she brought more assets into the marriage than did the
respondent, she was entitled to a greater share of the parties’ assets upon
divorce. She contends that, in a short-term marriage, the trial court was, in
effect, required to return the parties to their premarital financial positions. She
argues that the only circumstances under which a trial court may not return
the parties in a short-term marriage to the financial positions they held before
marriage “is when the party without the premarital assets leaves the . . .
marriage with physical custodial responsibilities.” We disagree.
“RSA 458:16-a, II creates a presumption that equal distribution of
marital property is equitable.” In the Matter of Watterworth & Watterworth,
149 N.H. 442, 453 (2003) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). Absent special
circumstances, the court must make the distribution as equal as possible. Id.
“The statute enumerates various factors for the court to consider, such as the
length of the marriage, the ability of the parties to provide for their own needs,
the needs of the custodial parent, the contribution of each party during the
marriage and the value of property contributed by each party.” In the Matter of
Crowe & Crowe, 148 N.H. 218, 221 (2002); see RSA 458:16-a, II (2004).
Additionally, the court may consider any other factor it deems relevant in
equitably distributing the parties’ assets. RSA 458:16-a, II(o).
The petitioner misinterprets the pertinent case law. In Rahn v. Rahn,
123 N.H. 222, 225 (1983), we observed: “A marriage of only one or two years
may be considered differently than a long-term marriage of ten, twenty, or
thirty years. In a short-term marriage, it is easier to give back property
brought to the marriage and still leave the parties in no worse position than
they were in prior to it.” This language does not require trial courts to return
the parties in a short-term marriage to their premarital financial positions. Nor
does our decision in Crowe, 148 N.H. at 222, require trial courts to award more
assets to the party who came into a short-term marriage with fewer assets
because that party has primary child care responsibilities.
The trial court’s statutory obligation is to apportion the property
equitably. “In a divorce proceeding, marital property is not to be divided by
some mechanical formula but in a manner deemed ‘just’ based upon the
evidence presented and the equities of the case.” In the Matter of Letendre &
Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 35 (2002). The duration of a marriage is but one of the
factors for a court to consider when equitably dividing the parties’ property.
See Crowe, 148 N.H. at 221. Under the statute, the court must “presume that
an equal division is an equitable division of property, unless . . . [it] decides
4
that an equal distribution of property would not be appropriate or equitable
after considering one or more of the following factors.” RSA 458:16-a, II
(emphasis added). The court need not consider all of the enumerated factors or
give them equal weight. Watterworth, 149 N.H. at 453.
Contrary to the petitioner’s implied assertion, RSA 458:16-a, I (2004)
makes no distinction between property brought to the marriage by the parties
and that acquired during marriage, and does not exclude property given to one
spouse during the course of the marriage. In the Matter of Harvey & Harvey,
153 N.H. 425, 438 (2006). Regardless of the source, all property owned by
each spouse at the time of divorce is to be included in the marital estate. Id.
While the court has discretion to consider when and by whom property was
acquired in determining its distribution, the relevant statutory scheme “does
not classify property based upon when or by whom it was acquired, but rather
assumes that all property is susceptible to division.” Crowe, 148 N.H. at 221.
The petitioner also contends that the trial court should have given her
“credit” for contributing $91,024 from her own or her family’s assets to the
marital estate. The record does not support this contention. Among other
things, contrary to the petitioner’s assertions, the court found that her family
gave each party $20,000, and gave an additional $18,000 to the parties jointly,
not to her alone. The record supports these findings. Further, although the
trial court did not find this specifically, the petitioner testified that while she
liquidated some of her Exxon stock to fund the construction of the marital
home, the remaining stock increased in value during the marriage from $5,000
to $25,000. The petitioner also testified that she received the settlement of her
sexual harassment suit after the parties were married, not before.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court failed to consider the
statutory factors in dividing the parties’ assets. To the contrary, the record
demonstrates that the court considered: (1) the duration of the marriage; (2)
the employability of the parties; (3) the ability of the petitioner, as the custodial
parent, to engage in gainful employment without substantially interfering with
the interests of the parties’ children; (4) the need of the custodial parent to
occupy the marital home; (5) the expectation of pension or retirement rights
acquired prior to or during the marriage; (6) the value of any property acquired
before the marriage; and (7) the value of any property acquired by gift. See
RSA 458:16-a, II(a), (b), (d), (e), (i) (m), (n). In considering these factors, the
court found that it was equitable to divide the marital estate relatively equally.
As the record shows that the trial court considered the relevant statutory
factors and as it supports the court’s factual findings based upon these factors,
we cannot say that the court’s near equal division of assets was so inequitable
as to constitute an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Watterworth, 149
N.H. at 453.
5
The petitioner next asserts that the trial court failed to explain the basis
for its “nearly equal division” of property. As she correctly observes, RSA
458:16-a, IV (2004) requires the trial court to “specify written reasons for the
division of property which it orders.” We hold that the trial court complied with
this requirement.
In Magrauth v. Magrauth, 136 N.H. 757, 763 (1993), we explained that
“if the superior court determines that an equal division is equitable, and the
parties have not requested findings and rulings . . ., it need only state that,
after considering the relevant factors enumerated in RSA 458:16-a, II, it has
decided to make an equal division which is presumptively equitable under the
statute.” Where, as here, the parties have made specific requests for findings
and rulings, “the court should state its reasons and make specific findings and
rulings supporting its decision, regardless of whether it decides to make an
equal or unequal distribution of the property.” Magrauth, 136 N.H. at 763.
The trial court need not “specify written reasons using the factors listed in the
statute,” however, unless it “concludes that an unequal distribution of property
is warranted.” Id.
In this case, as the petitioner observes, the trial court chose to divide the
parties’ property “equally, with the exception of a $10,000.00 credit for [her]
premarital assets.” As the court stated, “absent special circumstances,” its
obligation was to “make property distribution as equal as it can.” In addition,
the court ruled upon the parties’ specific requests for findings and rulings. By
statute, the court’s near equal division of property was presumptively
equitable. See RSA 458:16-a, II. The court thus complied with its statutory
obligation to specify written reasons for the distribution it ordered. See RSA
458:16-a, IV; see also Magrauth, 136 N.H. at 763.
Moreover, to the extent that the trial court’s division of property may
have been unequal because the court awarded the petitioner an additional
$10,000 in the equity of the marital home, we hold that the court complied
with its statutory obligation to specify its reasons for doing this. See RSA
458:16-a, IV. The court found that, before the parties married, the petitioner
invested $10,000 of her own funds in the marital home. Citing RSA 458:16-a,
II(o), the court deemed it equitable to return this money to the petitioner.
II. Respondent’s Cross-Appeal
A. Equitable Division of Assets
The respondent first argues that the trial court erred when it found that
he “agreed to waive his claim to [the] petitioner’s stock in return for her
agreement not to pursue his Rock 101 401(k) account.” The respondent
6
contends that this finding is based upon “no evidence.” The trial transcript
refutes this assertion.
At trial, the petitioner offered to play a tape of a discussion between the
parties in which she agreed “to sign off on a 401K that [the respondent] has
and he said Jennifer, I will relinquish my rights, any rights I may have to your
stock and your 401k.” The petitioner asserted that because of the respondent’s
offer to “sign off on her stock[,] she signed off on Valentine’s Day of 2005 on his
401k.” The trial court ruled that it would accept these assertions unless the
respondent disputed them. If the respondent disputed them, the court would
allow the tape to be played in rebuttal. The respondent told the court that it
was unnecessary to play the tape. To the extent that the respondent now
disputes the petitioner’s version of the parties’ conversation, he has failed to
demonstrate that he preserved this argument for our review. See Bean v. Red
Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
The respondent next asserts that the trial court erred when it awarded
each party the personal effects in their possession. He contends, “While that
might sound fair, [the respondent] had virtually no personal[ ]ty in his
possession . . . . [He] was reduced to not even having pots and pans.” The
petitioner testified, however, that the respondent took approximately $60,000
worth of personal property from the marital home after she filed for divorce.
Having found the respondent to be one of the “least credible witnesses” the trial
court had ever encountered, the court was entitled to disregard his testimony
on this subject. See Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (court defers to
trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in testimony,
measuring credibility of witnesses, and determining weight to be given
evidence).
B. Child Support Calculation
1. Voluntary Underemployment
The respondent contends that the trial court erred when it imputed
income to him for child support purposes after finding that he was voluntarily
underemployed. The trial court found that the respondent was voluntarily
underemployed because: (1) he was “fired from a series of well-paying jobs as a
result of his drug abuse”; and (2) “he walked away from employment
compensating him at the rate of $52,000 a year.” See RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)
(2004). The respondent first argues that the evidence does not support these
findings. We disagree.
In addition to the petitioner’s testimony that the respondent was fired
from radio station WLNH, the record demonstrates that the respondent was
also fired from radio station WKXL in April 2004, after the station received
7
complaints that he was obviously drunk or medicated at client meetings. One
complainant told the station that the respondent “was nodding off during his
sales call [and] was drooling.” The record further showed that the respondent
was fired from radio station WNNH in January 2004 because of his “pattern of
poor service, dishonesty, and losing clients for the station” due to prescription
drug abuse. This evidence supports the trial court’s finding that the
respondent was fired from several jobs because of his prescription drug abuse.
There was evidence in the record as well to support the trial court’s
finding that the respondent “walked away” from employment for which he
received an annual salary of $52,000. The respondent testified that before his
current employment, he worked for two radio stations, WNEX in Rochester and
another station in Nashua. When he worked for these stations, he earned
approximately $1,000 per week. He testified that he left these positions in
October, “when I came back from Vermont and I lost everything I ever dreamed
of and just didn’t go back to work, I didn’t even feel like it was worth it at the
time.” He also testified that he did not resume working in the radio industry
until the end of January 2005. Based upon this testimony, the trial court
reasonably could have found that the respondent “walked away” from the
Rochester and Nashua radio positions.
The respondent next asserts that because he did not intend to lose his
jobs, his alleged underemployment was not “voluntary.” RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)
authorizes “[t]he court, in its discretion, [to] consider as gross income the
difference between the amount a parent is earning and the amount a parent
has earned in cases where the parent voluntarily becomes unemployed or
underemployed, unless the parent is physically or mentally incapacitated.” We
have held that this statute “permit[s], rather than require[s] a court to impute
income based upon a voluntarily unemployed or underemployed parent’s prior
earnings.” In the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 355-56 (2006).
“Whether a party is underemployed is a question for the fact finder, whose
decision will not be disturbed on appeal if supported by evidence in the record.”
In the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55, 58-59 (2005).
In finding that the respondent was voluntarily underemployed and in
imputing income to him based upon this finding, the trial court relied upon our
decision in Noddin v. Noddin, 123 N.H. 73 (1983). In that case, we held that,
in the context of a post-divorce request for modification of an existing child
support order, the child support obligation should not be reduced where the
obligor’s wrongdoing resulted in the loss of high-earning employment and the
obligor owned an asset that could be applied to meet his or her obligations.
Noddin, 123 N.H. at 76. In In the Matter of Rossino & Rossino, 153 N.H. 367,
370 (2006), we recently clarified that RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) supersedes our
decision in Noddin.
8
In Rossino, the obligor moved to modify his child support obligation after
his annual income was reduced because he involuntarily resigned from his
employment with the Hudson Police Department and, thereafter, while working
as an electrician’s apprentice, was electrocuted. Rossino, 153 N.H. at 368-69.
Applying Noddin, the trial court attributed the higher earnings from the
Hudson Police Department to the obligor. Id. at 369. Specifically the court
found that “it was a result of [the obligor’s] own inappropriate conduct and
voluntary actions that brought about his loss of employment with the Hudson
Police Department.” Id. We held that the court erred when it ruled that
Noddin applied and imputed the obligor’s higher earnings as a police officer to
him without first determining whether the obligor was physically or mentally
incapacitated. Id. at 370-71. We noted that were we to conclude that Noddin
survived the enactment of RSA 458-C:2, IV(a), we “would circumvent the stated
purpose of RSA chapter 458-C to establish uniformity in child support
determinations and modifications.” Id. at 370.
In this case, to the extent that the trial court found the respondent to be
voluntarily underemployed because he lost his job(s) due to his own
wrongdoing, we hold that it erred as a matter of law. RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)
permits a trial court to impute income to a parent who “voluntarily” becomes
unemployed or underemployed. A parent who is involuntarily terminated from
his or her employment, or, as in the case of the obligor in Rossino, 153 N.H. at
368, involuntarily resigns from that employment, did not “voluntarily” become
unemployed or underemployed. Our task is to interpret legislative intent from
the statute as written. Donovan, 152 N.H. at 58. We will not consider what
the legislature might have said or add words that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. Accordingly, we will not graft Noddin onto the statutory scheme
as written. We leave to the legislature to decide whether to revive Noddin by
amending RSA 458-C:2, IV(a).
We therefore vacate the trial court’s finding that the respondent was
voluntarily underemployed and its decision to impute income to him, to the
extent that the court did so because it found that he was fired from several
jobs. We remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion and with
our decision in Rossino.
2. Escrow Account
Finally, the respondent argues that the court erred when it ordered that
his share of the proceeds of the marital home be held in escrow until he “is
compensated at the level of his previous employment and is able to pay [the]
petitioner the amount of child support he owes under the Guidelines.” See
RSA 458:21 (2004). While the respondent concedes that “[t]rial courts clearly
have the authority to provide for security for the payment of child support,” he
asserts that such security “is restricted to those cases where there has been
9
egregious non-payment, or misleading reporting of substantial amounts of
income.” (Citations omitted.) He contends, “[T]here is no basis for the escrow
the court required here.”
RSA 458:21 authorizes the trial court, in its discretion, to require
security for payment of child support “[i]n all cases where alimony or an
allowance shall be decreed for a spouse or children.” See In the Matter of
Feddersen & Cannon, 149 N.H. 194, 200-01 (2003). Although the respondent
argues that the court may exercise its discretion in this regard only “where
there has been egregious non-payment, or misleading reporting of substantial
amounts of income,” RSA 458:21 contains no such limitation. Id. at 201.
In this case, the trial court required the escrow after finding that the
respondent had “presented no persuasive evidence that he is not still abusing
prescription drugs. . . . As such, given the history of the case, and [his]
demeanor and attitude at trial, the Court is not persuaded he will pay as
ordered.” In light of this finding, we cannot conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by ordering that the respondent’s share
of the proceeds of the marital home be held in escrow to secure child support
payments.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
10