THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-751
TERRY T. THOMAS
v.
TELEGRAPH PUBLISHING CO. & a.
Submitted: January 11, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 1, 2007
Terry T. Thomas, by brief, pro se.
Gagliuso & Gagliuso, P.A., of Merrimack (Richard C. Gagliuso and Corey
N. Giroux by brief), for defendants Telegraph Publishing Company, Terence L.
Williams and Joshua Trudell.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Brian J.S. Cullen by
brief), for defendants Town of Hudson and Michael Gosselin.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (John A. Curran
and Elizabeth L. Hurley by brief), for defendants Roland Anderson, Albert
Droney and Gene Bousquet.
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (Christopher D.
Hawkins by brief), for defendant Edith Flynn.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Terry T. Thomas, appeals, and the
defendants, Telegraph Publishing Company (Telegraph), Terrence L. Williams,
Joshua Trudell, Town of Hudson (Town), Michael Gosselin, Roland Anderson,
Albert Droney, Gene Bousquet, and Edith Flynn, cross-appeal an order of the
Trial Court (Groff, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendants.
We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part and remand.
I. Background
This case was the subject of a previous opinion of this court. See
Thomas v. Telegraph Publ’g Co., 151 N.H. 435, 436 (2004). In December 2002,
the plaintiff filed a civil action alleging defamation against the defendants
based upon the publication of an article in the Nashua Telegraph on December
22, 1999. Id. It was entitled, “Police Say Burglar’s Luck Has Run Out After 25
Years.” The lengthy article states that Thomas “is now being held in the
Hillsborough County House of Corrections on $25,000 bail while facing charges
of receiving stolen property in Hudson.” The article also contains statements
about the plaintiff’s past criminal behavior and indicates that he “is suspected
in more than 1,000 home burglaries in Massachusetts and New Hampshire
since the mid-1970’s, according to police and court records.” The article, in its
entirety, is in an appendix to this opinion, as are the fifty-eight statements that
the plaintiff challenges as defamatory.
The article was written by Trudell, and contained quotes or statements
attributed to defendants Gosselin, Anderson, Droney, Bousquet and Flynn. At
the time the article was written, Gosselin was a detective in Hudson, Anderson
was the deputy police chief in Weston, Massachusetts, Droney was a detective
in Needham, Massachusetts, and Bousquet was a detective in Foxborough,
Massachusetts. Flynn was a professor of criminal justice at Northeastern
University. Williams was the publisher of the Telegraph. In the remainder of
this opinion, we reference Trudell, Williams and the Telegraph as “the
Telegraph defendants.” We reference Gosselin, Anderson, Bousquet, Droney
and the Town as “the police defendants.”
Over the course of litigating this case, the parties filed a number of
motions with the trial court. The plaintiff moved to amend his writ to name the
police officers in their individual – rather than just official – capacities. The
trial court denied the motion, and the plaintiff appeals that decision.
2
Each of the defendants also moved for summary judgment. Over the
plaintiff’s objection, the trial court granted summary judgment for all of the
defendants on all of the allegedly defamatory statements, ruling that the
plaintiff is libel-proof. In addition, the trial court ruled that: (1) certain
statements in the article are covered by the fair report privilege; (2) certain of
the statements are protected as substantially true; (3) Flynn’s statement was
an opinion, but the statements of the police defendants were not statements of
opinion; (4) Flynn’s statements were “of and concerning” the plaintiff; (5) the
plaintiff is not a limited purpose public figure and therefore did not need to
demonstrate actual malice; and (6) the police defendants do not enjoy a
qualified privilege for their statements. The plaintiff then appealed, and the
defendants cross-appealed, placing each of these rulings in dispute.
II. Motion to Amend
Arguing that his motion to amend was “a direct response” to discovery
issues between the parties and an attempt to cure a technical defect, the
plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in denying it. The decision of the
trial court to deny a motion to amend will not be overturned absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Thomas, 151 N.H. at 439. Generally, a
court should allow amendments to pleadings to correct technical defects, but
need only allow substantive amendments when necessary to prevent injustice.
Id. A substantive amendment that introduces an entirely new cause of action,
or calls for substantially different evidence, may be properly denied. Id.
In response to the plaintiff’s motion to amend, the trial court made the
following ruling:
The plaintiff filed this action over two years ago . . . .
His motion seeks to do more than cure a technical
defect. He essentially seeks to add a number of new
parties by suing the defendants in their individual
capacities, as well as, their official capacities. The
plaintiff previously represented to this Court that he
would not be seeking any further amendments to the
original Writ. . . . Given the delay in bringing this
motion and the surprise to the defendants, the Court
finds and rules that the amendment is not necessary
for the prevention of injustice.
We agree with the trial court’s reasoning. By seeking to name the
defendants in their individual capacities, the plaintiff essentially sought to add
parties who would be personally liable for damages in the event of a verdict
unfavorable to them. Further, defendants named in their individual capacities
3
in this type of case might need to maintain defenses that would differ from
those adopted by defendants named in their official capacities. These two
considerations, among others, support the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendants would suffer surprise from the proposed amendment. Clinical Lab
Prod’s, Inc. v. Martina, 121 N.H. 989, 991 (1981) (surprise to opposing side is
grounds to deny motion to amend). Indeed, the plaintiff filed the motion at
issue some two years after he initiated the suit, after having previously
amended his writ, and after having assured the trial court that no further
amendments would be sought. Under these circumstances, we cannot
conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying
the plaintiff’s motion to amend.
III. Summary Judgment: Legal Standard
In acting upon a motion for summary judgment, the trial court is
required to construe the pleadings, discovery and affidavits in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party to determine whether the proponent has
established the absence of a dispute over any material fact and the right to
judgment as a matter of law. Porter v. Coco, 154 N.H. 353, 356 (2006). An
issue of fact is material if it affects the outcome of the litigation. Id. We review
de novo a trial court’s grant of summary judgment. Tech-Built 153 v. Va.
Surety Co., 153 N.H. 371, 373 (2006). If our review of the evidence does not
reveal any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id.
IV. Libel-Proof Plaintiff Doctrine
The trial court granted summary judgment as to all defendants, ruling
that the plaintiff is libel-proof. The plaintiff appeals that ruling.
Typically, “[a] plaintiff proves defamation by showing that the defendant
failed to exercise reasonable care in publishing a false and defamatory
statement of fact about the plaintiff to a third party, assuming no valid
privilege applies to the communication.” Pierson v. Hubbard, 147 N.H. 760,
763 (2002). If defamation is established and no privilege applies, the plaintiff
may seek damages for harm to his or her reputation. See Thomson v. Cash,
119 N.H. 371, 376 (1979). However, in some jurisdictions a very narrow class
of plaintiffs is prohibited from seeking libel damages by operation of a doctrine
known as the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine. See generally Annotation,
Defamation: Who Is “Libel-Proof”, 50 A.L.R.4th 1257 (1986 & Supp. 2006).
Whether to adopt the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine in this state is a question of
first impression.
4
One of the earliest formulations of the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine was
announced by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in
Cardillo v. Doubleday & Co., Inc., 518 F.2d 638 (2d Cir. 1975); see also Note,
The Libel-Proof Plaintiff Doctrine, 98 Harv. L. Rev. 1909, 1909-10 (1985).
There, the court held that a prison inmate, who brought a civil libel action
against the publisher of a book that referenced his involvement in various
criminal organizations and activities, was libel-proof. Cardillo, 518 F.2d at
639-40. The court explained that the inmate was libel-proof because he was
“so unlikely by virtue of his life as a habitual criminal to be able to recover
anything other than nominal damages as to warrant dismissal of the
case . . . .” Id. at 639.
A. Incremental Harm Doctrine
Since Cardillo, two versions of the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine have
developed. See Note, supra at 1910. One version is the incremental harm
doctrine, which
involves an examination of the challenged
communication rather than a finding of a previously
damaged reputation. The judge evaluates the
defendant’s communication in its entirety and
considers the effects of the challenged statements on
the plaintiff’s reputation in the context of the full
communication. If the challenged statement harms a
plaintiff’s reputation far less than unchallenged
statements in the same article or broadcast, the
plaintiff may be held libel-proof. Finding that the
challenged statements could cause no cognizable
damage in addition to that presumed to attend the
unchallenged part of the communication, the court
dismisses the entire libel action.
Id. at 1912-13.
In performing the above-described analysis, courts must ensure that the
challenged statements are also actionable, since only actionable, challenged
statements may be considered in assessing the harm done to a plaintiff’s
reputation. Kite, Incremental Identities: Libel-Proof Plaintiffs, Substantial
Truth, and the Future of the Incremental Harm Doctrine, 73 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
529, 548-63 (1998). Thus, if a challenged statement is nonactionable, it is
treated like an unchallenged statement and its effects cannot be considered.
Challenged statements “may be nonactionable for any number of reasons—
constitutional defenses, substantial truth defenses, privileges allowed by state
statute . . . .” Id. at 542-43. Although some courts have adopted the
5
incremental harm doctrine, others have criticized and rejected it, and the
United States Supreme Court has held that its application is not compelled by
the First Amendment to the Federal Constitution. See id. at 548-63.
The Telegraph defendants contend that the incremental harm doctrine
applies because “the accurate reporting of the plaintiff’s criminal record, most
of which he has acknowledged in discovery, would have been more than
sufficient to ‘demolish his reputation.’ Nothing published by The Telegraph in
the Article did, or could have, done any incremental harm to this reputation
above and beyond that which such an accurate report would have caused.”
The police defendants also assert the applicability of the incremental harm
doctrine. They appear to argue that it applies because the plaintiff admitted
involvement in crime. We are not persuaded that the incremental harm
doctrine applies in light of the record presented to us.
We acknowledge that the plaintiff admitted to several arrests and
convictions during discovery in this case. Other arrests and convictions were
deemed admitted by an order of the trial court, which the plaintiff does not
here challenge. However, the plaintiff’s status as a convicted criminal and his
admission to various criminal activities, alone, are not dispositive under the
incremental harm doctrine. As stated above, the incremental harm doctrine
focuses upon the communication at issue and the extent to which the
challenged and actionable portions of its contents create harm above that
caused by the portions that are unchallenged or nonactionable. The doctrine
does not operate based upon a finding of a previously damaged reputation. See
Note, supra at 1912-13.
In addition, clearly some of the plaintiff’s arguments or challenges are
undercut by the admitted facts; however, the article’s potential harm to the
plaintiff’s reputation derives not only from admitted facts but also from other
statements which, at this time, have not been either admitted as true or
deemed nonactionable. Accordingly, this is not a case in which the plaintiff
challenges only a small number of statements in an article that is, on the
whole, otherwise unchallenged or nonactionable and largely injurious to his
reputation. See Ferreri v. Plain Dealer Publishing Co., 756 N.E.2d 712, 723
(Ohio Ct. App. 2001). Rather, on the record presented to us in connection with
this appeal, this is a case in which the plaintiff’s writ challenges fifty-eight out
of ninety statements from the article, only some of which are nonactionable by
operation of the fair report privilege, the substantial truth defense, and the
opinion defense. None of the statements has yet been deemed qualifiedly
privileged, a designation that would also render them “nonactionable.”
Therefore, given the state of this record, we need not wade into the debate over
the wisdom of adopting the incremental harm doctrine, see Kite, supra at 548-
63, because even were we to adopt it, it would not apply under the current
posture of this case.
6
B. Issue-Specific Libel-Proof Plaintiffs
The second version of the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine – and the one
apparently applied by the trial court in granting summary judgment to the
defendants – is known as the issue-specific version. Under it, “[a] libel-proof
plaintiff is one whose reputation on the matter in issue is so diminished that,
at the time of an otherwise libelous publication, it could not be further
damaged.” McBride v. New Braunfels Herald-Zeitung, 894 S.W.2d 6, 9 (Tex.
App. 1994); see also Church of Scientology Intern. v. Time Warner, Inc., 932 F.
Supp. 589, 593 (S.D.N.Y. 1996) (explaining that “when a particular plaintiff’s
reputation for a particular trait is sufficiently bad, further statements regarding
that trait, even if false and made with malice, are not actionable because, as a
matter of law, the plaintiff cannot be damaged in his reputation as to that
trait”). The issue-specific version is typically “applied to justify dismissal of
defamation actions where the substantial criminal record of a libel plaintiff
shows as a matter of law that he would be unable to recover other than
nominal damages.” Jackson v. Longcope, 476 N.E.2d 617, 619 (Mass. 1985).
Thus, “[w]hen invoked, the [issue-specific version of the] libel-proof plaintiff
doctrine bars a plaintiff from presenting his claim of libel to a jury.” McBride,
894 S.W.2d at 9. Many courts that have adopted the issue-specific version of
the doctrine have held that it applies only in a narrow class of cases, “since few
plaintiffs will have so bad a reputation that they are not entitled to obtain
redress for defamatory statements . . . .” Guccione v. Hustler Magazine, Inc.,
800 F.2d 298, 303 (2d Cir. 1986) (citation omitted); see also McBride, 894
S.W.2d at 10.
The United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, in an opinion by
then Circuit Judge Scalia, rejected the issue-specific version of the doctrine as
a “fundamentally bad idea.” Liberty Lobby, Inc. v. Anderson, 746 F.2d 1563,
1569 (D.C. Cir. 1984), reversed on other grounds by Anderson v. Liberty Lobby,
Inc., 477 U.S. 242 (1986). However, Liberty Lobby appears to represent a
minority view. See Annotation, Defamation: Who Is “Libel-Proof”, 50 A.L.R.4th
1257 (1986 & Supp. 2006). In fact, we have not been directed to any other
case in which a court has reached the same conclusion. While the plaintiff
contends that the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit rejected
the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine, in its entirety, in Masson v. The New Yorker
Magazine, Inc., 960 F.2d 896 (9th Cir. 1992), we do not share his reading of
that case. In Masson, the Ninth Circuit rejected the incremental harm doctrine
as “not an element of California libel law.” Id. at 899. The Masson court did
not take any position on the issue-specific version of the libel-proof plaintiff
doctrine.
Having outlined the nature of the issue-specific version of the doctrine
and the debate surrounding it, we reach the question before us: whether to
7
adopt it in this jurisdiction. Like the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court,
we “accept the principle that a convicted criminal may have such a poor
reputation that no further damage to it [i]s possible at the time of an otherwise
libelous publication . . . .” Jackson, 476 N.E.2d at 620; see also Wynberg v.
National Enquirer, Inc., 564 F. Supp. 924, 928 (C.D. Cal. 1982). However, we
are especially mindful of the Liberty Lobby court’s apprehension about the
difficulty courts will face in determining that a reputation has been irreparably
damaged. Liberty Lobby, 746 F.2d at 1568. Therefore, while we now adopt
this version of the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine, we warn that it should be
applied with caution and sparingly.
We hold that:
To justify applying the doctrine, the evidence of record
must show not only that the plaintiff engaged in
criminal or anti-social behavior in the past, but also
that his activities were widely reported to the public.
The evidence on the nature of the conduct, the
number of offenses, and the degree and range of
publicity received must make it clear, as a matter of
law, that the plaintiff’s reputation could not have
suffered from the publication of the false and libelous
statement.
McBride, 894 S.W.2d at 10 (citations omitted). Accordingly, criminal
convictions, alone, are not enough to justify application of the doctrine.
Compare Cofield v. The Advertiser Co., 486 So. 2d 434, 434-35 (Ala. 1986)
(applying the doctrine where no publicity attending the conviction is
referenced), with Jackson, 476 N.E.2d at 620 (conviction must be accompanied
by publicity), and Wynberg, 564 F. Supp. at 928 (conviction must be
accompanied by publicity). Bearing these principles in mind, we turn to the
question whether the plaintiff in this appeal is libel-proof.
The trial court found that the plaintiff has criminal convictions in New
Hampshire, Massachusetts and Texas for offenses ranging from burglary and
receiving stolen property to possession of a controlled substance, criminal
threatening, disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, and driving while intoxicated,
among others. The trial court also found that: (1) the plaintiff had admitted to
some twenty convictions between 1975 and 1990; (2) “the plaintiff has received
little media attention regarding his prior arrests and convictions”; and (3) the
plaintiff’s “habitual criminal record in three . . . states” damaged his reputation
decades prior to the publication of the Telegraph article. The trial court then
concluded that the plaintiff is libel-proof. In light of the principles articulated
above, we disagree.
8
Publicity is part and parcel of the damage to a reputation necessary to
trigger the issue-specific version of the libel-proof plaintiff doctrine. Indeed, it
is often the means by which such damage occurs and the most effective
evidence of that damage. In other cases where courts have most persuasively
applied the doctrine and deemed plaintiffs libel-proof, both the publicity
surrounding the crimes and the attendant level of notoriety are quite high.
See, e.g., Cardillo, 518 F.2d at 640 (plaintiff the subject of testimony before the
Federal Congress); Jackson, 476 N.E.2d at 620 (plaintiff the subject of “scores”
of newspaper articles); Ray v. Time, Inc., 452 F. Supp. 618, 622 (W.D. Tenn.
1976) (James Earl Ray’s notoriety rendered him libel-proof). The trial court’s
findings indicate that no such publicity is present in this case. Accordingly,
the trial court erred in deeming the plaintiff libel-proof and its grant of
summary judgment on this ground must be reversed.
Reversal on this ground, however, does not end our analysis. The trial
court also ruled upon the other grounds for summary judgment asserted by
some or all of the defendants as to some or all of the statements. Because the
legal issues raised by those rulings are likely to arise on remand, we address
them. See Figlioli v. R.J. Moreau Cos., 151 N.H. 618, 622 (2005).
V. The Fair Report Privilege
The Telegraph defendants moved for summary judgment on the ground
that the fair report privilege protected all but one of the statements contained
in the article. The trial court disagreed and concluded that only nine
statements from the article could be moored in the safe harbor of the fair report
privilege. It ruled that the other statements fell outside the protections of the
privilege because they constituted “information gathered by the police officers
during investigations.”
Both sides now appeal that ruling. The plaintiff contends that the trial
court erred in applying the fair report privilege because the statements in the
article were: (1) based upon confidential information; (2) inaccurate; and (3)
made with malice. The Telegraph defendants cross-appeal, contending that the
trial court took an overly narrow view of the fair report privilege. They argue
that the trial court should have applied the privilege to essentially all
statements made by the officers in their official capacities. We first describe
the contours of the privilege, and then address the parties’ contentions.
As noted above, a plaintiff establishes defamation by showing that the
defendant failed to exercise reasonable care in publishing a false and
defamatory statement of fact about the plaintiff to a third party, unless a valid
privilege applies to the communication. Pierson, 147 N.H. at 763. One such
9
privilege is the fair report privilege. It is a conditional, not absolute, privilege
that “applies to the publication of defamatory matter concerning another in a
report of an official action or proceeding or of a meeting open to the public that
deals with a matter of public concern . . . if the report is accurate and complete
or a fair abridgement of the occurrence reported.” Hayes v. Newspapers of
N.H., 141 N.H. 464, 466 (1996) (quotation and brackets omitted); Restatement
(Second) of Torts § 611 comment a at 297 (1977). A defendant who asserts the
fair report privilege bears the burden of establishing its applicability, and the
determination of whether the defendant has carried this burden is for the trial
court. Id. The privilege extends to the report of any official proceeding, or any
action taken by any officer or agency of the government. Id. A report need not
track or duplicate official statements to qualify for the privilege; rather, it need
give only a “rough-and-ready” summary that is substantially correct. Id.
(quotation omitted). In other words, “[a] statement is considered a fair report if
its ‘gist’ or ‘sting’ is true, that is, if it produces the same effect on the mind of
the recipient which the precise truth would have produced.” Yohe v. Nugent,
321 F.3d 35, 43 (1st Cir. 2003) (quotation omitted). If the privilege does not
apply – that is, if a report is not a fair and accurate account of an official
proceeding – general fault standards will govern. Hayes, 141 N.H. at 466.
For his part, the plaintiff attempts to convince us that the fair report
privilege does not apply because the information contained in the article was
based upon confidential materials, such as an allegedly inaccurate presentence
investigation report which he claims never to have seen. We are not
persuaded. A dispute over the applicability of the fair report privilege is not a
viable context in which the plaintiff may litigate or collaterally attack the facts
contained in the presentence investigation report. See Yohe, 321 F.3d at 44 (a
plaintiff cannot evade the protections of the fair report privilege by merely re-
labeling his claim). For the fair report privilege to apply, the article must be an
accurate and complete or fair abridgement of the official action or proceeding.
Hayes, 141 N.H. at 466. The inquiry does not focus upon truth about the
events that either underlie or are the subject of the official action or
proceeding. Yohe, 321 F.3d at 44. In other words, “accuracy for fair report
purposes refers only to the factual correctness of the events reported and not to
the truth about the events that actually transpired.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Furthermore, the plaintiff cites no legal authority for the proposition that
the information contained in the presentence report is outside the ambit of the
fair report privilege. Other courts have expressly rejected such an argument.
See Wilson v. Slatalla, 970 F. Supp. 405, 419 (E.D. Pa. 1997) (“the public
scrutiny rationale and the public’s interest in the sentencing of convicted
criminals support the application of the privilege to the presentence report”).
Especially since the presentence report was a part of the official sentencing
proceeding, the reasoning from Wilson is persuasive and we adopt it. See
Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra comments d at 299 and h at 301; see also
10
Yohe, 321 F.3d at 43 (“The fair report privilege protects published reports of
arrests by police.”). Therefore, we reject the plaintiff’s argument.
The plaintiff also argues that summary judgment should have been
denied because he “submitted affirmative circumstantial evidence to the trial
court from which actual malice could be inferred.” The plaintiff’s allegations of
“actual malice” appear to encompass claims of ill will towards him and claims
that the defendants knew their statements to be false. The Telegraph
defendants counter that the fair report privilege “does not depend on the state
of mind of the publisher or his belief in the accuracy of the statement
reported.” By referencing both state of mind and belief in accuracy, the
Telegraph defendants appear to acknowledge the plaintiff’s broad conception of
“actual malice” and to argue that neither ill will nor knowledge of falsity can
defeat the privilege.
Since the Telegraph defendants’ counterargument raises a threshold
legal issue, we address it first. There are two types of malice: (1) constitutional
or “actual” malice; and (2) common law malice. Constitutional or actual
“malice” is a subjective awareness of the falsity or probable falsity of a
statement. Herbert v. Lando, 441 U.S. 153, 156 (1979); New York Times Co. v.
Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 279-80 (1964) (actual malice is knowledge or reckless
disregard of falsity). Common law malice, on the other hand, is ill will or intent
to harm. Cantrell v. Forest City Publ’g Co., 419 U.S. 245, 252 (1974). As one
court explained, actual malice is concerned with the publisher’s attitude
toward the truth while common law malice is concerned with its attitude
toward the plaintiff. Geyer v. Steinbronn, 506 A.2d 901, 915 (Pa. Super. Ct.
1986). The plaintiff’s allegations appear to encompass both forms.
The only case the Telegraph defendants cite in support of their position is
Yohe. Yohe, however, supports only half of their position. It directly
contradicts the other half. In Yohe, the United States Court of Appeals for the
First Circuit noted that “the fair report privilege should not be forfeited even if
the party making the report knew the statement to be false.” Yohe, 321 F.3d at
44 (quotation omitted). The court also noted that “[t]o defeat the [fair report]
privilege, a plaintiff must either show that the publisher does not give a fair
and accurate report of the official statement, or malice.” Id. (emphasis added).
Taken together, these two statements indicate that actual malice cannot defeat
the fair report privilege, but common law malice can.
We acknowledge that in some jurisdictions, neither actual nor common
law malice can defeat the fair report privilege, see Solaia Technology v.
Specialty Pub. Co., 852 N.E.2d 825, 843 (Ill. 2006); Moreno v. Crookston Times
Printing Co., 610 N.W.2d 321, 333 (Minn. 2000); however, in other
jurisdictions, common law malice can defeat the privilege, a position consistent
with the two quoted sentences from Yohe. See, e.g., DeMary v. LaTrobe
11
Printing and Pub. Co., 762 A.2d 758, 764 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2000), appeal denied,
786 A.2d 988 (Pa. 2001); Russell v. Thomson Newspapers, Inc., 842 P.2d 896,
901 n.12, 904-05 (Utah 1992) (summarizing statutory codification of fair report
privilege and noting that common law malice can defeat it). We believe that
Yohe represents the better approach.
As noted above, the fair report privilege is not an absolute privilege;
instead, it is a conditional one, albeit arguably broader than some other
conditional privileges. Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra comment a at 297.
We have held that conditional privileges can be defeated by a showing of malice
involving ill will or intent to harm. See, e.g., Duchesnaye v. Munro Enterprises,
Inc., 125 N.H. 244, 253 (1984); Chagnon v. Union-Leader Co., 103 N.H. 426,
438 (1961), cert. denied, 369 U.S. 830 (1962); Huskie v. Griffin, 75 N.H. 345,
348 (1909). These holdings are persuasive, if not controlling.
We are not of the view that allowing a plaintiff to try to establish common
law malice as a means of defeating the fair report privilege will unduly chill the
free flow of information to the public, especially since it will likely be no easy
task for a plaintiff to establish ill will targeted specifically at him or her. See
Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra Reporter’s Note at 134 (acknowledging
that the Restatement (First) of Torts stated that the fair report privilege could
be defeated by showing that the publication was “made solely for the purpose
of causing harm to the person defamed,” but noting that “there appear to be no
cases in which the privilege was lost because of the purpose to harm”
(quotation omitted)). Allowing plaintiffs to try to establish common law malice,
where appropriate, will guard against abuse of the privilege and ensure that
the privilege continues to be used as a shield, not a sword.
To the extent the plaintiff argues that summary judgment should have
been denied as to all statements because he submitted “circumstantial
evidence” of common law malice to the trial court, we reject his argument. The
circumstantial evidence cited by the plaintiff is contained in his objection to the
defendants’ motions for summary judgment. We have reviewed the plaintiff’s
objection and the materials cited therein. They contain, for example, a motion
to suppress in a criminal case in which the plaintiff asserted police
misconduct. Essentially, the plaintiff argues that summary judgment should
have been denied because he feels that police officers acted maliciously toward
him. However, that is not the proper inquiry. In the context of the fair report
privilege, the malice inquiry – to the extent it is even properly before a court –
focuses upon the attitude of the defendant publisher vis-à-vis the plaintiff. See
Solaia, 852 N.E.2d at 842-43 (rejecting malice as part of fair report inquiry but
thoroughly summarizing and explaining the law in this area). The plaintiff
cannot defeat summary judgment wholesale on the fair report privilege by first
asserting malice on the part of police officers and then attempting to impute
that malice to the Telegraph defendants by conclusory assertion. See
12
Pennichuck Corp. v. City of Nashua, 152 N.H. 729, 739 (2005) (conclusory
allegations not enough to defeat summary judgment). Nor do allegations that
the Telegraph was careless amount to malice. Arguments about the accuracy
of the article bear upon whether it is accurate and complete or a fair
abridgement of the occurrence reported. See Hayes, 141 N.H. at 466.
Accordingly, we reject the plaintiff’s argument.
In their cross-appeal, the defendants make essentially two contentions.
First, they contend that the trial court took an overly narrow view of the fair
report privilege. They argue that the fair report privilege should apply not only
to all “rough and ready” summaries of official records and documents, but also
to news reports of any “oral statements made by law enforcement officers and
other public officials in their official capacity.” Second, they contend that even
under a narrower construction of the privilege, the trial court still erred in
failing to grant summary judgment as to certain statements.
With respect to the first contention, we agree that the privilege should
apply to all public, official actions or proceedings. However, the Telegraph
defendants ask us to decide an issue broader than the one before us. We need
not decide the extent to which all oral statements by both law enforcement
officers and other public officials would fall within the privilege because only
statements by police officers, imputing criminality, are here at issue.
Therefore, our analysis is narrow.
As to the police officers’ statements, we acknowledge that the fair report
privilege has been construed broadly in some jurisdictions to cover essentially
any communication to a reporter by a law enforcement officer. See generally
Annotation, Defamation: Privilege Attaching to News Report of Criminal
Activities Based on Information Supplied by Public Safety Officers – Modern
Status, 47 A.L.R.4th 718-39 (1986 & Supp. 2006).
In other jurisdictions, the privilege has been construed more narrowly:
[T]he fair report privilege should not be extended to
apply to the myriad types of informal reports and
official and unofficial investigations, contacts, and
communications of law enforcement personnel at all
levels of the state and federal bureaucracy with local,
regional, and national media. . . .
The American Law Institute has addressed how far
the scope of “official action” extends into the domain of
arrests and the underlying facts associated with the
arrests by differentiating between reports of an arrest
and statements regarding the underlying facts that
precipitated the arrest. The Restatement (Second) of
13
Torts states that an arrest by an officer is an official
action, and a report of the fact of the arrest or of the
charge of crime made by the officer in making or
returning the arrest is within the fair report privilege;
however, statements made by the police or by the
complainant or other witnesses or by the prosecuting
attorney as to the facts of the case or the evidence
expected to be given are not yet part of the judicial
proceeding or of the arrest itself . . . .
Lewis v. NewsChannel 5 Network, L.P., No. M2005-00458-COA-R3-CV, 2007
WL 1585163, at *13-*14 (Tenn. Ct. App. May 31, 2007) (quotations, citations
and brackets omitted).
Our view of the privilege lies between these two approaches. See D.
Elder, The Fair Report Privilege §§ 1.08–1.10, at 77-110 (1988) (explaining how
jurisdictions apply the fair report privilege to law enforcement activities and
criminal prosecutions). We do not view all private conversations between police
officers and reporters to be automatically within the privilege. For example,
“some unofficial version of events furnished by a policeman at a crime scene,
or . . . offhand prediction” would not be within the privilege. Id. § 1.08, at 77
(quotations and brackets omitted). These types of situations do not support a
contention that the media is justified in using the privilege as a defense
because it is functioning as “the eyes and ears of the public.” Costello v. Ocean
County Observer, 643 A.2d 1012, 1020 (N.J. 1994).
In Hayes, we held that the fair report privilege applies to “[t]he
publication of defamatory matter concerning another in a report of an official
action or proceeding or of a meeting open to the public . . . .” Hayes, 141 N.H.
at 466 (quotation omitted and emphases added). Thus, it is the terms “official,”
“action,” “proceeding” and “meeting” that are critical to the application of the
privilege in this state. Because not every conversation will involve “an official
action or proceeding or . . . a meeting open to the public,” id. (quotation
omitted), it would constitute a marked expansion of Hayes if we were to adopt
the broad view of the privilege taken in some jurisdictions and hold that the
fair report privilege applies to all conversations between law enforcement
personnel and reporters.
On the other hand, a narrow approach like the one adopted in Lewis
does not account for all types of “conversations” that may occur between a
reporter and a police officer, and would fall within the privilege. The privilege
also protects reports that meet the accuracy requirements of Hayes, and are
based upon press conferences, interviews with a police chief, see Yohe, 321
F.3d at 44, or other types of official “conversations.” Cf., e.g., Restatement
(Second) of Torts, supra comment d at 299.
14
The information at issue here came from private conversations between
Trudell and the officers. The article demonstrates that the conversations went
well beyond the fact of the plaintiff’s arrest and the grounds for the charge.
Indeed, the officers’ comments reference related investigations and the
plaintiff’s prior criminal history.
We have been directed to no evidence that the officers were given the
official imprimatur of their departments to function as spokesmen or even to
speak with Trudell. The officers’ affidavits state only that the shared
information “included” matters of public record. Therefore, we have no way of
assessing whether all or any part of the investigations discussed were public at
that time. Certainly, a police department does not make public all aspects of
all investigations. Doing so would seriously undermine its ability to combat
crime. Thus, for all that appears in the record the defendants in this case were
police sources making unofficial statements.
It bears noting that the Hudson Police Department, for example, operates
under a media relations policy that prohibits individual officers from revealing
to reporters, without the approval of the police chief, “[t]he prior criminal
history of the accused,” “[s]tatements regarding the character or reputation of
the accused,” and “[t]he evidence in the case.” We do not take a position on
whether and the extent to which this policy is consistent with the fair report
privilege. Those questions are not before us. Instead, we cite the Hudson
policy to illustrate that our holding today does not upset the practices of at
least some police departments in this state, including one whose officers are
involved with this case.
We now turn to the Telegraph defendants’ second contention concerning
specific statements that they believe fall within the privilege. The trial court
found that “statements 9, 10, 24, 27, 30, 51, 52, 53, and 54 . . . are fair and
accurate reports of the contents or records of official actions,” but that the
other “statements [in the article] consisted of information gathered by the
police officers during investigations” and were therefore not covered by the fair
report privilege. Because we hereafter uphold the trial court’s grant of
summary judgment as to statements 51-54 on the basis of substantial truth,
we take no position on the application of the fair report privilege to those
statements.
The Telegraph defendants argue that all of the statements attributable to
the officers fall within the privilege because the officers were summarizing the
contents of police records. With respect to the records Gosselin allegedly
summarized, the Telegraph defendants cite pages 103 to 120 of the appendix,
all but two of which are documents dated after the publication of the article.
Consequently, on this record, we have no way of evaluating whether Gosselin
15
was relying upon or summarizing any given record at the time of his interview.
Other police records are also contained in the appendix, but neither the
Telegraph defendants nor the officers’ affidavits explain which particular
records the officers relied upon at the time of the interview. Thus, even
assuming the Telegraph defendants’ argument is legally correct, the absence of
such an explanation and the requirement that all inferences must be construed
in favor of the plaintiff mean that summary judgment was correctly denied.
The Telegraph defendants argue that statements 20-23 are also within
the privilege because they “were derived from police and court records, [which]
are entitled to the protection of the privilege.” Again, we emphasize that our
discussion in this case is limited to police records. We agree that official police
records, such as official blotters, official reports, and so forth, fall within the
privilege. Elder, supra § 1.08, at 77; see also Restatement (Second) of Torts,
supra comment d at 299 (“The filing of a report by an officer . . . of the
government is an action bringing a reporting of the governmental report within
the scope of the privilege.”); cf. Costello, 643 A.2d at 1021 (a complaint not yet
filed does not constitute an official record and therefore is not subject to the
fair report privilege); Wynn v. Smith, 16 P.3d 424, 430 (Nev. 2001)
(“unauthorized or confidential investigatory [police] reports do not qualify as an
‘official action or proceeding’ under the fair report privilege”).
In support of their position that statements 20-23 derive from official
records, the Telegraph defendants cite six pages of the appendix. All of these
pages are copies of a typewritten facsimile transmission. At the top of one page
is printed “Seabrook Police Department Arrest Report” and at the top of
another is printed “Seabrook Police Department Initial Investigation Report.”
None of the pages is signed, not even where the document entitled “Initial
Investigation Report” contains lines requiring signatures from the investigating
officer and the reviewing officer. In addition, none of the six pages is
accompanied by an affidavit indicating that it is “official.” Nor does the
Telegraph’s brief direct us to any part of the record that would establish that
these unsigned documents are “official” or in the public record. Other police
records in the appendix are signed.
Documents authored by police officers do not become “official” or matters
of public record simply because they may be located in the police department.
Nor do they become “official” or matters of public record simply because they
are consistent with what a reporter might have heard while conversing with
people for a news story. They become “official” when they bear adequate
indicia of being “official” or are actually in the public record. In addition to
other circumstances, documents may be deemed “official” when they are
signed, correctly executed, filed or accompanied by an affidavit indicating they
are official. Cf. Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra comments d at 299 and h
at 301; Elder, supra § 1.10, at 87-110. On this record, we have no way of
16
knowing anything about the nature of these unsigned reports. It is the
defendants’ responsibility, as appellants on this issue, to provide an adequate
record to support their assertions. See Sup. Ct. R. 13(2), 16(3)(d).
Further, even if we were to assume that the “Arrest Report” is “official,”
none of the information in statements 20-23 comes from that page. Nor does
that page expressly incorporate the subsequent five. Thus, we reject the
Telegraph defendants’ arguments as to statements 20-23 and uphold the trial
court’s decisions regarding summary judgment, albeit on somewhat different
grounds.
VI. Substantial Truth
All of the defendants moved for summary judgment on the basis that the
statements in the article are substantially true. The trial court found that only
some of the statements were substantially true, while the other statements
“primarily deal[t] with the defendant police officers’ suspicions of the plaintiff
committing numerous crimes.”
On appeal, the parties’ arguments on the issue of substantial truth are
essentially two-fold. First, both sides contend that the trial court’s analysis of
substantial truth was incorrect because the court considered individual
statements rather than the article as a whole. The plaintiff contends that the
gist or sting of the entire article is defamatory, while the defendants argue that:
(1) the gist or sting of the article, read as a whole, is substantially true; and (2)
each defendant’s comments, considered in the aggregate, constitute a
“statement,” and the “statement” of each defendant is substantially true.
Second, the parties dispute the trial court’s rulings on the substantial
truth of particular statements. The plaintiff argues that summary judgment
should have been denied as to each statement because each either is untrue or
misrepresents the facts. The defendants, on the other hand, urge us to affirm
the trial court’s decision that nine of the statements from the article are
substantially true. We start with the parties’ broad attack on the trial court’s
method of analysis, and then consider their arguments concerning the trial
court’s rulings on specific statements.
One who publishes a defamatory statement of fact
is not subject to liability for defamation if the
statement is true. In the law of defamation, truth is
defined as substantial truth, as it is not necessary that
every detail be accurate. In other words, literal truth
of a statement is not required so long as the
imputation is substantially true so as to justify the gist
17
or sting of the remark. Furthermore, a false and
defamatory inference may be derived from a factually
accurate news report.
Faigin v. Kelly, 978 F. Supp. 420, 425 (D.N.H. 1997) (quotations omitted); see
also Restatement (Second) of Torts § 581A at 235-37. While substantial truth
is a defense to a libel or defamation claim, such a
claim can only rarely be dismissed on the rationale
that the statements complained of are substantially
true, as the notion of substantial truth necessarily
implies a thread of untruth, and the conclusion that a
statement is substantially true will therefore involve a
determination that whatever errors are in the
statement are irrelevant in the minds of the audience.
53 C.J.S. Libel and Slander; Injurious Falsehood § 164 (2005).
As noted above, both the plaintiff and the defendants contend that the
trial court erred in its method of evaluating substantial truth because it
evaluated the substantial truth of each challenged sentence individually. The
parties offer two alternative methods of analysis that they believe should have
been followed.
Gosselin contends that the trial court’s analysis of substantial truth is
deficient because the court misapprehended the term “statement.” The trial
court treated each challenged sentence as a statement and evaluated each of
those in the context of the whole article. However, in Gosselin’s view, a
statement, for purposes of substantial truth, is defined as the aggregate of all
sentences attributable to an individual speaker. Gosselin does not cite any
legal authority in support of this position. We decline Gosselin’s invitation to
define a statement as an aggregate of sentences attributable to individuals. We
see little merit in a rule that would allow a defendant to avoid liability by
simply couching injurious and baseless sentences in a longer “statement.” The
better view is that the “statement” giving rise to liability can be one of an
individual’s remarks or many, while the interview as a whole provides
important context for evaluating whether the “statement” is substantially true
or an opinion. Accordingly, we reject Gosselin’s argument and turn to the
second method of analyzing substantial truth advanced by the parties.
Both the plaintiff and the defendants argue that the trial court should
have evaluated the substantial truth of the article as a whole rather than the
substantial truth of each challenged statement individually. While we agree
that courts must consider defamatory statements in context, we discern no
error in the trial court’s approach here. Courts analyze claims of substantial
18
truth by examining individual sentences within a news report, see, e.g., John v.
Journal Communications, Inc., 801 F. Supp. 199, 200-10 (E.D.Wis. 1992);
Foretich v. CBS, Inc., 619 A.2d 48, 63 n.22 (D.C. 1993), in light of the context
of the report as a whole, see, e.g., 50 Am. Jur. 2d Libel and Slander § 251
(2006); 53 C.J.S. Libel and Slander; Injurious Falsehood § 34 (2005) (“Allegedly
defamatory words are to be considered in context under the circumstances of
their publication, as the context of a statement can significantly affect its fair
and natural meaning.”). This approach is consistent with our case law
discussing how statements of opinion must be evaluated in the defamation
context. See Nash v. Keene Publishing Corp., 127 N.H. 214, 219 (1985).
The plaintiff challenged approximately fifty-eight statements from the
article. Thus, each challenged and actionable statement had to be evaluated in
the context of the article as a whole. The trial court’s order demonstrates that
this is what it did: it identified the precise statements that it deemed
substantially true, mindful of the context of the article as a whole. Accordingly,
we uphold the trial court’s method of analysis and turn to the parties’
arguments concerning whether the trial court properly applied that analysis.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in entering summary
judgment on the issue of substantial truth because the statements at issue are
inaccurate or misrepresent the facts. Four of the statements the plaintiff
contends are inaccurate pertain to a conviction or sentence the plaintiff
received in connection with criminal activity. “If the defamatory statement is a
specific allegation of the commission of a particular crime, the statement is
[deemed] true [for purposes of a substantial truth defense] if the plaintiff did
commit that crime.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 581A comment c at 236.
Statements 9, 24, 27 and 30 fall within this rule.
Next, the trial court found that statements 10, 51, 52, 53 and 54 “are
based upon official records and proceedings.” The plaintiff nevertheless
contends that they are not substantially true. The plaintiff’s brief does not
point to any portion of the record creating a genuine issue of material fact with
respect to statement 10. See Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(d). More significantly, the basis
for statement 10 was deemed admitted by an order of the trial court that has
not been appealed. Therefore, we uphold the trial court’s conclusion regarding
statement 10 as well.
Statements 51-54 pertain to the circumstances surrounding the
plaintiff’s arrest in 1999. They report that the plaintiff was in possession of a
bag containing stolen property when he was arrested. However, the plaintiff
produced, in an appendix to his objection to the motions for summary
judgment, testimony from one of the arresting officers indicating that this bag
actually was found in a dumpster near where he was arrested. This factual
discrepancy is significant for purposes of summary judgment here only if it is
19
material to the determination of substantial truth. See Coco, 154 N.H. at 356
(defining “material”). We conclude that it is not material. The location of the
stolen property and the plaintiff’s possession of it may be considered important
facts in the prosecution of the plaintiff; however, the gist or sting of these
statements is that the plaintiff was arrested for receiving stolen property in
Hudson. Whether or not he possessed the stolen items at the time of his arrest
does not bear upon whether the fact of his arrest for that particular crime is
substantially true. See Faigin, 978 F. Supp. at 425 (disputed issue of fact as to
whether gist or sting is substantially true). Accordingly, we uphold the trial
court’s grant of summary judgment as to statements 51, 52, 53 and 54 on the
basis of substantial truth.
As for the defendants, they appear to contend that the statements on
which the trial court did not grant summary judgment are substantially true
because they pertain to criminal activity, the plaintiff admitted a number of
previous criminal activities, and his involvement in criminal activity is clear
from the article when it is read as a whole. While the plaintiff may have been
involved in criminal activity, he denies the facts underlying the challenged
statements at issue here, thereby rendering substantial truth a question for the
jury. For example, one of the statements indicates that the plaintiff is
suspected of having perpetrated “more than 1000 home burglaries.” There can
be no doubt that publishing suspicions about the plaintiff’s involvement in
additional crimes (beyond those to which he admitted or for which he has been
arrested), even in the context of the whole article, is capable of defaming him.
See Catalfo v. Jensen, 657 F. Supp. 463, 466 (D.N.H. 1987) (“Whether a
communication is capable of bearing a defamatory meaning is an issue of law
[for] the Court. Only if the Court determines that language is defamatory is
there then the question for the jury whether the communication was in fact
understood by its recipient in the defamatory sense.”); see also Burke v. Town
of Walpole, 405 F.3d 66, 94-95 (1st Cir. 2005) (“Words may be found to be
defamatory if they hold the plaintiff up to contempt, hatred, scorn or ridicule,
or tend to impair his standing in the community. Imputations of criminality
generally fit the bill.” (quotation and citations omitted)); Chagnon v. Union-
Leader Co., 103 N.H. 426, 434 (1961). And, while it may be true that the
plaintiff was a suspect in a number of burglaries, it remains for the jury to
determine the substantial truth of the defendants’ characterizations of those
suspicions, especially since the plaintiff denies them. The same reasoning
applies to the other statements with regard to which the trial court declined to
enter summary judgment.
Accordingly,
[a]lthough it is not necessary for the defendant[s] to
prove the literal truth of a defamatory statement in
every detail but only that it is substantially true[,] we
20
cannot say as a matter of law that the defendant[s]
met that burden in this case. The jury could find on
the evidence that the defamatory statements . . . were
untrue.
Chagnon, 103 N.H. at 437. Therefore, based upon our review of the record, we
uphold the trial court’s denial of summary judgment as to the remaining
statements.
VII. Statements of Opinion
All of the defendants moved for summary judgment on the basis that
their respective statements were not libelous because they were statements of
opinion. The trial court granted summary judgment with respect to Flynn’s
statements, concluding that they were statements of opinion, but denied
summary judgment with respect to the police defendants’ statements,
concluding that they were statements of alleged facts or implied, undisclosed
defamatory facts.
A statement of opinion is not actionable unless it may reasonably be
understood to imply the existence of defamatory fact as the basis for the
opinion. Nash, 127 N.H. at 219; see also Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 497
U.S. 1, 18-19 (1990). Whether a given statement can be read as being or
implying an actionable statement of fact is a question of law to be determined
by the trial court in the first instance, considering the context of the
publication as a whole. Nash, 127 N.H. at 219. If an average reader could
reasonably understand a statement as actionably factual, then there is an
issue for a jury’s determination and summary judgment must be denied. Id.
Citing two affidavits attached to his objection to the motions for
summary judgment, the plaintiff argues that all of Flynn’s statements could be
understood as asserting facts or as being based upon undisclosed facts. Not
so. As the trial court noted, Flynn’s statements constituted her
opinion about the plaintiff and [were] based completely
on information provided by others as disclosed in the
article. It cannot reasonably be concluded that Flynn’s
opinion was based on any undisclosed facts,
defamatory or otherwise. She was simply presented
with a set of hypothetical facts which were disclosed in
the article and rendered an opinion limited to those
facts.
The affidavits cited by the plaintiff merely summarize passages from the article,
21
and contain assertions that the affiants could not imagine the plaintiff would
commit the criminal activity referenced in the article. Such assertions do not
defeat summary judgment as to Flynn. See Salitan v. Tinkham, 103 N.H. 100,
103 (1960) (affidavits must contain facts not legal conclusions). Accordingly,
we uphold the trial court’s grant of summary judgment to Flynn and to the
Telegraph defendants as to Flynn’s statements.
Gosselin, Anderson, Droney and Bousquet contend that their statements
were also protected opinions. However, we agree with the trial court that even
assuming arguendo these statements are opinions, they are clearly based upon
undisclosed facts resulting from unspecified investigations. See Jorg v.
Cincinnati Black United Front, 792 N.E.2d 781, 784 (Ohio Ct. App. 2003)
(accusations of criminal activity generally give rise to “clear factual
implications”). Thus, an average reader could reasonably understand the
officers’ statements as actionably factual, and summary judgment was properly
denied as to them on this ground. Nash, 127 N.H. at 219.
The cases cited by the defendants do not change our conclusion. For
example, in Jorg, a police officer brought a defamation action against a civil
rights organization that distributed a letter to local media, which was
published, generally accusing the police department and some of its members
of murder, rape and planting false evidence. Jorg, 792 N.E.2d at 782-83. The
Ohio Court of Appeals noted that oftentimes these types of accusations would
be considered factual – as opposed to opinionative. Id. at 784-85. However,
given the unique nature and tenor of the letter, the court concluded that it was
“hyperbole,” “meant to be persuasive,” “a call to action,” and “meant to cause
outrage in the reader.” Id. at 786. Indeed, the court deemed the letter at issue
“a persuasive piece of advocacy and not a news article purporting to be
objective reporting.” Id. As such, the letter and its statements were very
clearly opinionative. In contrast, the article at issue in this appeal is not
intended to be a persuasive call to action. Rather, it is presented as an
objective reporting of the plaintiff’s alleged and admitted criminal activities.
Accordingly, we conclude that Jorg is distinguishable.
VIII. Limited Purpose Public Figure and Actual Malice
The police defendants contended that they were entitled to summary
judgment because the plaintiff should be considered a limited-purpose public
figure who cannot prove actual malice. The trial court found “that the plaintiff
is a private person and not a public figure and thus, is not required to prove
that the statements were made with ‘actual malice.’”
In an effort to strike a balance between First
Amendment freedoms and state defamation laws, [we]
22
accord[ ] . . . significance to the [public or private]
status of each individual plaintiff. Under the
taxonomy developed by the [United States] Supreme
Court, private plaintiffs can succeed in defamation
actions on a state-set standard of proof (typically,
negligence), whereas the Constitution imposes a higher
hurdle for public figures and requires them to prove
actual malice.
Pendleton v. City of Haverhill, 156 F.3d 57, 66 (1st Cir. 1998); see also Gertz v.
Robert Welch, Inc., 418 U.S. 323, 347 (1974). Determining whether an
individual is a public or private figure presents a threshold question of law, see
Nash, 127 N.H. at 222, which is “grist for the court’s—not the jury’s—mill.”
Pendleton, 156 F.3d at 67.
The United States Supreme Court has created two subclassifications of
public figures: (1) persons who are public figures for all purposes; and (2) so-
called limited-purpose public figures who are public figures for particular
public controversies. Gertz, 418 U.S. at 351. With respect to the first group,
“an individual may achieve such pervasive fame or notoriety that he becomes a
public figure for all purposes and in all contexts.” Id. When determining that
an individual is this type of public figure, courts should
not lightly assume that a citizen’s participation in
community and professional affairs rendered him a
public figure for all purposes. Absent clear evidence of
general fame or notoriety in the community, and
pervasive involvement in the affairs of society, an
individual should not be deemed a public personality
for all aspects of his life.
Id. at 352. In addition and significant to this appeal, a person does not
automatically become this type of public figure simply because he engages in
criminal activity. Wolston v. Reader’s Digest Assn., Inc., 443 U.S. 157, 167
(1979); see also Bender v. City of Seattle, 664 P.2d 492, 504 (Wash. 1983) (“[A]
person is not considered a ‘public figure’ solely because that person is a
criminal defendant, has sought relief through the courts, or is involved in a
controversy which is newsworthy.” (citations omitted)).
As to the second group, individuals may become limited-purpose public
figures when they “have thrust themselves to the forefront of particular public
controversies in order to influence the resolution of the issues involved.” Gertz,
418 U.S. at 345. Then, they “become[ ] a public figure for a limited range of
issues.” Id. at 351. Courts make the limited-purpose public figure
determination “by looking to the nature and extent of an individual’s
23
participation in the particular controversy giving rise to the defamation.” Id. at
352.
Finally, we must draw a distinction between these public figures and
private citizens.
Even if the foregoing generalities do not obtain
in every instance, the communications media are
entitled to act on the assumption that public officials
and public figures have voluntarily exposed themselves
to increased risk of injury from defamatory falsehood
concerning them. No such assumption is justified
with respect to a private individual. He has not
accepted public office or assumed an influential role in
ordering society. He has relinquished no part of his
interest in the protection of his own good name, and
consequently he has a more compelling call on the
courts for redress of injury inflicted by defamatory
falsehood. Thus, private individuals are not only more
vulnerable to injury than public officials and public
figures; they are also more deserving of recovery.
Id. at 345 (quotations and citation omitted). Accordingly, private plaintiffs need
not establish actual malice to recover actual damages. See Pendleton, 156
F.3d at 66.
We now apply these general principles to the present case. The
defendants argue that the plaintiff is a limited-purpose public figure by virtue
of his involvement in numerous criminal activities. Although a person does not
automatically become an all-purpose public figure simply because he engages
in criminal activity, some courts have ruled that a convicted criminal can
become a limited-purpose public figure depending upon the nature of his
involvement in crime. See, e.g., Ruebke v. Globe Communications Corp., 738
P.2d 1246, 1252 (Kan. 1987). For example, in Ruebke, the plaintiff had
committed a triple murder, the resulting investigation of which was highly
publicized and thrust him to the forefront of public attention. Id. The court
held that the crime committed was a public controversy and that the nature
and extent of Ruebke’s participation in it was enough to cause him to become a
public figure. Id. Similarly, in Talley v. WHIO TV-7, 722 N.E.2d 103, 106-07
(Ohio Ct. App. 1998), the court held that a defendant was a limited-purpose
public figure where he attempted to murder his wife by stabbing her
repeatedly, and the media covered his arrest and trial. The court determined
that the defendant’s crime was a matter of substantial public interest and
controversy. Id. at 107.
24
Here, by contrast, the crimes to which the plaintiff has admitted (and
those to which he has not) are not matters of public controversy. They are
burglaries that, while serious, affected those whose homes had been burgled
but did not otherwise garner much public attention. Indeed, as the trial court
quite properly found, “It is only because of the article that any publicity as to
the plaintiff was generated. There is no independent evidence to suggest that
the plaintiff has obtained independent notoriety or special prominence in the
public eye.” Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s conclusion that the
plaintiff was not a limited-purpose public figure and therefore would not be
required to establish actual malice.
IX. Qualified Privilege
All of the police defendants argued to the trial court that they were
entitled to summary judgment because they enjoyed a qualified privilege to
make their remarks. They argued that the qualified privilege protected their
communications with Trudell because they spoke with him in the course of
their official duties as law enforcement agents. The trial court held that “the
police officers’ statements were not conditionally privileged.”
On appeal, Gosselin argues that application of the privilege is justified
“both as a specific cautionary tale of the residents’ vulnerability to theft and to
demonstrate the service provided to the Town by its tax-supported police
department.” Gosselin further contends that the police had a legitimate
interest in educating the public about the facts of the plaintiff’s arrest, their
extensive investigation, and the importance of the arrest.
As we noted earlier, application of a privilege can absolve a defendant
from liability for libelous statements. Pierson, 147 N.H. at 763-64. Privileged
communications are generally divided into two classes: (1) those that are
absolutely privileged; and (2) those that are qualifiedly or conditionally
privileged. Id. at 764. On one hand, if a communication is absolutely
privileged, the speaker is absolutely immune from suit regardless of his or her
motive in making the communication. Id. at 763-64. Absolute privileges are
present in a narrow class of cases. Id. at 764. On the other hand, a
conditional or qualified privilege may be “established if the facts, although
untrue, were published on a lawful occasion, in good faith, for a justifiable
purpose, and with a belief, founded on reasonable grounds of its truth.”
Touma v. St. Mary’s Bank, 142 N.H. 762, 765 (1998). Facts or evidence used
in mounting a substantial truth defense may overlap with those used to
demonstrate the applicability of a qualified or conditional privilege (i.e., to show
good faith), but the two defenses are not the same and the inability to claim
one does not necessarily preclude an individual from claiming the other. In
any event, if all of the circumstances enumerated above are not present or if
25
there is actual malice, the speaker’s immunity from suit may be lost. Pierson,
147 N.H. at 764; see also Simpkins v. Snow, 139 N.H. 735, 740 (1995).
Since, under our test, a speaker is not always entitled to claim a
conditional or qualified privilege, it follows that “[n]ot every statement made to
a newspaper reporter by a police officer in the course of an investigation is
protected . . . .” Lee v. City of Rochester, 600 N.Y.S.2d 564, 565 (App. Div.
1993). This is true even though the qualified privilege protects the need “to
allow public officials to speak freely on matters of public importance in the
exercise of their official duties.” Burke, 405 F.3d at 94.
Other jurisdictions have also concluded that, with respect to police
officers, application of the qualified privilege has its limits. For example, the
Louisiana Supreme Court held
that law enforcement officers, whose duty includes
charging persons with crimes, should be allowed to
report the fact of a criminal investigation and an arrest
without fear of a defamation action if the person is
cleared of the charges, [however,] an officer cannot add
additional injurious statements that the officer had no
reason to believe were true. Such a restriction of the
privilege should not have a chilling effect on the free
reporting of criminal investigations and arrests, but
should prevent occurrences . . . where the officer not
only reported the investigation and arrest, but also
reported facts pertaining to guilt that were not
developed in the investigation.
Trentecosta v. Beck, 703 So. 2d 552, 564 (La. 1997). Similarly, the
Washington Supreme Court held that “[t]he right to inform the public . . . does
not include a license to make gratuitous statements concerning the facts of a
case or disparaging the character of other parties to an action.” Bender, 664
P.2d at 504.
Relying primarily upon Slocinski v. Radwan, 83 N.H. 501, 504 (1929),
the trial court ruled that the officers could not claim the privilege because: (1)
the statements were not made to release important information to the media
and the general public on an arrest, a possible threat to the community, or law
enforcement practices; (2) they were not published to a narrow group that
shared an interest in the communication; and (3) the police officers and the
Telegraph defendants did not share a corresponding duty or interest in the
subject. In so ruling, the trial court appears to have fashioned a more
particularized formulation of the qualified privilege inquiry and then ruled, as a
26
matter of law, that the privilege did not apply under that more particularized
test.
We disagree with the trial court’s determination for two reasons. First,
we acknowledge that some jurisdictions appear to view the speaker’s
entitlement to claim a qualified privilege as a question of law, see, e.g., Bender,
644 P.2d at 504-05; Burke, 405 F.3d at 94-95; however, we have held that it is
one of fact. See Pierson, 147 N.H. at 764 (“the question whether the speaker is
entitled to claim the [qualified] privilege is one for the trier of fact”). Second, we
have not previously articulated a special formulation of the qualified privilege
in the case of police defendants, and we decline to do so here. Rather, in light
of the above-described limitations upon when a speaker is entitled to claim the
privilege, we conclude that the test laid out in Pierson, 147 N.H. at 763-64,
adequately safeguards the interests of law enforcement personnel and
defamation plaintiffs. Consequently, it is this formulation of the privilege that
should apply.
Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s ruling on this issue. See Pierson,
147 N.H. at 764. On remand, the trier of fact should determine the availability
of the privilege by deciding whether it is “established if the facts, although
untrue, were published on a lawful occasion, in good faith, for a justifiable
purpose, and with a belief, founded on reasonable grounds of its truth.”
Touma, 142 N.H. at 765. These determinations may require a trial, or, if the
court finds no genuine issues of material fact, the applicability of the privilege
may be resolved on summary judgment. See Concord Group Ins. Co’s v.
Sleeper, 135 N.H. 67, 69 (1991) (“It has been recognized that the presence of a
question involving state of mind or intent does not automatically foreclose the
application of summary judgment, but it should be cautiously and sparingly
invoked in such instances.”).
X. Conclusion
Consistent with our analysis above and for the foregoing reasons, we
reverse the trial court’s grant of summary judgment on the issue of Thomas
being a libel-proof plaintiff and vacate its ruling on the issue of the applicability
of a qualified privilege to the police defendants. In all other respects, we affirm.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
vacated in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred.
27