THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-794
RALPH L. AKINS & a.
v.
SECRETARY OF STATE
Argued: July 21, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2006
Twomey Law Office, of Epsom (Paul Twomey on the brief and orally), for
the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Wynn E. Arnold, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The petitioners, who are the New Hampshire Democratic
party and individuals who ran as Democratic, Republican, or Libertarian
candidates in the 2004 New Hampshire general election, appeal an order of the
Superior Court (McGuire, J.) denying their petition for declaratory judgment
that the organization of parties and candidates on New Hampshire general
election ballots is unconstitutional. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The petitioners alleged that they
were disadvantaged in the 2004 New Hampshire general election by the
provisions of RSA 656:5 and requested that the trial court mandate a method
of randomly selecting both party order and candidate order on the ballot. At
that time, RSA 656:5 provided for an “office block” format ballot, in which all of
the candidates for an office were grouped within a box. RSA 656:5, II required
that the candidates of the party that had received the highest total votes for all
offices combined in the preceding election would be listed first within each
office box. RSA 656:5, II further organized the ballot by providing that the
candidates would be arranged alphabetically by surname within each party.
The language of RSA 656:5 in effect in 2004 read as follows:
Listing Candidates on Ballot.
I. The names of all candidates nominated in accordance with the
election laws shall be arranged by office in accordance with the
provisions of RSA 656:7. The names of candidates for any one
office shall not be split into more than one column.
II. All candidates for the same office shall be placed on separate
lines within a separate box. The name of each candidate shall be
grouped according to the party which nominates the candidate,
and the names of the candidates of the party which received the
largest number of votes at the last preceding state general election
shall be listed first. The names of the candidates shall be printed
with the given name first, and the candidates shall be listed
alphabetically according to their surnames within each party
grouping. The name of the party which nominates the candidate
shall be printed near the candidate’s name.
RSA 656:5 (Supp. 2004) (amended 2004).
In 2004, the legislature amended RSA 656:5. The current version
establishes a “party column” format ballot, which groups candidates by party,
listing all of one party’s candidates for all offices in one column. RSA 656:5
(Supp. 2005). The current statute requires that the first column on the ballot
represent the party that received the most total votes in the preceding general
election. Id. Thus, the current statute shares the former statute’s requirement
that the first candidate listed for any given office on the ballot is the candidate
from the party that received the most total votes in the preceding general
election. Id. The current statute no longer requires that candidates be listed in
alphabetical order; however, the Secretary of State testified at trial in this case
that the 2006 ballots will also list by alphabetical order within each column the
candidates from the same party running for the same office. Id. The current
statute reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
Party Columns. The names of all candidates nominated in
accordance with the election laws shall be arranged upon the state
general election ballot in successive party columns. Each separate
column shall contain the names of the candidates of one party;
2
except that, if only a part of a full list of candidates is nominated
by a political party, 2 or more such lists may be arranged whenever
practicable in the same column. The first column shall contain the
names of the candidates of the party which received the largest
number of votes at the last preceding state general election. Id.
At trial, the petitioners argued that the candidates of the party positioned
first on the ballot have an advantage over candidates from other parties. The
petitioners also argued that candidates appearing at the top of an alphabetical
list have an advantage over candidates appearing at the bottom of an
alphabetical list. The petitioners presented expert testimony that, when
choices are presented visually, such as on a survey or ballot, the tendency of
respondents who have no meaningful information, or have conflicting
information, about their choices is to select the choice listed first. This is
known as the “primacy effect.” The expert testified that, in elections, voters’
education levels and knowledge about the candidates affects the primacy effect,
with the more educated and knowledgeable voters being less influenced by the
primacy effect, and vice versa. In addition, difficulty of choice also affects the
primacy effect, with voters tending to select choices listed first when presented
with ballots containing many candidates, parties, or issues. The expert also
testified regarding the primacy effect in New Hampshire elections, concluding
that some New Hampshire voters, like voters in other states, will be influenced
to choose the first candidate or party listed for an office because of the
candidate’s or party’s position on the ballot. The State presented expert
testimony that contradicted the petitioners’ expert testimony.
Secretary of State William Gardner testified at trial that the last time any
party other than the Republican Party was listed first on a New Hampshire
general election ballot was 1966, after the Democratic party gained the majority
of votes in the 1964 general election. Secretary Gardner also testified regarding
prior testimony that he gave before the senate public affairs committee
regarding the primacy effect. Gardner affirmed at trial that he had told the
committee that studies showed that the primacy effect can confer as much as a
six to ten percent advantage upon candidates whose names appear on lists as
long as twelve candidates.
The trial court found that the petitioners’ expert was more credible than
the State’s. Based upon testimony from the petitioners’ expert and the
Secretary of State, the trial court found that the primacy effect influences
elections both nationwide and in New Hampshire, stating that “primacy effects
influence, to some small degree, the outcome of New Hampshire elections.”
The State does not appeal this finding.
After making its factual findings, the trial court addressed the
petitioners’ constitutional arguments. The trial court first addressed the
3
petitioners’ argument that the party order established by RSA 656:5 and the
candidate order practiced by the Secretary of State violate the voting rights
established in Part I, Article 11 of the New Hampshire Constitution, which
provides, in pertinent part: “Every inhabitant of the state, having the proper
qualifications, has an equal right to be elected into office.” N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 11. The trial court applied a rational basis level of scrutiny and found that
the organization of the ballot was a permissible regulation of voting. The trial
court next addressed the petitioners’ argument that RSA 656:5 violates the
New Hampshire Constitution’s equal protection guarantees under Part I,
Articles 1, 2, 10, 12, and 14. The trial court also applied a rational basis test
to the equal protection argument, concluding that distinguishing between
political parties on the basis of success in prior elections and the organization
of candidates based upon alphabetization served the legitimate governmental
interest of ordering a ballot.
The petitioners appeal, arguing that rational basis was an incorrect level
of scrutiny to apply. Strict scrutiny should apply in this case, the petitioners
argue, because the equal right to be elected is a fundamental right. The
arrangement of parties and candidates established by RSA 656:5 and practiced
by the Secretary of State impinges upon this fundamental right because the
arrangement unequally grants the benefits of the primacy effect to the majority
party and candidates whose surnames begin with the first letters of the
alphabet.
The State responds that the trial court properly used rational basis
review because the positioning of parties on a ballot according to their vote
counts in the prior election does not implicate a suspect class or a fundamental
right and falls within the State’s right to reasonably regulate elections. RSA
656:5 rationally establishes a logical and easily understood ballot, which, the
State argues, is sufficient to survive rational basis review.
It is the role of this court to interpret the State Constitution and to
resolve disputes arising under it. Petition of Below, 151 N.H. 135, 139 (2004).
Whether or not a statute is constitutional is a question of law, which we review
de novo. Gonya v. Comm’r, N.H. Ins. Dep’t., 153 N.H. ___, ___, 899 A.2d 278,
280 (2006). “In reviewing a statute, we presume it to be constitutional and we
will not declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds.” Id. Because the
petitioners argue only under the State Constitution, we base our decision upon
it alone, citing federal cases for guidance only. Id.
The State does not appeal the trial court’s finding, which is supported by
the evidence adduced at trial, that the primacy effect confers an advantage in
elections. Accordingly, we accept this finding. We note that other appellate
courts have accepted findings that the first position on a ballot confers an
4
advantage. Tsongas v. Secretary of the Commonwealth, 291 N.E.2d 149, 151-
52 (Mass. 1972); Gould v. Grubb, 536 P.2d 1337, 1341 (Cal. 1975) (en banc).
We first address the petitioners’ argument that rational basis was an
incorrect level of scrutiny to apply to their claim that RSA 656:5 violates Part I,
Article 11 of the New Hampshire Constitution because the equal right to be
elected is a fundamental right. The petitioners are correct that, generally,
when governmental action impinges upon a fundamental right, such matters
are entitled to review under strict judicial scrutiny. Claremont School Dist. v.
Governor, 142 N.H. 462, 472 (1997). Although the right to vote is
fundamental, see McGraw v. Exeter Region Coop. Sch. Dist., 145 N.H. 709, 713
(2001), we have never expressly determined the classification of the equal right
to be elected. We have previously stated, however, that the right to vote and
the equal right to be elected are “closely connected.” Opinion of the Justices,
83 N.H. 589, 592-93 (1927) (overruled on other grounds). Both of these rights
have been linked in our constitution in Part I, Article 11 since 1784. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 11; see also Wilkes v. Jackson, 101 N.H. 420, 422 (1958).
Other courts have recognized the close connection between the rights of
candidates and the right to vote. Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780, 786
(1983) (stating, “the rights of voters and the rights of candidates do not lend
themselves to neat separation; laws that affect candidates always have at least
some theoretical, correlative effect on voters” (quotation omitted)); Gould, 536
P.2d at 1338-39 (concluding, “any procedure which allocates [an] advantageous
position[] to a particular class of candidates inevitably discriminates against
voters supporting all other candidates”). Because the equal right to be elected
operates so closely with the fundamental right to vote, and because of the
importance that both rights have in our democratic system of government, and
because Part I, Article 11 expressly so provides for the equal right to be elected,
we conclude that every New Hampshire inhabitant’s equal right to be elected
into office under Part I, Article 11 is a fundamental right.
Simply because the equal right to be elected under Part I, Article 11 is
fundamental does not mean that any impingement upon that right triggers
strict scrutiny, however. Article I, Section 4, Clause 1 of the Federal
Constitution grants states the right to regulate the time, place, and manner of
state and federal elections. Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 433 (1992); see
also Kibbe v. Town of Milton, 142 N.H. 288, 293-94 (1997). Thus, we must
balance the legislature’s right to regulate elections with citizens’ rights to vote
and be elected. The United States Supreme Court has struck a balance
between similar rights in the following manner:
[T]o subject every voting regulation to strict scrutiny and to require
that the regulation be narrowly tailored to advance a compelling
state interest . . . would tie the hands of States seeking to assure
that elections are operated equitably and efficiently.
5
. . . .
A court considering a challenge to a state election law must weigh
the character and magnitude of the asserted injury to the rights
. . . that the plaintiff seeks to vindicate against the precise interests
put forward by the State as justifications for the burden imposed
by its rule, taking into consideration the extent to which those
interests make it necessary to burden the plaintiff’s rights.
Burdick, 504 U.S. at 433-34 (quotations omitted). Under this analytical
framework, when the election law at issue subjects the plaintiff’s rights to
“severe” restrictions, the regulation must withstand strict scrutiny to be
constitutional. Id. at 434. When the election law imposes only “reasonable,
nondiscriminatory restrictions” upon the plaintiff’s rights, then “the State’s
important regulatory interests are generally sufficient to justify the
restrictions.” Id. (quotations omitted). We conclude that this analysis properly
considers the rights of voters and candidates under Part I, Article 11 of the New
Hampshire Constitution as well as the legislature’s right to regulate elections.
Applying the above framework to the instant case, the task before us is
to consider whether RSA 656:5 and the Secretary of State’s practice of
alphabetizing candidates subject the petitioners’ equal right to be elected to
severe restrictions or whether the statute and the alphabetization impose only
“reasonable, nondiscriminatory restrictions.” The Secretary of State’s
testimony that the primacy effect can confer an advantage as great as six to ten
percent in races where there are numerous candidates demonstrates the
potency of the primacy effect. The trial court’s finding that the primacy effect
influences, even to a small degree, the outcome of New Hampshire elections
confirms that the impact of the primacy effect may be sufficiently strong to
affect one candidate’s victory over another. By establishing a system that
grants the primacy effect to the party that received the most votes in the prior
election, RSA 656:5 denies candidates of minority parties an equal opportunity
to enjoy the advantages of the primacy effect, and, thus, an equal right to be
elected. The ordering of candidates in alphabetical order, either by statutory
mandate or by practice, similarly deprives candidates whose surnames do not
begin with letters near the beginning of the alphabet the equal right to be
elected. Although the trial court found that the primacy effect’s influence on
the outcome of elections is small, it is well known that elections are often
decided by narrow margins, and even a small degree of influence carries the
potential to change the result of an election. Thus, the persistent assignment
of the primacy effect’s benefits to some groups of candidates and not to others
places a severe restriction on the constitutionally enumerated equal right to be
elected. The ordering of parties on a ballot based upon votes in the prior
election and the alphabetization of candidates are not “reasonable,
6
nondiscriminatory restrictions,” because these restrictions discriminate against
candidates running in minority parties and against candidates whose
surnames do not begin with letters located near the beginning of the alphabet.
Accordingly, the relevant provision of RSA 656:5 and the Secretary of State’s
practice of alphabetizing candidates must comply with strict scrutiny to be
constitutional.
To comply with strict judicial scrutiny, the governmental restriction must
“be justified by a compelling governmental interest and must be necessary to
the accomplishment of its legitimate purpose.” Follansbee v. Plymouth Dist.
Ct., 151 N.H. 365, 367 (2004). The State argues that its interest is to promote
a logical and easily understood ballot by arranging it so that the party receiving
the most votes in the previous election receives first place on the ballot and so
that candidates of the same party running for multi-seat offices are arranged in
alphabetical order by surname. Although the State has a compelling interest
in creating a manageable ballot, see Storer v. Brown, 415 U.S. 724, 743 (1974);
Eu v. San Francisco County Democratic Cent. Comm., 489 U.S. 214, 231
(1989) (declaring that states have a compelling interest in preserving the
integrity of the election process), the State has failed to demonstrate that
arranging the ballot as required by RSA 656:5 and the practice of
alphabetization are necessary to create a manageable ballot. Other states have
created manageable ballots using other methods of organization, such as
rotating the names of the candidates for a particular office, e.g. Alaska Stat.
§ 15.15.030(6) (Supp. 2005); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 3505.03 (West 2005), or
randomly selecting the order of candidates for a particular office. E.g. Cal.
Elec. Code § 13112 (Deering Supp. 2006); 10 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/7-60 (West
Supp. 2006). Additionally, the legislature has already shown that it is able to
create a manageable ballot using a different method of organization that
minimizes the primacy effect. RSA 656:24 (Supp. 2005) dictates that, in
primary elections, candidates running for the same office shall be alternated on
the ballot “so that each name shall appear thereon as nearly as may be an
equal number of times at the top, at the bottom, and in each intermediate
place.”
Because neither the provision of RSA 656:5 requiring that the party
receiving the most votes in the prior election enjoy first place on the ballot nor
the Secretary of State’s practice of alphabetizing candidates is necessary to
achieve a manageable ballot, we hold that neither restriction survives strict
scrutiny, and that both are thus unconstitutional under Part I, Article 11 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. Although New Hampshire’s constitutionally
guaranteed equal right to be elected is one not shared by most states, we note
that other states have found unconstitutional statutes and election procedures
that provided for unequal or biased distribution of the primacy effect. See
Gould, 536 P.2d at 1345-47 (concluding that a city charter provision providing
priority ballot listing to incumbents and advantageous ballot position based
7
upon alphabetization of candidates failed strict scrutiny and violated the equal
protection clauses of the Federal and California Constitutions); Kautenburger
v. Jackson, 333 P.2d 293, 295 (Ariz. 1958) (declaring unconstitutional an
Arizona statute that provided for alphabetical listing of candidates on primary
election ballots that would be tallied by voting machines).
Due to our holding under Part I, Article 11, we need not address the
petitioners’ equal protection argument.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN, and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8