THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2005-883
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MARTIN HOLMES
Argued: November 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 19, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Martin Holmes, appeals his conviction by a
jury for felonious sexual assault for engaging in sexual penetration with a
person who was thirteen years of age or older but less than sixteen years of
age. See RSA 632-A:3, II (Supp. 2006) (amended 2006). He argues that the
Superior Court (Fauver, J.) erred when it ruled that the State did not have to
prove that he knew that the victim was under the age of legal consent. We
affirm.
The parties do not dispute the following facts: The defendant is twenty-
four years old. The victim met the defendant while walking with a friend in
Rochester. Although she was fifteen years old, she told the defendant that she
was seventeen. The victim and the defendant exchanged telephone numbers
and spoke on the phone a few days later. Approximately a week later, after
consuming alcohol, the victim phoned the defendant and arranged to meet him
at a local park, where they eventually had sexual intercourse.
The defendant was charged by grand jury indictment with felonious
sexual assault for having engaged in sexual penetration with a person, other
than his legal spouse, who was then fifteen years old. See RSA 632-A:3, II. At
the close of the State’s case, he moved to dismiss the charge on the ground
that the State had failed to prove that he knew that the victim was less than
sixteen years of age. Relying upon our prior case law, the trial court denied the
motion, ruling that the State did not have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant knew that the victim was less than sixteen years old. See
Goodrow v. Perrin, 119 N.H. 483, 488-89 (1979).
On appeal, the defendant invites us to overrule our prior precedent,
which holds that the offense of felonious sexual assault with a person who is
under the age of legal consent (statutory rape) “is a strict liability crime in that
an accused cannot assert as a legal defense that he did not know the
complainant was under the age of legal consent when penetration occurred.”
State v. Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 58-59 (2001); see Goodrow, 119 N.H. at 488-89.
For the reasons that follow, we decline his invitation.
The doctrine of stare decisis “demands respect in a society governed by
the rule of law,” because “when governing legal standards are open to revision
in every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of judicial will, with
arbitrary and unpredictable results.” Brannigan v. Usitalo, 134 N.H. 50, 53
(1991) (quotations omitted). “[W]hen asked to reconsider a previous holding,
the question is not whether we would decide the issue differently de novo, but
whether the ruling has come to be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement
was for that very reason doomed.” State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 678 (2005)
(quotations omitted); see Planned Parenthood of Southeastern PA. v. Casey,
505 U.S. 833, 854 (1992). Several factors inform our judgment, including
whether: (1) the rule has proven to be intolerable simply by defying practical
workability; (2) the rule is subject to a kind of reliance that would lend a
special hardship to the consequence of overruling; (3) related principles of law
have so far developed as to have left the old rule no more than a remnant of
abandoned doctrine; and (4) facts have so changed, or come to be seen so
differently, as to have robbed the old rule of significant application or
justification. Jacobs v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502,
505 (2003); Casey, 505 U.S. at 854-55.
The defendant concentrates upon factors (3) and (4), conceding that
factor (1) does not support overruling our prior precedent and contending that
factor (2) does not support adhering to stare decisis. We will assume, without
2
deciding, that factor (2) does not support adhering to stare decisis, and limit
our discussion to factors (3) and (4).
I. Development of Related Principles of Law
The defendant first contends that we failed to interpret the statutory rape
provision, RSA 632-A:3, II and its predecessors, correctly in our prior cases
because we did not take into account another provision of the Criminal Code,
RSA 626:2, I (1996). RSA 626:2, I, provides that a person may be found guilty
of a crime only when he or she “acts purposely, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently, as the law may require, with respect to each material element of
the offense.” The defendant asserts that RSA 626:2, I, mandates proof of a
culpable mens rea with respect to all material elements of the statutory rape
statute, including the defendant’s knowledge of the victim’s age.
We interpreted RSA 632-A:3, II in concert with RSA 626:2, I, in State v.
Goodwin, 140 N.H. 672 (1996). In that case, we held that “knowingly” is the
mens rea for felonious sexual assault involving sexual penetration with a
person under the age of legal consent. Goodwin, 140 N.H. at 675. We
explained that “when a statute defining an offense is silent with respect to the
mens rea, we will look to the common law origins of the crime.” Id. at 674. We
noted that the crime involved was rape, which “is generally considered to be a
general intent, rather than a specific intent, crime.” Id. “Whereas specific
intent commonly refers to a special mental element above and beyond that
required with respect to the criminal act itself, the general intent requirement
for rape means that no intent is requisite other than that evidenced by the
doing of the acts constituting the offense.” Id. (quotation omitted). Thus, as
the Criminal Code generally uses the term “purposely” in place of specific
intent and “knowingly” in place of general intent, we ruled that “knowingly”
was the mens rea for statutory rape. Id. at 674-75.
Although we did not discuss in Goodwin whether this mens rea applied
to the defendant’s knowledge of the victim’s age, we had previously held, in
effect, that a defendant’s knowledge of the victim’s age is not a material
element of statutory rape. See Goodrow, 119 N.H. at 488-89. The plaintiff in
Goodrow challenged the constitutionality of our statutory rape law, contending,
in part, that the statute was invalid because it lacked the requirement of
scienter. Id. at 487. We observed first that the statutory rape provision did not
allow a defense of honest or reasonable mistake as to the victim’s age. Id. at
488-89. We then ruled that the statute was not unconstitutional because it
did not allow for such a defense. Id. at 489. We rejected the plaintiff’s
assertion that such a defense was constitutionally required, explaining that the
United States Supreme Court “has never held that an honest mistake as to the
3
age of the [complainant] is a constitutional defense to statutory rape.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Since we decided Goodrow in 1979, the legislature has amended the
statutory rape law numerous times, but has not seen fit to add a mens rea or
to make reasonable mistake of age a defense. See Laws 1981, 415:4; Laws
1985, 228:4; Laws 1997, 220:3; Laws 2003, 226:3, 4. The legislature most
recently amended the statutory rape provision during this past legislative
session. See Laws 2006, 162:1. As amended, the statutory rape provision
makes it a felony to engage in sexual penetration with a person other than
one’s legal spouse who is thirteen years of age or older and less than sixteen
years of age only where the age difference between the actor and the other
person is three years or more. See id.
By amending the statutory rape provision, but failing to insert a mens
rea or provide a reasonable mistake of age defense, the legislature has
impliedly accepted our construction of that provision. See Del Norte, Inc. v.
Provencher, 142 N.H. 535, 539 (1997). It is well settled that “when the
legislature reenacts a statute on which a repeated practical construction has
been placed by the Bench and Bar, that reenactment constitutes a legislative
adoption of the longstanding construction.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted); see also Com. v. Miller, 432 N.E.2d 463, 465 (Mass. 1982). Although
at oral argument, the defendant urged us to recognize an exception to this
general rule, we decline to do so.
The defendant next asserts that because adult consensual sexual
relationships are not as regulated as they were when we decided our prior
cases, there is no longer any justification for permitting strict liability for
statutory rape. The defendant notes, for instance, that fornication is no longer
a crime. Additionally, since we decided Goodrow, the United States Supreme
Court ruled in Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 562, 564 (2003), that
substantive due process precludes the State from criminalizing private
consensual sexual conduct between adults. Thus, the defendant reasons,
“Assuming that the accused has no reason to believe that a consensual sexual
partner has not reached the age of consent, . . . his mental state is that of a
person engaging in conduct that is not only lawful, but constitutionally
protected.” As he explains: “In an age where there is no fornication law and
the federal constitution would forbid any such law, one who engages in sex
with a person not his or her spouse cannot be said necessarily to have a
‘culpable’ mens rea.”
We decided Goodrow, however, assuming, without deciding, that the
plaintiff had a constitutionally protected privacy right to engage in consensual
heterosexual intercourse with other adults. Goodrow, 119 N.H. at 486.
Specifically, we held:
4
[E]ven assuming that the plaintiff has a federal privacy right to
engage in consensual heterosexual intercourse with adults, the
right does not require the invalidation of [the statutory rape
statute]. The reason is that the United States Constitution does
not require us to permit the defense of an honest and reasonable
mistake to a charged violation of the statutory [rape] provisions.
Id. at 489. Thus, the developments in the law since we decided Goodrow would
not change our analysis.
Moreover, intent to commit the then-legally wrongful act of fornication
was only one of the rationales for statutory rape laws. See Collins v. State, 691
So. 2d 918, 923 (Miss.), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 877 (1997). The other rationale
concerned “the need for strict accountability to protect young [people].” Id. As
we explained in Goodrow:
The State, by enacting [the statutory rape provision], has fixed the
age at which a minor person may consent to sexual intercourse. In
essence, this provision prohibits an adult, such as the plaintiff,
from engaging in sexual intercourse with a person who is below the
fixed age of consent. It is well established that the State has an
independent interest in the well-being of its youth. One reason for
this heightened interest is the vulnerability of children to harm.
Another reason for the State’s concern is that minors below a
certain age are unable to make mature judgments about important
matters.
Goodrow, 119 N.H. at 486 (quotation and citations omitted). This justification
for making statutory rape a strict liability crime remains viable, despite
decreased regulation of adult consensual sexual activity.
Statutory rape laws are based upon “a policy determination by the
legislature that persons under the age of sixteen are not competent to consent
to sexual contact or sexual intercourse.” State v. Jadowski, 680 N.W.2d 810,
817 (Wis. 2004); see Collins, 691 So. 2d at 923. “The statutes are designed to
impose the risk of criminal penalty on the adult, when the adult engages in
sexual behavior with a minor.” Jadowski, 680 N.W.2d at 817; see also Carlson,
146 N.H. at 59 (defendant placed himself in risky circumstances, relying upon
victim’s mature behavior to substantiate her representation of her age). In this
way, these statutes accomplish deterrence. Owens v. State, 724 A.2d 43, 54
(Md.), cert. denied, 527 U.S. 1012 (1999). “The reason that mistake of fact as
to the [child]’s age constitutes no defense is, not that these crimes like public
welfare offenses require no mens rea, but that a contrary result would strip the
victims of the protection which the law exists to afford.” State v. Yanez, 716
5
A.2d 759, 769 (R.I. 1998) (quotation omitted); see Owens, 724 A.2d at 54 (“The
legislature’s decision to disallow a mistake-of-age defense to statutory rape
furthers its interest in protecting children in ways that may not be
accomplished if the law were to allow such a defense.”). “If reasonable mistake
were recognized as a defense, the very purpose of the [statutory rape] statute
would be frustrated and the deterrent effect considerably diminished.” Collins,
691 So. 2d at 923.
The defendant next suggests that Goodrow is contrary to the modern
trend of judicial decisions in this area. He notes that “several state courts have
overruled prior precedent and have required either a culpable mens rea or have
allowed for some kind of reasonable mistake of age defense.” To the contrary,
“[i]n most states . . . a mistake of age, no matter how reasonable, is no
defense.” Loewy, Statutory Rape in a Post Lawrence v. Texas World, 58 SMU L.
Rev. 77, 88-89 (Winter 2005); see Carpenter, On Statutory Rape, Strict
Liability, and the Public Welfare Offense Model, 53 Am. U. L. Rev. 313, 316-17
(2003). While “mistake of age” “has been asserted successfully as a defense in
several states and is recognized by the Model Penal Code when the child is over
the age of ten years, . . . this defense remains the minority view. Far more
states have rejected [it].” Collins, 691 So. 2d at 923.
To the extent that a reasonable mistake of age defense exists in certain
states, it is generally because the legislature has amended the applicable
statute, not because the judiciary has engrafted this defense onto a statute
that does not contain it. Indeed, at oral argument, the defendant conceded
that hardly any states have a reasonable mistake of age defense. See
Carpenter, supra at 385-91 (legislatures in three states have enacted statutes
in which reasonable mistake of age is a defense regardless of age of victim;
legislatures in eighteen states have enacted statutes providing for defense of
reasonable mistake of age depending upon relative age of victim and
perpetrator; in remaining twenty-nine states, reasonable mistake of age is no
defense to statutory rape). As one commentator has noted, “[I]n more recent
times it has been recognized that [whether there should be a reasonable
mistake of age defense to statutory rape] is a policy matter that ought to be
specifically addressed in the statutory definition of the crime.” W. LaFave,
Substantive Criminal Law § 17.4(c) at 650 (2d ed. 2003).
For all of the above reasons, we conclude that the defendant has failed to
demonstrate that our decision in Goodrow is “no more than a remnant of
abandoned doctrine.” Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 505 (quotation omitted).
6
II. Changed Circumstances
The defendant next contends that changed circumstances have robbed
Goodrow of significant application or justification. Id. Specifically, he observes
that the age of consent has risen while the age at which adolescents are
becoming sexually active has declined over time. Further, he notes, the degree
of punishment and social ostracism associated with the crime of statutory rape
has escalated.
While these legitimate policy concerns might support a reasonable
mistake of age defense, we believe that it is up to the legislature, not us, to
create one. When we decided Goodrow, 119 N.H. at 489, we were “not
concerned with the wisdom of the . . . law’s policy in view of today’s sexual
mores. Instead, we [were] concerned only with whether the current law
violate[d] the Constitution by not allowing for a defense of honest or reasonable
mistake.”
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7