THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2005-021
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL COCHRANE
Argued: February 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: April 26, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (David W. Ruoff, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Ted Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and
orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. After a jury trial, the defendant, Daniel Cochrane, was
convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI), fourth offense. See RSA 265:82,
:82-b, II(c) (2004 & Supp. 2005). The defendant appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Mangones, J.) denying his motion in limine to exclude the
arresting police officer’s testimony regarding the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus
(HGN) test. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On August 10, 2003, Officer
Marc Beaudry of the Manchester Police Department observed the defendant
driving the wrong way on a one-way street in Manchester. After stopping the
defendant, Beaudry noticed that his eyes were glassy and bloodshot and that
there was an odor of an alcoholic beverage coming from the car. Beaudry
asked the defendant to submit to four field sobriety tests, including the HGN
test. Based upon his observations during the field sobriety tests, Beaudry
arrested the defendant for DWI.
Approximately ten days before trial, the defendant filed a motion in
limine to exclude Beaudry’s testimony regarding his administration of the HGN
test. The defendant asserted that Beaudry was required to testify as an expert
witness in order to establish a proper foundation for its admissibility pursuant
to New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702 and State v. Dahood, 148 N.H. 723,
735 (2002). Because the State had not complied with the pretrial disclosure
requirements in Superior Court Rule 98 (Discovery in Criminal Cases) and RSA
516:29-a (Supp. 2005) (Disclosure of Expert Witnesses), the defendant
contended that Beaudry’s testimony was not admissible at trial. The State
countered that Beaudry’s testimony regarding the HGN test was not expert
testimony and, therefore, it was not required to comply with pretrial disclosure
requirements pertaining to expert witnesses. The trial court ruled, in
accordance with its interpretation of Dahood, that if the State laid the
appropriate foundation encompassing “[Beaudry’s] training and how [sic]
whether or not the predicates of the test were met,” Beaudry’s testimony
regarding the HGN test would be admissible.
On appeal, the defendant asserts that Beaudry’s testimony regarding the
administration and interpretation of the HGN test constituted expert scientific
testimony. He interprets Dahood as requiring expert testimony because in that
case we determined the admissibility of the HGN test under New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 702 and the Daubert test. See Daubert v. Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993); Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-
Rand, 148 N.H. 609 (2002) (adopting the Daubert test to determine the
admissibility of scientific evidence).
Relying upon State v. Arsenault, 115 N.H. 109 (1975), and its progeny,
however, the State argues that Beaudry’s testimony was lay testimony based
upon his observations of the defendant while the test was being administered.
The State asserts this interpretation comports with Dahood.
Evidentiary rulings are within the sound discretion of the trial court.
State v. Fernandez, 152 N.H. 233, 242 (2005). We review the trial court’s
ruling for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Lambert, 147
N.H. 295, 296 (2001). “We will reverse the trial court only if the appealing
party can demonstrate that the ruling was untenable or unreasonable and that
the error prejudiced the party’s case.” State v. Gonzalez, 150 N.H. 74, 77
(2003) (quotation omitted).
We described the HGN test in detail in Dahood. See Dahood, 148 N.H. at
728-29. In summary, it is a standardized field sobriety test designed to detect
nystagmus, i.e., an involuntary, rapid, back-and-forth jerking of the eyes. Id.
2
at 728. The administering police officer positions a stimulus, such as a pen,
penlight, or finger, approximately twelve to fifteen inches in front of the
suspect’s eyes and gradually moves the stimulus laterally towards the
suspect’s ear. Id. The officer observes the suspect’s eyeballs to detect the
following three signs, which could indicate intoxication: (1) the inability of the
eye to smoothly track the stimulus; (2) the presence of nystagmus at the eye’s
maximum horizontal deviation; and (3) the point at which nystagmus, if
present, begins as the stimulus is moved. Id. The officer tests each eye and
gives the suspect a point for each sign observed; therefore, a total of six points
is possible. State v. O’Key, 899 P.2d 663, 674 (Or. 1995).
In Dahood, we considered the admissibility of the HGN test as scientific
evidence under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702 and Daubert. Dahood,
148 N.H. at 726. We concluded that the HGN test is based upon scientific
principles that are reliable, and that HGN test results are admissible as a
matter of law provided their proponent presents “a qualified witness who can
testify about the subject.” Id. at 735. Such evidence is admissible for the
limited purpose of providing circumstantial evidence of intoxication. Id. at 730.
Thus, HGN test results are a factor to be considered when determining whether
a defendant is intoxicated and may not be introduced for the purpose of
establishing a specific BAC level. Id. at 734.
In Dahood, consistent with a majority of jurisdictions, we recognized that
“to establish a proper foundation, the State must put forth evidence that the
police officer who administered the HGN test is trained in the procedure and
that the test was properly administered at that time.” Id. at 735. Once the
State has established the requisite foundation regarding the police officer’s
training and administration of the HGN test, “a properly trained and qualified
police officer may introduce the HGN test results at trial.” Id. While Dahood
addressed the admissibility of the HGN test, it did not address whether the
testimony of the police officer introducing the HGN test results constitutes
expert or lay testimony.
“Expert testimony involves matters of scientific, mechanical, professional
or other like nature, which requires special study, experience, or observation
not within the common knowledge of the general public.” Gonzalez, 150 N.H.
at 77 (quotations omitted); see N.H. R. Ev. 702. In contrast, “[l]ay testimony
must be confined to personal observations which any lay person would be
capable of making.” Gonzalez, 150 N.H. at 77 (quotations omitted); see N.H. R.
Ev. 701.
The theory underlying HGN testing is that “alcohol consumption causes
nystagmus, and that a trained officer can detect such nystagmus.” Dahood,
148 N.H. at 734. A police officer’s testimony regarding his training, his
administration and scoring of the HGN test, and the HGN test results as
established by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
3
standards and guidelines does not require an understanding of the underlying
scientific mechanisms explaining the phenomenon of nystagmus itself. All that
is required is an understanding that alcohol consumption can cause
nystagmus, which can be detected by a trained police officer through observing
the defendant during the administration of an HGN test.
We do not dispute that the scientific and neurological mechanisms
behind the effects of alcohol on the nervous system and the phenomenon of
nystagmus are specialized and highly technical and, therefore, not within the
common knowledge of the general public. Therefore, testimony regarding these
mechanisms would qualify as expert testimony under Rule 702 and be subject
to pretrial disclosure requirements applying to expert testimony. Nevertheless,
so long as a trained police officer’s testimony is limited to: (1) his or her
training and experience in administering and scoring the HGN test based upon
the NHTSA standards and guidelines; (2) the administration of the HGN test in
a particular case; and (3) the results of the HGN test as established by the
NHTSA standards and guidelines, we hold that it constitutes lay testimony not
subject to pretrial disclosure requirements applicable to expert testimony. In
reaching this conclusion, we are particularly persuaded by our previous
determination establishing the reliability of the underlying theory, our ruling
limiting the admissibility of evidence based upon this theory to circumstantial
evidence of intoxication, and our requirements for laying a proper foundation.
Id. at 734-35.
We are not persuaded by the defendant’s assertion that the
administration of the HGN test and a police officer’s interpretation of the
results are so subjective that expert testimony is required to assist the fact
finder in understanding the evidence. The HGN test is a standardized test
recommended by the NHTSA. See id. at 728. The administration of the test,
while requiring some training, is relatively straightforward. Standards and
guidelines controlling the HGN test are published by the NHTSA in a manual
used to instruct police officers in the administration and evaluation of the test
and its results. Id. at 732-33. The test results are based upon the
administering police officer’s observations of the presence or absence of a
physical phenomenon—nystagmus. If present while the test was being
administered, a layperson would be capable of observing: (1) whether there
was an involuntary, rapid, back-and-forth jerking of the suspect’s eyes
(nystagmus); (2) the onset of nystagmus, if present; and (3) the suspect’s ability
to track the stimulus with his or her eyes. Therefore, based upon our holding
that the HGN test is reliable, we find little distinction between a police officer’s
observations in this instance and those made by a police officer during the
administration of other field sobriety tests. See id. at 732.
In Dahood, we acknowledged that “[c]oncerns regarding false positive
readings would apply equally to other field sobriety tests administered in the
field, which are regularly admitted into evidence,” and concluded that these
4
factors go to the weight of the HGN evidence rather than its admissibility
because they “can be explored through cross-examination or expert testimony
offered at trial.” Dahood, 148 N.H. at 732. Similarly, we recognized that
concerns regarding a police officer’s training and experience administering the
test are appropriate subjects for cross-examination and, therefore, go to the
weight of the evidence rather than its admissibility. Id. at 733. Thus, we are
not persuaded by the defendant’s assertion that potential subjectivity in a
police officer’s administration and interpretation of his observations regarding
the HGN test requires a finding that such testimony is expert testimony.
Accordingly, we hold that a police officer’s testimony regarding his or her:
(1) training and experience in administering and scoring HGN tests; (2)
administration of a particular HGN test; and (3) interpretation of the resulting
HGN test score, constitutes lay testimony under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 701 provided that the testimony is based upon the officer’s
observations, made in accordance with established NHTSA standards and
guidelines, and does not encompass highly technical or specialized scientific
information pertaining to mechanisms behind the nystagmus phenomenon
itself.
This ruling is consistent with our position regarding the admissibility of
evidence obtained through the use of a radar gun, which is analyzed as
scientific evidence under Rule 702. State v. Ahern, 122 N.H. 744, 745 (1982).
Radar evidence is admissible provided “there is proof that the test device was
operating accurately and that the test was performed by qualified individuals.”
Id.; see State v. Caswell, 146 N.H. 243, 248 (2001). In practice, provided the
proper foundation is established, the testifying officer’s testimony is not expert
testimony despite the fact that the technical mechanisms underlying how the
radar gun works is not common knowledge. See Caswell, 146 N.H. at 248.
Both the results obtained from a radar gun and HGN test scores are
obtained through personal observations made by a trained police officer. As
such, the observations are “rationally based on the perception of the witness”
and are “helpful to a clear understanding of the testimony or the determination
of a fact in issue.” N.H. R. Ev. 701.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court properly denied the
defendant’s motion in limine.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5