THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord District Court
No. 2005-261
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL COHEN
Argued: May 17, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 22, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
John G. Vanacore, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Michael Cohen, appeals an order from
the Concord District Court (Cullen, J.) denying his motion for return of
property. We affirm.
The record supports the following. Cohen owns a record store in
Concord. In 2002, the State executed a search warrant at the store and seized
several hundred compact discs belonging to Cohen, which he had been offering
for sale.
Cohen was charged with seven misdemeanor counts of transferring, with
intent to sell, copies of recordings made without the express written consent of
their owners or performers. See RSA 352-A:2 (Supp. 2005). Cohen was never
convicted of any of the charges, as some were dismissed and the State chose
not to prosecute others. It appears that the State was unable to prove that
Cohen knew or should have known that the tapes were created without the
permission of the owners or performers.
Cohen then moved to have the compact discs returned to him. The State
objected, arguing that the compact discs were contraband. During the hearing,
Cohen’s attorney stated, “In fact, we concede if the CDs ended up back up in
his store, he was selling those CDs again, it would be an entirely new offense.”
Cohen makes similar concessions on appeal. The trial court denied Cohen’s
motion, stating, “The items in question were being offered for sale when they
were seized. It would be illegal to sell these items knowing that they are
counterfeit.” The defendant then filed a motion to reconsider, to which the
State objected. That motion was denied, and this appeal followed.
The legislature has established procedures governing the protection and
return of property seized for possible use at trial. RSA 595-A:6 (2001). These
rules state, in relevant part:
Upon application by a prosecutor, defendant, or civil claimants,
the court . . . shall, upon notice to a defendant and hearing, and
except for good cause shown, order returned to the rightful owners
any . . . property of evidential value, not constituting contraband.
. . . All other property seized in execution of a search warrant or
otherwise coming into the hands of the police shall be returned to
the owner of the property, or shall be disposed of as the court or
justice orders, which may include forfeiture and either sale or
destruction as the public interest requires, in the discretion of the
court or justice, and in accordance with due process of law.
Id. On appeal, Cohen argues that the compact discs are not contraband, and
additionally that there is no public interest that would require their forfeiture.
We review a trial court’s ruling on the disposition of property under RSA
595-A:6 for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Gero, 152 N.H.
379, 381 (2005). To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, a
party must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Cohen concedes that an innocent party may lose his property under
forfeiture statutes. See Bennis v. Michigan, 516 U.S. 442, 453 (1996)
(upholding forfeiture of wife’s car when used by husband to solicit prostitute);
Dobbins’s Distillery v. United States, 96 U.S. 395, 402 (1877) (upholding
forfeiture of lessor’s property when used for illegal purposes by lessee); The
2
Palmyra, 25 U.S. 1, 14 (1827) (upholding forfeiture of ship by owner where he
did not know it was used for privateering). This concept is, in part, rooted in
the notion that “[t]he thing is here primarily considered as the offender,” even if
its owner is not. The Palmyra, 25 U.S. at 14. Cohen argues, however, that his
case is distinguishable from others because “no crime was committed by
anybody with regard to the one CD for which he was tried, [but] was not found
guilty.”
We agree that nothing in RSA 352-A:2, II(b) prohibits the possession of
compact discs produced without the permission of the owners or performers.
However, we disagree with Cohen’s conclusion that such a determination is
dispositive as to whether these discs are contraband and should be returned to
him. That the possession of such compact discs is not illegal under this
particular statute does not mean that the discs themselves do not constitute
contraband pursuant to other statutes. Indeed, we conclude that they may
constitute such contraband, or, in the alternative, that they may be derivative
contraband.
Contraband materials are those which are “prohibited or excluded by law
or treaty: forbidden.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 494
(unabridged ed. 2002). Contraband may also be defined as “[g]oods that are
unlawful to . . . possess.” Black’s Law Dictionary 341 (8th ed. 2004). Black’s
Law Dictionary further elaborates on this definition: contraband per se is
“[p]roperty whose possession is unlawful regardless of how it is used”;
derivative contraband is “[p]roperty whose possession becomes unlawful when
it is used in committing an illegal act.” Id. Cohen proposes an alternative
definition, that contraband is generally “any property which is unlawful to
produce or possess.” We need not adopt any one of these definitions for
purposes of RSA 595-A:6, however, as any of them may be applicable given the
facts of a particular case.
We begin by examining whether the compact discs at issue could be
considered contraband per se. RSA 352-A:2, II(b) is not the only statute that
governs the illegal production and distribution of compact discs. To the
contrary, the legislature has made it a misdemeanor to produce or publish,
without permission of the author, any uncopyrighted literary, dramatic or
musical composition, as well as many other works. RSA 352:1, :2 (1995).
Similarly, Congress has made it a felony to willfully infringe copyrights either of
works having a value of more than $1,000, or for purposes of commercial
advantage or private financial gain. 17 U.S.C. § 506(a) (2000); 18 U.S.C.
§ 2319 (2000 & Supp. III 2003). As the creation of compact discs in violation of
copyright laws is illegal under both State and federal statutes, we conclude
that such discs are per se contraband, and thus contraband for the purposes
of RSA 595-A:6.
3
However, even if we assume that illegally produced compact discs are not
contraband per se, they nonetheless constitute derivative contraband.
Derivative contraband “includes tools or instrumentalities that a wrongdoer
has used in the commission of a crime.” Bennis v. Michigan, 516 U.S. at 460.
The production of compact discs in violation of copyrights, and without the
permission of the work’s author or owner for uncopyrighted works, is a
criminal offense. 17 U.S.C. § 506(a); 18 U.S.C. § 2319; RSA 352:1, :2.
Accordingly, even if Cohen himself did not produce these compact discs,
whoever did so likely committed several hundred State misdemeanors, or
various federal felonies. See RSA 352:1, :2; 17 U.S.C. § 506(a); 18 U.S.C.
§ 2319. Thus, Cohen’s argument that “no crime was committed by anybody” is
incorrect, assuming that the compact discs at issue were in fact created or
transferred in violation of these State or federal laws. The discs themselves
may be the instrumentalities of the commission of a crime — the means by
which another’s protected work was illegally copied — and, accordingly, may be
derivative contraband.
Furthermore, unlawful possession does not necessarily mean criminal
possession. The legislature, having chosen not to criminalize the possession of
such compact discs under RSA 352-A:2, has not necessarily sanctioned
possession of the same. Allowing the continued possession of items that can
be neither produced nor distributed thwarts Congress’ and the legislature’s
express intent in protecting authors’ rights in copyrighted and uncopyrighted
works. See U.S.C. tit. 17 (2000 & Supp. III 2003) (entitled “Copyrights”); RSA
352:1, :2; RSA 352-A:2, II(b) (1995 & Supp. 2005). Regardless of whether
possession of compact discs created in violation of these laws has been
criminalized, we hold that such compact discs nonetheless constitute
“contraband” under RSA 595-A:6, and are thus subject to a court’s disposal in
cases such as this.
Congress has also given copyright holders the ability to procure civil
injunctions to protect their interests by granting them the exclusive rights of
reproduction, adaptation, publication, performance, and display, irrespective of
criminal sanctions for copyright infringement. 17 U.S.C. §§ 106 (exclusive
rights to copyrighted works), 502-505 (civil remedies for copyright
infringement) (2000). Presumably, State statutes provide similar protections.
The State’s extensive and longstanding laws protecting authors’ and artists’
works indicate a strong public policy against the production, distribution, and
possession of such items by anyone. RSA 352:1, :2 (enacted in 1895).
We recognize that the trial court made its decision on the grounds that
the compact discs “were being offered for sale when they were seized,” and thus
seems to have based its order on RSA chapter 352-A rather than other State or
federal statutes. Accordingly, although we reach our conclusion, in part, on
different grounds than did the trial court, we nonetheless conclude that
4
illegally produced compact discs may be disposed of by a court in accordance
with RSA 595-A:6, regardless of the guilt or innocence of the discs’ owner.
We do not decide whether a trial court is required to order these discs
disposed of, even in the case of a conviction. Contra 17 U.S.C. § 506(b) (“the
court in its judgment of conviction shall, in addition to the penalty therein
prescribed, order the forfeiture and destruction or other disposition of all
infringing copies or phonorecords and all implements, devices, or equipment
used in the manufacture of such infringing copies or phonorecords” (emphasis
added)). However, we cannot say that, given these considerations, the trial
court here necessarily unsustainably exercised its discretion in applying RSA
595-A:6. See Gero, 152 N.H. at 381.
Because we determine that illegally produced compact discs may be
disposed of as contraband, we need not determine whether the public interest
requires the same result. Cf. id. at 386; RSA 595-A:6.
The only remaining issue, then, is whether Cohen’s compact discs were
in fact produced in violation of State or federal law. Cohen conceded below,
and does again on appeal, that the compact discs were counterfeit. The trial
court also made a specific finding to this effect. We read these concessions and
the trial court’s finding as a determination that the compact discs violated
either State or federal statutes regarding copyrights. Accordingly, the compact
discs are contraband, and the trial court was within its discretion to deny
Cohen’s motion for return of property.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS, J., with whom
GALWAY, J., joined, dissented:
DALIANIS, J., dissenting. The majority concedes that nothing in RSA
352-A:2, II(b) (Supp. 2005) prohibits the possession of compact discs produced
without the permission of the owners or performers. It further notes that
“contraband per se” is defined by Black’s Law Dictionary as “[p]roperty whose
possession is unlawful regardless of how it is used.” Black’s Law Dictionary
341 (8th ed. 2004). The majority then cites State and Federal statutes
prohibiting the production, publication, or sale of copyright-infringing
materials to reach the conclusion that compact discs created in violation of
copyright laws are per se contraband. However, the majority does not explain
how statutes prohibiting the production, publication, or sale of certain works
render possession of such works unlawful. Thus, I disagree with the majority’s
conclusion that the compact discs at issue may constitute per se contraband.
5
I further disagree that the compact discs at issue in this case, on the
record before us, constitute derivative contraband. The State has failed to
show that the defendant, or a third party, committed any crime or illegal act, or
that the seized property was used in the commission of any such act. Instead,
the State merely posits that the compact discs “were created and apparently
sold or distributed to the defendant by a third party,” and that such
manufacture and sale “would have” constituted a violation of RSA 352-A:2.
The majority credits the State’s position by noting that the party or parties
responsible for producing the compact discs “likely committed several hundred
State misdemeanors, or various federal felonies.” While the majority’s
conclusion may have merit, on the record here it is nothing more than
conjecture, and we cannot suppose criminality where there is none proven.
The majority concludes that the compact discs are, “in fact,” contraband.
It bases its conclusion upon the defendant’s concession that resale of the
compact discs would constitute a “new offense,” and a statement by the trial
court noting that sale of the discs “would be illegal . . . knowing that they are
counterfeit.” The statements of the defendant and the trial court are
predicated upon the assumption that the compact discs are counterfeit, and do
not, in my view, sufficiently compensate for the State’s failure to establish in
any way that the seized property constitutes contraband. Thus, I respectfully
dissent.
GALWAY, J., joins in the dissent.
6