THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2005-778
KENNETH MCKENZIE
v.
TOWN OF EATON ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Argued: November 14, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 31, 2007
Hastings Law Office, P.A., of Fryeburg, Maine (Peter J. Malia, Jr. on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Gardner, Fulton & Waugh, P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (H. Bernard Waugh, Jr.
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
Melendy & Lee, P.A., of Conway (Fay E. Melendy on the brief and orally),
for the intervenor.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, the Town of Eaton Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA), and the intervenor, Nancy Burns, appeal a ruling of the
Superior Court (Fauver, J.) that upheld the constitutionality of an ordinance
enacted by the Town. We affirm.
The record supports the following. In 1981, the town issued a building
permit to Burns, allowing her to place a storage shed fifty-nine feet from the
shore of a lake abutting her property. In 1989, the town increased the setback
requirements to 125 feet from the shore of the lake, thus making the shed
nonconforming with the zoning ordinance. Also in 1989, the town passed
Article VI, Section 2 of the Town of Eaton Zoning Ordinance, which stated, in
pertinent part:
Any structure damaged by fire, deterioration, or other casualty to
the extent of seventy-five (75) per cent or more of the floor area in
square feet and is not reconstructed within one (1) year shall
constitute discontinuance and abandonment under Article VI, 1.a.
above and shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity
with this ordinance. The Board of Selectmen may permit the
reconstruction or use of such building or structure substantially
as it was prior to destruction upon finding that the same will not
be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood. If, for any reason,
this permit is not granted such damaged structure shall be
removed to clear ground level and put into safe condition within
one (1) year following the date of damage. Any time after the
expiration of said one (1) year, the Board of Selectmen may cause
such removal to be done at the expense of the owner.
Article VI, Section 2 was still in effect on June 2, 2002, when a windstorm
caused trees to fall on Burns’ shed and damage it in excess of seventy-five
percent of its floor area.
In March 2003, Burns met with the Eaton Selectmen and indicated that
she wanted to rebuild her shed. The selectmen told her that “[t]he building
does not meet setbacks but is grandfathered so it can be replaced with a
building the same size and on the same footprint as before.” By June 2, 2003,
however, Burns had not rebuilt her shed or removed the debris left by the
storm. On June 4, 2003, Kenneth McKenzie, an abutter and the plaintiff in
this case, wrote to the selectmen, requesting that Burns remove the remnants
of the shed and the debris on her property as required by Article VI, Section 2.
The selectmen notified Burns on August 19, 2003, of her duties under this
provision. Burns subsequently applied for a building permit to rebuild her
shed, which the selectmen granted on August 26, 2003. McKenzie appealed
the selectmen’s decision to the ZBA. The ZBA reversed the selectmen’s
issuance of the building permit because it was not issued within the one-year
period required by the ordinance. Burns filed for rehearing, which the ZBA
granted. After a rehearing, the ZBA reversed its prior decision and affirmed the
selectmen’s issuance of the building permit.
McKenzie appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court, arguing that
the ordinance provision at issue was clear and unambiguous and that the ZBA
failed to properly apply it. McKenzie asserted that the ZBA erred by relying
2
upon the abandonment test established in Lawlor v. Town of Salem, 116 N.H.
61 (1976), which considers whether the property owner intended to abandon
the nonconforming use. McKenzie also argued that the ZBA acted ultra vires
by declaring the ordinance provision unconstitutional. The ZBA disagreed,
arguing that it had the authority to decide whether the ordinance provision was
unconstitutional and that it properly considered Burns’ subjective intent
because such a consideration was constitutionally required by Lawlor. The
trial court agreed with both parties’ conclusions that the ZBA had found the
provision unconstitutional and had determined that Burns did not intend to
abandon her nonconforming use. The trial court reversed the decision of the
ZBA, ruling that, while the ZBA’s consideration of intent may have been
reasonable in the absence of the ordinance provision, the terms of the provision
allowed the ZBA no discretion in determining abandonment. Because Burns
failed to reconstruct her shed within one year of its destruction, the trial court
found the ZBA’s decision unreasonable. The court also ruled that it could not
find the ordinance unconstitutional.
On appeal, the ZBA and Burns first argue that the trial court erred by
interpreting the ZBA’s decision as finding that the ordinance provision was
facially unconstitutional under substantive due process. They assert that the
ZBA actually found the provision unconstitutional as applied. They argue that,
had the trial court properly interpreted the ZBA’s decision, the court would
have recognized that the provision would not apply to the shed because RSA
674:19 (1996) prohibits the application of new zoning ordinances to existing
buildings. The appellants’ second argument is that a consideration of
subjective intent pursuant to the Lawlor test is required by the New Hampshire
Constitution when determining abandonment of a nonconforming use.
Because the ordinance provision precluded a consideration of intent, the
appellants argue, the trial court erred in reversing the ZBA.
McKenzie responds that, because the ZBA and Burns did not raise the
effect of RSA 674:19 at trial, this issue is not preserved for our review.
McKenzie additionally argues that the trial court was correct to rule that the
ZBA should not have considered Burns’ intent because intent is not a factor for
determining abandonment under the plain language of the ordinance.
I
Before we address the parties’ arguments, we note that we agree with
their interpretation that the ordinance provision at issue precludes a
consideration of a property owner’s subjective intent when determining
whether the owner has abandoned a destroyed nonconforming use or
structure. The provision states that a nonconforming use that is sufficiently
destroyed and is not rebuilt within a year “shall constitute discontinuance and
abandonment” and “shall not be reconstructed or used except in conformity
3
with this ordinance.” It is a general rule of statutory construction that the
word “shall” makes enforcement mandatory. In the Matter of Bazemore &
Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 354 (2006). Accordingly, we interpret the ordinance as
precluding a consideration of intent in determining abandonment. As we are
the final arbiter of the interpretation of a zoning ordinance, Olszak v. Town of
Hampton, 139 N.H. 723, 726 (1995), we will apply our interpretation
throughout this opinion.
II
The ZBA and Burns first argue that the ordinance provision should not
apply to Burns’ shed because RSA 674:19 prohibits the application of zoning
ordinances to buildings in existence prior to the enactment of the ordinance
provision. We conclude that this issue is not preserved for our review and
therefore decline to address it. See LaMontagne Builders v. Bowman Brook
Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 274 (2003). It is a long-standing rule that
parties may not have judicial review of matters not raised at trial. N. Country
Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 619 (2004). As the
appellants, the ZBA and Burns have the burden, not only of providing a record
sufficient for our review, but also of demonstrating that, before raising issues
on appeal, they first raised those issues to the trial court. See Bean v. Red Oak
Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004); Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b). Because the
appellants have not shown that they raised the effect of RSA 674:19 to the trial
court, we conclude that this issue is not preserved for appeal and decline to
review it.
III
The ZBA and Burns next contend that a consideration of intent pursuant
to Lawlor is constitutionally required to determine abandonment. On appeal
from a trial court’s decision regarding a zoning board of adjustment’s decision,
we will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is unsupported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous. Greene v. Town of Deering, 151 N.H. 795,
797-98 (2005). Because the constitutionality of an ordinance provision
involves a question of law, we review the trial court’s decision de novo. Taylor
v. Town of Plaistow, 152 N.H. 142, 144 (2005). We are the final arbiter of state
constitutional disputes. Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H. 124, 129
(2005). Zoning ordinances are presumed to be valid, and the challengers bear
the burden of proving them unlawful. Morgenstern v. Town of Rye, 147 N.H.
558, 562 (2002).
The ZBA and Burns are correct that the Lawlor test for abandonment
considers the property owner’s intent to abandon a nonconforming use;
however, we established that test in the absence of an applicable ordinance
defining abandonment. In this case, an ordinance directly applies and permits
4
the abandonment of a nonconforming use without a consideration of intent.
We note that courts of other jurisdictions, as well as legal scholars, have
concluded that a consideration of intent to abandon is not necessary when an
ordinance defines abandonment without a consideration of intent. See Toys
“R” Us v. Silva, 676 N.E.2d 862, 867 (N.Y. 1996) (stating that, generally,
abandonment requires an intent to relinquish and some overt act or failure to
act, but that “the inclusion of a lapse period in the zoning provision removes
the requirement of intent to abandon – discontinuance of nonconforming
activity for the specified period constitutes an abandonment regardless of
intent”); Gurganious v. City of Beaufort, 454 S.E.2d 912, 916-18 (S.C. Ct. App.
1995) (rejecting the appellant’s argument that the common law definition of
abandonment applied, and applying instead the objective test established in
the relevant zoning ordinance that prohibited the resumption of a
nonconforming use if discontinued for one year); Union Square Ass’n, Inc. v.
Marc Lounge, Inc., 541 A.2d 1321, 1324 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1988) (enforcing
an ordinance that required the owner of a destroyed nonconforming use to
obtain a building permit and begin construction within one year in order to
retain the nonconforming status of the structure, and holding that the
nonconforming use owner’s lack of intent to abandon the use “matters not one
whit”); 4 Zeigler, Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning and Planning § 74:3, at 74-11
(2005) (stating, “A discontinuance provision which specifically states that it
operates to prevent and prohibit resumption of a nonconforming use after a
specified period of time has lapsed, regardless of any reservation of an intent
not to abandon or of an intent to reserve the right to resume, removes the
factor of intent to abandon; it operates even where there was no intent to
abandon or even where there was an intent not to abandon”); 15 P. Loughlin,
New Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and Zoning § 8.04, at 128 (2000)
(stating that most municipalities have taken the guesswork out of determining
common law abandonment by enacting ordinances that give a specific time
period of nonuse that constitutes abandonment); Annotation, Zoning: Right to
Resume Nonconforming Use of Premises After Voluntary or Unexplained Break
in the Continuity of Nonconforming Use, 57 A.L.R.3d 279, 312 (1974) (stating,
“[I]n many instances, ordinances have nullified the theretofore-adopted rule of
intention as controlling in connection with abandonment of a non-conforming
use, by fixing a Time Limit in such ordinances, for mere Non-Use of a non-
conforming use, so that – under such ordinances – mere non-use thereof for a
stated time, becomes, of itself, sufficient to terminate a non-conforming use”
(quotations omitted)). The task before us is to determine whether the
ordinance provision at issue is a constitutional exercise of Eaton’s police
power, which presents an issue of substantive due process.
A substantive due process challenge to an ordinance questions the
fundamental fairness of the ordinance. Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H.
121, 124 (2002). “In determining whether an ordinance is a reasonable
exercise of the municipality’s police powers and, therefore, can withstand a
5
substantive due process challenge, we have consistently applied the rational
basis test.” Id. We recently clarified our analysis under the rational basis test
in Boulders at Strafford v. Town of Strafford, 153 N.H. 633, 641 (2006):
We . . . hold that the rational basis test under the State
Constitution requires that legislation be only rationally related to a
legitimate governmental interest. We further hold that the rational
basis test under the State Constitution contains no inquiry into
whether legislation unduly restricts individual rights, and that a
least-restrictive-means analysis is not part of this test.
The only manner in which application of the rational basis test will differ
depends upon whether one challenges the ordinance on its face or as applied to
the property. In a facial challenge to an ordinance, we will not rule the
ordinance unconstitutional unless it could not be constitutionally applied in
any case. Id. at 642. An as-applied challenge solely questions the
constitutionality of the ordinance “in the relationship of the particular
ordinance to particular property under particular conditions existing at the
time of litigation.” Dow, 148 N.H. at 124.
The appellants argue that the ordinance provision is unconstitutional as
applied to Burns’ shed. Accordingly, we address whether the provision is
rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest under the particular
facts of this case. The part of the provision upon which the ZBA and Burns
focus is the first sentence, which states that any nonconforming structure that
is destroyed to the extent of seventy-five percent or more and is not rebuilt
within one year “shall constitute discontinuance and abandonment” and “shall
not be reconstructed or used except in conformity with this ordinance.” The
plain language of this provision evinces a purpose to discourage the
continuation of nonconforming uses. The provision works to reduce
nonconforming uses by establishing a time limit on their reconstruction. Those
nonconforming uses not reestablished within a year are lost. Thus, the
provision reduces the chance that a nonconforming use will be rebuilt. It is
well established both in this state and in others that a legitimate purpose of
zoning is the reduction and elimination of nonconforming uses. See, e.g.,
Hurley v. Hollis, 143 N.H. 567, 571 (1999) (stating, “the well established policy
of zoning law is to carefully limit the enlargement and extension of
nonconforming uses, and, ultimately, to reduce them to conformity as
completely and rapidly as possible” (quotations omitted)); 4 Zeigler, Rathkopf’s
The Law of Zoning and Planning § 74:11, at 74-38 (stating, “the spirit of zoning
is to restrict, rather than increase, nonconforming uses and to eliminate such
uses as speedily as possible”). Accordingly, the ordinance’s purpose of
reducing nonconforming uses is a legitimate governmental interest.
6
The remaining question is whether the provision, as applied to Burns’
shed, bears a rational relationship to the legitimate goal. By imposing a time
limit on Burns’ ability to rebuild her nonconforming shed, the provision
reduced the possibility that Burns would reconstruct her nonconforming shed
and increased the possibility that the shed, if rebuilt, would be rebuilt in
compliance with the zoning ordinance. As Burns did not rebuild her shed
within a year, the efficacy of the time limitation is evident. Accordingly, as
applied to Burns’ property, the ordinance provision bears a rational
relationship to the legitimate goal of reducing nonconforming uses. Based
upon the above reasoning, we conclude that the ordinance provision at issue
does not violate substantive due process as applied to Burns’ nonconforming
shed. Although there may be ways in which the provision could further the
goal of reducing nonconforming uses while being less restrictive of Burns’
property rights, we have not considered such alternatives, pursuant to our
holding in Boulders, 153 N.H. at 638 (stating, “We will not second-guess the
town’s choice of means to accomplish its legitimate goals, so long as the means
chosen is rationally related to those goals”).
We finally note that the appellants rely in part upon Dugas v. Town of
Conway, 125 N.H. 175 (1984), in support of their position. In Dugas, we
required the town to pay attorney’s fees to the plaintiff for having to defend
against an unconstitutional taking of his nonconforming use. Id. at 183. Dicta
notwithstanding, Dugas is distinguishable from the instant case because the
sole issue in Dugas was whether the trial court erred in denying the plaintiff’s
request for attorney’s fees. Id. at 179-80. Further, the underlying challenge in
Dugas was a takings challenge, as distinguished from the challenge in this
case, which is substantive due process.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DUGGAN,
J., concurred specially.
DUGGAN, J., concurring specially. Because neither Burns nor the
Town expressly argued in their briefs or in the notice of appeal that the trial
court should have applied either a takings analysis or a heightened level of
review, I concur in the result reached by the majority. However, I write
separately to offer some observations about applying the rational basis test
under the facts of this case and to suggest an alternative approach.
I
Our jurisprudence involving the relationship between the State
Constitution and nonconforming uses derives primarily from Part I, Articles 2
and 12 of the State Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 2, 12; see also
7
Town of Salem v. Wickson, 146 N.H. 328, 330-31 (2001). These two provisions
provide all persons the right to acquire, possess and protect property. See
Wickson, 146 N.H. at 330. “The right to maintain nonconforming uses is
meant to protect property owners from a retrospective application of zoning
ordinances . . .” that would otherwise effectuate a taking by depriving property
owners of the continuing use of their land. Id.
In past cases analyzing nonconforming uses under Articles 2 and 12, we
have used broad language that carries constitutional implications. We have
implied – if not held – that property owners have fundamental constitutional
rights in vested nonconforming uses. Two examples are illustrative.
First, in Grondin v. Town of Hinsdale, 122 N.H. 882, 885-86 (1982), we
were confronted with two provisions of a town ordinance that regulated the
operation of mobile homes in Hinsdale. The first provision provided that all
preexisting mobile homes would be grandfathered and could continue to
operate in substantially the same manner as they did on the date of adoption of
the ordinance. Id. at 884-85. The second provision required mobile home
owners to obtain a special permit for their mobile homes and imposed a limit of
350 on the number of permits that would be issued. Id. at 885. The plaintiffs
in Grondin owned a parcel of property that contained 156 sites for mobile
homes, all of which had been constructed prior to the enactment of the
ordinance provisions at issue. Id. at 884. The plaintiffs argued that the 350-
permit ceiling, which had been reached before the plaintiffs could obtain
permits for all of their mobile home sites, failed to take into account the
plaintiffs’ vested property right in the 156-mobile home park sites which had
become valid, nonconforming uses under the first provision of the ordinance
(described above). Id. at 885.
We agreed with the plaintiffs and held that
[t]he fundamental and inalienable property right that
vests in a property owner has as its foundation this
State’s Constitution. Part I, article 2 of the New
Hampshire Constitution guarantees all persons the
right to acquire, possess, and protect property. This
guarantee has been deemed so specific as to
necessarily limit all subsequent grants of power to deal
adversely with it. Similarly, every person has the right
to have his enjoyment of property protected. N.H.
Const. part I, art. 12. These two constitutional
provisions are limitations upon the so-called police
power of the State and subdivisions thereof, and
nullify arbitrary legislation passed under the guise of
that power.
8
Id. at 885-86 (quotations, citations and brackets omitted). Compare id. with
Morgenstern v. Town of Rye, 147 N.H. 558, 562 (2002) (“Generally speaking, a
property owner has no right to the continued existence of any particular zoning
classification of his property, because all property is held in subordination to
the police power of the municipality.”), and Loundsbury v. City of Keene, 122
N.H. 1006, 1009-10 (1982) (stating, in the context of an amortization ordinance
provision, that the protections of Part I, Articles 2 and 12 of the State
Constitution apply to nonconforming uses and holding that a past use of land
may “create vested rights to a similar future use, so that a town may not
unreasonably require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use. A provision
requiring the discontinuance of a nonconforming use will be deemed
unreasonable if no public purpose supports it or if the amortization period is
inadequate.” (citations omitted)), and Metzger v. Town of Brentwood, 117 N.H.
497, 502 (1977) (“The police power and the right to private property must be
considered together as interdependent, the one qualifying and limiting the
other.” (quotation omitted)), overruled on other grounds by Boulders at
Strafford v. Town of Strafford, 153 N.H. 633, 641 (2006).
Later, we applied the types of principles articulated in Grondin in a case
involving an ordinance that regulated abandonment of nonconforming uses.
See Dugas v. Town of Conway, 125 N.H. 175 (1984). In Dugas, the face of a
sign was removed from the pole to which it had been affixed, but the pole was
left standing for over a year. Id. at 178. During that year, the Town enacted
an ordinance limiting the number of free-standing signs that could be placed in
front of a business. Id. Despite the presence of other free-standing signs in
front of the plaintiff’s place of business, he sought a permit to reinstall the face
of his sign on the pole, arguing that the Town’s limitation on the number of
free-standing signs that could stand in front of a business was inapplicable
because his sign was a vested nonconforming use. Id. at 178-79. The Town
denied the plaintiff’s application for the permit, relying upon another ordinance
provision which provided, in part, “Any non-conforming sign the use of which
has been discontinued for a period of one year or that has been damaged 100%
shall not be reestablished, restored, or repaired unless it is made to comply
with this ordinance.” Id. The plaintiff appealed.
The superior court held that the ordinance provision quoted above
resulted in an unconstitutional taking. Id. at 179. The superior court,
however, denied the plaintiff’s request for attorney’s fees because it did not find
that the Town’s enforcement and subsequent defense of the ordinance were
frivolous or in bad faith. Id. The plaintiff appealed, and we reversed. Id. at
183.
As in Grondin, our language in Dugas was broad. We held that a town’s
power to regulate the use of buildings and land through the enactment of
9
zoning ordinances is circumscribed by Part I, Articles 2 and 12 of the State
Constitution, id. at 181-82, and we described the Town’s refusal to issue a
permit for the sign as an allegation of interference “with the fundamental
property rights of a plaintiff.” Id. at 180 (emphasis added). Therefore, we
determined the plaintiff was entitled to attorney’s fees. Id. at 183.
Although, as the majority correctly observes, we were addressing takings
claims in both Grondin and Dugas, both cases could reasonably be read to
speak of effectuating a taking of property rights that are not only vested but
also fundamental under our State Constitution. Moreover, in Dugas, we stated
that the regulation at issue there, which is materially similar to the regulation
at issue here, interfered with fundamental rights. Id.; see also id. at 182-83.
If, under Dugas, such a regulation implicates fundamental property rights,
then so too does the regulation in this appeal. And, if regulations interfere with
fundamental rights, the rational basis standard generally is not applicable.
See Akins v. Secretary of State, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 904 A.2d 702, 706 (2006)
(“[G]enerally, when governmental action impinges upon a fundamental right,
such matters are entitled to review under strict judicial scrutiny.”).
Given such precedent, it is unclear whether we ought to “consistently
appl[y] the rational basis test” in evaluating substantive due process challenges
to local ordinances that regulate vested nonconforming uses without some
explanation as to why we do so. See Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H. 121,
124 (2002). It would be more consistent with our general substantive due
process jurisprudence to first explore the nature of the right allegedly infringed,
and based upon that analysis, explain why we apply a particular level of
scrutiny. This is especially true where, as here, the regulation at issue
allegedly interferes with a right (or rights) we seem to have specifically held to
be fundamental.
Exploring the nature of the right infringed could involve, for example: (1)
clarifying our earlier case law by more narrowly and clearly defining the nature
of the fundamental rights (vis-à-vis nonconforming uses) protected by Part I,
Articles 2 and 12, cf. Robertson v. City and County of Denver, 874 P.2d 325,
339-46 (Colo. 1994) (Vollack, J., concurring); (2) explaining how the police
power circumscribes the fundamental rights at issue, cf. Asselin v. Town of
Conway, 135 N.H. 576, 578 (1992) (explaining in context of equal protection
challenge); or (3) adopting a heightened level of review, see, e.g., Casperson v.
Town of Lyme, 139 N.H. 637, 645-46 (1997) (Brock, C.J., concurring specially)
(suggesting that given an appropriate occasion, we should review our holding
that substantive due process challenges to zoning ordinances are evaluated
under the rational basis standard); Quirk v. Town of New Boston, 140 N.H.
124, 129 (1995) (refusing to reconsider the level of review that should be
applied when ordinance provisions are challenged because the parties did not
brief or raise the issue). Such an analysis would provide a stronger foundation
10
to explain why we apply a particular level of scrutiny in any given case. In this
appeal, however, the parties have not raised or briefed these issues; hence,
resolution of them must be left for another day. See id.
II
Ordinance provisions like the one at issue in this appeal more
appropriately lend themselves to a takings analysis than a substantive due
process one. If a takings claim had been clearly raised in this case, Dugas may
have been on point and perhaps even dispositive. Further, if a takings claim
had been clearly asserted, a different result may have obtained.
A strict one-year “use-it-or-lose-it” ordinance provision is unduly rigid. A
nonconforming use may not be repaired for over a year for any number of
reasons, none of which suggest that it should be deemed abandoned. For
example, a soldier may be deployed overseas for over a year and have no way of
knowing that there has been property damage or that repairs need to be made;
a family business may have difficulty in obtaining financing to rebuild; or some
type of natural disaster or catastrophe could make rebuilding within a year
impractical. To the extent an ordinance is read to contain a strict one-year
“use-it-or-lose-it” provision, it would fail to account for such reasonable
contingencies. Moreover, under our precedent, the ordinance likely would
result in a taking. See, e.g., Dugas, 125 N.H. at 180-83. In light of the
individual property rights involved, some courts have adopted a rule that
accommodates those rights while at the same time accounting for a
municipality’s interest in eliminating nonconforming uses. See City of Minot v.
Fisher, 212 N.W.2d 837 (N.D. 1973); Ansley House v. City of Atlanta, 397
S.E.2d 419 (Ga. 1990).
In City of Minot, the North Dakota Supreme Court considered whether
an ordinance dealing with abandonment of nonconforming uses was
confiscatory and discussed three approaches to analyzing such provisions. The
first approach is “that there must be shown an intent to abandon a
nonconforming use before its resumption can be prohibited; this despite the
presence of an ordinance containing a specified period of discontinuance
designed to prevent resumption of a nonconforming use.” City of Minot, 212
N.W.2d at 839. The second approach is “that the inclusion of a discontinuance
period in a zoning ordinance on nonconforming uses removes the necessity of
proving intent to abandon such a use, and, therefore, passage of the required
discontinuance period of time alone prevents the resumption of the
nonconforming use.” Id. at 840. The third approach, which was the one
ultimately adopted by the North Dakota Supreme Court, “presumes
abandonment after the designated period of nonuse [as set forth in an
ordinance] has passed, but avoids a due process challenge by not applying the
presumption of abandonment in situations where the cessation of use was
11
beyond the control of the property owner.” Id. at 841; see also Ansley House,
397 S.E.2d at 421 (adopting the presumption approach and describing it as the
majority view).
The North Dakota Supreme Court’s reasoning is persuasive as to why the
third approach would be not only the most practical, but also the most
respectful of land ownership rights, at least as we have articulated them. See,
e.g., Dugas, 125 N.H. at 181-83. Thus, if a takings claim had been clearly
raised by the defendant, we could have followed the lead of the North Dakota
Supreme Court in City of Minot and read Article VI, Section 2 of the Town of
Eaton Zoning Ordinance as establishing a rebuttable presumption, which
would have protected the rights that gave rise to the taking at issue in Dugas.
By so doing, we would have been able to avoid concluding that the ordinance
was confiscatory. See City of Minot, 212 N.W.2d at 841.
If the third approach were applied in the present case, Article VI, Section
2 of the Town of Eaton Zoning Ordinance would have created a presumption
that Burns’ nonuse of her shed rendered it an abandoned nonconforming use.
Then, the ZBA would have been required to permit Burns to attempt to
overcome that presumption by offering facts or argument that demonstrated
that the cessation of use was beyond her control. I concur in the result
reached by the majority because I do not read its opinion as foreclosing the
adoption of such an approach under more compelling facts where the takings
issue is squarely raised.
12