THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Health and Human Services
No. 2005-856
APPEAL OF EMILY HUFF
(New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services)
Argued: July 21, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 28, 2006
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Jan P. Myskowski and Jaime I.
Gillis on the brief, and Mr. Myskowski orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Suzan M. Lehmann, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
John D. MacIntosh, of Concord, and John S. Kitchen, of Laconia, on the
brief, for the Office of Public Guardian, Tri-County Cap, Inc./Guardianship
Services and Enhanced Life Options Group, as amici curiae.
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Portsmouth and Manchester (Kay E.
Drought and Laurel O’Connor on the brief) and Disability Rights Center, of
Concord (Ronald K. Lospennato on the brief), for Michael Bourgeois, Anita
Handren, The Brain Injury Association of New Hampshire and the National
Alliance of the Mentally Ill, as amici curiae.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (Tina L. Annis on the brief),
Laboe Associates, PLLC, of Concord (John E. Laboe on the brief), McLane, Graf,
Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Nelson A. Raust on the brief), Law
Office of W. Michael Todd, of New London (W. Michael Todd on the brief), and
Law Office of Ann N. Butenhof, of Manchester (Ann N. Butenhof and Judith L.
Bomster on the brief), for the Elder Law, Estate Planning and Probate Section
of the New Hampshire Bar Association, as amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Emily Huff, appeals a final decision of the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services Administrative
Appeals Unit (AAU). The AAU concluded that special needs trust distributions
function as income for purposes of Medicaid eligibility. We vacate and remand.
The following facts were found by the AAU or are uncontested. The
petitioner is a disabled, young woman. On February 24, 2004, the petitioner’s
mother, who also serves as her legal guardian, applied on the petitioner’s
behalf for medical assistance under the Aid to the Permanently and Totally
Disabled (APTD) program. As part of her application, the petitioner informed
the department of health and human services (DHHS) that she was the
beneficiary of a special needs trust, the Emily Huff Irrevocable Trust (the trust).
DHHS determined that the petitioner satisfied the APTD’s categorical
criteria and therefore sought to determine her financial eligibility. In order to
ascertain the petitioner’s financial eligibility, DHHS verified her monthly Social
Security benefits and requested information concerning expenditures made by
the trust. On May 7, 2004, the petitioner’s mother, who also serves as trustee
for the trust, provided a list of expenditures from the trust, which included
payments for: (1) federal and state taxes; (2) attorney’s fees; (3) a camp
attended by the petitioner; (4) a bond required for the guardianship; and (5) a
trip to Wisconsin. DHHS concluded that some of these expenditures
constituted income for purposes of determining the petitioner’s financial
eligibility for medical assistance. Based upon this conclusion, DHHS
determined that the petitioner qualified as medically needy, but not
categorically needy; therefore, she would have to meet a spend-down
requirement before she could receive Medicaid.
From DHHS’ initial determination, the petitioner appealed to the AAU.
There, a hearings officer reversed DHHS’ finding as to the amount of the spend-
down that the petitioner would be required to meet, but upheld DHHS’
determination that trust expenditures for the benefit, or on behalf, of the
2
petitioner constituted income for purposes of Medicaid eligibility. The
petitioner moved for reconsideration, which the hearings officer denied. The
petitioner also moved to supplement the record with documents pertaining to
the department’s Medicaid eligibility policies in effect on January 1, 1972. The
hearings officer denied this request as well, concluding that the petitioner had
not followed the appropriate procedure to supplement the record or to
introduce additional information as part of her motion for reconsideration.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the AAU erred in counting trust
expenditures as income for purposes of Medicaid eligibility and in denying her
motion to supplement the record. The petitioner also argues that DHHS and
the AAU violated her due process rights by engaging in improper rule-making
and by relying on unwritten rules in adjudicating her application. DHHS
counters that: (1) this matter may only be brought as a declaratory judgment
action in Superior Court; and (2) the petitioner’s income was lawfully and
properly calculated.
Established in 1965 as Title XIX of the Social Security Act (SSA), the
Medicaid program offers federal financial assistance to states that opt to
reimburse certain costs of medical treatment for needy persons. Schweiker v.
Gray Panthers, 453 U.S. 34, 36 (1981). States participating in the program
must develop a plan that includes reasonable standards for determining an
individual’s eligibility for Medicaid and the extent of medical assistance to be
provided. Id. “An individual is entitled to Medicaid if [s]he fulfills the criteria
established by the State in which [s]he lives. State Medicaid plans must
comply with requirements imposed both by the [SSA] itself and by the
Secretary of Health and Human Services.” Id. at 36-37 (citation omitted).
“As originally enacted, Medicaid required participating States to provide
medical assistance to ‘categorically needy’ individuals who received cash
payments under one of four welfare programs established elsewhere in the
[SSA].” Id. at 37 (citation omitted). These programs included Old Age
Assistance, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, Aid to the Blind, and Aid
to the Permanently and Totally Disabled. Id. at 37 n.1. Congress deemed the
individuals who participated in these four programs to be especially deserving
of public assistance. Id. at 37. States were also allowed to offer assistance to
the “medically needy,” meaning persons who could not pay for their medical
expenses but who had “incomes too large to qualify for categorical assistance.”
Id.
In 1972, Congress replaced three of the four
categorical assistance programs with a new program
called Supplemental Security Income for the Aged,
Blind, and Disabled (SSI). Under SSI, the Federal
Government displaced the States by assuming
3
responsibility for both funding payments and setting
standards of need. In some States, the number of
individuals eligible for SSI assistance was significantly
larger than the number eligible under the earlier,
state-run categorical need programs.
The expansion of general welfare accomplished by
SSI portended increased Medicaid obligations for some
States because Congress retained the requirement that
all recipients of categorical welfare assistance—now
SSI—were entitled to Medicaid. Congress feared that
these States would withdraw from the cooperative
Medicaid program rather than expand their Medicaid
coverage in a manner commensurate with the
expansion of categorical assistance. In order not to
impose a substantial fiscal burden on these States or
discourage them from participating, Congress offered
what has become known as the § 209(b) option. Under
it, States could elect to provide Medicaid assistance
only to those individuals who would have been eligible
under the state Medicaid plan in effect on January 1,
1972.
Id. at 38-39 (quotations and citations omitted). “Section 209(b) allowed states
which had used more restrictive criteria than those subsequently enacted in
SSI to continue using those more restrictive criteria after the 1974 effective
date of the SSI Program.” Mowbray v. Kozlowski, 914 F.2d 593, 596 (4th Cir.
1990). Nevertheless, if a state adopted section 209(b) and retained its more
restrictive standards, it was required to provide benefits for the medically needy
pursuant to the plan under which it operated on January 1, 1972, and which
had been approved by the Federal Department of Health and Human Services.
Id.; see also 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(f) (2000).
The United States District Court for the District of New Hampshire has
held that “New Hampshire is a ‘§ 209(b) option’ state, and therefore the
eligibility standards for medical assistance are the same as those in effect in
New Hampshire on January 1, 1972,” Duquette v. Dupuis, 582 F. Supp. 1365,
1368 (D.N.H. 1984) (citation omitted), under the State’s approved plan. See 42
U.S.C. § 1396a(f). Accordingly, if New Hampshire is a section 209(b) state, the
petitioner’s application must be evaluated against the 1972 eligibility standards
for medical assistance in the State’s approved plan because those standards
define the nature and extent of the State’s Medicaid obligations under section
209(b).
4
On the record in this case, the status of New Hampshire’s Medicaid plan
in 1972 is unclear. The AAU hearings officer concluded that “[t]he record
contains no persuasive evidence as to the treatment of trust distributions in
1972 (special needs or otherwise) either in New Hampshire or under the then
newly created SSI program. Accordingly, neither party presented sufficient
evidence on this issue for it to be fairly addressed by the undersigned.” At oral
argument, DHHS conceded that it has not located a copy of the 1972 approved
plan, but argued that such an approved plan (with provisions pertaining to
special needs trusts) exists. DHHS also contended that the status and nature
of New Hampshire’s Medicaid plan in 1972 presents questions of fact which we
ought not decide in the first instance. The petitioner argued that no valid
approved plan from 1972 exists and therefore New Hampshire is not a section
209(b) state. The petitioner also asserts that the state of the 1972 plan is
primarily a question of law which we ought to reach here.
The interpretation of New Hampshire legislation in 1972 is a question of
law. See Roloff v. Sullivan, 975 F.2d 333, 341 (7th Cir. 1992); Indiana Dep’t of
Pub. Welfare v. Payne, 622 N.E.2d 461, 465 (Ind. 1994). However, the instant
case requires more than simply interpreting laws and regulations extant on a
particular date. Rather, it requires determining whether the State had a
Medicaid plan in place on January 1, 1972, and whether that plan was
approved pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(f). These types of determinations
present questions of fact, which we decline to address in the first instance. See
Boston & Maine R. R. v. State, 97 N.H. 380, 385 (1952).
The hearings officer did not make these types of findings. Having
determined that she lacked sufficient evidence concerning the status and
nature of New Hampshire’s Medicaid plan in 1972, the hearings officer
adjudicated the petitioner’s application based upon New Hampshire
Administrative Rule, He-W 654.04(b)(10) (eff. April 25, 1998), which provides,
“Payments of income from a trust or similar legal device or payments from the
corpus of a trust or a similar legal device made to, or for the benefit of, or on
behalf of the individual shall be considered income to the individual.” The
hearings officer concluded that Rule 654.04(b)(10) “require[d] the Department
to count disbursements from trusts made to the individual, on the individual’s
behalf or for the individual’s benefit as income.” The hearings officer then
determined that the particular disbursements from the petitioner’s special
needs trust were income for purposes of determining Medicaid financial
eligibility. Even if we assume without deciding that the hearings officer
correctly interpreted Rule 654.04(b)(10), absent a conclusion that New
Hampshire is not a section 209(b) state and that Rule 654.04(b)(10) is
consistent with current federal obligations, or a finding that the standard
contained in Rule 654.04(b)(10) was part of the State’s approved Medicaid plan
in 1972, it was error for the hearings officer to rely and adjudicate this case
based solely upon the rule.
5
We acknowledge that both sides have cited portions of regulations, rules,
and manuals that allegedly existed in 1972. However, neither side has
submitted the actual, approved plan from January 1, 1972. Given the
importance of the legal issues before us, we decline, at this time and in the first
instance, to assume that portions of policy manuals and other regulations
constitute the approved plan. As the Connecticut Supreme Court observed in a
case quite similar to this one, “proper consideration of the [petitioner’s] claim
must include an examination of the actual state plan in effect on January 1,
1972.” Matarazzo v. Rowe, 623 A.2d 470, 475 (Conn. 1993), overruled on other
grounds by Ross v. Giardi, 680 A.2d 113, 119 (Conn. 1996).
Therefore, this matter must be remanded so that the January 1, 1972
plan can be made a part of the record and considered in adjudicating the
petitioner’s claim. To the extent that the AAU determines that such a plan
cannot here be produced, further proceedings may also be necessary. See
Matarazzo v. Aronson, No. CV-91-0388251-S, 1993 WL 284819, at *1 (Conn.
Super. Ct. July 23, 1993) (order remanding case to Connecticut Department of
Income Maintenance).
Before concluding, we address one final point made by the AAU hearings
officer because it is likely to arise on remand. Figlioli v. R.J. Moreau Cos., 151
N.H. 618, 622 (2005). The hearings officer declined to look beyond Rule
654.04(b)(10), stating, “Given the restriction found in RSA 161:4, IV, the
undersigned cannot decide the matter in violation of that rule.” RSA 161:4, IV
(2002) provides:
The commissioner may, in accordance with the rules
adopted by the director of personnel pursuant to RSA
541-A, appoint a hearings officer or hearings officers,
as necessary, to preside over such hearings as are
required to comply with federal and state statutes and
federal or state rules or regulations. The decision of
the officer shall not be contrary to rules adopted by the
department of health and human services pursuant to
RSA 541-A. The officer’s decision shall be binding on
all parties unless such decision is overturned on
appeal.
Although the hearings officer was correct to note that RSA 161:4, IV,
precludes her from issuing a decision contrary to departmental rules, the
statute also indicates that she was to “preside over such hearings as are
required to comply with federal and state statutes and federal or state rules or
regulations.” RSA 161:4, IV. Assuming without deciding that New Hampshire
is a section 209(b) state, see Duquette, 582 F. Supp. at 1368, federal law – by
6
application of 42 U.S.C. § 1396a(f) – required the petitioner’s application to be
adjudicated based upon the plan in effect on January 1, 1972. The hearings
officer’s decision is silent as to how she reconciled federal law obligations with
the requirements imposed by state administrative rules. Absent a copy of the
State’s approved plan from 1972 or a decision from the hearings officer
discussing these types of matters, it would be premature for us to resolve
issues in this regard. We also note, for purposes of the remand, that New
Hampshire’s administrative rules currently contain a provision requiring
compliance with 42 U.S.C. § 1396a, the statutory provision setting forth the
section 209(b) option. See N.H. Admin. Rules, He-W 602.04(a) (eff. Oct. 22,
2005) (“The department shall provide medical assistance for the adult
categories under the provisions of 42 USC 1396a.”); see also 42 U.S.C.
§ 1396a(f).
Accordingly, we vacate the order of the AAU and remand this case for
further proceedings. See Matarazzo, 623 A.2d at 475-76; see also Matarazzo,
1993 WL 284819, at *1.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7