THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2005-470
DARREN STARR
v.
GOVERNOR
Argued: July 20, 2006
Opinion Issued: September 26, 2006
Darren Starr, pro se, on the brief, and Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C.,
of Manchester (Robert E. Murphy, Jr., on the supplemental memorandum of
law and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Andrew B. Livernois, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Darren Starr, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) dismissing his petition for declaratory judgment.
We affirm.
The facts of this case are not in dispute. In October 1981, the Governor
issued a resolution calling the legislature into special session (1981-1982
special session), to begin on November 17, 1981. The resolution stated that
“the welfare of the State” necessitated the special session, and that certain
enumerated matters required legislative action. One such matter was the
“enactment of corrective legislation” to address the unforeseen impact of
“certain laws enacted during the 1981 regular session.”
During the 1981-1982 special session, the house of representatives
drafted and presented for consideration House Bill 20, which, in its initial form,
addressed minimum mandatory sentences for driving while intoxicated. The
house subsequently passed an amended version of House Bill 20, which was
also passed by the senate, and signed into law by the Governor. The amended
portion of House Bill 20 became RSA 651:2, II-e (Supp. 2005), also known as
the “truth in sentencing” law.
The petitioner was convicted of second-degree murder on November 17,
1987, and sentenced to a term of twenty-eight years to life imprisonment in
accordance with RSA 651:2, II-e. In December 2004, he sought a declaratory
judgment that the legislature had illegally adopted RSA 651:2, II-e. The
respondent, the Governor, responded with a motion to dismiss, which was
granted on March 3, 2005. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the legislature, when meeting in
special session, is restricted to considering only those matters enumerated in
the Governor’s resolution calling for such session. He further contends that
the enactment of RSA 651:2, II-e violated the due process protections of the
State and Federal Constitutions.
I. Justiciability
We must first determine whether the petitioner’s claim that the
legislature enacted RSA 651:2, II-e outside of the authority granted to it by the
Governor is, as the respondent contends, a nonjusticiable political question.
This is a question of law, which we review de novo. Hughes v. Speaker, N.H.
House of Representatives, 152 N.H. 276, 283 (2005).
“The political question doctrine is essentially a function of the separation
of powers, existing to restrain courts from inappropriate interference in the
business of the other branches of Government, and deriving in large part from
prudential concerns about the respect we owe the political departments.”
Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H. 124, 128 (2005) (quotation omitted).
The principle of separation of powers is set forth in Part I, Article 37 of the New
Hampshire Constitution. Id. The justiciability doctrine prevents judicial
violation of the separation of powers by limiting judicial review of certain
matters that lie within the province of the other two branches of government.
Id.
2
A case presents a nonjusticiable political question when there is a
textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate
political department. Petition of Judicial Conduct Comm., 151 N.H. 123, 128
(2004). Where such a commitment exists, we must decline to adjudicate the
matter to avoid encroaching upon the powers and functions of that coordinate
political branch. Id.; see also Baines, 152 N.H. at 128 (“If a question is not
justiciable, it is not ours to review.”). Deciding whether a matter has, in any
measure, been committed by the constitution to another branch of government
is itself a delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation, and is a
responsibility of this court as its ultimate interpreter. Hughes, 152 N.H. at
283.
Part II, Article 3 of the State Constitution instructs the senate and house
to “assemble biennially on the first Wednesday of December for organizational
purposes in even numbered years, and . . . assemble annually on the first
Wednesday following the first Tuesday in January, and at such other times as
they may judge necessary . . . .” N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 3. Part II, Article 50
of the State Constitution grants the Governor the power to call the legislature,
when adjourned, into an extra session if and when the welfare of the State so
requires. N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 50; see also Opinion of the Justices, 115
N.H. 686, 692 (1975). The State Constitution does not, however, mandate that
the Governor set forth with particularity the business to be taken up by the
legislature during such extra sessions; nor does it limit the scope of the
legislature’s power upon being called together by the Governor. Rather, the
State Constitution grants the legislature the “full power and authority” to
make, “from time to time,” laws and statutes, “for the benefit and welfare of
this state,” so long as such enactments are constitutional. N.H. CONST. pt. II,
art. 5. In the absence of any constitutional language or provision limiting this
“full power and authority” to the regular legislative sessions prescribed by Part
II, Article 3 of the State Constitution, we interpret the phrase “from time to
time” to encompass any time the legislature is called into session. Thus, Part
II, Article 5 of the State Constitution plainly constitutes a “textually
demonstrable constitutional commitment” of the authority to make laws to the
legislative branch.
The petitioner points out that Part II, Article 50 of the State Constitution
empowers the Governor to call the legislature into extra sessions “if the welfare
of the state should require the same,” and contends that this final clause
constitutes a limit upon the legislature’s power to enact laws when so called.
We disagree. The quoted clause constitutes a limitation upon the power of the
executive branch to call the legislature into extra sessions. In other words, the
Governor may call for an extra session only when, in the Governor’s judgment,
it is required for the welfare of the State. The clause does not in any way limit
the legislature’s response to the Governor’s call for a special session.
3
The petitioner further contends that because Part II, Article 50 of the
State Constitution does not expressly authorize “the enactment of laws that the
[G]overnor does not identify as being necessary for the welfare of the state,” the
legislature was required to abide by the direction of Mason’s Manual of
Legislative Procedure. Legislative rules in effect during the 1981-1982 special
session provided that “[i]n such cases where New Hampshire Committee Rules
are silent, ‘Mason’s Manual of Legislative Procedures’ [sic] shall be referred to
as the primary guide.” Manual of the New Hampshire General Court 1981 at
119; see also Keefe v. Roberts, 116 N.H. 195, 197 (1976). Mason’s Manual
stipulated that, when called into a special session by a governor, a legislature
should only enact laws that come within the scope of the governor’s resolution.
National Conference of State Legislatures, Mason’s Manual of Legislative
Procedure § 780, at 551-54 (1979).
Mason’s Manual is a handbook of general applicability, and there are
states in which the scope of the legislature’s power upon being called into
special session by the governor is specifically limited by their constitutions.
See, e.g., COLO. CONST. art. 4, § 9; NEB. CONST. art. IV, § 8. In New
Hampshire, however, there is no such specific constitutional limitation; thus,
the general exhortation in Mason’s Manual does not control the outcome here.
In any event, while a procedural manual might assist in a legal analysis, it is
not binding upon the court in interpreting the State Constitution.
Because we believe that the State Constitution empowers the legislature
to enact any laws and statutes for the benefit of the State whenever it sits in
session, general or special, we disagree with the petitioner’s contention that the
State Constitution is silent on the issue before us. However, even if we were to
agree with the petitioner, we would nonetheless be compelled to conclude that
this issue raises a nonjusticiable political question.
It is well established that the authority to adopt procedural rules for
passing legislation is demonstrably committed to the legislative branch by Part
II, Articles 22 and 37 of the State Constitution. Baines, 152 N.H. at 130; see
also Hughes, 152 N.H. at 284. Part II, Article 22 of the State Constitution vests
in the house of representatives the power to “settle the rules of proceedings in
their own house.” N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 22. Part II, Article 37 of the State
Constitution grants a corresponding power to the senate. N.H. CONST. pt. II,
art. 37.
In light of Part II, Articles 22 and 37, we have recognized that the
legislature, alone, has complete control and discretion whether it shall observe,
enforce, waive, suspend, or disregard its own rules of procedure. Hughes, 152
N.H. at 284. “[T]he legislature’s adherence to the rules or statutes prescribing
procedure is a matter entirely within legislative control and discretion, not
subject to judicial review unless the legislative procedure is mandated by the
4
constitution.” Id. (quotation omitted). We will not declare a legislative act
invalid for failure of a house to observe its own rules. See Baines, 152 N.H. at
131. Thus, even if we were to conclude that the legislature’s authority to enact
laws in a special session is not specifically covered by the constitution or
legislative rules, we would nonetheless be compelled to decline judicial review
of the issue.
Part II, Article 5 of the State Constitution constitutes a “textually
demonstrable constitutional commitment” of the authority to make laws to the
legislative branch. Thus, we conclude that the petitioner’s challenge to RSA
651:2, II-e on procedural grounds presents a nonjusticiable political question.
II. Due Process
The petitioner argues that the legislature enacted RSA 651:2, II-e
contrary to the due process protections of Part I, Article 15 of the State
Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution.
Specifically, he contends, “The due process requirement of notice mandates
that the citizens of . . . New Hampshire be advised of what laws would be
changed or enacted in special session.” We first address this issue under the
State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. Id. at 232-33.
It is well established that an elementary and fundamental requirement of
due process, as guaranteed by Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution, is
notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested
parties of the pendency of an action and afford them an opportunity to present
their objections. City of Claremont v. Truell, 126 N.H. 30, 35 (1985). We have
never taken up the question of whether the legislature, when in regular or
special session, is required to provide any such notice to the citizenry prior to
the enactment of a law. At least one federal circuit court has suggested that
the prospective character and general applicability of legislation renders the
notion of “[l]egislative due process” virtually meaningless. L C & S, Inc. v.
Warren County Area Plan Com’n, 244 F.3d 601, 602 (7th Cir. 2001). However,
even if we assume, without deciding, that constitutional due process
protections attend the passage of legislation, we conclude that the legislature
provided such protections in this case.
“All public proceedings shall be open to the public, and all persons shall
be permitted to attend any meetings of those bodies or agencies.” RSA 91-A:2,
II (Supp. 1981) (amended 1983, 1986, 1991). Any meeting of the legislature for
the purposes of doing business affecting any or all citizens of this State is
defined as a “public proceeding” for the purposes of RSA 91-A:2, II. RSA 91-
A:1-a, I(a) (Supp. 2005). Thus, all sessions of the legislature, including those
5
extra sessions called by the Governor for the welfare of the State, are required
by statute to be open to the public. Legislative rules in effect during the 1981-
1982 special session further required that all committee meetings be open to
the public. See Manual of the New Hampshire General Court 1981 at 119 (“All
meetings of any committee of the House and Senate shall be open to the public
subject to the provisions of N.H. RSA 91-A.”).
The petitioner does not contend that the legislature failed to abide by
these requirements prior to enacting RSA 651:2, II-e. Indeed, at a January 5,
1982 hearing on House Bill 20, various members of the public spoke in favor of
or in opposition to the amendment that would become RSA 651:2, II-e. On
January 25, 1982, the house held a public hearing on House Bill 20, and
numerous interested members of the public again took the opportunity to
speak for or against the amendment. Because it is evident that the citizens of
New Hampshire had notice of and an opportunity to be heard on the
amendment to House Bill 20, we conclude that the enactment of RSA 651:2, II-
e during the 1981-1982 special session did not violate the due process
protections of Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
The Federal Constitution offers the petitioner no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See L C & S, 244 F.3d
at 605 (concluding that “bona fide” legislation requires no notice or opportunity
to be heard). Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal
Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6