THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2005-287
MARY CARIGNAN
v.
LESLIE WHEELER & a.
Argued: March 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: May 5, 2006
Matthew J. Lahey, P.A., of Laconia (Matthew J. Lahey on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Bouchard, Kleinman & Wright, P.A., of Hampton (Kenneth G. Bouchard
and Shenanne R. Tucker on the brief, and Mr. Bouchard orally), for defendant
Leslie Wheeler.
HICKS, J. Defendant Leslie Wheeler appeals a decision of the Superior
Court (Smith, J.) that a police officer’s accident report is not trustworthy and
hence was properly excluded at trial. We affirm.
This is the second appeal of this case. See Carignan v. N.H. Int’l
Speedway, 151 N.H. 409 (2004). The facts, including the details of the August
23, 1998 accident from which this case arises, are sufficiently recited in
Carignan. Id. at 411-12. In Carignan, the jury returned a verdict for the
plaintiff, Mary Carignan, which was appealed. Id. at 412. Wheeler argued,
among other things, that the trial court erred by: (1) refusing to admit Officer
Locke’s police accident report under the hearsay exception in New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence Rule 803(8)(C); (2) allowing the plaintiff to establish a new
liability theory by cross-examining Wheeler’s expert witness based upon
inadmissible deposition testimony; (3) failing to grant his motion to set aside
the jury verdict; and (4) failing to grant a remittitur because the jury award was
excessive and improperly calculated. Id. at 415-16.
We determined that the conclusion in Locke’s police report that “the
driver of the motorcycle made a wrong decision in his attempt to pass the RV”
was a factual finding within the meaning of Rule 803(8)(C). Id. at 416.
Accordingly, we vacated the trial court’s ruling excluding the report and
remanded the case “for a determination of whether that portion of the report
was trustworthy.” Id. at 417. We also concluded that while Wheeler’s expert
witness could be asked on cross-examination about otherwise inadmissible
facts that underlay or formed the basis of his opinion, the trial court did not err
in excluding testimony concerning Locke’s conclusion. Id. at 418.
On remand, the trial court conducted an evidentiary hearing and found
the following facts: On August 23, 1998, Locke, a part-time officer in the
Loudon Police Department, arrived at the scene of an accident involving co-
defendant Dennis Carignan’s motorcycle and Wheeler’s recreational vehicle,
which was entering co-defendant New Hampshire International Speedway,
Inc.’s parking facility. During his subsequent investigation, Locke used
triangulation to mark the resting place of the vehicles and gouge marks on the
pavement, took measurements, prepared a diagram, and made observations.
In addition, he received statements from witnesses upon which he relied in
reaching his conclusion of fault. Locke issued his accident report on that same
day.
The trial court ruled that the “the police report is not trustworthy and
was properly excluded at trial.” The court found that “Officer Locke lacked the
skill, training, and experience in accident investigation to allow his conclusion
of fault to be admitted” and that his investigation was “rather unsophisticated”
as his conclusion of fault was based “on witness testimony rather than
independently verifiable objective facts.”
On appeal, Wheeler argues that the trial court erred by excluding Locke’s
report and findings. He also argues that the trial court made the following
errors, which were raised, but not addressed, in Carignan: (1) allowing the
plaintiff to establish a new liability theory by cross-examining Wheeler’s expert
witness based upon inadmissible deposition testimony; (2) failing to grant his
“motion to set aside the jury verdict and for new trial”; (3) allowing the future
cost of medical treatment and lost wages without requiring the plaintiff to
reduce them to present value; and (4) denying his motion to reconvene the jury
when it used a per diem formula in calculating its pain and suffering award
2
and impermissibly awarded the plaintiff a credit for attorney’s fees in its
damages award.
I. Police Report
We review a trial court’s ruling on the admissibility of evidence under an
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard, and reverse only if the rulings
are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case.
Carignan, 151 N.H. at 416.
Rule 803(8)(C) provides an exception to the hearsay rule for:
“[r]ecords, reports, statements or data compilations, in any form, of
public offices or agencies, setting forth . . . (C) in civil actions . . .
factual findings resulting from an investigation made pursuant to
authority granted by law, unless the sources of information or
other circumstances indicate lack of trustworthiness.”
N.H. R. Ev. 803(8)(C).
In Carignan, we ruled that Locke’s conclusion that “the driver of the
motorcycle made a wrong decision in his attempt to pass the RV” was
“admissible under that subsection of the rule, unless the sources of
information or other circumstances indicate a lack of trustworthiness.”
Carignan, 151 N.H. at 416-17. We suggested that the trial court consider, on
remand, the following factors from Baker v. Elcona Homes Corp., 588 F.2d
551, 558 (6th Cir. 1978), cert. denied, 441 U.S. 933 (1979): (1) the timeliness
of the investigation; (2) the special skill or experience of the official; (3) the level
at which the investigation was conducted; and (4) whether the report was made
with any improper motive. Id. at 417.
Wheeler first contends that, with respect to the second factor, the trial
court “inappropriately dwelled on Officer Locke’s lack of accident
reconstruction” when it is “not necessary” that he be an “accident
reconstructionist” or have investigated “a large number of accidents.”
The trial court found that Locke was a part-time officer who had
previously investigated only five to ten accidents. It also found that Locke’s
“only training in accident investigation came from a part-time Academy
program and he did not learn any accident reconstruction skills aside from
using triangulation.” In regard to triangulation, the court noted Locke’s
testimony that this technique does not “determine what or who caused an
accident.” As such, the trial court determined that Locke’s skill, training, and
experience indicated that his conclusion of fault lacked trustworthiness.
3
Although we agree with Wheeler that there is no requirement that a
police officer be an expert in accident reconstruction or have investigated a
large number of accidents, the trial court could properly consider Locke’s
limited training and experience in evaluating the trustworthiness of his
findings. We see no error in the court’s consideration of these facts. See
Baker, 588 F.2d at 558 (finding that a twenty-eight-year veteran patrolman
who “had investigated hundreds or even thousands” of accidents and testified
in detail about the vector analysis he performed possessed the requisite skill
and experience).
Wheeler also contends that, with respect to the third factor, the trial
court erred by finding that Locke relied “solely on witness statements and
ignored other parts of his investigation.” Specifically, Wheeler contends that
Locke made his findings based upon his entire investigation, which, in addition
to interviewing witnesses, included taking measurements, making
observations, and performing triangulation.
Although the trial court noted that Locke “marked the resting place of
vehicles and gouge marks on the pavement using triangulation,” it found that
“he did not consider this evidence in drawing a conclusion as to fault.” Locke
testified that he did not perform any accident reconstruction or any skid mark
calculations, and that neither his diagram nor his vehicle resting point
measurements (triangulation) was used by him to arrive at his conclusion of
fault. In addition to admitting that his conclusion was formed from the witness
statements he received, Locke explained that without “being an accident
reconstructionist,” he did not have anything besides the witness statements to
use as the basis for his conclusion. The witnesses who provided these
statements were two employees of the New Hampshire International Speedway
as well as Wheeler and Carignan. When asked if “anybody could take [their]
statements and draw a conclusion,” Locke testified, “Sure, anybody could.”
Wheeler does not contest the trial court’s findings on the other factors –
that the investigation was timely and the report was made without any
improper motive. Considering the trial court’s findings on all of the factors, we
conclude that the trial court’s finding, that Locke’s report was untrustworthy,
is both tenable and reasonable. See Faries v. Atlas Truck Body Mfg. Co., 797
F.2d 619, 623 (8th Cir. 1986) (ruling that a trooper’s accident report containing
his conclusion of the accident’s cause was inadmissible because there was no
method for “checking or corroborating” the report and there was insufficient
physical evidence to support his conclusion that was “largely based upon the
statements of an interested [witness]”); cf. Breagy v. Stark, 138 N.H. 479, 484
(1994) (finding that an officer’s opinion testimony concerning the fault or cause
of an accident is properly excluded when it would not assist the jury); Johnston
v. Lynch, 133 N.H. 79, 88 (1990) (same); Saltzman v. Town of Kingston, 124
4
N.H. 515, 524-25 (1984) (same). We thus find no error in the trial court’s
ruling that “the police report . . . was properly excluded at trial.”
II. New Liability Theory
Wheeler next argues that the trial court erred by allowing the plaintiff to
establish a new liability theory (that Wheeler “did not make a normal left turn,
but rather drifted left on a direct angle well before the turn, and entered the
motorcycle’s lane causing the collision”) during cross-examination of Wheeler’s
expert witness using the inadmissible deposition testimony of Carignan.
In Russell v. Boston & Maine Railroad, 83 N.H. 246, 252 (1928), we held
that a plaintiff was not entitled to present to a jury a new liability theory, which
was suggested “[j]ust before the close of evidence, in cross-examination of the
defendant’s expert,” when it “constituted a radical departure from the theory
upon which the whole trial had proceeded up to that time” and where “there
was a total lack of evidence to sustain it.” Citing Russell, Wheeler appears to
argue that the trial court erred in allowing this new liability theory to go to the
jury essentially because it “was not presented in the Plaintiff’s pretrial
statement, opening statement, or anywhere in the Plaintiff’s case in chief,” but
rather was “spontaneously developed” during the cross-examination of
Wheeler’s expert witness. The record reflects otherwise.
Unlike in Russell, plaintiff’s counsel here referenced evidence concerning
the “clipped corner” manner of Wheeler’s turn during his opening statement.
Subsequently, the plaintiff and Carignan described Wheeler’s turn in their
direct examination both as a normal and as a gradual turn. Therefore, there
was no “radical departure” within the meaning of Russell. Id. at 252 (rejecting
new theory of cause of fire interjected at conclusion of trial without
foundation).
Furthermore, even though large portions of Carignan’s deposition were
not admitted into evidence, we reiterate our statement from Carignan that New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 705 “permits inquiry on cross-examination into
facts underlying an expert’s opinion even if those facts would be otherwise
inadmissible.” Carignan, 151 N.H. at 417. Plaintiff’s counsel was allowed to
cross-examine Wheeler’s expert witness about statements in Carignan’s
deposition because he testified that he relied upon this deposition in forming
his opinions. In addition, the trial court gave a limiting instruction to the jury
that the deposition evidence was relevant only for what Wheeler’s expert
considered in forming his opinions.
We therefore conclude that the trial court did not err in allowing the
plaintiff’s case as presented to go to the jury for consideration.
5
III. Reconvening the Jury
Wheeler also argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to
reconvene the jury when its verdict was based upon “impermissible speculation
as to the Plaintiff’s attorneys’ fees and expenses” and an “impermissible per
diem” based formula in order to make sure that the plaintiff received “$20,000
per year above medical costs, lawyer’s fees and any other expenses.”
Wheeler’s motion was accompanied by an affidavit of his attorney,
Kenneth Bouchard. Attorney Bouchard’s affidavit detailed how, upon receiving
a response to a juror questionnaire, he called the juror and thereby received
the information that formed the basis for the motion. The trial court denied
the motion.
We review the trial court’s decision under an unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard, and reverse only if the rulings are clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case. State v. Low, 138 N.H. 86, 88
(1993); see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)(explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). Whether or not to reconvene
the jury based upon an attorney’s affidavit is a matter within the sound
discretion of the trial court. Drop Anchor Realty Trust v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co.,
126 N.H. 674, 683 (1985). Based upon the record before us, the trial court’s
denial of the defendant’s motion is neither untenable nor unreasonable.
IV. Remaining Arguments
Wheeler asserts in his remaining arguments that the trial court erred by
failing to grant his “motion to set aside the jury verdict and for new trial,” and
by allowing the future cost of medical treatment and lost wages without
requiring the plaintiff to reduce them to present value. We conclude that these
arguments lack merit and warrant no further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel,
137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6