THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-606
LIBERTARIAN PARTY NEW HAMPSHIRE & a.
v.
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Argued: July 21, 2006
Opinion Issued: November 21, 2006
Twomey Law Office, of Epsom (Paul Twomey on the brief and orally), for
the plaintiffs.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Orville B. Fitch II, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Wynn E. Arnold, senior assistant attorney
general, orally), for the State.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiffs, Libertarian Party New Hampshire,
Constitution Party New Hampshire and Coalition for Free and Open Elections,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) dismissing their petition for
a declaration that certain state election laws are unconstitutional. We affirm.
I
The challenged statutes provide three avenues to nominating a candidate
for a place on the general election ballot. The first is nomination by party
primary. RSA 652:11 (Supp. 2005) defines “party” as “any political
organization which at the preceding state general election received at least 4
percent of the total number of votes cast for any one of the following: the office
of governor or the offices of United States Senators.” For ease of reference, we
will adopt the plaintiffs’ terms of “major party” for any political organization
meeting this definition and “minor party” for any political organization not
meeting this definition.
A major party’s candidate for elective office is chosen in a primary
election conducted according to the same procedures used for the general
election, except as otherwise provided. RSA 655:35 (1996). Prospective
candidates for party nomination secure a place on the primary ballot by, in
addition to other requirements, filing either an administrative assessment or a
specified number of primary petitions. RSA 655:19-c, I, III (Supp. 2005). The
assessments range from $100 for the offices of governor and United States
Senator to $2 for state representative, RSA 655:19-c, I(a) – (f); the number of
primary petitions ranges from 200 for governor and United States Senator to
five for state representative, RSA 655:19-c, III.
The second avenue to placement on the general election ballot is
nomination by nomination papers: “As an alternative to nomination by party
primary, a candidate may have his or her name placed on the ballot for the
state general election by submitting the requisite number of nomination
papers.” RSA 655:40 (Supp. 2005). RSA 655:42 (Supp. 2005), in turn,
provides in pertinent part:
I. It shall require the names of 3,000 registered voters, 1,500
from each United States congressional district in the state, to
nominate by nomination papers a candidate for president, vice-
president, United States senator, or governor.
II. It shall require the names of 1,500 registered voters to
nominate by nomination papers a candidate for United States
representative; 750 to nominate a candidate for councilor or state
senator; and 150 to nominate a candidate for state representative
or county officer.
The third avenue is nomination by organization, or, in other words, by a
minor party: “A political organization may have its name placed on the ballot
for the state general election by submitting the requisite number of nomination
papers, in the form prescribed by the secretary of state, pursuant to RSA
655:42, III.” RSA 655:40-a (Supp. 2005). RSA 655:42, III (Supp. 2005), in
turn, provides: “It shall require the names of registered voters equaling 3
percent of the total votes cast at the previous state general election to nominate
by nomination papers a political organization.”
2
The plaintiffs commenced this action in superior court, arguing that this
statutory scheme limits the access of minor parties, their candidates and
independent candidates to the general election ballot, in violation of their state
constitutional rights to equal protection, equal right to be elected, and free
speech and association. Specifically, the plaintiffs’ amended petition alleged:
The laws of the State of New Hampshire create two classes of
political organizations, so called major parties, which have
automatic [general election] ballot status for their candidates and
so called minor parties which have to clear extra burdensome
hurdles before they are allowed to bring their ideas before the
people on the [general election] ballot.
The State moved to dismiss the petition. The trial court upheld the
statutory provisions, and the plaintiffs appealed.
We apply the following standard of review:
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our task
is to ascertain whether the allegations pleaded in the plaintiff[s’]
writ are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. We assume all facts pleaded in the plaintiff[s’] writ are
true, and we construe all reasonable inferences drawn from those
facts in the plaintiff[s’] favor. We then engage in a threshold
inquiry that tests the facts in the complaint against the applicable
law.
Berry v. Watchtower Bible & Tract Soc., 152 N.H. 407, 410 (2005) (quotations
and citations omitted).
The plaintiffs contend that the challenged statutes violate Part I, Article
11 of the New Hampshire Constitution, which provides that “[a]ll elections are
to be free, and every inhabitant of the state of 18 years of age and upwards
shall have an equal right to vote in any election” and that “[e]very inhabitant of
the state, having the proper qualifications, has an equal right to be elected into
office.” They also argue that the ballot access provisions “violate the rights of
Association guaranteed jointly and individually by Part One Article 22 (Free
Speech) . . . [and] Article 4 (Rights of Conscience).” For ease of analysis, we will
refer to all of the preceding rights as “associational rights.” Finally, the
plaintiffs maintain that the statutes violate their right to equal protection
guaranteed under the State Constitution. Because the plaintiffs make claims
under the State Constitution only, we confine our analysis to it and cite federal
cases for guidance. See Akins v. Secretary of State, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 904 A.2d
702, 706 (2006).
3
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in applying a
reasonableness test. Specifically, it ruled that “[c]onsidering New Hampshire’s
ballot access statutes in light of federal constitutional analysis, . . . they do not
unreasonably restrict the rights to vote effectively and to associate for political
ends.” The trial court further concluded that this court’s Part I, Article 11
cases “employed a reasonableness standard . . . [that] is no more protective of
ballot access rights than federal constitutional standards.”
The plaintiffs contend that “[t]he equal right to vote and hold office and
the right of freedom of speech and association are fundamental rights that can
only be limited upon a showing of compelling state interest where the
limitations imposed are the least restrictive measures available to preserve . . .
state interests.” Thus, they argue for a heightened standard of strict scrutiny.
We recently addressed this issue in Akins, where we held:
Because the equal right to be elected operates so closely with the
fundamental right to vote, and because of the importance that both
rights have in our democratic system of government, and because
Part I, Article 11 expressly so provides for the equal right to be
elected, we conclude that every New Hampshire inhabitant’s equal
right to be elected into office under Part I, Article 11 is a
fundamental right.
Id. at ___, 904 A.2d at 706. Nevertheless, we also stated that “[s]imply because
the equal right to be elected under Part I, Article 11 is fundamental does not
mean that any impingement upon that right triggers strict scrutiny.” Id. at ___,
904 A.2d at 706. Rather, we adopted the balancing test employed by the
United States Supreme Court under the Federal Constitution. Id. at ___, 904
A.2d at 707. This test
“weigh[s] the character and magnitude of the asserted injury to the
rights that the plaintiff[s] seek[] to vindicate against the precise
interests put forward by the State as justifications for the burden
imposed by its rule, taking into consideration the extent to which
those interests make it necessary to burden the plaintiff[s’] rights.”
Id. at ___, 904 A.2d at 707 (quoting Burdick v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 434
(1992)) (ellipsis omitted). We note, for ease of reference to federal cases, that
this balancing test stems from Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780 (1983),
and is sometimes referred to as the Anderson test. Under this test, “when the
election law at issue subjects the plaintiff[s’] rights to severe restrictions, the
regulation must withstand strict scrutiny to be constitutional. When the
election law imposes only reasonable, nondiscriminatory restrictions upon the
plaintiff[s’] rights, then the State’s important regulatory interests are generally
4
sufficient to justify the restrictions.” Akins, 153 N.H. at ___, 904 A.2d at 707
(quotations and citation omitted).
Accordingly, we must first determine whether the challenged statutes
impose severe restrictions or only reasonable, nondiscriminatory ones upon the
plaintiffs’ associational rights. See id. at ___, 904 A.2d. at 707. We note
initially that the statutes are nondiscriminatory in that they “[do] not
differentiate among Republicans, Democrats, and Libertarians.” Werme v.
Merrill, 84 F.3d 479, 484 (1st Cir. 1996). In Werme, the First Circuit Court of
Appeals noted that certain New Hampshire statutes governing the appointment
of ballot clerks and election inspectors were nondiscriminatory for the following
reason:
[T]he regulation conditions the right to appoint election inspectors
and ballot clerks on a certain degree of success at the polls.
Distinguishing between recognized political parties based on past
electoral accomplishment is not per se invidiously discriminatory.
. . . [T]he Libertarian Party has exactly the same opportunity to
qualify as a source of election inspectors and ballot clerks under
New Hampshire law as does any other party. Equality of
opportunity exists, and equality of opportunity – not equality of
outcomes – is the linchpin of what the [Federal] Constitution
requires in this type of situation.
Id. at 484-85. We agree with this reasoning and conclude that the New
Hampshire Constitution also requires equal opportunity, not equal outcomes,
and that the statutes challenged here provide the plaintiffs an equal
opportunity to qualify for a place on the general election ballot. Thus, we
conclude that the challenged statutes are nondiscriminatory for purposes of
our state constitutional analysis.
We also conclude that the statutory restrictions imposed upon voting
and election rights are not severe. The United States Supreme Court has noted
that a nominating scheme “[d]emanding signatures equal in number to 3% or
5% of the vote in the last election is not invalid on its face.” American Party of
Texas v. White, 415 U.S. 767, 789 (1974). It also upheld a nomination process
requiring 22,000 signatures, id. at 778, and observed that challenging a
signature requirement with a “500-signature limit . . . [as] unduly burdensome
approaches the frivolous,” id. at 789. Accordingly, and even in view of the
difference in population between Texas and New Hampshire, we have little
trouble concluding that the signature requirements at issue, ranging from 150
to 3,000 for nomination of an independent candidate to three percent of the
total votes cast at the last state general election to nominate by nomination
papers a political organization, do not impose a severe burden upon
associational rights.
5
We also conclude that the threshold required for party status – four
percent of the votes cast for the offices of governor or United States Senator –
does not severely burden associational rights. In comparison, the electoral
scheme upheld in Jenness v. Fortson, 403 U.S. 431, 439 (1971), required an
organization to garner twenty percent support at a prior election in order to
achieve the status of “‘political party’ with its attendant ballot position rights
and primary election obligations.”
Having determined that none of the challenged restrictions is
discriminatory or severe, we next consider “the precise interests put forward by
the State as justifications for the burden[s] imposed by [the statutes],” bearing
in mind that “the State’s important regulatory interests are generally sufficient
to justify the restrictions.” Akins, 154 N.H. at ___, 904 A.2d at 707 (quotations
omitted). The State asserts that it has an “interest in avoiding undue voter
confusion and in running efficient and equitable elections.” The United States
Supreme Court has deemed these interests important for purposes of its
federal constitutional balancing test:
There is surely an important state interest in requiring some
preliminary showing of a significant modicum of support before
printing the name of a political organization’s candidate on the
ballot – the interest, if no other, in avoiding confusion, deception,
and even frustration of the democratic process at the general
election.
Jenness, 403 U.S. at 442. We likewise consider the State’s interests sufficient,
under our state constitutional analysis, to justify the restrictions imposed by
the statutes challenged here. We conclude that the statutes do not
unconstitutionally burden the plaintiffs’ associational interests.
II
We next address the plaintiffs’ equal protection challenge. “In
considering an equal protection challenge under our State Constitution, we
must first determine the appropriate standard of review by examining the
purpose and scope of the State-created classification and the individual rights
affected.” In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 637 (2004) (quotation omitted). Our
equal protection analysis usually employs the strict scrutiny, intermediate
scrutiny and rational basis standards, see id. at 637-38, with strict scrutiny
applicable to “[c]lassifications based upon suspect classes or affecting a
fundamental right,” id. at 637. The plaintiffs again argue that because voting
is a “fundamental activity,” strict scrutiny should be applied.
6
The question arises, however, whether having subjected the admittedly
fundamental right at issue to a balancing test under our associational interest
analysis, we should employ the same test to an equal protection analysis.
Federal courts have struggled with the same question. The Third Circuit Court
of Appeals, for instance, noted that “this Court, as well as others, has been
unclear whether the Anderson balancing test applies to ballot access claims
brought under the Equal Protection Clause, given that Anderson is a First
Amendment case.” Rogers v. Corbett, 460 F.3d 455, 460 (3d Cir. 2006). The
Rogers court concluded that “the Anderson test is the proper method for
analyzing such equal protection claims due to their relationship to the
associational rights found in the First Amendment.” Id. at 460-61.
For similar reasons, we conclude that the balancing test we adopted in
Akins is the appropriate test to apply to this equal protection challenge. First,
the plaintiffs themselves assert that voting is a “fundamental activity” precisely
because “Part I, Article 11 [of] the State Constitution contains an explicitly
enumerated guarantee of equality in . . . voting.” Thus, the equal protection
claims here are not just related to, but based upon, the associational rights
found in Part I, Article11 and to which we have applied the Akins test. Cf.
Rogers, 460 F.3d at 460-61. Moreover, our adoption of the balancing test in
Akins was based upon our recognition that although the voting and election
rights at issue were fundamental, “Article I, Section 4, Clause 1 of the Federal
Constitution grants states the right to regulate the time, place, and manner of
state and federal elections.” Akins, 154 N.H. at ___, 904 A.2d at 706 . Thus,
we held, “we must balance the legislature’s [constitutional] right to regulate
elections with citizens’ [constitutional] rights to vote and be elected.” Id. at ___,
904 A.2d at 706. Because the State’s right to regulate elections is as relevant
to an equal protection analysis as it is to an associational rights analysis, we
conclude that such an equal protection analysis must also balance the State’s
and citizens’ rights. Accordingly, we hold that the balancing test adopted in
Akins is applicable to the equal protection challenge here.
The plaintiffs contend that this case “involves a question of advantages
bestowed upon the majority party in all state elections in New Hampshire.”
Viewed alternatively, it involves purported disadvantages faced by minor
parties and independents. For instance, the plaintiffs argue that the
nomination paper requirements of RSA 655:42 are “fifteen times the number of
petition signatures required to get on the ballot for candidates of the major
parties, who also don’t have to meet the totally arbitrary requirement of
submitting half the signatures coming from each congressional district.” The
plaintiffs continue the comparison:
The putative major party candidate can of course by-pass the
petition process by paying $100, a significant discount compared
to the $10,000 to $15[,]000 cost of obtaining the necessary
7
signatures for candidates of the minor parties in the 2004 election.
Seekers of other offices face similar steep hurdles: Congress –
1500 signatures, rather than the 100 needed by major party
candidates; executive councilor or senator – 750, rather than 50 or
20; state representative – 150, rather than 5.
(Citation omitted.)
The plaintiffs’ argument, however, compares apples and oranges by
juxtaposing the requirements a major party candidate must meet to secure a
place on the party’s primary ballot with the requirements an independent
candidate must meet to secure a place on the general election ballot. As stated
by the court in Rogers v. Cortes, 426 F. Supp. 2d 232, 242 (M.D. Pa.), aff’d sub
nom. Rogers v. Corbett, 460 F.3d 455 (3d Cir. 2006), “[a] primary election is
not a general election, and to endeavor to measure ballot access requirements
for one against the other grossly confuses the issue.”
The plaintiffs’ argument also ignores that in order to get on the general
election ballot, a major party candidate must not only satisfy the requirements
for appearing on the primary ballot, but must also win the party’s primary.
The United States Supreme Court has noted the difficulty of comparing
alternative ballot access methods. In American Party of Texas, for instance, it
observed that “Texas has provided alternative routes to the ballot – statewide
primaries and precinct conventions – and it is problematical at best which is
more onerous in fact.” American Party of Texas, 415 U.S. at 784 n.16. This
difficulty, in turn, poses a problem for an equal protection claim. Thus, in
Jenness, the Court noted that the equal protection claim at issue was
“necessarily bottomed upon the premise that it is inherently more burdensome
for a candidate to gather the signatures of 5% of the total eligible electorate
than it is to win the votes of a majority in a party primary. That is a premise
that cannot be uncritically accepted.” Jenness, 403 U.S. at 440 (footnote
omitted).
Assuming, however, for purposes of an equal protection analysis, that
the statutes at issue do impose a more onerous burden upon the plaintiffs than
upon major party candidates, the Akins test requires us to determine whether
the additional burdens upon the plaintiffs are severe, or reasonable and
nondiscriminatory. Akins, 154 N.H. at ___, 904 A.2d at 707 (quotations and
citation omitted). We previously concluded that, taken alone, the burdens the
statutes impose upon the plaintiffs are not severe. Thus, they cannot logically
be considered severe when viewed as additional burdens as compared to those
imposed upon major party candidates.
In addition, we agree with the United States Supreme Court that differing
treatment of the type at issue here is not invidiously discriminatory:
8
The fact is that there are obvious differences in kind between
the needs and potentials of a political party with historically
established broad support, on the one hand, and a new or small
political organization on the other. [A State is not] guilty of
invidious discrimination in recognizing these differences and
providing different routes to the printed ballot.
Jenness, 403 U.S. at 441-42; see also American Party of Texas, 415 U.S. at
782-83 (“So long as the larger parties must demonstrate major support among
the electorate at the last election, whereas the smaller parties need not, the
latter, without being invidiously treated, may be required to establish their
position in some other manner.”).
We also conclude that the additional burdens are reasonable,
particularly “taking into consideration the extent to which [the State’s] interests
make it necessary to burden the plaintiff[s’] rights.” Akins, 154 N.H. at ___,
904 A.2d at 707 (quotation omitted). We previously acknowledged that a State
has an important “interest in requiring some preliminary showing of . . .
significant . . . support before printing the name of a political organization’s
candidate on the ballot,” Jenness, 403 U.S. at 442, and thus conclude that a
reasonable means of demonstrating such support is through petition
signatures. The United States Supreme Court has held similar ballot access
requirements to be “constitutionally valid measures, reasonably taken in
pursuit of vital state objectives that cannot be served equally well in
significantly less burdensome ways.” American Party of Texas, 415 U.S. at
781. Having determined that the challenged statutes “impose[] only
reasonable, nondiscriminatory restrictions upon the plaintiff[s’] rights,” we
conclude, under the Akins test, that “the State’s important regulatory interests
are . . . sufficient to justify the restrictions.” Akins, 154 N.H. at ___, 904 A.2d
at 707 (quotations omitted). Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ equal protection
challenge must fail.
III
The plaintiffs also contend that the trial court erred in dismissing their
petition without benefit of an evidentiary hearing. They argue that although
the trial court purported to engage in the Anderson balancing test, “it had
absolutely no evidence before it [to establish] there was any link between the
restrictions placed upon ballot access in New Hampshire and the harms
purportedly sought to be protected against.” The plaintiffs appear to argue that
proper application of the Anderson test requires that the trial court hear
evidence. We disagree.
9
In Munro v. Socialist Workers Party, 479 U.S. 189, 194-95 (1986), the
Supreme Court observed that it has “never required a State to make a
particularized showing of the existence of voter confusion, ballot overcrowding,
or the presence of frivolous candidacies prior to the imposition of reasonable
restrictions on ballot access.” It explained:
To require States to prove actual voter confusion, ballot
overcrowding, or the presence of frivolous candidacies as a
predicate to the imposition of reasonable ballot access restrictions
would invariably lead to endless court battles over the sufficiency
of the “evidence” marshaled by a State to prove the predicate.
Such a requirement would necessitate that a State’s political
system sustain some level of damage before the legislature could
take corrective action. Legislatures, we think, should be permitted
to respond to potential deficiencies in the electoral process with
foresight rather than reactively, provided that the response is
reasonable and does not significantly impinge on constitutionally
protected rights.”
Id. at 195-96. We agree with this reasoning and conclude that the plaintiffs
were not entitled to an evidentiary hearing.
The plaintiffs nevertheless argue that a hearing was required because
they “specifically alleged that the barriers put before the candidates of smaller
parties were unnecessary to meet a genuine state interest[] and in fact were
specifically designed solely to preserve the power of the majority party.”
(Quotation omitted.) In particular, they challenge the 1997 amendment of RSA
652:11, which changed the percentage of prior support required for major party
status from three to four. The plaintiffs alleged that this change “was enacted
for the sole purpose of eliminating the Libertarian Party as a viable challenger
to the Republican party.”
These allegations, however, do not necessitate an evidentiary hearing.
Any evidence of an alleged nefarious legislative purpose would be irrelevant
because such a purpose is not a recognized basis for declaring a statute
unconstitutional. See United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 383 (1968). As
the United States Supreme Court has stated: “It is a familiar principle of
constitutional law that this Court will not strike down an otherwise
constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive.” Id.;
cf. Lisbon School District v. District, 96 N.H. 290, 295 (1950) (court does not
“inquire into the motives of the legislature”). If the four percent threshold is
itself constitutional, the statute will stand regardless of the legislature’s motive
in raising it from its previous level of three percent. Accordingly, the trial court
did not err by not conducting an evidentiary hearing before it granted the
State’s motion to dismiss.
10
IV
Finally, the plaintiffs argue that although the trial court looked to federal
cases in its analysis, it overlooked the United States Supreme Court’s most
recent election case, Clingman v. Beaver, 544 U.S. 581 (2005). The plaintiffs
contend that although the Court in Clingman upheld a statute “utilizing the
same reasonableness standard adopted by the [trial court] in this case[,] . . .
[the] ruling was limited to situations where there was no claim of a cumulative
effect of an overall system of election laws.” The plaintiffs claim that because
they alleged a “[p]ervasive statutory scheme” that burdened their associational
interests, the trial court was required to engage in fact finding to “determine
. . . the cumulative effect . . . on the[ir] rights.” They also argue that Clingman
“calls into question the relevancy of a reasonableness standard to the issues
presented in this case.”
We disagree both with the plaintiffs’ interpretation of Clingman and their
conclusion. In Clingman, the Libertarian Party of Oklahoma (LPO) and others
challenged an Oklahoma statute (§1-104) that allowed a political party to invite
only its own members and registered independents to vote in that party’s
primary. Clingman, 544 U.S. at 584. The United States Supreme Court
upheld the statute, concluding that “any burden Oklahoma’s semiclosed
primary impose[d] [was] minor and justified by legitimate state interests.” Id.
at 587. A plurality of the Court reasoned that “[n]othing in §1-104 prevents
members of other parties from switching their registration to the LPO or to
Independent status.” Id. at 588 (Thomas, J.). The Court noted, however, that
for the first time on appeal, the respondents had broadened their challenge to
include other election laws in addition to §1-104. Id. at 597. The Court
declined to consider the expanded claim as it had not been raised below. Id. at
598.
Justice O’Connor, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
agreed that it would not be proper to rule upon the respondents’ newly-raised
claims, but found their allegations “troubling,” id. at 607 (O’Connor, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment), and stated:
[I]f they had been properly raised, the Court would want to
examine the cumulative burdens imposed by the overall scheme of
electoral regulations upon the rights of voters and parties to
associate through primary elections. . . . [I]f it were shown, in an
appropriate case, that such regulations imposed a weighty or
discriminatory restriction on voters’ ability to participate in the
LPO’s or some other party’s primary, then more probing scrutiny of
the State’s justifications would be required.
11
Id. at 607-08 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment).
The plaintiffs seize upon Justice O’Connor’s opinion as supporting their
right to an evidentiary hearing and a stricter standard of review. We disagree.
Justice O’Connor’s opinion advances the unremarkable proposition that “[a]
panoply of regulations, each apparently defensible when considered alone, may
nevertheless have the combined effect of severely restricting participation and
competition.” Id. (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment).
In Clingman, the respondents advanced a theory, albeit tardily, as to how
various election-related statutes worked together to burden their rights.
Specifically, “[r]espondents contend[ed] that several of the State’s ballot access
and voter registration laws, taken together, severely burden their associational
rights by effectively preventing them from changing their party affiliations in
advance of a primary election.” Id. at 597 (emphasis added). In the case before
us, the plaintiffs’ amended complaint merely listed a series of provisions and
practices claimed to have disadvantaged them, with no indication of how they
worked together to their detriment:
This restriction of ballot access is only one of a series of anti-
democratic and unfair practices promulgated by the largest party
to tilt the playing field to their advantage. Others include laws
virtually guaranteeing the first spot on all ballots; huge multi-
member districts where voters of minority parties are effectively
disenfranchised; mid-decade gerrymandering to make majority
seats safe; and removal of independent judicially appointed
members of the Ballot [Law] Commission so as to guarantee
dominant party control of the body deciding close election
disputes. Taken individually and collectively, these actions
diminish and threaten democracy in New Hampshire.
These conclusory allegations are not sufficient to trigger heightened
scrutiny. Nor are they sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss, as a court
considering such a motion “need not accept statements in the complaint which
are merely conclusions of law.” Thompson v. Forest, 136 N.H. 215, 216 (1992)
(quotation omitted).
For all of the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court’s decision.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12