THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2005-627
APPEAL OF PINKERTON ACADEMY
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: June 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: February 21, 2007
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Linda S.
Johnson and Cathryn E. Vaughn on the brief, and Ms. Johnson orally), for the
petitioner.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, staff attorney, NEA-New Hampshire,
by brief and orally, for respondents Pinkerton Academy Teachers Association
and NEA-New Hampshire.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Pinkerton Academy (Pinkerton or the
Academy), appeals an order of the New Hampshire Public Employee Labor
Relations Board (PELRB) asserting jurisdiction over an unfair labor practice
complaint against the Academy filed by the respondents, who are two
Pinkerton teachers, the Pinkerton Academy Teachers Association and NEA-New
Hampshire. Because exclusive jurisdiction over the complaint at issue lies
with the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB or Board), we vacate the order
of the PELRB and remand with instructions to dismiss the complaint.
I
Pinkerton Academy was organized in 1814 as a nonprofit organization.
The Academy operated as an independent day and boarding school until 1948.
Beginning in 1949, Pinkerton entered into a contractual agreement with the
Derry School District to provide high school education to students from Derry.
Pinkerton currently has long-term contracts to provide high school education
to students from the school districts of Derry, Chester and Hampstead.
In November 2004, the respondents filed an unfair labor practice charge
against the Academy with the PELRB. NEA-New Hampshire also filed a
petition for declaratory judgment, asking the PELRB to decide whether
Pinkerton is a public employer subject to the PELRB’s jurisdiction. In May
2005, the PELRB determined that the Academy is a “quasi-public corporation”
subject to its jurisdiction. Pinkerton appealed. Following oral argument, we
ordered supplemental briefing on an issue not addressed below: whether the
National Labor Relations Act confers exclusive jurisdiction over this dispute to
the NLRB.
II
The National Labor Relations Act (Act) provides that
[t]he Board is empowered . . . to prevent any person from engaging
in any unfair labor practice . . . affecting commerce. This power
shall not be affected by any other means of adjustment or
prevention that has been or may be established by agreement,
law, or otherwise: Provided, That the Board is empowered by
agreement with any agency of any State or Territory to cede to
such agency jurisdiction over any cases in any industry . . . even
though such cases may involve labor disputes affecting commerce,
unless the provision of the State or Territorial statute applicable to
the determination of such cases by such agency is inconsistent
with the corresponding provision of this subchapter or has
received a construction inconsistent therewith.
29 U.S.C. § 160(a). “By this language . . . Congress meant to reach to the full
extent of its power under the Commerce Clause.” Guss v. Utah Labor Board,
353 U.S. 1, 3 (1957) (quotation omitted). “The Board, however, has never
exercised the full measure of its jurisdiction.” Id. “For a number of years, the
Board decided case-by-case whether to take jurisdiction.” Id. “In 1950,
concluding that experience warrants the establishment and announcement of
certain standards to govern the exercise of its jurisdiction, the Board published
standards, largely in terms of yearly dollar amounts of interstate inflow and
outflow.” Id. at 3-4 (quotation omitted).
2
In 1957, noting that the Board’s standards left an unknown number of
labor disputes “in the ‘twilight zone’ between exercised federal jurisdiction and
unquestioned state jurisdiction,” id. at 4, the United States Supreme Court
addressed the question “whether Congress, by vesting in the [NLRB]
jurisdiction over labor relations matters affecting interstate commerce, has
completely displaced state power to deal with such matters where the Board
has declined or obviously would decline to exercise its jurisdiction but has not
ceded jurisdiction [under the Act].” Id. at 2-3. The Court held that even if the
NLRB declined to exercise jurisdiction in its discretion, State courts and
agencies could not exercise jurisdiction over matters placed within the
competence of the NLRB. Id. at 9-10. The Court stated that “Congress knew
full well that its labor legislation preempts the field that the act covers insofar
as commerce within the meaning of the act is concerned.” Id. at 9-10
(quotation omitted). Recognizing that its decision created “a vast no-man’s-
land, subject to regulation by no agency or court,” in those cases in which the
NLRB declined to exercise jurisdiction in its discretion, the Court invited
Congress to “change the situation.” Id. at 10, 11.
In 1959, Congress responded by passing section 14(c) of the Act. See 29
U.S.C. § 164(c). The statute provides in paragraph (1) that the NLRB may “in
its discretion . . . decline to assert jurisdiction over any labor dispute involving
any class or category of employers, where, in the opinion of the Board, the
effect of such labor dispute on commerce is not sufficiently substantial to
warrant the exercise of its jurisdiction.” 29 U.S.C. § 164(c)(1). Paragraph (2)
provides that federal law shall not be deemed to preclude “any agency or the
courts of any State . . . from assuming and asserting jurisdiction over labor
disputes over which the Board declines, pursuant to paragraph (1) of this
subsection, to assert jurisdiction.” 29 U.S.C. § 164(c)(2).
The United States Supreme Court subsequently clarified the extent of
federal preemption over labor disputes. “When it is clear or may fairly be
assumed that the activities which a State purports to regulate are protected by
[the Act], . . . due regard for the federal enactment requires that state
jurisdiction must yield.” San Diego Unions v. Garmon, 359 U.S. 236, 244
(1959). Even when it is not clear whether a particular activity regulated by a
state is governed by the Act, “courts are not primary tribunals to adjudicate
such issues. It is essential to the administration of the Act that these
determinations be left in the first instance to the National Labor Relations
Board.” Id. at 244-45.
“Although a state court may assume jurisdiction over labor disputes over
which the National Labor Relations Board has, but declines to assert,
jurisdiction, . . . there must be a proper determination of whether the case is
actually one of those which the Board will decline to hear.” Radio Union v.
3
Broadcast Serv., 380 U.S. 255, 256 (1965) (citation omitted). “While the
language of Section 14(c) does not compel the Board to assert jurisdiction, it
does manifest a congressional policy favoring such assertion where the Board
finds that the operations of a class of employers exercise a substantial effect on
commerce.” Cornell University, 183 N.L.R.B. 329, 332 (1970). The task before
us, therefore, is to determine whether the case at issue is one the Board would
decline to hear.
III
“[T]he Board may exercise its broad statutory jurisdiction whenever an
employer has more than a de minimus impact on the flow of interstate
commerce.” YMCA of the Pikes Peak Region, Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 914 F.2d 1442,
1447-48 (10th Cir. 1990) (quotation omitted). Section 2(2) of the Act defines an
“employer” as
any person acting as an agent of an employer, directly or
indirectly, but shall not include the United States or any wholly
owned Government corporation, or any Federal Reserve Bank, or
any State or political subdivision thereof, or any person subject
to the Railway Labor Act, . . . or any labor organization.
29 U.S.C. § 152(2). The Board has noted that Congress’ rejection in 1947 of
proposals to specifically exempt from the Act “broad classes of charitable or
nonprofit organizations seems to indicate that Congress was content to leave to
the Board’s informed discretion in the future as it had in the past, whether and
when to assert jurisdiction over nonprofit organizations whose operations had
a substantial impact upon interstate commerce.” Cornell University, 183
N.L.R.B. at 331.
A
In 1970, pointing to what it saw as an increased involvement in
commerce by educational institutions, the NLRB held that “the Board has
statutory jurisdiction over nonprofit educational institutions whose operations
affect commerce.” Id. at 331 (overruling Columbia University, 97 N.L.R.B. 424
(1951)). The Board was “convinced that assertion of jurisdiction is required
over those private colleges and universities whose operations have a
substantial effect on commerce to insure the orderly, effective, and uniform
application of the national labor policy.” Id. at 334. Thus the Board
determined that it would “no longer decline to assert jurisdiction over such
institutions as a class.” Id. at 331. Pursuant to the Code of Federal
Regulations, the NLRB “will assert its jurisdiction in any proceeding arising
under sections 8, 9, and 10 of the Act involving any private nonprofit college or
4
university which has a gross annual revenue from all sources . . . of not less
than $1 million.” 29 C.F.R. § 103.1 (2006).
One year after Cornell was decided, the NLRB extended its holding in
that case to private nonprofit secondary schools. See Shattuck School, 189
N.L.R.B. 886 (1971). The NLRB asserted jurisdiction over a nonprofit
Minnesota corporation operating a secondary boarding school that had gross
revenues of approximately $1,174,000 per year and annual purchases of more
than $71,000 in goods from outside Minnesota. Id. at 886. The Board noted
that the employer’s operations were not expressly covered by the standards set
out in 29 C.F.R. § 103.1, under which the Board asserted jurisdiction over
private nonprofit colleges and universities. Id. Nonetheless, the Board stated
that “the Employer is a private nonprofit educational institution which, we find,
is sufficiently similar to warrant assertion of jurisdiction under the same
jurisdictional standard.” Id. “The Board now asserts jurisdiction over all
private, nonprofit, educational institutions with gross annual revenues that
meet its jurisdictional requirements.” N.L.R.B. v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago,
440 U.S. 490, 497 (1979). Thus the Academy’s status as a private nonprofit
secondary school does not in itself preclude NLRB jurisdiction.
B
The main legal issue before us is whether Pinkerton Academy is a
“political subdivision” exempt from the Act’s coverage, as that term has been
defined by the NLRB. In 1971, the United States Supreme Court approved the
Board’s interpretation of the jurisdictional exemption for “political
subdivisions” as contained in section 2(2) of the Act. N.L.R.B. v. Natural Gas
Utility District, 402 U.S. 600 (1971). Under this standard, “political
subdivisions” are those “entities that are either (1) created directly by the state,
so as to constitute departments or administrative arms of the government, or
(2) administered by individuals who are responsible to public officials or to the
general electorate.” Id. at 604-05. In Gas Utility District, because the
Tennessee statute under which the employer utility district was organized
made “crystal clear” that the employer was “administered by a Board of
Commissioners appointed by an elected county judge, and subject to removal
proceedings at the instance of the Governor, the county prosecutor, or private
citizens,” the Court held that the NLRB erred in holding that the employer
“exists as an essentially private venture, with insufficient identity with or
relationship to the State of Tennessee.” Id. at 605 (citation omitted). As the
Court stated: “Plainly, commissioners who are beholden to an elected public
official for their appointment, and are subject to removal procedures applicable
to all public officials, qualify as ‘individuals who are responsible to public
officials or to the general electorate’ within the Board’s test.” Id. at 608.
5
Over the past two decades, the NLRB has changed the standard it uses
to determine whether it will assert jurisdiction over a private company that
contracts with a governmental entity exempt from the Act. Prior to 1995, the
Board extended the “political subdivision” exemption to private employers
providing services for exempt governmental entities where the exempt entity
exercised effective control of the primary terms of employment. See Res-Care,
Inc., 280 N.L.R.B. 670 (1986). In Management Training Corp., 317 N.L.R.B.
1355, 1357 (1995), the Board declared it would no longer apply the Res-Care
governmental control test. Rather, it would thereafter “only consider whether
the employer meets the definition of ‘employer’ under Section 2(2) of the Act,
and whether such employer meets the applicable monetary jurisdictional
standards.” Id. at 1358. Under the “bright-line” rule of Management Training,
therefore, the jurisdiction of the NLRB is established simply by the minimal
showing that the entity both meets the definition of “employer” under section
2(2) of the Act and meets the applicable monetary jurisdictional standards.
“Federal, rather than state, law governs the determination, under § 2(2),
whether an entity created under state law is a ‘political subdivision’ of the State
and therefore not an ‘employer’ subject to the Act.” Gas Utility District, 402
U.S. at 602-03. “[I]t is to the actual operations and characteristics” of the
employer that the Board must look in deciding whether an entity is exempt
from the Act’s coverage as a political subdivision. Id. at 604 (citation omitted).
“[R]eview of the NLRB’s assertion of jurisdiction [is] fact-intensive and [must] be
done on a case-by-case basis.” N.L.R.B. v. Young Women’s Christian Ass’n,
192 F.3d 1111, 1119 (8th Cir. 1999) (citation omitted).
The Pinkerton Academy Teacher’s Association argues that two recent
cases, Los Angeles Leadership Academy, No. 31-RM-1281 (N.L.R.B. Region 31
March 2, 2006), cert. denied, (N.L.R.B. May 17, 2006), and Education for
Change, No. 32-RM-801 (N.L.R.B. Region 32 May 9, 2006), which held that
charter schools established under California law qualified as exempt political
subdivisions under the Act, “make it fair to say that the NLRB would not assert
jurisdiction over Pinkerton.” We do not agree. A close reading of these regional
directors’ decisions reveals material differences between the California charter
schools and Pinkerton Academy. We conclude that, as a matter of law,
Pinkerton Academy is a nonprofit educational institution over which the NLRB
has jurisdiction, rather than an exempt political subdivision.
There are three factors the NLRB has consistently relied upon in
determining whether an employer is a political subdivision and thereby exempt
from coverage under the Act. The first factor is whether special legislation was
required to create the employer. See Research Foundation of the City Univ. of
NY, 337 N.L.R.B. 965, 968 (2002); Hinds County Human Resource Agency, 331
N.L.R.B. 1404, 1404 (2000); University of Vermont, 297 N.L.R.B. 291, 295
(1989); Truman Medical Ctr., Inc. v. N.L.R.B., 641 F.2d 570, 572 (8th Cir.
6
1981). The second factor is whether individuals on the employer’s board of
trustees are appointed by, or are subject to removal by, government officials,
and whether the board includes government officials as members. See Shelby
County Health Care Corp., 343 N.L.R.B. No. 48 (2004), 2004 WL 2461368, at
*24-*25; Enrichment Services Program, Inc., 325 N.L.R.B. 818, 819 (1998);
University of Vermont, 297 N.L.R.B. at 294; Rosenberg Library Assn., 269
N.L.R.B. 1173, 1175 (1984); Truman Medical Ctr., 641 F.2d at 573. The third
factor is whether the employees may participate in a state-sponsored pension
system. See Shelby County, 2004 WL 2461368, at *26; Hinds County, 331
N.L.R.B. at 1405; Jervis Public Library Association, Inc., 262 N.L.R.B. 1386,
1387 (1982). While each case is unique and there are numerous additional
factors which may be taken into consideration, these three factors present a
common theme throughout many of the Board’s decisions.
As explained in Los Angeles Leadership Academy, charter schools may be
created pursuant to California legislation enacted in 1992 authorizing their
establishment. L.A. Leadership Academy, slip op. at 4-5. The state statute
“establishes the rights and obligations of [the charter schools’] operators,
personnel and pupils.” Id. at 5. The statute provides for public funding and
governmental oversight and declares that charter schools are part of the public
school system as defined in the state constitution. Id. Pre-existing private
schools are prohibited from obtaining a charter. Id. at 4. To operate a charter
school, its developers must submit a petition for approval to one of three
chartering authorities: (1) the State Board of Education; (2) a county office of
education; or (3) the school district in which the charter school will be located.
Id. at 5-6. To be approved, a charter school petition must address sixteen
elements required by the authorizing legislation. Id. at 6. These sixteen
elements encompass such factors as: a description of the proposed
educational program; the educational outcomes that the charter operators
commit to achieving and how that academic success will be measured; the
governance structure of the charter school itself; the student suspension and
discipline policies; whether the charter school will handle its own labor
relations or delegate those to the chartering authority; and the manner in
which staff will be covered by the public employee retirement system. Id.
[C]harter schools are strictly creatures of statute. From how
charter schools come into being, to who attends and who can
teach, to how they are governed and structured, to funding,
accountability and evaluation – the Legislature has plotted all
aspects of their existence. Having created the charter school
approach, the Legislature can refine it and expand, reduce or
abolish charter schools altogether.
Wilson v. State Bd. of Educ., 89 Cal. Rptr. 3d 745, 751 (Ct. App. 1999).
Accordingly, in Los Angeles Leadership Academy, because the charter school
7
could not exist but for the State’s enabling legislation, it was found to be
created directly by the State so as to constitute an administrative arm of the
government, thereby satisfying the first common factor in determining if an
employer is a “political subdivision.” L.A. Leadership Academy, slip op. at 15.
In contrast, Pinkerton Academy was organized in 1814 as a nonprofit
corporation. Although the Academy was established by a special act of the
legislature, that act was simply the mechanism of incorporating a private
academy in New Hampshire in the 1800s. Cf. University of Vermont, 297
N.L.R.B. at 295 (holding that because University was created by special act of
Vermont General Assembly it constitutes a political subdivision). Nothing in
the special act indicates that Pinkerton Academy was intended to operate
under the control of the State of New Hampshire. Compare Research
Foundation, 337 N.L.R.B. at 968 (nothing in corporation’s charter indicated
that employer was intended to operate under control of or as administrative
arm of City University of New York), with University of Vermont, 297 N.L.R.B.
at 291-92 (University “shall be recognized and utilized as an instrumentality of
the state for providing higher education” and the legislature shall “appropriate
such sums as it deems necessary for the support and maintenance of said
corporation”).
Pinkerton Academy was created by private individuals who gave money
and land to establish the school “for the purpose of promoting piety and virtue
and for the Education of Youth in such of the liberal Arts and Sciences or
Languages as the Trustees hereinafter provided shall direct.” Laws 1814, ch.
18, reprinted in Laws of New Hampshire, Vol. 8, Second Constitutional Period,
1811-1820 298 (Evans Printing Co. 1920). Pinkerton Academy operated as an
independent day and boarding school until 1948. In 1949, Pinkerton entered
into a contractual agreement with the Derry School District to provide high
school education to students in Derry. Pinkerton is currently engaged in long-
term contracts with the Towns of Derry, Chester and Hampstead. “The
creation of the Employer by private individuals as a private corporation,
without any state enabling action or intent, clearly leaves the Employer outside
the ambit of the Section 2(2) exemption.” Research Foundation, 337 N.L.R.B.
at 968. “The plain language of Section 2(2) exempts only government entities
or wholly owned government corporations from its coverage – not private
entities acting as contractors for the government.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Pinkerton Academy is not governed by a local school board nor is it part
of a local school district. Pursuant to RSA 194:22 (1999): “Any school district
may make a contract with an academy . . . located in this or . . . in another
state, and raise and appropriate money to carry the contract into effect. If the
contract is approved by the state board the school with which it is made shall
be deemed a high school maintained by the district.” This language does not
mean that the district takes over the operation of the private academy, but
8
rather has “the limited purpose . . . of relieving the towns from paying the
tuition of students who chose to attend schools lacking town contracts.”
Johnson v. Pinkerton Academy, 861 F.2d 335, 338 (1st Cir. 1988). Although
Pinkerton Academy has assumed the statutory responsibility of providing high
school education for the Towns of Derry, Chester and Hampstead, it has done
so pursuant to a series of contracts between the Academy and the sending
districts, not pursuant to any statutory duty imposed upon Pinkerton
Academy. Its contractual relations with political subdivisions of the State do
not transform it into a political subdivision. See Truman Medical Ctr., 641
F.2d at 572.
Unlike charter schools in California, where legislation expressly states
that the government intends to retain control over them, we conclude that
Pinkerton Academy was not created by the State of New Hampshire so as to
constitute an administrative arm of the government as that standard has been
interpreted by the NLRB and the courts.
Concerning the second major factor, in determining whether an employer
is administered by individuals who are responsible to public officials, the NLRB
looks to whether individuals on the board of trustees are “appointed by, and
subject to, removal by public officials.” Id.; see also Gas Utility District, 402
U.S. at 605; Research Foundation, 337 N.L.R.B. at 969. “For an entity to be
deemed ‘administered by’ individuals responsible to public officials or to the
general electorate, those individuals must constitute a majority of the board.”
Enrichment Services, 325 N.L.R.B. at 819. In Temple University, 194 N.L.R.B.
1160, 1160 (1972), the Board declined to assert jurisdiction over the University
because, among other things, “the board of trustees, [which] was established to
manage, control, and conduct the instructional, administrative, and financial
affairs of the University,” included the Governor of Pennsylvania, the mayor of
Philadelphia, the superintendent of public education, the president of the
senate and the speaker of the house of representatives. Likewise, in University
of Vermont, 297 N.L.R.B. at 291, the NLRB found the employer exempt from
the Board’s jurisdiction as a political subdivision in part because twelve of the
twenty-one trustees were selected by the State, whether by legislation or by
gubernatorial appointment, thereby establishing that the State clearly
exercised control over the University’s board of trustees. See also St. Paul
Ramsey Medical Center, 291 N.L.R.B. 755, 758 (1988) (absent requirement that
employer’s board of directors be government officials or appointed by
government officials or provision for removal of board members by any
government official, employer was not political subdivision).
The California enabling legislation provides that the state’s charter
schools are “under the jurisdiction of” the public school system and “under the
exclusive control of officers of the public school system.” Wilson, 89 Cal. Rptr.
3d at 754. While the California charter schools have a board of directors, the
9
board must comply with all laws relating to public agencies. L.A. Leadership
Academy, slip op. at 13. The board meetings are noticed and open; the board
members are selected by a nominating committee and elected by the sitting
board of directors. Id. Parents must be represented on the board and a non-
voting space is reserved for a representative of the school district. Id. at 14.
The statute has audit, budget and financial oversight provisions, and controls
the curriculum and student progress. Id. at 13-15. Furthermore, the state
and the school district retain the ultimate power to revoke the school’s charter.
Id. at 13. Based upon these facts, the regional director concluded that the
California charter schools are “administered by individuals who are responsible
to public officials or to the general electorate.” Id. at 15.
Unlike the California charter schools, Pinkerton Academy is governed by
a private board of trustees. Pursuant to the sending district contracts, a
certain number of the trustees are from each of the sending districts; however,
no trustee is elected or appointed by any governmental body. The decision-
making authority of the Academy is not under the direct control of any
municipality, school district, or group of taxpayers, citizens or voters in New
Hampshire. The trustees have the power to elect future trustees, own and
operate real and personal property, and transact all business necessary to run
the Academy.
Also unlike the California charter schools, Pinkerton Academy is not
administered by individuals who are responsible to public officials or the
general public as that requirement has been interpreted by the NLRB. See
Hinds County, 331 N.L.R.B. at 1404; Truman Medical Ctr., 641 F.2d at 572.
Any responsibility of Pinkerton’s trustees to the sending districts “derives from
the contractual relations between [Pinkerton] and these political subdivisions,
and is not the sort of direct personal accountability to public officials or to the
general public required to support a claim of exemption under § 2(2).” Truman
Medical Ctr., 641 F.2d at 573 (emphasis added).
Employee participation in a state-sponsored or created pension system is
the third significant indicator of statutory exemption under section 2(2) of the
Act. See Hinds County, 331 N.L.R.B. at 1405. Pinkerton Academy was
removed from the New Hampshire Retirement System in 1991 because it was
determined that the Academy is not a “governmental entity, political
subdivision, agency or instrumentality.” The New Hampshire Retirement
System based that conclusion upon the fact that: Pinkerton is not
administered by individuals who are responsible to public officials or to the
general electorate; Pinkerton is not a department or administrative arm of the
government; Pinkerton enjoys financial autonomy and is not subject to the
control or supervision of any governmental authority; and Pinkerton does not
perform services that are traditionally within the exclusive prerogative of the
government. Although a state determination that the employer is not
10
considered to be a political subdivision is not controlling, it is to be given
“careful consideration.” Gas Utility District, 402 U.S. at 602. “[T]he Board has
found the state’s characterization of an entity to be an important factor in
determining the more specific issue of whether the Employer was created so as
to constitute a department or administrative arm of government.” Hinds
County, 331 N.L.R.B. at 1404.
In summary, Pinkerton Academy was not created directly by the State of
New Hampshire so as to constitute an administrative arm of the State, nor is it
administered by individuals who are responsible to public officials, nor do its
employees participate in the New Hampshire Retirement System.
Consequently, we hold that Pinkerton Academy is an employer as defined in
section 2(2) of the Act. Pinkerton likewise meets the monetary jurisdictional
standard as the record indicates that Pinkerton receives gross annual revenue
in excess of $26 million. Because Pinkerton Academy qualifies as a nonprofit
educational institution within the jurisdiction of the NLRB, we vacate the
decision of the PELRB, and remand with instructions to dismiss.
Vacated and remanded
with instructions.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11