THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-596
LINDA DESCLOS
v.
SOUTHERN NEW HAMPSHIRE MEDICAL CENTER & a.
Argued: February 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: June 9, 2006
Nixon, Raiche, Manning, Vogelman & Leach, P.A., of Manchester (Kevin
M. Leach on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Michael P. Lehman and Margaret
H. Nelson on the brief, and Mr. Lehman orally), for the defendants.
Burns, Bryant, Cox, Rockefeller & Durkin, P.A., of Dover, by brief, for the
New Hampshire Trial Lawyers Association, as amicus curiae.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Linda Desclos, brings this interlocutory appeal
from a Superior Court (Groff, J.) order granting the defendants, Southern New
Hampshire Medical Center, James F. Carroll, M.D., and Nurse Jane Doe,
access to her psychiatric and psychological records. We vacate and remand.
The record reveals the following facts. Desclos brought a suit for medical
negligence, alleging that, on August 18, 2003, she sought treatment from the
defendants who failed to recognize her symptoms of spinal cord injury. As a
result, the suit alleged, Desclos suffered irreversible quadriplegia. She claimed
damages including pain and suffering, loss of earning capacity, and loss of
enjoyment of life.
The defendants sought all of Desclos’ psychiatric and psychological
records created before August 18, 2003. Their motion stated that, although
Desclos had released her psychological records created after the injury, the
records of her psychiatric history prior to the injury would be relevant to her
damage and liability claims.
The trial court ruled: “The plaintiff’s psychiatric and psychological
records are clearly relevant to the issue of damages in regard to pain and
suffering and loss of enjoyment of life, and are reasonably calculated to lead to
the discovery of admissible evidence.” In denying Desclos’ motion to
reconsider, the trial court further ruled that “by the nature of the plaintiff’s
claim [for loss of enjoyment of life and pain and suffering,] she has waived the
psychotherapist-patient privilege.”
On appeal, Desclos argues that the trial court’s order violates the
psychotherapist-patient privilege, and that she did not waive the privilege
simply by claiming generic damages that are likely to arise from the injuries
caused by the medical negligence alleged. She notes that she neither brought a
claim for intentional or negligent infliction of emotional distress, nor claimed
separate emotional distress damages, specifically to avoid waiving her privilege.
The defendants argue that the trial court properly balanced Desclos’
privacy rights in her mental health records against the defendants’ need to
obtain evidence relevant to their defense. Discovery of Desclos’ mental health
records created prior to her injury is necessary, the defendants argue, for them
to respond to the damage claims of pain and suffering, loss of earning capacity,
and loss of enjoyment of life. They also argue that they need the records to
challenge Desclos’ reliability in reporting symptoms.
We review a trial court’s decisions on the management of discovery and
the admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. In re Juvenile 2002-209, 149 N.H. 559, 561 (2003). We will not
disturb the trial court’s order absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Petition of Haines, 148 N.H. 380, 381 (2002). To meet this standard, Desclos
must demonstrate that the trial court’s rulings were clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of her case. In re Juvenile 2002-209, 149 N.H.
at 561.
2
At issue in this case is the psychotherapist-patient privilege. Evidentiary
privileges are exceptions to the general duty to give all testimony that one is
capable of giving. Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1, 9 (1996); 1 J. Strong et al.,
McCormick on Evidence § 72, at 298-99 (5th ed. 1999). Such exceptions are
justified by a public good that transcends the general principle of using all
rational means for ascertaining truth. Jaffee, 518 U.S. at 9. Evidentiary
privileges promote sufficiently important interests to justify the sacrifice of
some available probative evidence. Id. at 9-10; Strong, supra § 72. New
Hampshire has codified the psychotherapist-patient privilege in RSA 330-A:32
(2004), which states, in pertinent part:
The confidential relations and communications between [a licensed
mental health practitioner] and such licensee’s client are placed on
the same basis as those provided by law between attorney and
client, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require
any such privileged communications to be disclosed, unless such
disclosure is required by a court order.
See also N.H. R. Ev. 503(b). We recently emphasized the importance of the
psychotherapist-patient privilege:
By fostering productive relationships between therapists and their
clients, the therapist-client privilege advances the public good
accomplished when individuals are able to seek effective mental
health counseling and treatment. . . . The mere possibility of
disclosure may impede development of the confidential relationship
necessary for successful treatment. It is difficult if not impossible
for a psychotherapist to function without being able to assure
patients of confidentiality and, indeed, privileged communication.
In the Matter of Berg & Berg, 152 N.H. 658, 665 (2005) (quotations and
citations omitted). Neither party disputes that the records sought by the
defendants in the instant case are privileged communications pursuant to RSA
330-A:32 and New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 503(b).
Despite the privileged nature of the communications at issue, the trial
court applied the “relevance” standard to determine whether to compel
production of the records for pretrial discovery. The trial court stated that
Desclos’ psychiatric and psychological records were “clearly relevant to the
issue of damages in regard to pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life,”
and were “reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible
evidence.” Superior Court Rule 35(b)(1) sets forth the standard that the trial
court used, but the rule specifically exempts privileged material from that
standard, stating:
3
Parties may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged,
which is relevant to the subject matter involved in the pending
action . . . . It is not ground for objection that the information
sought will be inadmissible at the trial if the information sought
appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of
admissible evidence.
Super. Ct. R. 35(b)(1) (emphasis added). Accordingly, the trial court applied an
incorrect standard for discovery of privileged material. Relevance alone is not
the standard for determining whether or not privileged materials should be
disclosed. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. v. Home Indem. Co., 32 F.3d 851, 864 (3d
Cir. 1994); Alcon v. Spicer, 113 P.3d 735, 741 (Colo. 2005); Gould, Larson,
Bennet, Wells & McDonnell, P.C. v. Panico, 869 A.2d 653, 659-660 (Conn.
2005); R.K. v. Ramirez, 887 S.W.2d 836, 842 (Tex. 1994).
Generally, there are two means by which disclosure of privileged
information may occur: (1) the court finds a waiver of the privilege, Petition of
Dean, 142 N.H. 889, 890 (1998); or (2) the court orders a piercing of the
privilege, State v. Elwell, 132 N.H. 599, 605 (1989). We address each method
in turn.
I. Waiver
The defendants argue that Desclos impliedly waived her psychotherapist-
patient privilege by claiming damages for loss of enjoyment of life, loss of
earning capacity, and pain and suffering. Courts in other jurisdictions have
held that a plaintiff impliedly waives the psychotherapist-patient privilege by
putting his or her emotional or mental condition “at issue,” e.g., Jackson v.
Chubb Corp., 193 F.R.D. 216, 225 (D. N.J. 2000); State ex rel. Dean v.
Cunningham, 182 S.W.3d 561, 567 (Mo. 2006) (en banc), or by “injecting his or
her mental condition into the case,” e.g., Hoffman v. Brookfield Republic, Inc.,
87 P.3d 858, 863 (Colo. 2004). Though we have never explicitly held that a
plaintiff may impliedly waive the psychotherapist-patient privilege, we have
stated that a plaintiff may impliedly waive the attorney-client privilege by
putting the privileged communications “at issue.” Dean, 142 N.H. at 890. We
have additionally qualified waiver of the attorney-client privilege by “limit[ing]
the extent of an at-issue waiver of the attorney-client privilege to circumstances
in which the privilege-holder injects the privileged material itself into the case.”
Id. When a party asserting the attorney-client privilege injects privileged
material into the case “such that the information is actually required for
resolution of the issue, the privilege-holder must either waive the attorney-
client privilege as to that information or be prevented from using the privileged
information to establish the elements of the case.” Aranson v. Schroeder, 140
N.H. 359, 370 (1995) (quotations and ellipsis omitted). Since our law places
4
the psychotherapist-patient privilege on the same basis as the attorney-client
privilege, RSA 330-A:32; N.H. R. Ev. 503(b), we conclude that a party waives
the psychotherapist-patient privilege by putting the confidential
communications at issue by injecting the privileged material into the case. If
the privilege-holder has injected the privileged material into the case such that
the information is actually required for resolution of the issue, then the
privilege-holder must either waive the privilege as to that information or be
prevented from using the privileged information to establish the elements of the
case.
We must now determine whether the trial court was correct in ruling that
Desclos impliedly waived her psychotherapist-patient privilege by asserting
damage claims for pain and suffering, loss of earning capacity, and loss of
enjoyment of life. Though we have never stated what actions by a plaintiff will
place psychotherapy communications at issue and inject them into the case
such that they are required for resolution of the issue, we have addressed
similar issues in the attorney-client and physician-patient contexts.
In Dean, the petitioner moved for a new criminal trial, claiming
ineffective assistance of counsel. Dean, 142 N.H. at 890-91. The State argued
that the petitioner waived his attorney-client privilege and sought to interview
the petitioner’s trial counsel. Id. at 890. We held that the petitioner waived his
attorney-client privilege by basing his motion for a new trial upon an ineffective
assistance of counsel claim because, “Claims of ineffective assistance of
counsel go to the core of attorney-client communications. Such claims
challenge the lawyer’s representation of the client.” Id. at 891. Thus, the
petitioner waived the privilege because the cause of action that he brought
required consideration of the very communications that he sought to protect:
those between himself and his attorney. In this way, the petitioner injected his
privileged communications into the case such that it was required for
resolution of the ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
In contrast, we upheld the physician-patient privilege in State v. Elwell.
Elwell, 132 N.H. at 607. There, the State charged a defendant with negligent
homicide due to his involvement in an auto accident. Id. at 601-02. After the
accident, the defendant went to a hospital, where doctors took a blood sample,
revealing that the defendant had a blood-alcohol content of .14 percent. Id. at
601. The State sought to use the blood sample as evidence and the defendant
objected, arguing that the physician-patient privilege applied. Id. at 602. The
State countered that the defendant waived the privilege by pleading not guilty.
Id. at 607. We ruled that the defendant’s plea of not guilty was insufficient to
place the privileged communications between a doctor and a patient at issue in
the dispute. Id. Although the legislature has since modified the physician-
patient privilege to exclude blood samples, see RSA 329:26 (2004), our waiver
analysis stands. Because the defendant’s plea did not inherently require
5
information regarding the blood sample to resolve the issue of his innocence,
the defendant did not waive his privilege.
Other jurisdictions have similar waiver analyses in the psychotherapist-
patient context. There is broad agreement in both federal and state courts that
the holder of a psychotherapist-patient privilege will impliedly waive the
privilege by bringing a cause of action that requires use of the privileged
material to prove the elements of the case. E.g., Vanderbilt v. Town of
Chilmark, 174 F.R.D. 225, 230 (D. Mass. 1997); Cunningham, 182 S.W.3d at
568; see also 3 Weinstein’s Federal Evidence § 504.07[8] (J. McLaughlin ed., 2d
ed. 2006) (stating that the “narrow view” taken by some courts, which is the
view least likely to find waiver, will do so if the plaintiff makes affirmative use of
the mental condition in connection with the case). The most helpful distinction
for the instant case is whether or not to imply a waiver as a result of a damage
claim, rather than as a result of a cause of action.
In Cunningham, the Missouri Supreme Court considered whether a
plaintiff bringing a cause of action for sexual harassment placed her mental
condition “in issue” or “in controversy,” and thus impliedly waived her
psychotherapist-patient privilege, by claiming damages for emotional distress,
humiliation, inconvenience, and loss of enjoyment of life. Cunningham, 182
S.W.3d at 567. The court determined that if the plaintiff used expert testimony
or evidence of medical or psychological treatment to support her damage claim
for emotional distress, she would waive the privilege. Id. at 568. The plaintiff
would not waive her privilege, however, if she sought emotional distress
damages of a “generic kind,” meaning “the kind of distress or humiliation that
an ordinary person would feel in such circumstances. These damages are
generally in the common experience of jurors and do not depend on any expert
evidence.” Id. The court distinguished the plaintiff’s claim of physical injury
with accompanying generic emotional distress damages from cases in which a
plaintiff brings a cause of action for negligent infliction of emotional distress.
Id. at 568. In cases of the latter sort, the plaintiff must show a medically
diagnosed mental condition resulting from a negligent act. Id. Such a claim,
by its very nature, would waive the privilege because it would require medical
evidence to support the claim. Id.
This decision is consistent with our rule on waiver of the attorney-client
privilege, which is that the holder of the privilege waives it when he “has
injected privileged material into the case, such that the information is actually
required for resolution of the issue.” Aranson, 140 N.H. at 370. When a holder
of the psychotherapist-patient privilege brings a cause of action for a physical
injury, that will not waive the privilege because the privileged information will
not be required for resolution of the claim. By the same reasoning, if the
privilege-holder also alleges a damage claim for “generic” mental suffering that
is incident to the physical injury, the privilege will not be waived because the
6
privileged information will not be required for resolution of the claim. We use
the term “generic” as did the Missouri Supreme Court, meaning mental
suffering that is in the common experience of jurors, does not depend upon
expert evidence, and does not exceed the kind of mental suffering that an
ordinary person would experience in similar circumstances. Because generic
mental suffering is in the jurors’ common experience and does not depend
upon expert evidence, it will not involve any privileged records from
psychotherapy sessions. Thus, a damage claim for generic mental suffering
that is incident to a physical injury will not waive the psychotherapist-patient
privilege because a resolution of the claim will not require any privileged
information.
In the instant case, Desclos brought a cause of action for medical
negligence and claimed damages that included pain and suffering, loss of
enjoyment of life, and loss of earning capacity. As the primary injury that
Desclos claimed was a physical injury, the mental components of the pain and
suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, and loss of earning capacity claims were
incident to the physical claim. The record before us contains no specific
description of Desclos’ damage claims. Because we do not know the details of
the mental suffering that Desclos claims to have experienced as a result of the
alleged negligence, we cannot determine whether or not she has waived her
psychotherapist-patient privilege by injecting her mental condition into the
case. We can, however, provide guidance for the trial court. If Desclos claims
that her pain and suffering, loss of enjoyment of life, or loss of earning capacity
include a clinically diagnosed disorder, such as depression or post traumatic
stress disorder, or if the claims involve expert testimony or other expert
evidence regarding her mental suffering, that will waive her psychotherapist-
patient privilege. If, however, the mental suffering that Desclos claims involves
only generic mental suffering, then such claims would not waive her
psychotherapist-patient privilege. Because the record before us contains
insufficient detail regarding Desclos’ claims, we vacate and remand to the trial
court for a determination based upon the standard that we have articulated.
The final issue that we must address in regard to implied waiver is the
scope of such a waiver. In the attorney-client and physician-patient realms, an
implied waiver does not waive the privilege for all confidential communications
between the attorney and client or doctor and patient. Nelson v. Lewis, 130
N.H. 106, 110 (1987); Dean, 142 N.H. at 890-91. “[Implied] waiver is only
partial. It extends not to all information given in the course of treatment, but
only to what is relevant to the plaintiff’s claim.” Nelson, 130 N.H. at 110.
Given the similarity between the attorney-client and psychotherapist-patient
privileges, we conclude that an implied waiver of the psychotherapist-patient
privilege extends only to confidential communications that are relevant to the
plaintiff’s claim. If the trial court determines on remand that Desclos impliedly
waived her psychotherapist-patient privilege, the trial court may compel
7
discovery of only those psychotherapeutic records necessary to resolve Desclos’
claims, which may require in camera review.
II. Piercing the Privilege
The defendants next contend that the trial court properly ordered
disclosure of Desclos’ psychotherapeutic records because they may provide
information as to her reliability in reporting her symptoms. This lack of
reliability, the defendants argue, is relevant to the issue of liability, because
there is a factual dispute regarding what symptoms Desclos described to her
treating physician.
Though the purpose of the psychotherapist-patient privilege is to
encourage trust and disclosure between patient and psychotherapist so as to
maximize the effectiveness of therapy, the privilege is not absolute. State v.
Kupchun, 117 N.H. 412, 415 (1977). The psychotherapist-patient privilege
must yield when disclosure of the information concerned is considered
“essential.” Id. at 415. “To establish essential need, the party seeking the
privileged records must prove both that the targeted information is unavailable
from another source and that there is a compelling justification for its
disclosure.” In re Grand Jury Subpoena (Medical Records of Payne), 150 N.H.
436, 442 (2004).
Before establishing essential need for the information contained in the
privileged records, however, the party seeking to pierce the privilege must first
“establish a reasonable probability that the records contain information that is
material and relevant to” the party’s defense or claim. State v. Gagne, 136 N.H.
101, 105 (1992). We required such a showing in Gagne, in which a criminal
defendant requested discovery of the alleged victims’ psychotherapeutic
records, because such records may have contained information relevant to his
defense, such as the victims’ reliability. Id. at 103-04. This initial showing of
probability was necessary to protect both the victims’ privacy interests in the
confidential records and the defendant’s due process interests in obtaining
potentially exculpatory information. Id. at 105. The “reasonable probability”
showing also established an initial, minimum standard that the party seeking
to pierce the privilege had to meet before the trial court undertook an in
camera review and a determination of whether the privilege should be
abrogated. Id. at 104. We find the interests of privacy, due process, and
judicial economy compelling in the instant case, as well. Thus, before the
defendants may argue that they have an essential need for the privileged
information, they must make an initial showing sufficient to establish a
reasonable probability that the records they seek contain information that is
material and relevant to their defense. Such a showing may rely upon
inadmissible evidence, such as hearsay evidence. See In re Grand Jury
8
Subpoena, 150 N.H. at 445 (concluding that hearsay evidence of a defendant’s
lacerations and surgery was sufficient to demonstrate a reasonable probability
that the defendant’s privileged medical records contained information regarding
his injuries).
If the defendants successfully make a showing of reasonable probability,
they may then argue to the trial court that the information they seek is
“essential.” The first requirement of showing essential need is that the
privileged information sought must be unavailable from another source. Id. at
442. To determine whether a reasonable alternative source of information is
available, we use a three-part test: (1) whether the alternative evidence is
admissible at trial; (2) whether the alternative evidence is sufficient to overcome
a motion for directed verdict, when applicable; and (3) whether the party
seeking to pierce the privilege has made adequate efforts to investigate
alternative sources. See id. at 442-43. When presented with an unavailability
argument, the trial court must make explicit findings and rulings on each of
the above prongs. Id. at 444. The importance of the first prong is that we
consider unavailable any alternative evidence not admissible at trial. Id. at
443. For the second prong, if the alternative evidence is insufficient to survive
a motion for directed verdict, then it is, for practical purposes, unavailable. Id.
The third prong is the most rigorous, requiring that the party seeking to pierce
the privilege make an offer of proof demonstrating “substantial, good faith
efforts to discover alternative sources of competent evidence.” Id. at 444.
Conclusory statements that alternative sources are non-existent or futile to
explore will not be sufficient. Id. Nor is it sufficient to simply argue that the
privileged information provides the best source of evidence sought or the least
burdensome means to acquire such evidence. Id. at 443. On the other hand,
we will not require the exhaustion of alternative sources of information that
offer little chance of revealing alternative evidence. Id. The determination as to
whether or not the party seeking to pierce the privilege has made adequate
investigative efforts to satisfy the third prong is, at least initially, a question of
fact for the trial court to resolve. Id. at 444.
In the instant case, there is no record of whether or not the information
that the defendants seek from Desclos’ psychotherapeutic records is
unavailable from other sources. The defendants have presented no evidence on
the record that they have made adequate efforts to investigate alternative
sources that could provide the information that they seek. Further, they have
not argued that any potentially available alternative evidence would be
inadmissible. The trial court has made no explicit findings on any of the
applicable prongs of the unavailability test. Accordingly, we must remand the
case on the issue of unavailability. If the defendants argue that they may
pierce the privilege because the information that they need is essential, they
must argue that such information is unavailable from another source, and the
9
trial court must make the requisite findings, in accordance with the standard
articulated above.
We now address whether there is a compelling justification for the
information’s disclosure. We considered this issue in In re Grand Jury
Subpoena, and determined that obtaining privileged information to establish
an element of a felony criminal offense constituted a compelling justification to
support piercing the physician-patient privilege. In re Grand Jury Subpoena,
150 N.H. at 442. Though In re Grand Jury Subpoena is our only decision
using the “compelling justification” test, we have employed similar reasoning in
other decisions. In State v. Pelletier, 149 N.H. 243, 249 (2003), we determined
that the spousal privilege under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 504 would
yield when disclosure would provide relevant information concerning alleged
sexual abuse of a child. We attributed this abrogation of the privilege to public
policy, stating that “Child abuse is a horrendous crime,” and that “[i]t would be
unconscionable to permit a privilege grounded on promoting communications
of trust and love between husband and wife to prevent a properly outraged
spouse with knowledge from testifying against the perpetrator of such a crime.”
Id. at 248-49. In Kupchun, we determined that piercing the psychotherapist-
patient privilege was appropriate in the context of a criminal commitment
hearing. Kupchun, 117 N.H. at 415-16. The purpose of the hearing was for
the superior court to determine whether it would be dangerous for the
defendant to go at large. Id. at 415. For the court to make such a
determination, we held that it had to “be presented with the best information
available which has a bearing on defendant’s dangerousness or mental
condition.” Id. Our decisions in In re Grand Jury Subpoena, Pelletier, and
Kupchun, show that we will find a compelling justification for the disclosure of
privileged information when a sufficiently important public interest is at stake.
The question before us is whether the defendants’ desire to obtain
privileged information that could affect their liability presents a compelling
justification for disclosure of the information. The defendants’ argument
implicates the fairness of trial proceedings. It is well established that a fair
trial is a fundamental constitutional right for parties in both criminal and civil
cases. E.g., Davidson v. Riley, 44 F.3d 1118, 1122 (2d Cir. 1995); Lemons v.
Skidmore, 985 F.2d 354, 357 (7th Cir. 1993); Bailey v. Systems Innovation,
Inc., 852 F.2d 93, 98 (3d Cir. 1988). Accordingly, if a party seeking to pierce a
privilege showed that there would be a deprivation of a fair trial without access
to the privileged information so that there would not be a just resolution of the
issues involved, such a showing would present a sufficiently important public
interest to qualify as a compelling justification. Whether the defendants in the
instant case have made such a showing is unclear from the record. Though we
can discern the basic intent of the defendants’ argument, they have provided
us with insufficient factual detail regarding their fairness argument. We do not
know, for instance, the extent to which deprivation of the privileged information
10
would impair their ability to fairly defend themselves. We remand this issue to
the trial court for a determination on whether or not the defendants’ argument
presents a compelling justification to pierce the psychotherapist-patient
privilege. We note that, though the defendants’ argument in the instant case
was based upon liability, the fundamental fairness of a trial would undoubtedly
be implicated by other arguments. An example is an argument that the
privileged information was the only means for a defendant to show a break in
the chain of causation.
We finally instruct the trial court that if the party seeking to pierce the
privilege successfully shows that the information sought is essential, the trial
court should conduct an in camera review. In re Grand Jury Subpoena, 150
N.H. at 448. The trial court’s responsibility during this review is to limit the
disclosure of privileged information to that which is relevant to the purpose for
which the disclosure was ordered. Id.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11