THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2005-859
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DARIN A. PARKER
Argued: November 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The sole issue on appeal is whether the Superior
Court (Fitzgerald, J.) erred when it refused to appoint counsel for the
defendant, Darin A. Parker, to assist him in seeking to avoid imposition of the
deferred portion of his sentence. We reverse in part, vacate in part and
remand.
In November 1990, the defendant pled guilty to second-degree murder,
and the Superior Court (Dunn, J.) sentenced him as follows:
The defendant is sentenced to New Hampshire State Prison
for not more than life nor less than 25 years. Stand
committed. 7 years of the sentence deferred for a period of
15 years. Prior to the expiration of the [deferral] period, the
defendant may petition the Court to show cause why the
deferred commitment should not be imposed. At this
hearing, the defendant shall have the burden of
demonstrating that he no longer poses a threat to society. It
is contemplated that the hearing shall be scheduled
sufficiently in advance to allow defendant to be paroled at
the end of eighteen years if he meets said burden at the
anticipated hearing. Pretrial confinement credit 623 days.
In August 2004, the defendant filed a motion for appointment of counsel to
assist him “in a show cause hearing as to why a deferred commitment should
not be imposed.” The trial court denied the motion, and subsequently
conducted a hearing in September 2005 during which the defendant
represented himself pro se. Concluding that “[the] defendant’s record in prison
[did] not merit suspension of the deferred sentence,” the trial court imposed the
deferred seven-year sentence. It also denied the defendant’s motion for
reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
The defendant argues that he was entitled to the assistance of counsel
during the 2005 proceeding, relying upon both the Right to Counsel and Due
Process Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 15; U.S. CONST. amend. V, VI, XIV. Under the narrow circumstances of
this case, we hold that the 2005 hearing was conducted in violation of his right
to counsel under our State Constitution. We therefore do not engage in a
separate federal analysis, State v. Rothe, 142 N.H. 483, 484 (1997); State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 232 (1983), and do not address the defendant’s due
process argument. Furthermore, we rely upon federal decisions only to aid our
analysis. See State v. Scarborough, 124 N.H. 363, 368 (1983).
Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution reads:
Every person held to answer in any crime or offense punishable by
deprivation of liberty shall have the right to counsel at the
expense of the state if need is shown; this right he is at liberty to
waive, but only after the matter has been thoroughly explained by
the court.
A defendant’s right to assistance of counsel attaches “by virtue of the
commencement of formal criminal proceedings,” State v. Bruneau, 131 N.H.
104, 108 (1988), and once the right has attached, a defendant is entitled to the
assistance of counsel at “critical stages” of criminal proceedings, State v.
2
Delisle, 137 N.H. 549, 550 (1993) (citation omitted). In this case, the parties
agree that sentencing, as well as a hearing on a deferred sentence, constitute
critical stages of the proceeding. See Mempa v. Rhay, 389 U.S. 128, 134-37
(1967). The dispute lies in whether the 1990 sentencing order postponed the
sentencing decision regarding the seven-year deferred term so that the
sentencing phase of the defendant’s criminal prosecution remained open at the
time of the 2005 proceeding.
The State agrees that “in a typical case, when a sentencing court imposes
a deferred sentence, it makes no decision as to whether to impose or suspend
the sentence, and thus necessarily postpones that decision.” In the typical
case of deferred sentencing, of course, the entire term of incarceration is
deferred, not just a portion of it. See, e.g., State v. Graham, 146 N.H. 142, 143
(2001). The State contends, however, that the sentencing phase of this case
concluded in 1990 because the defendant was immediately incarcerated; he
was not granted or assured of any conditional liberty; and the State bore no
burden of proving that he committed any affirmative act in order that he serve
twenty-five years of imprisonment. According to the State, if neither it nor the
defendant took any action, the defendant automatically would have served his
full term of twenty-five years to life. We conclude, however, that under the
particular language of the 1990 sentencing order, the trial court did not
complete the defendant’s sentencing in 1990. Thus, the defendant was entitled
to the assistance of counsel in 2005 when the court concluded the sentencing
phase by considering whether to impose the deferred seven-year term.
The language of the sentencing order determines the nature of the
defendant’s sentence. Indeed,
[d]ue process requires a sentencing court to make clear at
the time of sentencing in plain and certain terms what
punishment it is exacting, as well as the extent to which the court
retains discretion to impose punishment at a later date and under
what conditions the sentence may be modified. The sentencing
order must clearly communicate to the defendant the exact nature
of the sentence.
State v. LeCouffe, 152 N.H. 148, 152 (2005) (emphasis in original). The State
does not cite any applicable statutes that would assist us in construing the
sentencing order in this case. We therefore confine our review to the four
corners of the 1990 sentencing order. Whether the order left open the
sentencing phase against the defendant such that he was entitled to the
assistance of counsel during the subsequent hearing in 2005 constitutes a
question of law which we review de novo. See State v. Grant-Chase, 140 N.H.
264, 267 (1995) (on appeal, questions of law are considered de novo).
3
The 1990 sentencing order begins by stating that the defendant “is
sentenced to New Hampshire State Prison for not more than life nor less than
25 years. Stand committed.” However, the order continues: “7 years of the
sentence [is] deferred for a period of 15 years, [and] [p]rior to the expiration of
the [deferral] period, the defendant may petition the Court to show cause why
the deferred commitment should not be imposed.” (Emphasis added.) The
order specifically refers to seven years of the term as “deferred,” and the
language indicates that this deferred term was not yet deemed “imposed.” The
express purpose of the anticipated show cause hearing was to determine
whether the seven-year deferred term would be imposed, indicating that a
sentencing decision was being postponed on that portion of the sentence.
We disagree with the State that this case is akin to State v. Gibbons, 135
N.H. 320, 322-23 (1992), in which the court held that the indigent defendant,
who was incarcerated and seeking a sentence suspension pursuant to RSA
651:20, was not entitled to court-appointed counsel. Gibbons is inapposite to
the circumstances before us. Sentencing had concluded for the Gibbons
defendant, and, thus, he argued for appointment of counsel pursuant to his
right to procedural due process. Id. at 320-21. He did not assert his
constitutional right to counsel during a critical stage of criminal prosecution.
Id. In the matter before us, sentencing was not completed in 1990 because the
trial court postponed its sentencing decision with respect to the seven-year
deferred term.
We acknowledge that the terms of the deferred sentence in this case may
be unusual. Cf. Graham, 146 N.H. at 143 (entire term of incarceration
deferred). Nevertheless, the language of the 1990 order leaves open the
sentencing decision of whether to impose the seven-year term until after the
defendant served the initial fifteen years of his sentence. Furthermore, to the
extent the language of the sentencing order is ambiguous concerning the
conclusion of the sentencing phase in 1990, we ought to err on the side of
protecting a defendant’s constitutional right to counsel. Cf. State v. MacLeod,
141 N.H. 427, 434 (1996) (federal rule of lenity resolves ambiguity in statutes
against greater punishment). Accordingly, we reverse the order denying the
defendant’s motion for appointment of counsel, vacate the decision denying
suspension of the seven-year deferred term, and remand for a further hearing
on whether the seven-year deferred sentence should be imposed.
Reversed in part; vacated in part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4