THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2005-441
PREMIER CAPITAL, LLC
v.
NICKOLAS SKALTSIS & a.
Argued: July 19, 2006
Opinion Issued: March 30, 2007
Law Offices of Randall L. Pratt, of Portsmouth (Randall L. Pratt on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Law Office of James H. Schulte, of Dover (James H. Schulte on the brief
and orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendants, Nickolas and Lorraine Skaltsis,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) entering judgment for the
plaintiff, Premier Capital, LLC, on a promissory note in the amount of
$703,504.99. They argue that the trial court erred in ruling that: (1) the
applicable statute of limitations on the note was twenty years; (2) the plaintiff
had standing to bring this action; (3) there was sufficient evidence of the
amount due under the note; and (4) the plaintiff’s claim was not barred by
laches. Following oral argument before this court, the parties were allowed to
file supplemental memoranda on or before August 28, 2006, further addressing
the statute of limitations issue. We affirm.
I
On March 12, 1990, the defendants executed a promissory note in the
amount of $565,000 in favor of First NH Banks, Exeter Banking Company.
The note provided for a variable interest rate equal to the Bank of Boston base
rate plus 1.50% adjusted daily, and provided for amortization over twenty-five
years. The note was secured by first mortgages on 3A Rose Street and 124
Broadway in Dover, together with an assignment of leases and rents on those
properties. In 1992, the promissory note and mortgages were assigned to Hilco
Realty Corp., and in 1993 they were further assigned to AMRESCO New
Hampshire, Inc.
The defendants defaulted on the note in 1992 and filed unsuccessfully
for bankruptcy protection. In December 1993, AMRESCO New Hampshire, Inc.
made a demand upon the defendants for the balance then due on the note,
which was $659,632.79. Subsequently, AMRESCO New Hampshire, Inc.
advertised and conducted a mortgage foreclosure sale in June 1994 on both
properties. In March 1996 AMRESCO New Hampshire, Inc. assigned the
original promissory note to AMRESCO New Hampshire, L.P. On September 23,
1997, AMRESCO New Hampshire, L.P. assigned the note to Premier Capital,
Inc. On September 10, 2003, the plaintiff commenced this action, alleging that
it had been assigned the promissory note originally given by the defendants to
Exeter Banking Company in March 1990. Following a bench trial, the court
entered judgment for the plaintiff in the amount of $703,504.99. This appeal
followed.
II
The defendants first argue that the trial court erred in applying the
twenty-year statute of limitations under RSA 508:6 (1997) rather than the
three-year statute of limitations under RSA 508:4, I (1997). They contend that
our decision in Cross v. Gannett, 39 N.H. 140 (1859), “squarely holds that once
the mortgage has been foreclosed, even if no discharge is recorded, the
mortgage is no longer enforceable and no action may be brought on it within
the meaning of the statute.” The defendants also argue that our recent holding
in Cadle Co. v. Dejadon, 153 N.H. 376 (2006), is in conflict with Cross and
should be overruled.
A brief review of the legislative history of RSA 508:6 and our early
decisions interpreting that statutory provision is necessary to determine
whether the defendants are correct that our decision in Cadle effectively
overruled Cross “without actually citing [it] and without stating why the Cadle
decision was stating new law.”
When New Hampshire’s general statute of limitations was first enacted in
1791, “notes secured by mortgages were completely exempt from the statute.”
2
Del Norte, Inc. v. Provencher, 142 N.H. 535, 538 (1997). In 1842, the statute
was amended to provide that “[a]ctions upon notes secured by mortgage, may
be brought so long as the plaintiff is entitled to commence any action upon the
mortgage.” RS 181:6 (1842). “[T]he only change intended by the 1842 revision
was that, rather than being completely exempt from the statute of limitations, a
mortgage note would thereafter only be exempt for the same amount of time as
the mortgage securing it.” Del Norte, 142 N.H. at 538. Although the statute
“has been reenacted a number of times since 1842 . . . [t]he only material
change is that since 1878, application of the statute has been limited to notes
secured by mortgages of real estate.” Id. at 538-39. The statute, now codified
as RSA 508:6, currently provides: “Actions upon notes secured by a mortgage
of real estate may be brought so long as the plaintiff is entitled to bring an
action upon the mortgage.” Read in conjunction with RSA 508:2 (1997), which
provides that “[n]o action for the recovery of real estate shall be brought after
20 years from the time the right to recover first accrued,” RSA 508:6
“establishes a twenty-year statute of limitations for notes secured by mortgages
on real property.” Del Norte, 142 N.H. at 537.
In Cross, we considered the application of RS 181:6. In that case, the
maker-obligor gave defendant Gannett promissory notes secured by a
mortgage. Cross, 39 N.H. at 140. Shortly thereafter, Gannett endorsed the
notes and transferred them and the mortgage to Joseph Bell. Id. Some years
later, Bell sold and delivered the notes and mortgage to the plaintiff, Cross. Id.
Cross later foreclosed upon the mortgage but was unable to satisfy the balance
due on the notes. Id. at 140-41. Some fifteen years later Cross sued Gannett
on the notes, which had become due more than ten years before
commencement of the suit. Id. at 141. We held that the action was barred
based upon the fact that “[t]he mortgage . . . was given to secure the liability of
the maker [obligor] [and that Cross’ action was] brought on the liability of the
endorser.” Id. at 142. Because the endorser, Gannett, did not give a mortgage
to secure his liability, his obligations were not subject to the twenty-year
statute of limitations. We noted that the decision left open the question
“whether the statute can be construed to mean any thing more than that an
action may be brought, on account of any specific liability, upon the note, so
long as the plaintiff is entitled to maintain an action upon the mortgage, as
security for the same liability.” Id. at 142-43 (emphasis added). Left
unanswered by the Cross decision, therefore, was “whether the specific
liability, on account of which the right of action on the note is to be considered
as extended by [RS 181:6], must not be the same as that which the mortgage is
given to secure.” Id. at 142.
One year later, we cited Cross as support for the conclusion that the
twenty-year statute of limitations did not apply to parties who did not,
themselves, give security for their obligations. See Savings Bank v. Ladd, 40
N.H. 459, 471 (1860). In Savings Bank, the plaintiff claimed the benefit of the
twenty-year statute of limitations for a promissory note signed by seven
3
individuals, including J.T. Cheney and Jesse Ladd. Id. at 460. Six days after
the note was signed, Cheney’s father, who had not signed the note, executed a
mortgage of his homestead to the plaintiffs to secure it. Id. We held that the
twenty-year statute of limitations did not apply to individuals who had no
knowledge of the existence of the mortgage. Id. at 470-71. We reasoned:
[U]nless it was the design and intention of the legislature to
make all persons who sign a note liable upon it so long as the
creditor may bring an action upon any mortgage which has been
given him to secure it, whether given by a party to the note or a
stranger; whether given at the date of the note or at any time
after; and whether given by the consent and with the knowledge
of the signer of the note, or without either of them, this
defendant cannot be held liable, if he chooses to avail himself of
the statute bar; and that such could have been the intention of
the legislature we have before seen to be impossible.
Id. We found “some views in the opinion in Cross v. Gannett . . . which, we
think, favor the construction of the statute which we have given it,” id. at 471,
quoting with approval the statement in Cross that “‘the object of [RS 181:6] is
manifestly to make the remedy of the holder of the note, by suit upon it,
coextensive with that which he has by action upon the mortgage, for the
purpose of making application of the land pro tanto, for the payment of the
debt secured by it.’” Id. at 471 (quoting Cross, 39 N.H. at 141).
Four years later, in Alexander v. Whipple, 45 N.H. 502 (1864), we relied
upon and extended the holding in Savings Bank that the statute applies “only
to such persons as should sign both the note and the mortgage given to secure
it.” Id. at 503. We rejected the suggestion that under the decision in Cross,
an action may be maintained upon the note so long as the payee
may have any available remedy under his mortgage upon the
property thus pledged to secure the note; and when such
property is destroyed and the security by way of the mortgage is
no longer available, that the right of action both upon the note
and the mortgage shall be barred in six years.
Id. Rather, we held that the statute meant that it “shall not be a bar to any
action upon the note until the statute of limitations might be properly pleaded
as a bar to any action upon the mortgage given to secure it.” Id. at 504. Thus:
If the mortgage were discharged so that no action could be
maintained on it, then, by the terms of the act, the statute of
limitations would run against the note. If the mortgage had been
foreclosed and the note thereby paid, no action could be
maintained on either. But if the note remains unpaid by
4
foreclosure of the mortgage or otherwise, and the mortgage is not
discharged, an action may be maintained upon the note without
being barred by the statute, until such time as the statute of
limitations might be properly pleaded to any action upon the
mortgage.
Id. at 505.
In Cadle, we noted that we have “consistently interpreted [RSA 508:2 and
508:6] to mean that only upon performance of the conditions of a mortgage is it
rendered void and a discharge compelled by the mortgagee.” Cadle, 153 N.H.
at 379. “[A]bsent full payment of a note or an express discharge of the
mortgage by the mortgagee, merely foreclosing upon the mortgage cannot void
or discharge it by operation of law.” Id.
Unlike Cross, in the case before us, as in Cadle, the defendants both
made the note and gave the mortgages to secure it. Thus, under an
unwavering line of decisions from this court, “although the mortgagee no longer
has recourse to the property once it has been sold free and clear at a
foreclosure sale, he may still assert, in an action against his debtor (the
mortgagor), that where the covenants of the mortgage given to secure the note
remain undischarged, the debtor waived the right to plead the statute of
limitations for twenty years.” Del Norte, 142 N.H. at 539-40. Accordingly, we
hold that Cross is not in conflict with Cadle and that the trial court correctly
concluded that the “action was clearly brought within 20 years of the
defendants’ default, and is therefore not barred by the statute of limitations.”
III
The defendants next argue that the trial court’s ruling that the plaintiff
had standing to bring this action on the note was not supported by the
evidence. “No particular phraseology is required to effect an assignment.” In
re Dodge-Freedman Poultry Company, 148 F. Supp. 647, 650 (D.N.H. 1956)
(quotation omitted). “The ultimate test is the intention of the assignor to give
and the assignee to receive present ownership of the claim.” Id. at 650-51
(quotation omitted). “A valid assignment may be made by any words or acts
which fairly indicate an intention to make the assignee the owner of a claim.”
Cosmopolitan Trust Co. v. Leonard Watch Co., 143 N.E. 827, 829 (Mass. 1924).
“The important thing is the act and the evidence of intent; formalities are not
material.” Id. Thus, “[w]hether or not an assignment occurred is a question of
fact for the trial court.” Gold’n Plump Poultry, Inc. v. Simmons Eng. Co., 805
F.2d 1312, 1316 (8th Cir. 1986).
John Cummings, an account manager at plaintiff Premier Capital LLC,
testified that the defendants’ file was given to him by an authorized
5
representative of Premier Capital, Inc. with the intent that it be transferred to
Premier Capital, LLC. The trial court found:
Cummings credibly testified that a representative from Premier
Inc. gave him the defendants’ file and told him to enforce it on
behalf of Premier LLC. The physical transfer was conducted with
the intent to give Cummings, as an agent of Premier LLC, the right
to enforce the note. As such, the transfer from Premier Inc. to
Premier LLC was a valid transfer and vested Premier LLC with
Premier Inc.’s right to enforce the note. Therefore, Premier LLC
has standing to bring this action.
We affirm the trial court’s factual findings as they are supported by the record
before us. See In the Matter of Hampers &. Hampers, 154 N.H. ___ , ___, 911
A.2d 14, 20 (2006).
The defendants also contend that the plaintiff does not have standing
because the note was not a negotiable instrument and, thus, it could only be
conveyed by an assignment for value for which there was no evidence. We
reject this argument, however, because it is not “necessary that there should
be any consideration where the question arises between the assignee and the
debtor.” Cosmopolitan Trust, 143 N.E. at 829.
IV
The defendants next argue that the trial court erred by ruling that there
was sufficient evidence of the amount due under the note and that insufficient
funds were generated from the foreclosure sale. They also contend that the
evidence submitted to prove the amount of the deficiency owed was
insufficient.
“On review, we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the
prevailing party below and will overturn a damage award only if we find it to be
clearly erroneous.” Touma v. St. Mary’s Bank, 142 N.H. 762, 766 (1998)
(quotation and brackets omitted). As to the foreclosure sale, a mortgagee
“must exert every reasonable effort to obtain a fair and reasonable price under
the circumstances.” Murphy v. Financial Development Corp., 126 N.H. 536,
541 (1985) (quotation omitted). “What constitutes a fair price, or whether the
mortgagee must establish an upset price, adjourn the sale, or make other
reasonable efforts to assure a fair price, depends upon the circumstances of
each case.” Id. “Inadequacy of price alone is not sufficient to demonstrate bad
faith unless the price is so low as to shock the judicial conscience.” Id.
The 1994 tax assessments for the properties were $154,600 for the Rose
Street property and $313,200 for the Broadway property. Cummings testified
that he believed the fair value on the properties was $80,000 for Rose Street
6
and $170,000 for Broadway. The foreclosure sale brought $51,000 for Rose
Street and $190,000 for Broadway. The trial court found that although the
prices realized at auction were significantly below the tax assessment values of
the properties, the properties carried significant tax burdens for the years the
defendants did not pay their taxes, thus making them less valuable to potential
buyers. In addition, the court found that there was evidence that “there may
have been a glut in the property market at the time of the foreclosure sale.”
Finally, the court found that the defendants had approximately one year
between the withdrawal of their bankruptcy petition and the foreclosure,
during which time they made no payments and no effort to sell the property.
As the court stated in its order:
Being relatively sophisticated real estate investors, the
defendants surely would have sold the properties had they been
able to secure a high enough price on the properties to satisfy a
large portion of the outstanding mortgage. No steps to find a
buyer were taken until after Ameresco [sic] foreclosed on the
property. The court can reasonably infer that the defendants did
not sell the properties because they could not obtain as high a
selling price as they would need to satisfy their mortgage
obligations.
We hold that the record supports the trial court’s finding that the foreclosure
sale obtained a reasonable price under the circumstances and that the price
was not so low as to support a finding of bad faith.
As to the amount of the deficiency owed, the record likewise supports the
trial court’s findings. Although Cummings did not use the Bank of Boston
interest rate specified in the note to calculate the amount owed, he testified
“that the Federal Reserve prime rate was equal to the Bank of Boston base rate
at times when the Bank of Boston base rate was available [and] that the
Federal Reserve prime rate is a reliable and accurate measure to use for the
time period the Bank of Boston rate was unavailable that is, when Bank of
Boston was ultimately consumed by another bank.” Cf. F.D.I.C. v. Cage, 810
F. Supp. 745, 747 (S.D. Miss. 1993) (where the interest rate on a note is
determined by reference to the prime rate of a failed institution, it is reasonable
to compute interest based on an alternative prime rate selected by FDIC).
Furthermore, as the trial court noted, the plaintiff’s evidence of the defendants’
payment history was “essentially uncontroverted by the defendants.”
V
The defendants’ final argument is that the trial court erred by ruling that
the plaintiff was not guilty of laches. The defendants assert that they destroyed
all of their records relating to the note at issue based upon their belief that any
actions under the note would be barred by the statute of limitations. They
7
argue that they have been prejudiced by the plaintiff’s delay in bringing this
action and should therefore not be obligated to pay the debt.
“Laches is an equitable doctrine that bars litigation when a potential
plaintiff has slept on his rights.” In re Estate of Laura, 141 N.H. 628, 635
(1997). “Laches . . . is not a mere matter of time, but is principally a question
of the inequity of permitting the claim to be enforced – an inequity founded on
some change in the conditions or relations of the property or the parties
involved.” Id. (quotation omitted). When the delay in bringing the suit is less
than the applicable statute of limitation period, laches will constitute a bar to
suit only if the delay was unreasonable and prejudicial. Jenot v. White Mt.
Acceptance Corp., 124 N.H. 701, 710 (1984). “In determining whether the
doctrine should apply to bar a suit, the court should consider the knowledge of
the plaintiffs, the conduct of the defendants, the interests to be vindicated, and
the resulting prejudice. Miner v. A & C Tire Co., 146 N.H. 631, 633 (2001)
(quotation omitted). “[T]he trial court has broad discretion in deciding whether
the circumstances justify its application,” id., and “[u]nless we find that the
trial court’s decision is unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter
of law, we will not overturn it,” id.
The trial court stated in its ruling:
The defendants’ destruction of their financial records relating to
this note between the foreclosure and the commencement of this
action was not reasonable because it was based upon an
inaccurate interpretation of the law and does not amount to
sufficient prejudice. The defendants are not unsophisticated,
they were savvy real estate purchasers and sellers, and operated
their business running considerable lines of credit and
transferring large amounts of real estate. Additionally, Skaltsis
testified he and his wife ceased making payments on this note
because they no longer wanted to maintain control of the
properties. The defendants consciously defaulted on the note,
hoping the foreclosure would absolve them of their
responsibilities under the note. As such, any prejudice resulting
from the defendants’ destruction of the records relating to this
note is purely the defendants’ own fault and the court will not
impose the equitable doctrine of laches to discharge their
obligation to pay on this note.
We find no error.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8