THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2005-675
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GEORGE CORRADO
Submitted: June 8, 2006
Opinion Issued: August 3, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Charles J. Keefe, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. Following a jury trial, the defendant, George Corrado,
was convicted on one count of acting as an accomplice or principal to the
sale of the controlled drug marijuana. See RSA 626:8 (Supp. 2005); RSA
318-B:26 (2004) (amended 2005). On appeal, he argues that the Trial
Court (Arnold, J.) erred in denying his motion to suppress the audiotape of
the sale. We affirm.
The record contains the following evidence. The State used a confidential
informant to purchase drugs from an individual in Rindge on several occasions.
On each occasion, the informant had a recording device hidden on him. On May
14, 2004, when the informant called to arrange a purchase, he was advised that
the seller would not be at home that day but that someone would be there to
make the sale. When the informant arrived, the defendant sold him marijuana.
The sale was recorded on the device hidden on the informant.
After his arrest, the defendant moved to suppress the audiotape of the May
14, 2004 conversation, arguing that the State lacked the requisite reasonable
suspicion to intercept the conversation with him, see RSA 570-A:2 (Supp. 2003)
(amended 2004), because it had no information that he would be present or that
he might be involved in the expected sale of a controlled drug. The trial court
denied the motion.
Following his conviction, the defendant appealed. He argues that to
establish reasonable suspicion to justify the recording of a conversation with an
individual pursuant to RSA 570-A:2, II(d), the police must have information
implicating that specific person in criminal conduct. Because the police had little
or no information about the defendant until after the May 14 sale, they lacked
the requisite reasonable suspicion.
Our review of the trial court’s order on a motion to suppress is de novo,
except as to any controlling facts determined by the trial court. State v. Gubitosi,
152 N.H. 673, 676 (2005).
RSA 570-A:2, II(d) authorizes the interception of oral communication by an
investigative or law enforcement officer when one of the parties to the
communication has given prior consent to such interception and a determination
is made by a statutorily authorized individual that “reasonable suspicion [exists]
that evidence of criminal conduct will be derived from such interception.”
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative
intent as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. State v.
Clark, 151 N.H. 56, 57 (2004). We first examine the words of the statute and
ascribe plain and ordinary meanings to them. Id. We interpret the statute as
written and will not consider what the legislature could have said or add words to
the statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. In re Estate of Fischer,
152 N.H. 669, 673 (2005).
2
We have previously held that the phrase “reasonable suspicion” in RSA
570-A:2 should be construed as it is in constitutional cases involving
investigative stops. State v. Conant, 139 N.H. 728, 729-30 (1995). Therefore,
reasonable suspicion exists under RSA 570-A:2, II(d) when specific and
articulable facts taken together with rational inferences from those facts lead the
authorizing official to believe that evidence of criminal conduct will be derived
from an interception. Id. at 730. To determine whether reasonable suspicion
exists, we look to the totality of the circumstances. Id.
RSA 570-A:2, II(d) requires only a reasonable suspicion that evidence of
criminal conduct will be derived from the interception; it does not include a
requirement that the identity of all those who may be recorded be known by law
enforcement officials prior to the recording. While identity of the participants
may be a factor in the reasonable suspicion analysis, we decline to impose such
an absolute requirement in the absence of any indication of the legislature’s
intention to do so. Cf. United States v. Donovan, 429 U.S. 413, 427 n.15 (1977)
(“It is not a constitutional requirement that all those likely to be overheard
engaging in incriminating conversations be named.”).
The trial court found that on the day of the authorized interception, the
informant made arrangements to purchase marijuana from an individual from
whom he had purchased it on several prior occasions. The informant knew the
individual and had recently purchased marijuana from him at his residence. The
informant was aware that the seller kept a quantity of marijuana in his kitchen
cupboard above the sink. Based upon the record before us, we conclude that
under the totality of the circumstances, the authorizing official had reasonable
suspicion to believe that evidence of criminal conduct would be derived from the
interception. Thus, suppression of the evidence so obtained was not warranted.
See Conant, 139 N.H. at 730-32.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3