THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Employment Security
No. 2005-120
APPEAL OF ANDREW J. KAPLAN
(New Hampshire Department of Employment Security)
Argued: November 16, 2005
Opinion Issued: March 10, 2006
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Edwinna C.
Vanderzanden and Jill A. DeMello on the brief, and Ms. Vanderzanden orally),
for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Wynn E. Arnold, senior assistant
attorney general on the brief and orally) and Charles H. Bradley, of Concord, on
the brief, for the New Hampshire Department of Employment Services.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Andrew J. Kaplan, appeals a decision of the
appeal tribunal (tribunal) as affirmed by the appellate board, of the New
Hampshire Department of Employment Security (DES) denying him
unemployment benefits. See RSA 282-A:32, I(e) (Supp. 2005). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In March 1984, Kaplan co-
founded Kinderworks Corporation (Kinderworks). Kaplan handled some of its
marketing and sales and invested $45,000 of his own funds in the corporation.
He also served as a salaried president, chief executive officer and, at the end of
the corporation’s existence, was its sole director, treasurer and secretary.
Kinderworks had more than 200 shareholders. Kaplan owned between forty
and forty-nine percent of Kinderworks’ stock.
By late 2003, Kinderworks had incurred substantial debt. Its lender
withdrew financial support by calling in Kinderworks’ loans. Kinderworks
failed to satisfy its obligations and the lender foreclosed. Kinderworks
terminated operations on February 27, 2004.
Kaplan subsequently applied to DES for unemployment benefits. A
certifying officer denied his request. On appeal to the tribunal, Kaplan argued
that: (1) he was an employee of Kinderworks and thus eligible for
unemployment benefits; and (2) he was entitled to a refund of unemployment
premiums that DES had collected from Kinderworks. The tribunal ruled that
Kaplan was not eligible for benefits because he was self-employed within the
meaning of RSA 282-A:32, I(e) and New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Emp
503.03 (Rule 503.03). Kaplan appealed to the commissioner who denied his
request to reopen the case. Kaplan then appealed to the appellate board,
alleging in part that DES’ actions were confiscatory and violated his equal
protection rights. The appellate board sustained the tribunal’s decision and
denied Kaplan’s motion to reconsider. This appeal followed. See RSA 282-
A:67, II (1999).
On appeal, Kaplan argues that: (1) the tribunal’s decision to deny him
unemployment was clearly erroneous because he “did not control the
corporation”; (2) RSA 282-A:32, I(e) and its accompanying regulations violate
the Equal Protection Clause of both the Federal and State Constitutions; and
(3) his federal and State constitutional rights entitle him to the return of all
unemployment contributions made by Kinderworks on his behalf.
“In reviewing a decision of the tribunal we are confined to the record and
will not substitute our judgment for its judgment as to the weight of the
evidence on questions of fact.” Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. 396, 398 (2005).
We will uphold the tribunal’s decision “unless its findings or conclusions are
unauthorized, affected by an error of law, or clearly erroneous in view of all the
evidence presented.” Id. We address each argument in turn.
I
The tribunal concluded that although Kaplan was an employee of
Kinderworks, he was self-employed according to RSA 282-A:32, I(e), Rule
503.03 and our decision in Appeal of Hickey, 139 N.H. 586 (1995). Kaplan
argues that the tribunal’s conclusion that he was self-employed was clearly
erroneous. See RSA 282-A:67, V. Specifically, Kaplan contends that the
tribunal failed to consider that he was not a majority or controlling shareholder
of Kinderworks. Kaplan asserts that, unlike the claimant in Hickey, he was a
minority stockholder and “did not control the corporation.”
2
New Hampshire’s unemployment compensation scheme denies benefits
to those whose entrepreneurial businesses fail because of circumstances
beyond their control. Hickey, 139 N.H. at 587. RSA 282-A:32, I(e) disqualifies
a person who has “left his self-employment or closed his business” from
receiving benefits. Rule 503.03(a) provides that an individual is deemed to
have left his self-employment or closed his business based upon a showing of
three or more of the following criteria:
(1) The individual was a sole proprietor, partner, officer or director, both
in name and in fact;
(2) The individual had an investment or was a stockholder;
(3) The individual formed the entity or became involved in the activity in
order to create profits, which for purposes of this subparagraph shall
include wages, capital gains, dividends, salaries, commissions,
bonuses, board, rent, housing, payment in kind, insurance, disability
plans, retirement and similar advantages, and benefits;
(4) The individual controlled or had the right to control the business;
(5) The individual had a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, or step
family member of the same relationship who was either an officer,
manager, director, investor, stockholder or partner, who controlled or
who had the express or implied right to control the business, and said
family member either acceded to the decisions of the individual or
delegated rights or authority to the individual; or
(6) The individual performed services not required to be done by an
officer or director.
In applying this statute and rule, “[w]e look to the plain and ordinary
meaning of the statutory language in determining legislative intent.” Appeal of
AlphaDirections, 152 N.H. 477, 482 (2005). “We do not read words or phrases
in isolation, but rather in the context of the entire statute.” Id.
The tribunal concluded that Kaplan was ineligible for unemployment
benefits because he met at least three of the criteria in Rule 503.03(a).
Specifically, the tribunal found that Kaplan was “an officer of the corporation,
had an investment and was a stockholder, received a salary and benefits from
the corporation and performed services not required of an officer.” Although
Kaplan does not challenge these findings, he argues that the tribunal’s
conclusion that he was self-employed was clearly erroneous because he was
not a majority shareholder in Kinderworks and, thus, did not have a controlling
interest in the corporation. This fact, however, is not determinative under the
rule where, as in this case, the petitioner satisfied at least three of the rule’s
criteria. See Rule 503.03(a). Thus, the record provides ample support for the
tribunal’s findings and conclusion that Kaplan was self-employed under Rule
503.03(a).
3
Kaplan further contends that the tribunal’s literal application of Rule
503.03(a) effectively precludes officers, directors and shareholders from
receiving unemployment benefits. The requirement that an individual meet at
least three discrete criteria, however, undercuts this argument. So long as
officers, directors, and shareholders do not meet two other criteria in Rule
503.03(a), they remain eligible for unemployment benefits.
Finally, Kaplan requests that we revisit our decision in Hickey. In
Hickey, we held that the terms of RSA 282-A:32, I(c) [now codified at RSA 282-
A:32, I(e)] were “clear and unambiguous.” Hickey, 139 N.H. at 588. We thus
declined to interpret the statute beyond its plain meaning, which denies
unemployment benefits to those who leave their self-employment. Id. Kaplan
asserts that we should reconsider Hickey because our interpretation of the
language “left his self-employment” in that case “was not consistent with the
unemployment compensation act’s purpose,” which “afford[s] some degree of
protection to” those who are unemployed through no fault of their own. This
assertion, however, is insufficient to persuade us to overrule a prior decision.
See Jacobs v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 504-05
(2003) (setting forth factors that guide our judgment when asked to overrule
prior holding). Accordingly, we decline his invitation.
II
Kaplan next contends that RSA 282-A:32, I(e) and its accompanying
regulations violate the Equal Protection Clause of both the Federal and State
Constitutions. U.S. CONST. amend. XIV § 1; N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 12.
Kaplan argues that the unemployment compensation scheme violates his right
to equal protection because it fails to match equality of burden with equality of
compensation. Kaplan also asserts that the statute and regulations lack a
rational basis for treating officers, directors and shareholders differently from
other employees.
DES argues that Kaplan failed to preserve his constitutional claims for
appellate review because he did not raise them before the tribunal. Kaplan
responds that his pro se letter to the appellate board, alleging in part that DES
violated his equal protection rights, adequately preserved his constitutional
claims. Moreover, Kaplan asserts that his claims were also preserved in his
attorney’s statement to the tribunal that it was “improvident and probably
inequitable” for the State to collect unemployment benefits from him.
We review decisions of the appeal tribunal “for errors of law, except
insofar as that record may have been clarified or the issues limited in the
course of subsequent proceedings before the appellate [board].” Appeal of
Pelleteri, 152 N.H. __, __, 887 A.2d 140, 143 (2005) (quotation omitted); see
RSA 282-A:67, V (1999). “On appeal, we consider only issues that have been
both timely raised below and preserved for our review.” Pelleteri, 152 N.H. at
4
__, 887 A.2d at 143. “The appellate board provides an intermediate
administrative appeal, in which issues previously raised may be waived or
narrowed; it does not provide an opportunity to raise new issues for the first
time.” Id. (quotation omitted). Therefore, “[u]nless a claim is raised in the trial
forum, there is no opportunity for a party to develop a factual record
supporting his theory of relief, or to make an offer of proof sufficient to justify a
demand to introduce relevant evidence and preserve an issue for appeal.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
In Appeal of Bosselait, we held that constitutional claims, first presented
to the appellate board after the tribunal had reached a final determination, are
not preserved for review by this court. Appeal of Bosselait, 130 N.H. 604, 607
(1988), cert. denied, 488 U.S. 1011 (1989). Bosselait also provides that the test
to determine if a constitutional claim was sufficiently raised at the tribunal
level is whether the claim was “sufficient to put anyone on notice that [the
employee] thereby meant to raise a constitutional issue.” Id. at 607. In
Bosselait, we held that the petitioner’s statement to the tribunal that a statute
“was discriminatory against the aged” was not sufficient to put DES on notice
of his intention to raise a constitutional claim because the petitioner did not
express “the view that the statute was therefore invalid as working a denial of
equal protection.” Id. Similarly, in Pelleteri, we held that the petitioners’
“generalized assertions of unreasonableness” did not constitute “sufficient
notice that they were raising constitutional claims.” Pelleteri, 152 N.H. at __,
887 A.2d at 144.
Kaplan’s argument that his pro se letter to the appellate board preserved
his claim fails because the letter was sent after the tribunal had reached its
final determination. Kaplan’s pro se status at the time he sent the letter does
not excuse his failure to preserve his claims. See State v. Porter, 144 N.H. 96,
100-01 (1999) (citing the general principle that “rules of preservation are not
relaxed for a pro se [litigant]”). Like the petitioners in Bosselait and Pelleteri,
Kaplan failed to sufficiently articulate his constitutional claims before the
tribunal. Kaplan’s attorney stated to the tribunal that DES “inequitably and
probably improvidently” collected unemployment premiums from him.
However, neither Kaplan nor his counsel linked these allegations to the
assertion that DES had thereby violated his right to equal protection.
Accordingly, Kaplan did not give the tribunal sufficient notice that he would be
raising an equal protection claim. We conclude, therefore, that the
constitutional issues were not preserved for our review. Cf. Pelleteri, 152 N.H.
at __, 887 A.2d at 144.
III
Finally, Kaplan urges us to rule that, even if he did leave his self-
employment or close his business within the meaning of RSA 282-A:32, I(e), he
is entitled to all unemployment contributions made by Kinderworks on his
5
behalf from 1984 to 2004. DES counters that, at best, Kaplan’s refund claim is
premature as he has yet to exhaust the administrative remedies prescribed by
RSA 282-A:149 (1999).
Under RSA 282-A:149, employers who seek adjustment or refund of
unemployment contributions must file an application with the commissioner.
The record is devoid of any indication that either Kaplan or Kinderworks,
assuming either is eligible to do so, ever filed an application for adjustment or
refund of employer contributions pursuant to RSA 282-A:149. Kaplan has
cited no persuasive reason why he should not have to submit to the refund
application process. Accordingly, the refund claim is not properly before us.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
6