THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-332
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DOUGLAS GIDDENS
Argued: January 11, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (John M. Gasaway, Jr., attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Douglas Giddens, appeals his conviction in
Superior Court (Groff, J.) of seven counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I(c) (1996 & Supp. 2006), and one count of
kidnapping, see RSA 633:1, I(d) (1996). We affirm.
The record supports the following. On the night of December 31, 2003,
C.M., a young woman, was walking by herself in Milford. As she walked near
the center of town, the defendant approached her, walked alongside her, and
talked to her, although the two had never met. C.M. alleged that, after a few
minutes, the defendant showed her a knife, told her that he would kill her if
she screamed, and led her into the woods where he sexually assaulted her.
The defendant denied making this threat and contended that the sexual
encounter that ensued was consensual. C.M. further alleged that, after the
initial assaults, the defendant led her to his car and drove her to another
wooded location where he committed additional sexual assaults.
Early the next morning, C.M. reported the assaults to the Milford Police.
She described the threats the assailant made, the various wooded locations
involved in the assaults, and the assailant’s physical appearance. She also
described the assailant’s vehicle as a reddish or maroon colored, four-door
Grand Am or Grand Prix that had an air freshener in the shape of a blue foot
hanging from the rearview mirror.
On January 6, Captain Fortin of the Milford Police Department observed
a maroon Grand Am drive by. He followed the vehicle and ran a check on its
license plate number, which revealed that the car was registered to the
defendant, whom Fortin knew used to camp and spend time in wooded areas of
Milford ten years earlier. While stopped behind the Grand Am at a traffic light,
Fortin observed an object shaped like a sneaker hanging from the Grand Am’s
rearview mirror. Fortin continued to follow the vehicle as it made a series of
turns and entered and exited several shopping plazas without stopping. The
vehicle made an abrupt turn without using a turn signal and later made
another abrupt turn into a library parking lot and parked. Fortin pulled into
the parking lot, blocking the Grand Am from moving. He approached the
vehicle and asked the driver, who was the defendant, for his license and
registration. After conversing with the defendant and obtaining further
evidence, Fortin arrested him. It was not until after the stop that Fortin
noticed that the Grand Am had two rather than four doors.
At the Milford Police Department, a Milford officer interviewed the
defendant. Soon thereafter, two officers from the Manchester Police
Department interviewed him. The Manchester officers had traveled to Milford
to interview the defendant about abductions and sexual assaults in
Manchester that were similar to those he had allegedly committed in Milford.
The defendant denied involvement in the Manchester crimes. The Manchester
officers then asked him about his feelings regarding the sexual assaults that
had occurred in Manchester or what the rapist in Manchester was probably
thinking about. The record does not contain an exact representation of what
the officers asked or what the defendant said in response. The record contains
the parties’ summaries of the conversation.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved in limine to exclude all evidence of his
interview with the two Manchester officers, pursuant to New Hampshire Rules
of Evidence 401, 402, 403, and 404(b). Following a hearing, the trial court
denied the defendant’s motion, ruling that evidence of the interview was
relevant, that such relevance was not substantially outweighed by unfair
prejudice to the defendant, and was not evidence of prior bad acts. The trial
2
court explicitly permitted the admission of evidence regarding the defendant’s
“statements about what he thinks a rapist would feel or do.” The trial court,
however, precluded the State from eliciting any testimony regarding the reason
that the Manchester Police questioned the defendant, or regarding his prior
imprisonment.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved for reconsideration of the court’s
ruling, arguing that, without the context of the defendant’s introductory
statement that he learned how rapists think by spending time with them in
state prison, the testimony to be presented at trial would sound like the
defendant’s own thoughts about how to commit a rape. The trial court denied
the motion.
Before trial, the defendant also moved to suppress all evidence derived
from the stop of his car. He argued that Fortin did not have reasonable,
articulable suspicion that he had committed a crime; thus, the stop violated
his state and federal constitutional protections against unreasonable searches
and seizures. The trial court denied the motion.
At trial, the State called Manchester Police Officer John Patti as a
witness. Patti testified that he was contacted by the Milford Police Department
and that he and another officer went to the Milford Police Department and met
with the defendant. Patti’s testimony included the following exchange:
Q. Did you ask [the defendant] if he had any feelings or thoughts
about how a potential rapist might go about picking out a
victim?
A. Yes, we did.
Q. And what was his response?
A. It was a lengthy part of the conversation. His immediate
response was that it wasn’t for sexual gratification. It was more
for the rush of it all. The rush of trying to find a victim and
making sure that you weren’t detected.
Q. Did he – did he talk about how someone might go about
picking out a victim?
A. Yes. He said he wouldn’t just pick out a victim, he would study
them first for a short time. However, he made sure to make it
clear that he wouldn’t go as far as stalking them, maybe just to
look for them for a day or so, no longer than a day, so that he
wouldn’t be detected.
3
Q. Did he indicate – did he talk at all about any escape
possibilities or anything like that?
A. Yes. He said to make sure of – that there were no escape
routes for the victim.
Q. Can you tell us what his appearance or demeanor was when he
was making this statement to you?
. . . .
A. Okay. That was an intense part of the conversation. His feet
were up on the desk, his arms were behind his head, and as he
spoke, it was very intense and very personal. His face became
red and flushed as, you know, as if involved in intense thought
and conversation.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motion in limine and his motion to suppress. We address each issue below.
I. Motion in Limine
The defendant’s sole argument regarding his motion in limine is that the
presence of Manchester police questioning him in Milford, and his responses to
those questions, conveyed to the jury that the Manchester police suspected
him of sexual assaults in Manchester. Because the defendant made the
statements in the context of questioning by the Manchester police, he argues,
the jury could infer that his testimony was not about the rape for which he was
on trial, but was about another rape, and thus conveyed his propensity to
engage in sexual assault. Thus, the defendant argues, the trial court erred in
not excluding Patti’s testimony pursuant to New Hampshire Rules of Evidence
403 and 404(b).
We accord the trial court considerable deference in determining the
admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its decision absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Yates, 152 N.H. 245, 249 (2005).
To demonstrate that the trial court exercised unsustainable discretion, the
defendant must show that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Id.
Rule 404(b) provides, in pertinent part, “Evidence of other crimes,
wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person in order to
show that the person acted in conformity therewith.” Accordingly, for Rule
4
404(b) to apply, there must be evidence of a crime, wrong, or act at issue.
Here, the defendant does not allege a crime, wrong, or act – only an inference.
“Rule 404(b) generally bars evidence of specific acts to show character in order
to prove conduct on a particular occasion.” 2 J. McLaughlin, Weinstein’s
Federal Evidence § 404.02[2], at 404-9 (2d ed. 2006) (emphasis added). Since
the evidence at issue is simply an inference, we agree with the trial court and
conclude that Rule 404(b) does not apply to the challenged evidence in this
case.
As the defendant does not challenge the admission of his statements due
to their hypothetical nature, we need not address that issue. Likewise, as the
defendant does not challenge the admission of his statements because they
implied his own thoughts about rape, rather than thoughts that other people
described to him, we need not address that issue. The dissent concentrates on
these issues without acknowledging that the defendant did not raise them on
appeal. Further, the dissent notes that the trial court excluded evidence of the
source of the defendant's knowledge regarding how rapists think, but does not
acknowledge that the trial court did so at the defendant's request and never
prohibited the defendant from eliciting testimony on cross-examination that the
defendant was conveying statements that he heard from other people, not his
own thoughts.
We now address the defendant’s argument under Rule 403, which
provides that evidence is unfairly prejudicial
if its primary purpose or effect is to appeal to a jury’s sympathies,
arouse its sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger
other mainsprings of human action that may cause a jury to base
its decision on something other than the established propositions
in the case. Unfair prejudice is not, of course, mere detriment to a
defendant from the tendency of the evidence to prove his guilt, in
which sense all evidence offered by the prosecution is meant to be
prejudicial. Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible
error is an undue tendency to induce a decision against the
defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that is
emotionally charged.
Yates, 152 N.H. at 249-50. The testimony was unfairly prejudicial, the
defendant argues, because the presence of the Manchester officers in Milford
implied his personal participation in other, uncharged assaults.
We disagree. The statements made by the defendant show his
consciousness of guilt because the methods for committing rape that he
described are similar to the events of the alleged rape. C.M. alleged that the
defendant forced her to a wooded location to assault her, which is consistent
5
with the defendant’s description of a rapist’s need to eliminate escape routes
for the victim. The defendant also discussed the need for a rapist to study his
victim before an assault, which is consistent with C.M.’s description of how the
defendant walked beside her and engaged in conversation with her for a few
minutes before showing her a knife and beginning the assault. Further, the
defendant’s demeanor demonstrated that he was speaking from personal
experience. The intensity and thoughtfulness that the defendant exhibited by
reclining in his chair and becoming flushed suggested the defendant’s personal
experience with the offense charged. Such evidence was relevant and was
probative of his involvement in the charged offense.
We see little danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant. The trial court
could reasonably have concluded that the presence of Manchester police in
Milford would not imply to the jury that the defendant was suspected of
additional assaults. The jury heard that the Manchester officers had traveled
to Milford, but the jury did not hear why the Manchester officers were there.
The statements that the defendant made, such as how a potential rapist might
pick out a victim, could easily have been about the rape for which the
defendant was charged. Due to the probative value of the testimony, and its
lack of unfair prejudice, we cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in denying the defendant’s motion to exclude Patti’s
testimony pursuant to Rule 403.
Further, the defendant did not request a limiting instruction that could
have reduced or eliminated any prejudicial inference that the Manchester
officers were questioning the defendant because they believed that he had
committed sexual assaults in Manchester. See State v. Martin, 138 N.H. 508,
519 (1994); N.H. R. Ev. 105. “In the absence of such a request, we cannot
conclude that the admission of the evidence was untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of the defendant’s case.” Martin, 138 N.H. at 519 (citation
omitted).
At oral argument, the defendant argued that it would have been futile to
request a limiting instruction, because no limiting instruction could have
prevented the jury from considering the presence of the Manchester officers for
an illegitimate purpose. We disagree.
There are some cases in which a limiting instruction cannot erase from
the jury’s mind the taint of prejudice caused by testimony of the defendant’s
involvement in crimes other than those charged. See State v. Woodbury, 124
N.H. 218, 221 (1983) (granting a motion for mistrial due to police testimony
that the defendant had been previously charged with a crime that was identical
to the one for which he stood trial); State v. LaBranche, 118 N.H. 176, 178-79
(1978) (granting a motion for mistrial due to testimony from two witnesses that
the defendant was allegedly culpable for other instances of criminal conduct
6
closely related to the charge for which he stood trial). We have further held,
however, that such cases unambiguously conveyed the defendant’s prior
criminal conduct to the jury, and that, when there is no such unambiguous
conveyance of prior criminal conduct, a limiting instruction is effective. State
v. Sammataro, 135 N.H. 579, 582-83 (1992). Accordingly, the correct inquiry
is whether the prior criminal conduct has been unambiguously conveyed to the
jury. Id.
The evidence of the Manchester officers’ presence in Milford to question
the defendant did not unambiguously convey prior criminal conduct to the
jury. The evidence established, at most, a potential inference of other criminal
conduct. Accordingly, we conclude that this is not a case in which a limiting
instruction could not erase the taint of prejudice from the jury’s mind. We
presume that, had the defendant requested a limiting instruction, and had the
trial court given it, the jury would have followed it. Beltran, 153 N.H. at 652.
Thus, we cannot conclude that the defendant has shown that the trial court’s
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
II. Motion to Suppress
The defendant argues that the trial court should have suppressed the
evidence derived from Fortin’s stop of his car because Fortin did not have
reasonable, articulable suspicion that the defendant had committed a crime;
thus, Fortin violated the defendant’s state and federal constitutional
protections against unreasonable seizures.
We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution,
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), citing federal opinions for guidance
only. Id. at 232-33. In reviewing the trial court’s ruling, we accept its factual
findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State
v. Wiggin, 151 N.H. 305, 307 (2004). Our review of the trial court’s legal
conclusions, however, is de novo. Id.
Neither party contests that Fortin’s stop of the defendant’s vehicle in the
library parking lot was a seizure. The issue before us is whether the seizure
was lawful at the time of the stop.
To undertake an investigatory stop, a police officer must have
reasonable suspicion, based upon specific, articulable facts taken
together with rational inferences from those facts, that the
particular person stopped has been, is, or is about to be engaged
in criminal activity. The suspect’s conduct and other specific facts
must create a significant possibility of criminality, and the
articulated facts must lead to somewhere specific, not just to a
7
general sense that this is probably a bad person who may have
committed some kind of crime. To determine the sufficiency of the
officer’s suspicion, we must consider the facts he articulated in
light of all of the surrounding circumstances.
Id. at 308 (quotations and citations omitted). The facts that create a sufficient
basis to support an investigative stop need not reach the level of those required
to support either an arrest or a finding of probable cause. State v. Galgay, 145
N.H. 100, 103 (2000).
The facts articulated by Fortin and relied upon by the trial court are as
follows. Fortin saw a maroon-colored Grand Am drive by. Based upon his
knowledge that C.M. had reported to the police that the vehicle driven by her
assailant was a maroon or reddish, four-door Grand Am or Grand Prix, Fortin
began following the car. He did not stop the car at that point. He continued to
follow it and checked the license plate to determine the car’s owner. The check
revealed that the car belonged to the defendant, whom Fortin knew was
familiar with wooded areas of Milford. Fortin was aware that C.M. reported
that the sexual assaults took place in multiple wooded areas of Milford. Fortin
continued to follow the vehicle and noticed that an object shaped like a sneaker
hung from the car’s rearview mirror. Fortin was aware that C.M. reported that
her assailant drove a car with a blue air freshener in the shape of a foot
hanging from the rearview mirror.
The defendant argues that, although his car bore some similarity to the
one described by C.M., her description was not so detailed, and the car was not
so similar, as to justify the stop. We disagree. Fortin possessed more than a
general sense that the person driving the vehicle had possibly committed some
kind of crime. The specific, articulable facts in this case created the reasonable
suspicion that the defendant had been involved in a specific criminal activity:
the sexual assaults reported by C.M.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Wiggin, 151 N.H.
at 308; Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 20-21 (1968). Accordingly, we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution and uphold the trial court’s ruling on the defendant’s motion to
suppress.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J., dissented.
8
BRODERICK, C.J., dissenting. Because I believe that the statements the
defendant made to Manchester police officers were not probative of his guilt,
that evidence that he was interviewed by those officers was unfairly prejudicial,
and that no limiting instruction could have prevented the jury from considering
the presence of Manchester police officers for illegitimate purposes, I
respectfully dissent.
The majority observes that “the defendant does not challenge the
admission of his statements due to their hypothetical nature” and “does not
challenge the admission of his statements because they implied his own
thoughts about rape rather than thoughts that other people described to him.”
I disagree. The defendant has consistently challenged the admissibility of the
statements he made to Manchester police officers under New Hampshire Rule
of Evidence 403. That challenge necessarily involved a weighing of the
statements’ probative value against the danger of unfair prejudice. The
starting point for assessing the probative value of those statements, or their
relevance under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 401, is a consideration of
what those statements actually were and the context in which they were made.
Thus, by raising a Rule 403 challenge, the defendant put at issue the
hypothetical nature of his statements. Moreover, at several points in his brief,
the defendant referred to the differences between the context of his interview
(i.e., elicitation of responses to hypothetical questions) and the context in
which his interview answers were used at trial (i.e., as evidence of his guilt of a
specific sexual assault), which further demonstrates that he did challenge the
admission of his statements due to their hypothetical nature. Similarly, by
invoking Rule 403, the defendant put at issue the question of unfair prejudice,
which, in my view, is sufficient to challenge the statements to Manchester
police as implying his own thoughts about rape rather than thoughts other
people described to him.
The majority states that “[t]he statements made by the defendant show
his consciousness of guilt because the methods for committing rape that he
described are similar to the events of the alleged rape.” However, as the State
itself acknowledges: “It [the evidence in question] was merely the defendant’s
response to a hypothetical question, and as elicited, was completely generic. It
simply conveyed the defendant’s thoughts about what motivates a rapist and
how a rapist operates.” (Emphasis added.) In addition, the State also recites
in its brief that the trial court indicated that the defendant’s statements “were
just general statements about how he feels rapists work.” I agree that the
defendant’s statements are completely generic. They describe precautions that
would pertain to virtually any rape, or any other crime against a person, and
could have been offered by any reasonably intelligent person responding to the
hypothetical questions posed to the defendant. That is, the answers the
defendant gave did not require a rapist to give them, and certainly did not
require the rapist charged in the Milford crime to give them. Had the
9
defendant responded with specific details distinctive of the Milford rape, rather
than generic precautions, i.e., study the victim and cut off escape routes, then
perhaps the responses might have demonstrated the defendant’s
consciousness of guilt. But the defendant’s responses contained no such
distinctive details. The responses the defendant gave to the hypothetical
questions he was asked are no different than the answers a randomly selected
person on the street might give when asked how to rob a bank. Such a person
would likely suggest use of a gun, a disguise, a note for a teller, and a getaway
car. Yet such a response would hardly be probative of whether that person
ever committed a bank robbery, much less some specific bank robbery.
Moreover, the relationship the majority sees between the facts of the
Milford rape and the defendant’s hypothetical answers is not as strong as the
majority implies. For example, on the subject of studying the victim, the
defendant said a rapist would “look for them for a day or so, no longer than a
day, so that he wouldn’t be detected” (emphasis added), while the victim in the
Milford rape described “how the defendant walked beside her and engaged in
conversation with her for a few minutes before showing her a knife and
beginning the assault” (emphasis added). In short, I see nothing in the content
of the defendant’s hypothetical answers that demonstrates his consciousness
of guilt.
I also disagree with the majority’s conclusion that “the defendant’s
demeanor demonstrated that he was speaking from personal experience [and
that] [t]he intensity and thoughtfulness that the defendant exhibited by
reclining in his chair and becoming flushed suggested the defendant’s personal
experience with the offense charged.” Consciousness of guilt may be evidenced
by flight, see, e.g., State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 335 (2005), or by various
kinds of statements, see, e.g., State v. Bean, 153 N.H. 380, 387 (2006); State v.
Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003). We have not, however, held that a
defendant’s mere demeanor, body language or involuntary physical responses
demonstrate consciousness of guilt. Nor would I be prepared to do so without
first examining the possible need for expert testimony on this issue. Unlike the
act of flight, or the content of a statement, the demeanor evidence on which the
majority relies is, to my mind, ambiguous at best. Moreover, even if I were to
accept the proposition that the defendant’s intensity, thoughtfulness, posture,
and facial reddening were evidence of personal experience, the majority does
not explain how to distinguish between personal experience with rape in
general, which was the topic of the questions the defendant was asked, and
personal experience with the rape for which he was charged.
I am also troubled by the majority’s analysis of the issue of unfair
prejudice. According to the majority opinion:
10
The trial court could reasonably have concluded that the presence
of Manchester police in Milford would not imply to the jury that the
defendant was suspected of additional assaults.
. . . .
The evidence of the Manchester officers’ presence in Milford
to question the defendant did not unambiguously convey prior
criminal conduct to the jury. The evidence established, at most, a
potential inference of other criminal conduct.
What the majority does not say, and what I do not know, is what the presence
of the Manchester police in Milford, by invitation, could possibly imply to the
jury other than something unfairly prejudicial about the defendant, that is,
something about him unrelated to the charges in Milford. If we presume that
the jury would have understood that Manchester police officers normally do not
investigate crimes committed in Milford, then the jury had little choice but to
conclude that these two Manchester police officers were interviewing the
defendant on Manchester police business. Given the questions the Manchester
officers asked, the most logical inference would be that they were investigating
a Manchester rape. And why would they be questioning the defendant? The
most logical inference would be that he was a suspect in a Manchester rape
they were investigating. And if he were not a suspect, why would the
Manchester officers ask the defendant questions about how a rapist thinks?
The most logical inference would be that the Manchester officers considered the
defendant to be especially knowledgeable about rape. Given that the trial court
excluded evidence concerning the source of the defendant’s knowledge of rape –
that he had learned some things about rape from rapists he had met in prison
– the most logical inference would be that the source of the defendant’s
knowledge was personal experience as a rapist. As I look at the facts, the only
reasonable inferences that the jury could draw from the presence of the
Manchester officers in Milford are these: (1) the defendant was a suspect in a
Manchester rape; or (2) the Manchester officers knew the defendant to be a
rapist and sought him out for his special insights into the crime of rape. I can
conceive of no inference that can reasonably be drawn from the presence of
Manchester police officers in Milford that is not unfairly prejudicial to the
defendant.
Finally, I disagree with the majority’s conclusion that the trial court
could have crafted a limiting instruction that would have prevented the jury
from drawing an improper inference from the fact that the defendant was
questioned in Milford by Manchester police officers. While the majority posits
that such a limiting instruction could have been crafted, it does not suggest
what such an instruction might say. The problem, it seems to me, with any
such instruction, is that if members of the jury were to be instructed that they
11
were not to infer that the defendant was a suspect in a crime being investigated
by the Manchester police, then the only possible inference they would be
allowed to draw is that the Manchester officers believed that the defendant had
some kind of expert knowledge of rape that would help them solve a crime they
were investigating. The defendant prefaced his comments with the explanation
that the information he was providing came from rapists he met while in
prison, and, at the defendant’s request, the trial court correctly excluded any
reference to the defendant’s incarceration. Absent that information, any
limiting instruction would lead the jury to the reasonable inference that the
defendant knew a great deal about rape either because he was a rapist or
because he spent time with rapists, discussing how to commit rapes. Either
inference is devastating, and no other inference is reasonable. In other words,
it is exceedingly difficult to imagine a limiting instruction that could have
prevented the jury from drawing improper inferences from the fact that the
defendant was questioned in Milford by Manchester police officers.
The majority also suggests that after the trial court excluded the
introduction of evidence concerning the defendant’s incarceration as the source
of his knowledge of how rapists think, the defendant should have developed the
foundation for his knowledge on cross-examination, and could have elicited
testimony that he was conveying statements that he had heard from other
people. There are three problems with this suggestion. First, I am not sure
that when evidence is introduced, it is the job of the opposing party to develop
the foundation for the evidence offered against him. Second, if it were
established that the evidence in question consisted of statements made to the
defendant, how could such evidence possibly be relevant? That is, how does
the fact that other people told the defendant how rapists think tend to make it
more probable than it otherwise would have been that the defendant
committed the charged rapes? And finally, if the defendant had conducted the
suggested cross-examination, it could not have consisted of much more than
this: “Q: What was the source of the defendant’s responses to your
hypothetical questions? A: Things he had been told by other people.” No
inquiry could have been conducted into who those other people might have
been, to avoid the unfair prejudice that would have resulted from the
defendant’s admission that he had been incarcerated, thus leaving the jury to
infer that the defendant was a person who voluntarily spent time with rapists,
a conclusion the trial court well knew to be misleading if not flatly inaccurate.
What is most disturbing in this case is that the prosecution used the
defendant’s answers and his demeanor in answering hypothetical questions
asked by Manchester police officers to allow the jury to draw inferences about
his “consciousness of guilt” concerning the Milford rape. The jury
appropriately was not told that the source of his knowledge, according to the
defendant, was what he had heard from inmates who had been incarcerated
with him. Accordingly, the jury would likely have concluded that the defendant
12
was himself a rapist and knew what he described or postulated from his own
experience. Any limiting instruction on this topic suggesting that what he
reported he had “learned from others” would call into question the company
the defendant kept and the purpose behind the conversation in which he
learned about how rapists operate. Either way, the defendant would be
unfairly prejudiced, either because of too much disclosure or too little.
Because I find the disputed evidence to have no probative value of
consciousness of guilt, to be unfairly prejudicial, and to be incurable by any
possible limiting instruction, I would reverse and remand for a new trial.
Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
13