THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Portsmouth District Court
No. 2005-938
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL A. HUNT & a.
Argued: February 27, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 25, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Law Office of Mark Stevens, of Salem (Mark Stevens on the brief), for
defendant Jennifer Dahlen, and (Mr. Stevens orally), for all defendants.
Jeffco, Starbranch & Soldati, of Portsmouth (Harry N. Starbranch, Jr. on
the brief), for defendants Michael A. Hunt and Merle Wilbur.
Hanlon & Zubkus, of Rochester, for defendant James A. Dickson, joins in
the brief of defendant Jennifer Dahlen.
Meade & Loring, PC, of Portsmouth, for defendant William Ballard, joins
in the brief of defendant Jennifer Dahlen.
BRODERICK, C.J. In these consolidated appeals, the State challenges
an order of the Portsmouth District Court (DeVries, J.) ruling that a sobriety
checkpoint operated by the Portsmouth Police Department (PPD) was
unconstitutional, suppressing evidence collected at the checkpoint, and
dismissing charges of driving while under the influence (DWI), see RSA 265:82
(2004), against defendants Michael A. Hunt, Jennifer Dahlen, James A.
Dickson, William Ballard and Merle Wilbur. We reverse and remand.
I
The relevant facts are not in dispute. At approximately 3:00 p.m. on
Tuesday, July 5, 2005, Michael J. Magnant, Chief of the PPD, petitioned the
Rockingham County Superior Court to authorize a sobriety checkpoint during
the late-night and early-morning hours of Friday and Saturday, July 8 and 9,
as well as Saturday and Sunday, July 9 and 10. The petition included an
affidavit from Chief Magnant, a sobriety checkpoint operational plan, a press
release dated July 6, 2005, and a proposed order.
In his petition, Chief Magnant referred to the guidelines adopted by the
attorney general’s office for sobriety checkpoints which, in his words, call for
“the achievement of maximum deterrent effect through aggressive public
information efforts and advanced publicity.” Regarding the public information
efforts the PPD proposed to undertake, the petition recited that “[t]he proposed
sobriety checkpoint plan in this case calls for a detailed press release that
[would] be sent to many press agencies throughout the State [and that] ample
signs warning motorists that they [were] entering the checkpoint [would] be set
up well in advance of any motor vehicles being stopped.” In his affidavit, Chief
Magnant explained the broader context of the proposed sobriety checkpoint:
Year-round, my officers conduct alcohol compliance checks in
stores and taverns in the city. We also conduct random “DWI-
Hunter” saturation patrols, and most recently we have conducted
impaired driver training for police officers that emphasizes the use
of a Drug Recognition Expert (DRE) to screen out operators under
the influence of drugs. All of these initiatives carry with them
heightened media attention and a clear message to the public that
we do not tolerate alcohol/drug-impaired drivers.
With the summer season coming and the influx of tourists
frequenting our drinking establishments now is the time for a well
publicized sobriety checkpoint. . . . These checkpoints will be
compl[e]mented by Statewide DUI saturation patrols conducted by
bordering agencies.
2
The PPD operational plan, in turn, stated: “Sufficient warning signs [would] be
placed ahead of the checkpoint to provide advance notice for oncoming
vehicles. The Police Department’s illuminated sign trailer [would] display the
necessary messages.” The plan further provided that “[a]dvanced notification
of sobriety checkpoints [would] be announced to the media by the Chief-of-
Police and the day of the checkpoint and a general location [would] be
disclosed.”
At 8:55 a.m. on Thursday, July 7, the superior court granted Chief
Magnant’s petition after finding that “the conduct of such sobriety checkpoints
[would] significantly advance the public interest in a manner which outweighs
any accompanying intrusion on individual rights[,] . . . that there are no less
intrusive means available to accomplish the goal of such checkpoints . . . [and
that] [t]here should be a significant deterrent effect in the event this sobriety
checkpoint authorization is implemented.”
After the superior court authorized the checkpoints, the PPD distributed
its press release to local media. On Friday, July 8 it appeared in Foster’s Daily
Democrat. Thereafter, the PPD operated the checkpoint in accordance with the
operational plan submitted to the superior court. The five defendants in this
case were all arrested at the checkpoint and charged with DWI.
Before the trials of defendants Hunt and Dahlen, the prosecutor in each
case filed a motion in limine asking the trial court to admit evidence collected
as a result of the traffic stops that led to the defendants’ arrests. Hunt and
Dahlen both moved to suppress the evidence collected at the PPD checkpoint,
arguing that when they were stopped at the checkpoint, they were seized in
violation of their rights under the State and Federal Constitutions. In addition,
Hunt moved to dismiss the charges against him, arguing, among other things,
that the superior court’s warrant authorizing the PPD checkpoint was defective
on its face and that the statistical information the PPD supplied the superior
court did not support the court’s issuance of a warrant. After holding two
hearings in Hunt’s case and one in Dahlen’s case, the district court suppressed
the evidence collected at the checkpoint and dismissed the charges against all
five defendants. The district court ruled, in relevant part:
The evidence in this case establishes that in actuality, no
aggressive advance notice to the public or envisioned advance
publicity of this proposed sobriety checkpoint took place.
. . . .
According to the State, the evidence of compliance with the
advance publicity alleged in its petition consisted of signage at the
checkpoint site, one article printed in Foster’s [Daily Democrat] on
3
the afternoon of 7/8/05 (a newspaper whose circulation is
primarily to the Dover/Rochester areas), and a press release sent
or faxed to various media on 7/7/05. No other published
information was furnished, no evidence of the type specified in the
attorney general’s guidelines produced.
. . . .
To justify the intrusion [occasioned by a sobriety checkpoint], there
must be a reasonable minimal intervention. What may make it
reasonable, inter alia, is that the public knows about it in advance,
a less intrusive method than what was used here and what is the
recommended protocol by the head law enforcement agency in the
State. See, also, Opinion of the Justices [128 N.H. 14 (1986)].
Whether this Petitioner is bound by the protocols of the attorney
general does not in hindsight excuse the failure to follow those
protocols. The State chose to rely on those protocols when they
sought the authorization from the Superior Court, incorporated
them in to the proposed plan they presented and included [a]
specific provision regarding “advance notification to the media”.
Once they relied on these guidelines, they are bound to follow what
they told the Superior Court would be the checkpoint plan.
The responsibility of ensuring publication lies with the State. It is
not the “whim of the media” that resulted in the absence of public
notification. It was the failure to obtain the requisite Superior
Court authorization sufficiently in advance of the proposed
checkpoint date. The State could have postponed the checkpoint
date to meet the terms of advance deterrent publicity and met its
constitutional burden. It failed to do so.
For the reasons stated herein, the Court finds the State failed to
follow through with an essential element of a constitutionally
permissible checkpoint plan.
(Emphases added.) Significantly, the district court did not address Hunt’s
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence presented to the superior court or
the facial validity of the warrant it issued; the district court determined only
that the PPD failed to provide the aggressive advance notice it promised in its
petition to the superior court. This appeal followed.
4
II
The State argues that the district court erred by failing to perform the
balancing test we established in State v. Koppel, 127 N.H. 286 (1985), and by
treating the fact that the PPD issued its press release one day before the
checkpoint as dispositive of the question of the checkpoint’s constitutionality.
The State also asks us to clarify our decisions in Koppel and Opinion of the
Justices by explaining “whether, and to what extent, the factors discussed in
those two cases are essential to the creation of a valid checkpoint plan, in light
of the developments in case law and the evidence of checkpoint effectiveness
discussed in the petition submitted to the superior court in this case.”
According to Hunt, the district court ruled correctly because: (1) failure to
aggressively publicize the PPD checkpoint rendered it unconstitutional under
Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution; (2) failure to aggressively publicize
the checkpoint rendered invalid the superior court order allowing the
checkpoint, thus rendering the checkpoint unconstitutional under the State
Constitution; and (3) sobriety checkpoints of any sort violate the State
Constitution because they are ineffective at both detecting and deterring
impaired drivers. According to Dahlen: (1) the trial court correctly ruled that
inadequate publicity rendered the PPD checkpoint unconstitutional; (2)
sobriety checkpoints violate the State Constitution; and (3) sobriety
checkpoints violate the Fourth Amendment to the Federal Constitution.
Our review of the district court’s order is de novo, except as to any
controlling facts determined at the district court level in the first instance. See
State v. Livingston, 153 N.H. 399, 402 (2006). We will affirm the trial court’s
factual findings unless the evidence does not support them or they are legally
erroneous. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 279 (2006).
III
On two occasions, in Koppel and in Opinion of the Justices, we have
discussed the validity of sobriety checkpoints under Part I, Article 19 of the
State Constitution. In Koppel, a case involving a sobriety checkpoint that was
operated without any warning signs or advance publicity, Koppel, 127 N.H. at
288, we explained that stopping and detaining an automobile and its
occupants, whether by roving patrol or roving roadblock, constitutes a seizure
within the meaning of Article 19 of our State Constitution, id. at 289. We
further explained that where the search or seizure of a motor vehicle is
involved, Article 19 provides significantly greater protection than the Fourth
Amendment against intrusion by the State. Id. at 291. We then established
the following test:
To justify the search or seizure of a motor vehicle, absent probable
cause or even a reasonable suspicion that a criminal offense is
5
being committed, the State must prove that its conduct
significantly advances the public interest in a manner that
outweighs the accompanying intrusion on individual rights. It
must further prove that no less intrusive means are available to
accomplish the State’s goal.
Id. at 291-92. We stated that the validity of a sobriety checkpoint depends
upon two factors: (1) whether it is more effective at advancing the public
interest than other, less intrusive means; and (2) whether its value outweighs
the degree of intrusion it involves. Id. at 292. We also identified two separate
public interests that might be advanced by sobriety checkpoints: detection of
drunk drivers and deterrence of drunk driving. Id. at 292-93. Regarding the
deterrent effect of sobriety checkpoints, we observed that publicity about
roadblocks is the chief means of deterrence and that the deterrent value of the
checkpoint program in that case was lessened, and its potential for surprise
was increased, by a complete lack of advance publicity. Id. at 293. Although
we held that the particular program of sobriety checkpoints in that case
violated Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution, we did not hold that every
sobriety checkpoint constitutes a per se violation of Article 19. That is, we left
open the possibility that a properly designed and implemented program of
sobriety checkpoints could meet constitutional requirements.
In Opinion of the Justices, we were asked by the legislature to determine
the constitutionality of proposed legislation concerning sobriety checkpoints.
In the words of the legislature, the bill we considered provided
that a judicial warrant authorizing the conduct of a sobriety
checkpoint shall be issued upon application to any justice of a
district, municipal, or superior court upon a finding by such
justice that the checkpoint is a reasonable means of detecting,
apprehending, and deterring impaired motorists, and that the
interest of the state in maintaining such a checkpoint outweighs
the intrusion upon individual rights.
Opinion of the Justices, 128 N.H. at 14. The bill also included a provision
requiring notice at least seven days prior to the implementation of a sobriety
checkpoint. Id. at 15. We characterized the bill as follows:
The issuing municipal, district, or superior court justice would
consider a variety of factors, to include the degree of intrusiveness
of the proposed checkpoint, safety provisions, the relative
effectiveness of such a checkpoint, the anticipated deterrent effect,
and factors such as accident and DWI arrest statistics in the area
in which the checkpoint would be conducted. The issuing justice
would be required to make an express finding that the proposed
6
checkpoint would be a reasonably effective means of detecting and
apprehending impaired motorists, and that the public interest in
DWI enforcement through this means would outweigh the
intrusion visited upon the individual motorist. The bill
incorporates a general notice requirement, calculated to achieve
the maximum deterrent effect while not compromising the
effectiveness of the checkpoint through disclosure of the precise
location(s). The notice requirement would also have the salutary
effect of minimizing apprehension on the part of motorists who are
detained at the sobriety checkpoint.
Id. at 16. Based upon that understanding of the bill, we concluded that it was
consistent with our analysis in Koppel and, therefore, that the checkpoint
program it outlined would not violate Part I, Article 19. Id. at 16-17. In other
words, in Opinion of the Justices, we answered the question left open in Koppel
by determining that it was possible to establish a program of sobriety
checkpoints that complied with Article 19.
Approximately six years after we issued Opinion of the Justices, the
attorney general’s office produced and disseminated, as chapter XXV of its
1993 Law Enforcement Manual, a set of guidelines for sobriety checkpoints.
Among other things, those guidelines call for the achievement of “maximum
deterrent effect through aggressive public information efforts.” Substantively,
the guidelines provide:
The chief advantage that sobriety checkpoints enjoy over
more conventional DWI enforcement methods lies in their deterrent
effect. Although information about a sobriety checkpoint program
may be expected, over time, to pass by word of mouth, it is only
through an aggressive program of advance publicity that the
deterrent potential of a sobriety checkpoint program can be fully
realized. Virtually every court which has addressed the sobriety
checkpoint issue has suggested that advance publicity is an
extremely important factor. Public awareness maximizes the
deterrent value of the sobriety checkpoint, and minimizes fear and
apprehension on the part of the motoring public.
. . . .
Law enforcement agencies should make full use of the
various media resources available. Press conferences, press
releases, radio and television coverage, posters and flyers should
all be considered as means of increasing public awareness of the
existence of sobriety checkpoints. Only through an aggressive
public information campaign can the true deterrent value of
7
sobriety checkpoints be realized. Advance notice through media
sources, coupled with appropriate warning signs at the individual
checkpoint site, substantially reduces apprehension occasioned by
the sobriety checkpoint.
The legislation we considered in Opinion of the Justices did not become
law, but approximately ten years later, the legislature enacted RSA 265:1-a
(2004), which provides:
Sobriety Checkpoints. Notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, no law enforcement officer or agency shall
establish or conduct sobriety checkpoints for the purposes of
enforcing the criminal laws of this state, unless such law
enforcement officer or agency petitions the superior court and the
court issues an order authorizing the sobriety checkpoint after
determining that the sobriety checkpoint is warranted and the
proposed method of stopping vehicles satisfies constitutional
guarantees.
This case presents us with our first opportunity to determine the
constitutionality of a sobriety checkpoint authorized under the process
established by RSA 265:1-a.
IV
We begin by rejecting the defendants’ argument that sobriety
checkpoints of any sort violate the State Constitution, which would require us
to overrule Opinion of the Justices. See State v. Holmes, 154 N.H. ___, ___
(decided January 19, 2007) (explaining principles of stare decisis).
The defendants have given us no reason to conclude that the State’s
interest in detecting and deterring drunk driving is any less today than it was
when we decided Koppel. See Koppel, 127 N.H. at 292-93 (explaining that the
State has a great interest in detecting drunk drivers and that roadblocks may
also have a deterrent effect sufficient to outweigh their intrusion on individual
rights). Nor have they given us any reason to conclude that properly designed
and executed sobriety checkpoints are any more intrusive than we believed
them to be when we issued Opinion of the Justices. Rather, they direct us to
decisions from other states in which sobriety checkpoints have been found to
violate state constitutions. See, e.g., Ascher v. Commissioner of Public Safety,
519 N.W.2d 183 (Minn. 1994); Sitz v. Department of State Police, 506 N.W.2d
209 (Mich. 1993); Pimental v. Dept. of Transp., 561 A.2d 1348 (R.I. 1989); City
of Seattle v. Mesiani, 755 P.2d 775 (Wash. 1988); Nelson v. Lane County, 743
P.2d 692 (Or. 1987). But see Annotation, Validity of Police Roadblocks or
Checkpoints for Purpose of Discovery of Alcoholic Intoxication – Post-Sitz
8
Cases, 74 A.L.R.5th 319, 339-41 (1999 & Supp. 2006) (collecting state cases
holding that sobriety checkpoints are not per se unconstitutional
notwithstanding state constitutional provisions providing more protection than
the Fourth Amendment). Beyond that, the defendants argue that sobriety
checkpoints result in few DWI arrests and have no demonstrated deterrent
effect. Of course, low arrest numbers may demonstrate the relative
ineffectiveness of sobriety checkpoints for the detection of drunk drivers, but
such numbers may also demonstrate effective deterrence. In any event, the
defendants have given us no reason to reconsider our belief that sobriety
checkpoints may have a deterrent effect sufficient to outweigh the
accompanying intrusion on individual rights. See Koppel, 127 N.H. at 293.
Thus, we decline to rule that sobriety checkpoints, in every instance, violate
Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution. Moreover, because the United
States Supreme Court has held that sobriety checkpoints do not violate the
Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, see Michigan Dept. of
State Police v. Sitz, 496 U.S. 444 (1990), we must necessarily reject the
defendants’ argument to the contrary.
V
Having disposed of the defendants’ facial challenge to sobriety
checkpoints, we turn to the State’s argument that the district court erred by
deciding that the PPD checkpoint in this case was unconstitutional because
“no aggressive advance notice” was provided to the public. According to the
State, the district court erred by making the question of advance notice
dispositive and by failing to perform the balancing test we established in
Koppel. Hunt argues that the PPD’s failure to engage in aggressive advance
notice obviated the need to perform the Koppel test and further argues that the
PPD’s failure to provide the type of advance notice promised in its petition to
the superior court invalidated the warrant that court issued. Dahlen argues
that the district court was not required to consider all of the Koppel factors and
that even if it had done so, it would have been obligated to reach the same
result.
We begin by addressing the State’s argument that the district court erred
by failing to perform the test we established in Koppel. It did not. In Koppel,
we outlined an analytical framework for determining whether a particular
sobriety checkpoint is permissible under the State Constitution. Koppel, 127
N.H. at 291-92. Subsequently, by establishing a procedure under which the
superior court determines whether a proposed sobriety checkpoint “satisfies
constitutional guarantees,” RSA 265:1-a, the legislature gave the superior court
the responsibility, in the first instance, of performing the test we set out in
Koppel. An individual defendant, in turn, may challenge the introduction of
evidence against him on grounds that it was collected unconstitutionally, but
when addressing such a challenge, the trial court – be it the superior court or
9
the district court – does not perform the Koppel test de novo. Instead, it
assesses the validity of the superior court’s warrant in the same way it would
assess the validity of a search warrant. See State v. Zwicker, 151 N.H. 179,
185-86 (2004) (explaining that the court assigns great deference to a
magistrate’s determination of probable cause and interprets affidavits in
support of search warrants realistically and with common sense). Accordingly,
the district court did not err by failing to perform the Koppel test. While the
district court had before it a challenge to the validity of the search warrant the
superior court issued, it based its decision upon narrower grounds: its finding
that the PPD failed to do what it had promised to do in its petition to the
superior court. Because the district court did not rule upon the validity of the
warrant, that issue has not been fully briefed, and so we decline to decide, in
the first instance, whether the PPD provided the superior court with
information sufficient to meet the Koppel test or whether the superior court
properly issued the warrant.
The question before us is whether the district court correctly ruled that
the PPD failed to meet constitutional standards in its operation of its sobriety
checkpoint. Our analysis has both a legal and a factual component.
We turn first to the legal issue. In its order, the district court imposed
upon the PPD the obligation to provide “aggressive advance notice to the
public.” While that language appears in the PPD’s petition to the superior
court, it is important to note that that language comes from the attorney
general’s guidelines for sobriety checkpoints, not from Koppel or Opinion of the
Justices. Thus, to the extent the district court treated aggressive advance
notice as a constitutional requirement, it erred. Aggressive notice – whatever it
may be – is a worthwhile aspirational goal, not a constitutional requirement.
Moreover, to the extent the district court construed the PPD’s petition as
promising aggressive advance notice, the court was not free to provide its own
definition of that term and then fault the PPD for failing to give notice that met
the court’s definition. Rather, the relevant definition of “aggressive advance
notice” is the one in paragraph seventeen of the petition and on page three of
the PPD’s operational plan, which was approved by the superior court. In both
the petition and the operational plan, the PPD committed itself to sending a
detailed press release to media outlets across the state and posting ample
signage at the checkpoint site, which it did. Moreover, while the superior court
had the authority to require the PPD to use various media resources mentioned
in the attorney general's guidelines, those guidelines are not the law of this
state; Koppel is, and while Koppel suggests the importance of advance
publicity, Koppel, 127 N.H. at 293, it does not make advance publicity a
constitutional requirement, much less impose a requirement of aggressive
advance