THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Nashua District Court
No. 2004-747
AIMCO PROPERTIES, LLC d/b/a ROYAL CREST ESTATES
v.
KASHA DZIEWISZ
Argued: June 22, 2005
Opinion Issued: September 7, 2005
Gormley & Gormley, P.C., of Nashua (Arthur O. Gormley, III on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Kasha Dziewisz, by brief, pro se.
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Manchester (Elliott Berry on the
brief and orally), for The Way Home, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Kasha Dziewisz, appeals an order of the
Nashua District Court (Ryan, J.) granting the plaintiff, AIMCO Properties, LLC
d/b/a Royal Crest Estates, possession of her apartment. We reverse.
The limited record reflects the following facts. The parties entered into a
lease beginning on September 1, 2003, and ending on August 31, 2004. On
July 12, 2004, the plaintiff sent the defendant a letter stating, in pertinent
part:
Dear Ms. Dziewisz,
Please be advised your current apartment lease expires on August
31, 2004.
You are hereby notified that Royal Crest Estates – Nashua does not
intend to renew you [sic] lease. Therefore, you must vacate your
apartment by Tuesday August 31, 2004.
After the defendant failed to vacate the apartment, the plaintiff filed suit
seeking a writ of possession. The defendant filed three motions to dismiss,
arguing that: (1) the plaintiff’s letter concerning non-renewal of the lease did
not constitute a notice to quit; (2) even assuming the letter constituted a notice
to quit, the plaintiff failed to allege good cause for the eviction in the notice to
quit; and (3) the plaintiff failed to serve her personally or at her abode. On
October 7, 2004, the district court denied these motions and granted the
plaintiff’s request for a writ of possession.
The defendant appeals, arguing that the district court erred by denying
her motions to dismiss. Because we agree with respect to her second motion to
dismiss, we need not address her first and third motions to dismiss.
The defendant argues that the plaintiff’s “failure to state one of the
statutory reasons for eviction or state good cause in the Letter of Non-Renewal”
does not comply with the requirement of RSA 540:2, II (1997) that a landlord of
restricted property have good cause for an eviction. RSA 540:3, III (1997)
requires that the notice to quit state the reason for eviction. She contends that
the expiration of the lease, in and of itself, does not constitute good cause.
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. Bedford Chapter-Citizens for a
Sound Economy v. Sch. Admin. Unit #25, 151 N.H. 612, 614 (2004). We first
examine the language of the statute, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain
and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. When the language of a statute
is unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent. Id.
RSA 540:2, II provides:
The lessor or owner of restricted property may terminate any
tenancy by giving to the tenant or occupant a notice in writing to
quit the premises in accordance with RSA 540:3 and 5, but only
for one of the following reasons:
2
(a) Neglect or refusal to pay rent due and in arrears, upon
demand.
(b) Substantial damage to the premises by the tenant,
members of his household, or guests.
(c) Failure of the tenant to comply with a material term of the
lease.
(d) Behavior of the tenant or members of his family which
adversely affects the health or safety of the other tenants or the
landlord or his representatives, or failure of the tenant to accept
suitable temporary relocation due to lead-based paint hazard
abatement, as set forth in RSA 130-A:8-a, I.
(e) Other good cause.
(f) The dwelling unit contains a lead exposure-hazard which
the owner will abate by:
(1) Methods other than interim controls or encapsulation;
(2) Any other method which can reasonably be expected
to take more than 30 days to perform; or
(3) Removing the dwelling unit from the residential rental
market.
RSA 540:2, II states that it applies to “any tenancy.” The plain meaning
of any is “every” or “all.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 97 (2d
unabridged ed. 2002). Prior to the expiration of the lease, the defendant had a
leasehold tenancy. On August 31, 2004, the defendant’s lease expired; when
the lease expired and the defendant did not vacate the apartment, she became
a tenant at sufferance. See Hill v. Dobrowolski, 125 N.H. 572, 575 (1984) (“A
tenant who, without any agreement, holds over after his term has expired is a
tenant at sufferance.”). Thus, at all times relevant to these proceedings, the
plaintiff and defendant had a landlord-tenant relationship. Regardless of
whether the defendant had the status of a leasehold tenant or the status of a
tenant at sufferance, the plaintiff needed good cause to terminate the
defendant’s tenancy.
RSA 540:3, III requires that the “notice to quit shall state with specificity
the reason for the eviction.” Assuming, without deciding, that the plaintiff’s
letter of non-renewal constituted a notice to quit, the only reason that the
plaintiff provided in its letter of non-renewal was the expiration of the lease.
Thus, we must determine whether the expiration of a lease, alone, constitutes
good cause for an eviction as required by RSA 540:2, II.
RSA 540:2, II does not provide that the expiration of a lease constitutes
good cause. It does, however, contain a section describing “other good cause.”
RSA 540:2, II(e). The question we must answer is whether the expiration of a
lease constitutes “other good cause.”
3
RSA 540:2, V provides that other good cause “includes, but is not limited
to, any legitimate business or economic reasons and need not be based on the
action or inaction of the tenant, members of his family, or guests.” Whether
the expiration of a lease constitutes “other good cause” cannot be determined
by merely looking to the plain language of RSA 540:2, II. The term “other good
cause” is ambiguous. When a statute is ambiguous we consider legislative
history to aid our analysis. State v. Whittey, 149 N.H. 463, 467 (2003). Our
goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and
in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Id.
RSA 540:2, II was adopted in 1985 as part of House Bill 95, which was
enacted to “limit[] the grounds for eviction of tenants from restricted property.”
House Bill 95 (1985) (analysis). It was described as “giv[ing] . . . greater
flexibility to landlords to evict tenants for any good reason and at the same
time protect[ing] tenants from arbitrarily and/or ill motivated evictions.”
N.H.S. Jour. 157 (1985). Interpreting the term “other good cause” as including
the mere expiration of a lease would run contrary to this legislative intent, as it
would allow landlords to arbitrarily evict tenants whose leases have expired,
thereby denying tenants the precise protection that RSA 540:2, II was designed
to provide.
Nor would it advance the purpose of the statute to conclude that the
mere expiration of a lease constitutes a legitimate business or economic
reason. RSA 540:2, II only applies to landlords who rent restricted property:
landlords who are generally in the business of renting residential property, and
whose main concern is, presumably, profit. See RSA 540:1-a, II (1997). It does
not apply to: property rented for nonresidential purposes, see RSA 540:1-a, I
(1997); single-family houses if the owner of such a house does not own more
than three single-family houses at one time, see RSA 540:1-a, I(a) (1997); rental
units in an owner-occupied building containing a total of four units or fewer,
see RSA 540:1-a, I(b) (1997); rental units in a vacation or recreational dwelling
rented during the off-season for certain purposes, see RSA 540:1-a, I(c) (1997);
or single-family houses acquired by banks or other mortgagees through
foreclosure, see RSA 540:1-a, I(d) (1997). Replacing one tenant upon the
expiration of a lease with another tenant who will pay the same rent and
occupy the same position as the tenant being evicted does not, in and of itself,
provide the landlord of restricted property with any economic or business
advantage.
During the senate debates in 1985, it was stated by the sponsor of the
bill that:
Under current law if a tenant does not have a lease, as in the case
with most low and moderate income tenants, he or she can be
evicted without any reason whatsoever. All the landlord has to do
4
is give the tenant a notice directing the tenant to leave in 30 days.
Under HB 95, almost all landlords will be required to establish
justifiable cause for eviction.
N.H.S. Jour. 1040 (1985). Were we to hold that a landlord may evict a tenant
for good cause merely because a lease has expired we would eviscerate the
protections that RSA 540:2, II was designed to afford; a landlord could easily
avoid the requirements of RSA 540:2, II, by simply requiring tenants to sign
renewable month-long leases, allowing the landlord to evict any tenant
arbitrarily upon the expiration of any month’s lease. A landlord would thus be
able to evict tenants in the exact manner that RSA 540:2, II was designed to
prohibit.
Were the mere expiration of a lease to constitute good cause, then
tenants could be evicted arbitrarily from their homes through no fault of their
own; such evictions, as the legislature undoubtedly realized, create substantial
hardships for tenants. At worst, tenants may become homeless as a result.
Even when another residence is procured, the tenant must bear the expenses
and inconveniences of moving. Relationships with friends and neighbors may
be disrupted, children may be forced into new school districts, and local
services and support systems for elderly and disabled tenants may be lost.
Such a result would be contrary to what the legislature intended.
Furthermore, were the mere expiration of the lease to constitute good
cause for eviction, it could enable landlords to evict when the true reason for
eviction is ill-motivated. RSA 540:2, II was enacted to prevent landlords from
evicting tenants for ill-motivated reasons. If the mere expiration of the lease
were to constitute good cause, a landlord who did not wish to continue renting
to a tenant for any reason – for example, because the tenant became disabled
during the course of the tenancy – could evict the tenant at the end of the lease
without disclosing the true reason for eviction. This would be contrary to what
the legislature intended.
Our holding does not restrict a landlord’s ability to lease or rent to
whomever the landlord chooses, within the limits imposed by other laws. The
legislature only sought to establish limited protections for tenants who had
already established a tenancy, as demonstrated by this exchange on the senate
floor during the debate on whether to adopt the changes to RSA chapter 540:
SENATOR STEPHEN: Isn’t [sic] the owner or realtor, in the
past, always had his choice of who to rent to. Would he still have
that?
5
SENATOR BOYER: Yes, he would have that. That is when
the decision ought to be made whether they [sic] want a tenant or
not.
SENATOR STEPHEN: Does that give the tenant the right to
stay on the premise [sic] forever?
SENATOR BOYER: No.
N.H.S Jour. 1042-43 (1985). The time for a landlord to determine whether to
rent to a tenant is not after the tenant has established a residence, but at the
beginning of the landlord-tenant relationship. A landlord, of course, is not
forced into a perpetual landlord-tenant relationship, and may terminate the
tenancy for good cause as laid out in RSA 540:2, II.
The plaintiff set forth no good cause in its “notice to quit” for its desire to
evict the defendant; we must, therefore, reverse the district court’s denial of the
second motion to dismiss.
Finally, we note that the plaintiff argues that this issue is not preserved
for our review because, while the defendant’s motion to dismiss addressed the
issue, her notice of appeal did not. To the contrary, the defendant’s second
question in her notice of appeal is precisely that which we address today:
“Whether the landlord’s failure to state good cause should have been grounds
for dismissal.” Accordingly, the issue was properly preserved for our review.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred;
NADEAU, J., concurred specially.
NADEAU, J., concurring specially. I concur in the judgment reversing
the trial court’s decision because the landlord, AIMCO Properties, L.L.C. d/b/a
Royal Crest Estates, concedes that the trial court erred when it ruled that the
landlord did not have to serve a notice to quit upon the tenant, Kasha Dziewisz.
The landlord argues that this error was harmless and, therefore, has the
burden of proof on that issue. See Hodgdon v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 147 N.H.
286, 292 (2001). Our review is limited by the record provided by the appellant
unless supplemented by the appellee. “An error is considered harmless if it is
trivial, or formal, or merely academic, and was not prejudicial to the
substantial rights of the party asserting it.” McIntire v. Lee, 149 N.H. 160, 167
(2003). Thus, in a civil case, we will not disturb the trial court’s judgment
“where it appears that an error did not affect the outcome below, or where [we]
can see from the entire record that no injury has been done.” Id. (quotation
and brackets omitted). Because we have no transcript, we have no way of
6
making this determination. Accordingly, I believe we have no choice but to
reverse the trial court.
In light of the landlord’s concession, I would not reach the issue of
whether, consistent with RSA 540:2, II (1997), the trial court could have
awarded the landlord possession of the premises based upon its notice of
intent not to renew the lease. Additionally, unlike the majority, I would hold
that, in this case, the landlord’s notice met the requirements of RSA 540:2, II.
Therefore, I concur only in the judgment
RSA 540:2, II provides, in pertinent part, that the “lessor or owner of
restricted property may terminate any tenancy by giving to the tenant . . . a
notice in writing to quit the premises in accordance with RSA 540:3 and 5, but
only for one of the following reasons.” One of the reasons provided is “[o]ther
good cause.” RSA 540:2, II(e). Other good cause “includes, but is not limited
to, any legitimate business or economic reason.” RSA 540:2, V (1997).
The majority asserts that the mere expiration of the lease is not good
cause. I disagree. I believe that the statutory language defining “[o]ther good
cause” is broad enough to include terminating a tenancy at the expiration of
the term of a written lease. The expiration of the term of a written lease, in my
view, may, under appropriate circumstances, constitute a “legitimate business
or economic reason” for terminating a tenancy. As we have no transcript of the
trial court proceedings, I believe the majority is mistaken when it assumes that
the landlord here could not prove any set of circumstances under which the
expiration of the tenant’s lease could be a “legitimate business or economic
reason” for terminating her tenancy.
The majority contends that, under its interpretation of RSA 540:2, II, a
landlord “is not forced into a perpetual landlord-tenant relationship.” To the
contrary, under the majority’s interpretation, a landlord with a lease of a
specified term is obliged to continue the tenancy absent some other “good
cause.” See Franklin Tower One, L.L.C. v. N.M., 725 A.2d 1104, 1110 (N.J.
1999). Under the majority’s interpretation, lease provisions purporting to limit
the lease to a specified duration have no meaning. The effect of the majority’s
interpretation “is to create a perpetual tenancy, virtually a life interest, in favor
of a tenant of [restricted property] covered by [the statute].” J.M.J. Properties
v. Khuzam, 839 A.2d 102, 106 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2004) (quotations
omitted). I do not believe that was the intent of RSA 540:2.
Although the amicus curiae relies upon precedent developed in the
context of federally subsidized housing, I believe that its reliance is misplaced.
We are not bound by cases interpreting the good cause requirements imposed
upon owners of federally subsidized rental housing when interpreting RSA
540:2. Moreover, although the tenant argues that she receives assistance from
7
the federal Section 8 housing program, she has failed to demonstrate that she
preserved this claim for review on appeal. Thus, we treat this claim as waived
on appeal. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
For all of these reasons, respectfully, I concur only in the judgment.
8