THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2005-262
JANET DEBENEDETTO, ADMINISTRATRIX OF THE ESTATE OF DAVID
DEBENEDETTO
v.
CLD CONSULTING ENGINEERS, INC.
Argued: March 9, 2006
Opinion Issued: July 27, 2006
Turgeon & Associates, of Amesbury, Massachusetts (Roger D. Turgeon on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and
Donald L. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Dunn orally), for the defendant.
Abramson, Brown & Dugan, of Manchester (Kenneth C. Brown and Jared
R. Green on the brief) and Borofsky, Amodeo-Vickery & Bandazian, P.A., of
Manchester (Stephen E. Borofsky and Erica Bodwell, on the brief) for New
Hampshire Trial Lawyers Association, as amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Janet DeBenedetto, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (McHugh, J.) permitting the jury in a wrongful death case to
apportion fault among various entities, including defendant CLD Consulting
Engineers, Inc. (CLD). The defendant cross-appeals. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On May 31, 1999, the plaintiff’s
husband, David DeBenedetto, was killed in a two-car automobile collision on
Route 28 in Derry. The other driver, Doris Christous, was waiting at a red light
to cross Route 28 from a Wal-Mart store. After approximately five minutes
passed, Christous apparently concluded that the traffic light was broken and
attempted to cross Route 28 while the light was still red. Christous’ vehicle
struck the rear quarter of the vehicle operated by DeBenedetto, who was
passing through the intersection on a green light. The collision caused
DeBenedetto’s vehicle to roll over, resulting in his death.
Christous had a motor vehicle liability insurance policy, and her
insurance carrier paid the $100,000 limit upon demand. Christous was not
named as a defendant in the subsequent litigation.
In June 2003, the plaintiff brought a wrongful death action against seven
entities: CLD; East Coast Signals, Inc. (ECS); MHF Design Consultants, Inc.
(MHF); Yvon Cormier Construction Corp. (Cormier); RayCor Development, Inc.
(RayCor); Leo Roy (Roy); and the New Hampshire Department of Transportation
(NHDOT). The suit alleged that each named defendant was involved in the
design, selection, installation, or authorization of the traffic control system.
Prior to trial, the plaintiff settled her claims against ECS, MHF, Cormier,
RayCor, and Roy, and the trial court granted NHDOT’s motion to dismiss on
grounds of immunity. Thus, CLD was the sole defendant remaining at the time
of the trial.
At trial, the plaintiff claimed that when the exit from Wal-Mart was
redesigned in 1999 to accommodate through traffic to the newly opened plaza
of shops across the street, a new “loop detector” should have been installed to
detect cars in the center lane. A “loop detector” is a piece of equipment
installed under the asphalt at an intersection that detects approaching vehicles
and signals the computer regulating the traffic control system, producing a
green light during the next traffic cycle. The plaintiff alleged that because there
was no loop detector to detect cars in the center lane of the Wal-Mart exit, and
because CLD knew or should have known that motorists would use the center
lane, it was foreseeable that one or more drivers would become stuck at an
interminable red light and elect to proceed against it, thereby exposing all
motorists lawfully passing through the intersection to an unreasonable risk of
injury.
Before trial, CLD requested a jury instruction that included the following
language regarding apportionment of fault:
There are a number of parties in this case, including those that are
absent from this trial. It is your duty to determine the
2
proportionate fault of each party. That is, you should decide what
percentage of fault lies with each of the alleged tortfeasors, whether
they are here or not. You may consider evidence that another
party may be responsible for the accident, or any part thereof. In
doing so, you may attribute liability to an absent party.
At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court did not give the instruction as
requested. Instead, the trial court instructed the jury to determine the
percentage of fault, if any, of only the remaining named defendant, CLD, as
well as Christous, ECS, and NHDOT. The instruction omitted MHF, Cormier,
RayCor and Roy. The jury returned a verdict awarding $5.3 million in damages
and apportioned forty-nine percent of fault to CLD, forty-nine percent of fault
to Christous, and two percent of fault to NHDOT. Approximately $3 million of
the damages awarded were attributable to “non-economic” damages. The jury
did not find ECS negligent to any degree.
CLD submitted a post-trial motion for remittitur, requesting that the
damage award be reduced to $2.5 million, and that its apportionment of fault
be reduced to twenty percent. CLD also submitted motions to set aside the
verdict and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict. The trial court denied
the latter motions, but partially granted the motion for remittitur, leaving
apportionment of fault at forty-nine percent but reducing the damages award
to $3.8 million.
The plaintiff also sought post-trial relief, submitting a motion to reform
the verdict requesting that 100% of fault be apportioned to CLD. The trial
court denied this motion.
On appeal, the plaintiff asserts that: (1) the trial court erred by
instructing the jury to consider Christous and NHDOT when assigning fault
percentages; (2) the trial court’s interpretation of RSA 507:7-e (1997), which
governs apportionment of damages, was unconstitutional; and (3) the trial
court erred in granting remittitur. CLD cross-appeals, claiming that: (1) the
trial court erred by failing to instruct the jury that it could apportion fault to
RayCor and Cormier; (2) the jury verdict apportioning no fault to ECS and two
percent fault to NHDOT was against the weight of the evidence; and (3) the trial
court erred in denying CLD’s motion for directed verdict. We address each
issue in turn.
I. Christous and NHDOT
The plaintiff first contends that, in light of the plain language of RSA
507:7-e, I(a), the trial court erred when it instructed the jury to consider
apportioning fault to “non-parties” Christous and NHDOT. RSA 507:7-e
provides, in relevant part:
3
I. In all actions, the court shall:
(a) Instruct the jury to determine, or if there is no jury shall find,
the amount of damages to be awarded to each claimant and
against each defendant in accordance with the proportionate
fault of each of the parties; and
(b) Enter judgment against each party liable on the basis of the
rules of joint and several liability, except that if any party shall
be less than 50 percent at fault, then that party’s liability shall
be several and not joint and he shall be liable only for the
damages attributable to him.
This court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed
in the words of a statute considered as a whole. DeLucca v. DeLucca, 152 N.H.
100, 103 (2005). When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we
need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Carlisle v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 152 N.H.
762, 773 (2005). If a statute is ambiguous, however, we may consider
legislative history to aid in our analysis. Id. We interpret statutes in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. DeLucca, 152
N.H. at 103. We review a trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo.
Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Fischer), 152 N.H. 205, 211 (2005).
The plaintiff argues that the “plain and ordinary meaning” of the word
“party” or “parties,” in the context of RSA 507:7-e, I, is “claimant” and
“defendant.” The defendant, however, argues that we must construe “party” to
include all parties who causally contribute to an accident, “including immune
parties and parties who settle prior to suit,” in order to effectuate the purpose
of RSA 507:7-e. Reading RSA 507:7-e, I(a) in isolation, the phrase “amount of
damages to be awarded to each claimant and against each defendant in
accordance with the proportionate fault of each of the parties” could be read to
favor the plaintiff’s interpretation. However, reading RSA 507:7-e as a whole,
the word is employed in an arguably broader sense. See, e.g., RSA 507:7-e, I(b)
– (c), II; see also Estate of Hunter v. General Motors Corp., 729 So. 2d 1264,
1273 (Miss. 1999) (“If the Legislature had intended to refer to ‘parties to a
lawsuit’ then it could have easily used this language or a similar term such as
‘litigant,’ but it did not do so.”). Because we find that the use of the word
“party” throughout RSA 507:7-e creates an ambiguity, we look to the legislative
history of the statute to aid in our analysis.
RSA 507:7-e was enacted as part of a comprehensive statutory
framework for apportionment of liability and contribution. Nilsson v. Bierman,
150 N.H. 393, 395 (2003) (framework includes RSA 507:7-d (1997) through
4
RSA 507:7-i (1997)). The “Act Relative to Tort Reform and Insurance,” Laws
1986, 227:2, closely modeled the Uniform Comparative Fault Act, 12 U.L.A. 38-
49 (Supp. 1987), in its treatment of comparative fault and apportionment of
damages. Jaswell Drill Corp. v. General Motors Corp., 129 N.H. 341, 343-44
(1987). Indeed, when the legislature enacted this framework, “it clearly
intended these provisions to function as a unified and comprehensive approach
to comparative fault, apportionment of damages, and contribution.” Id. at 344-
45.
As originally enacted in 1986, RSA 507:7-e required that judgment be
entered against “each party liable” on the basis of joint and several liability.
Laws 1986, 227:2; see also Jaswell, 129 N.H. at 344. Under the rule of joint
and several liability, a defendant who is only partly responsible for a plaintiff’s
injuries may be held responsible for the entire amount of recoverable damages.
See Restatement (Third) of Torts: Apportionment of Liability § 10, at 99 (2000).
This allows a plaintiff to sue any one of several tortfeasors and collect the full
amount of recoverable damages. The burden of joining other potentially liable
tortfeasors to share in the apportionment of damages falls upon the defendant.
See id. comment b. at 101-02. Thus, pursuant to joint and several liability, the
risk that other nonparty tortfeasors cannot be joined in a suit for reasons of
immunity, insolvency, or jurisdiction must also be borne by the defendant. See
id.
The joint and several liability rule has the ancillary effect of enabling
injured plaintiffs to seek out and sue only “deep pocket” defendants –
tortfeasors with significant assets but a potentially low degree of fault who by
virtue of joint and several liability may be responsible for the entire amount of
recoverable damages. See, e.g., Alvarez v. New Haven Register, Inc., 735 A.2d
306, 312 (Conn. 1999). As a result, numerous jurisdictions have enacted
legislation seeking to ameliorate the “inequities” suffered by low fault, “deep
pocket” defendants as a result of joint and several liability. See, e.g., McCoy v.
Monroe Park West Associates, 44 F. Supp. 2d 910, 913 (E.D. Mich. 1999);
Chianese v. Meier, 774 N.E.2d 722, 724 (N.Y. 2002); Alvarez, 735 A.2d at 313-
14. Indeed, “[t]he clear trend over the past several decades has been a move
away from joint and several liability.” Restatement (Third) of Torts:
Apportionment of Liability, § 17 Reporters’ Note at 149 (2000). A majority of
jurisdictions have adopted, in lieu of joint and several liability, pure several
liability, whereby an injured plaintiff may only recover a defendant’s
comparative-responsibility share of damages, see id. § 11, at 108, or a hybrid
system that employs both rules. See id. § 17 Reporters’ Note at 149.
In 1989, the New Hampshire Legislature, recognizing that
“manufacturers, professionals and public agencies . . . become targets for
damage recoveries because of their potential money resources rather than their
fault,” sought to amend RSA 507:7-e “to treat fairly those entities which may be
5
unfairly treated” under the rule of joint and several liability. N.H.S. Jour. 286
(1989). The bill, as introduced, would have revised RSA 507:7-e, I(b) to require
that judgment be entered severally against “each party liable,” see Senate Bill
No. 110 (1989), thereby providing “that defendants involved in personal injury
lawsuit [sic] could only be held liable for their percentage of the damages.”
N.H.S. Jour. 286 (1989). The legislature rejected this pure several liability
approach and instead passed a compromise measure adopting several liability
only for those parties “less than 50 percent at fault.” See RSA 507:7-e, I(b).
The resulting legislation made New Hampshire a hybrid jurisdiction.
In Nilsson, we considered whether a trial court may, consistent with RSA
507:7-e, instruct a jury to assess the percentage of fault attributable to
settling, as well as non-settling, tortfeasors. Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 395. The
plaintiff argued that the plain and ordinary meaning of the word “party,” as
employed in the context of RSA 507:7-e, did not include a defendant who
settled with the plaintiff before trial. Id. at 396. We disagreed, noting first that
Black’s Law Dictionary defined “party” as “[one] who takes part in a
transaction” or “[o]ne by or against whom a lawsuit is brought.” Nilsson, 150
N.H. at 396 (quotations omitted). We then recognized that other courts
“construing similar statutes” defined “party” to encompass “persons involved in
an accident, defendants in a lawsuit, or all litigants in a lawsuit.” Id.
Ultimately, we held that, for the purposes of apportionment pursuant to RSA
507:7-e, I(b), the term “party” refers to “parties to an action, including settling
parties,” and affirmed the trial court’s verdict apportioning ninety-nine percent
of fault to the settling defendant and one percent of fault to the non-settling
defendant. Id. at 394, 396. We expressly declined, however, to reach the issue
of whether a tortfeasor who is immune from liability (such as NHDOT) or
otherwise not before the court (such as Christous) constitutes a “party” for
apportionment purposes under RSA 507:7-e, I(b). Id. at 397.
Many jurisdictions permit a jury to consider “nonparties” such as
unknown or immune tortfeasors when apportioning fault. 1 Comparative
Negligence Manual § 14.9, at 14-12 (3d ed., Clark Boardman Callaghan 1995);
see also Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 396-97. The underlying rationale for such a rule
is that true apportionment cannot be achieved unless that apportionment
includes all tortfeasors who are causally negligent by either causing or
contributing to the occurrence in question, whether or not they are named
parties to the case. See Lasselle v. Special Products Comp., 677 P.2d 483, 485
(Idaho 1984); see also Comparative Negligence Manual, supra. “It would be
patently unfair in many cases to require a defendant to be ‘dragged into court’
for the malfeasance of another and to thereupon forbid the defendant from
establishing that fault should properly lie elsewhere.” Estate of Hunter, 729
So. 2d at 1273. “There is nothing inherently fair about a defendant who is 10%
at fault paying 100% of the loss, and there is no social policy that should
6
compel defendants to pay more than their fair share of the loss.” Brown v.
Keill, 580 P.2d 867, 874 (Kan. 1978).
Apportionment of fault to nonparties is, moreover, recognized in many
jurisdictions as being compatible with the doctrine of comparative fault. See
Carroll v. Whitney, 29 S.W.3d 14, 21 (Tenn. 2000). “[T]he policy considerations
underlying the comparative fault doctrine would best be served by the jury’s
consideration of the negligence of all participants to a particular incident which
gives rise to a lawsuit.” Estate of Hunter, 729 So. 2d at 1273; cf. Northland
Ins. Co. v. Truckstops Corp. of America, 914 F. Supp. 216, 220 (N.D. Ill. 1995)
(failure to include immune employers in apportionment process violates main
purpose of comparative fault by improperly subjecting defendants to liability in
excess of their proportion of fault). New Hampshire is a comparative fault
jurisdiction. See RSA 507:7-d (1997).
The plaintiff contends, however, that the term “parties,” as used in the
context of RSA 507:7-e, I(a), should be strictly construed to include only
“actual parties to the action,” i.e., “all plaintiffs, defendants and third-party
defendants actually involved in the case whose actions have contributed to the
loss.” We disagree.
As we noted in Nilsson, other jurisdictions construing statutes similar to
RSA 507:7-e have defined the term “party” to include persons involved in an
occurrence giving rise to a plaintiff’s injuries. See Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 396.
For example, Idaho’s apportionment statute stipulates that a trial court must,
“when requested by any party . . . , direct the jury to find . . . the amount of
damages and the percentage of negligence or comparative responsibility
attributable to each party . . . .” IDAHO CODE § 6-802 (2004) (emphases added);
compare RSA 507:7-e, I(a). The Supreme Court of Idaho has interpreted the
statute to encompass “parties to the transaction which resulted in the injury
whether or not they are parties to the lawsuit.” Van Brunt v. Stoddard, 39
P.3d 621, 627 (Idaho 2001) (citing Pocatello Ind. Park Co. v. Steel West, Inc.,
621 P.2d 399 (Idaho 1980)). In so doing, the court recognized that “ ‘[i]t is
established without doubt that, when apportioning negligence, a jury must
have the opportunity to consider the negligence of all parties to the transaction,
. . . whether or not they can be liable to the plaintiff or to the other tortfeasors
either by operation of law or because of a prior release.’ ” Pocatello Ind. Park
Co., 621 P.2d at 403 (quoting Connar v. West Shore Equipment of Milwaukee
Inc., 227 N.W.2d 660, 662 (Wis. 1975)). Idaho, like New Hampshire, is a
comparative negligence jurisdiction. See IDAHO CODE § 6-801 (2004).
The Supreme Court of Mississippi, interpreting statutory fault
apportionment language similar to New Hampshire’s, has also determined that
the term “party” is to be applied broadly. Construing MISS. CODE ANN. § 85-5-
7(7) (1991), which provided that “[i]n actions involving joint tort-feasors, the
7
trier of fact shall determine the percentage of fault for each party alleged to be
at fault,” the court held that the term “party” referred to “any participant to an
occurrence which gives rise to a lawsuit, and not merely the parties to a
particular lawsuit or trial.” Estate of Hunter, 729 So. 2d at 1276. Thus, the
term “party,” in the context of MISS. CODE ANN. § 85-5-7(7), “swept broadly
enough to bring in entities which would not or could not have been ‘parties to a
lawsuit,’ thus including immune parties.” Mack Trucks, Inc. v. Tackett, 841
So. 2d 1107, 1113 (Miss. 2003) (citing Estate of Hunter, 729 So. 2d at 1273).
The court noted that limiting a jury to a consideration of the fault of the parties
at trial would infringe upon a defendant’s right to present his or her version of
a case to a jury, and recognized that its holding was “based upon sound
considerations of judicial fairness.” Estate of Hunter, 729 So. 2d at 1272,
1275; see also Mack Trucks, Inc., 841 So. 2d at 1113. Mississippi is a
comparative negligence jurisdiction. See MISS. CODE. ANN. § 11-7-15 (2004).
In Kansas, “[w]here the comparative negligence of the parties in [a civil]
action is an issue,” the trier of fact must “determin[e] the percentage of
negligence attributable to each of the parties, and determin[e] the total amount
of damages sustained by each of the claimants . . . .” KAN. STAT. ANN. § 60-
258a(b) (2005); compare RSA 507:7-e, I(a). The Supreme Court of Kansas,
tasked with determining whether the percentage of fault of one who cannot
formally be joined as a party under the statute could be considered to “arrive at
the proportionate liability of [a] defendant,” concluded that “the intent and
purpose of the legislature in adopting [KAN. STAT. ANN. § 60-258a] was to
impose individual liability for damages based on the proportionate fault of all
parties to the occurrence which gave rise to the injuries and damages even
though one or more parties cannot be joined formally as a litigant or be held
legally responsible for his or her proportionate fault.” Brown, 580 P.2d at 876.
The court included in its analysis those parties possessing governmental
immunity: “[Although] one of the parties at fault happens to be a . . .
governmental agency and if by reason of some competing social policy the
plaintiff cannot receive payment for his injuries from the . . . agency, there is
no compelling social policy which requires [a] codefendant to pay more than his
fair share of the loss.” Id. at 874.
The plaintiff asserts that at least four jurisdictions “have interpreted
statutes that are similar to ours” and concluded that apportionment of fault
among non-litigants is not permitted. The Supreme Court of Connecticut, for
instance, has defined “party,” for fault apportionment purposes, as active
litigants or those litigants who have settled and received releases. Donner v.
Kearse, 662 A.2d 1269, 1275-76 (Conn. 1995). Thus, if a defendant wishes to
“broaden the universe of negligence to be considered,” that defendant must
implead any allegedly negligent non-party. Eskin v. Castiglia, 753 A.2d 927,
933 (Conn. 2000). However, Connecticut’s comparative negligence statute,
8
CONN. GEN. STAT. § 52-572h (2005), is far more specific on the topic of fault
apportionment than RSA 507:7-e:
In a negligence action to recover damages resulting from . . .
wrongful death . . . , if the damages are determined to be
proximately caused by the negligence of more than one party, each
party against whom recovery is allowed shall be liable to the
claimant only for such party’s proportionate share of the
recoverable [economic and non-economic] damages.
CONN. GEN. STAT. § 52-572h(c) (emphasis added). Thus, unlike RSA 507:7-e,
the plain language of the Connecticut statute expresses a legislative intent to
limit the scope of the term “party” for purposes of fault apportionment.
Similarly, the Iowa legislature explicitly defined “party” for purposes of
the State’s comparative fault and apportionment statutes, thereby limiting fault
apportionment to claimants, defendants, third-party defendants, and those
persons who have entered into a release, covenant not to sue, or “similar
agreement” with the claimant. IOWA CODE. ANN. §§ 668.2, 668.3, 668.7 (1998);
see also Spaur v. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 510 N.W.2d 854, 862 (Iowa
1994) (Iowa comparative fault regime precludes fault sharing unless plaintiff
has viable claim against a party).
The plaintiff also cites Bencivenga v. J.J.A.M.M., Inc., 609 A.2d 1299
(N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1992), as support for her position that similar
statutes have been interpreted to preclude apportionment among non-litigants.
Indeed, Bencivenga states that the plain language of N.J. STAT. ANN. §§ 2A:15-
5.1 and 2A:15-5.2 makes “the negligence of the person or persons against
whom recovery is sought and the negligence of each party or parties to the suit
the prerequisites to apportioning fault.” Id. at 1303 (emphasis omitted); see
also Straley v. United States, 887 F. Supp. 728, 742 (D.N.J. 1995) (under New
Jersey Comparative Negligence Act, assessment of liability limited to those who
are party to suit). However, unlike RSA 507:7-e, New Jersey’s apportionment
statute, N.J. STAT. ANN. § 2A:15-5.2, explicitly requires the trier of fact to find
“[t]he percentage of negligence or fault of each party” with the “total of all
percentages of negligence or fault of all the parties to a suit” totaling 100%.
N.J. STAT. ANN. § 2A:15-5.2 (2000) (emphases added); see also Bencivenga, 609
A.2d at 1303. Similarly, in Eberly v. A-P Controls, Inc., also cited by the
plaintiff, the Supreme Court of Ohio construed analogous statutory language
requiring a trier of fact to find “[t]he percentage of negligence . . . in relation to
one hundred per cent, that is attributable to each party to the action,” to reach
a similar result. Eberly v. A-P Controls, Inc., 572 N.E. 2d 633, 638 (Ohio
1991). Because the statutes interpreted, respectively, by the New Jersey and
Ohio courts expressly limit apportionment to parties to a lawsuit, we find these
cases inapposite to the instant dispute.
9
We find persuasive the reasoning of those jurisdictions with comparative
fault schemes and apportionment statutes similar to New Hampshire’s that
have interpreted the term to include all parties to the transaction or occurrence
giving rise to a plaintiff’s injuries. We believe that a rule of law limiting a jury
or court to consideration of the fault of only the parties to an action would
directly undermine the New Hampshire legislature’s decision to assign only
several liability to those parties who are “less than 50 percent at fault.” RSA
507:7-e, I(b).
Finally, we note that the legislature recently rejected a proposed
amendment to RSA 507:7-e that would have added a paragraph defining the
terms “party” and “parties” as “only those individuals or entities who are
plaintiffs or defendants in the action.” Senate Bill 47 (2005); see also N.H.S.
Jour. 197 (2005). We hold, therefore, that for apportionment purposes under
RSA 507:7-e, the word “party” refers not only to “parties to an action, including
. . . settling parties,” Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 396, but to all parties contributing to
the occurrence giving rise to an action, including those immune from liability
or otherwise not before the court. We are mindful that at least one jurisdiction
does not permit the apportionment of fault to entities enjoying “absolute
immunity,” and has articulated sound policy reasons for declining to do so.
See Lexington-Fayette Urb. Cty. Gov. v. Smolcic, 142 S.W.3d 128, 135-36 (Ky.
2004) (“Even though free from financial liability, the possessor [of immunity]
still would be subject to process; to the burdens of discovery, including the
giving of depositions; and to testifying at trial even if he or she chose not to
actively defend his or her actions at trial.”). Nonetheless, we believe that
fairness precludes a defendant from bearing the entire weight of a damages
verdict where, for example, that defendant is ten percent at fault and another
party possessing absolute immunity from liability is ninety percent at fault.
We note that a defendant may not easily shift fault under RSA 507:7-e;
allegations of a non-litigant tortfeasor’s fault must be supported by adequate
evidence before a jury or court may consider it for fault apportionment
purposes. See Gust v. Jones, 162 F.3d 587, 593 (10th Cir. 1998) (interpreting
Kansas law); see also Carroll, 29 S.W.3d at 21 (jury can apportion fault to
nonparty only after it is convinced that defendant has met burden of
establishing that nonparty caused or contributed to plaintiff’s injury).
On appeal, the plaintiff does not dispute that Christous and NHDOT were
at fault. In light of our holding, we conclude that the trial court did not err by
instructing the jury to consider the percentage of fault attributable to them.
II. Constitutionality of RSA 507:7-e
The plaintiff advances two arguments that RSA 507:7-e, I(a) is
unconstitutional. First, she contends that RSA 507:7-e, I(a), as interpreted by
10
the trial court, violates Part I, Article 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution,
which provides:
Every subject of this state is entitled to a certain remedy, by having
recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive in his person,
property, or character; to obtain right and justice freely, without
being obliged to purchase it; completely, and without any denial;
promptly, and without delay; conformably to the laws.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 14. The purpose of this provision is to make civil
remedies readily available, and to guard against arbitrary and discriminatory
infringements upon access to courts. Minuteman, LLC v. Microsoft Corp., 147
N.H. 634, 640 (2002).
The plaintiff, citing Panagoulis v. Company, 95 N.H. 524 (1949),
contends that an “innocent plaintiff” is “entitled to recover his full damages
from any negligent person who was a concurrent and proximate or legal cause
of his injuries.” (Emphases added.) Thus, she argues that a plaintiff without
fault is entitled to recover full damages from any negligent tortfeasor pursuant
to the principles of joint and several liability. See Restatement (Third) of Torts:
Apportionment of Liability § 10, at 99. Citing Carson v. Maurer, 120 N.H. 925
(1980), the plaintiff further asserts that “[t]his common law right is an
important substantive right that is protected by the New Hampshire
Constitution.” In the plaintiff’s analysis, the trial court’s interpretation of RSA
507:7-e will have the effect of depriving “innocent plaintiffs . . . of the right to
seek full compensation from one of two or more negligent persons” without a
compensatory quid pro quo.
We find the plaintiff’s argument in this regard unpersuasive. First, and
foremost, Carson does not establish a common law right to recover for one’s
injuries pursuant to the principles of joint and several liability. Carson stands
only for the proposition that the “right to recover for personal injuries,” though
not a fundamental right, is nevertheless an important substantive one.
Carson, 120 N.H. at 931-32. Furthermore, RSA 507:7-e does not infringe upon
the rights of an “innocent plaintiff,” or any plaintiff for that matter, to seek and
obtain redress in the courts of New Hampshire for personal injuries. Rather, it
simply establishes standards for the apportionment of fault among parties once
an action has been brought and tried. See RSA 507:7-e. That another statute,
such as RSA 541-B:19 (1997) (retaining sovereign immunity for State or State
actors in various actions, including those arising from the performance of a
discretionary function), may limit an injured plaintiff’s ability to acquire
financial recompense from certain entities is of no consequence in our analysis
of RSA 507:7-e. RSA 507:7-e itself does not, by its language, restrict a
plaintiff’s right to seek a remedy for personal injuries, limit a plaintiff’s ability
11
to bring an action against any party, or cap the amount of damages that a
plaintiff may seek.
Part I, Article 14 does not guarantee that all injured persons will receive
full compensation for their injuries. Welzenbach v. Powers, 139 N.H. 688, 691
(1995). It stipulates only that a plaintiff “is entitled to a certain remedy, by
having recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive . . . .” N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 14. Because we believe that RSA 507:7-e does not infringe upon this
entitlement, we conclude that it does not violate Part I, Article 14 of the New
Hampshire Constitution.
The plaintiff’s second constitutional challenge is that RSA 507:7-e, as
interpreted by the trial court, violates the “Equal Protection Clause,” though
she neglects to identify any specific provision of the State or Federal
Constitutions in support of this challenge. An appellant must fulfill two
preconditions before triggering a State constitutional analysis: first, the
appellant must raise the State constitutional issue in the trial court; second,
the appellant’s brief must specifically invoke a provision of the State
Constitution. State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632 (1986). In the instant
case, the plaintiff did not unambiguously and specifically raise equal protection
issues grounded in Part I, Articles 2, 12 or 14 of the State Constitution in her
brief. We will not, therefore, undertake a State constitutional analysis of the
plaintiff’s equal protection argument. See id. at 633. However, we have never
held that a party’s failure to include a citation to a specific provision of the
Federal Constitution precludes appellate review. State v. Burke, 153 N.H. __,
__ (decided April 12, 2006). Therefore, we address the plaintiff’s equal
protection claim under the Equal Protection Clause of the Federal Constitution
only. See id. at __.
The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Federal Constitution commands that no State shall “deny to any person within
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” Cleburne v. Cleburne Living
Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 439 (1985). This provision creates no substantive
rights; rather, it embodies a general rule that States must treat like cases alike
but may treat unlike cases accordingly. Vacco v. Quill, 521 U.S. 793, 799
(1997). If a legislative classification or distinction neither burdens a
fundamental right nor targets a suspect class, federal equal protection analysis
applies rational basis scrutiny, under which the classification will stand so
long as it bears a rational relation to some legitimate governmental end. See
id.; see also Gary S. v. Manchester School Dist., 374 F.3d 15, 22 (1st Cir.
2004).
We do not agree that RSA 507:7-e, I(a) creates any such classifications
among plaintiffs. RSA 507:7-e, I(a) requires only that a jury or court determine
“the amount of damages to be awarded to each claimant and against each
12
defendant in accordance with the proportionate fault of each of the parties.”
Thus, subsection I(a) treats all claimants and defendants equally; an amount of
damages must be affixed, and a percentage of fault must be calculated for each
tortfeasor. Though the result will inevitably differ from case to case, depending
upon the number and availability of claimants and defendants, the standard
for determining damages and apportioning fault is uniform and non-
discriminatory. Given our interpretation of RSA 507:7-e, I(a), it is irrelevant
that certain claimants, such as the plaintiff in the instant case, may elect not
to name a culpable tortfeasor in a suit. Moreover, RSA 507:7-e, I(a) does not
make exceptions for defendants made immune by statute or common law. We
conclude, therefore, that RSA 507:7-e, I(a) does not treat similarly situated
persons differently.
RSA 507:7-e, I(b), however, treats plaintiffs differently depending upon
the percentage of fault attributable to each party contributing to the underlying
occurrence. For example, if a plaintiff suffers injuries caused by four separate
actors, and each is attributed twenty-five percent of the fault, then the plaintiff
may only receive twenty-five percent of the damages from any one tortfeasor. If
another plaintiff suffers the same injuries, but one of four tortfeasors is at least
fifty percent at fault, then the plaintiff may receive 100% of the damage award
from that tortfeasor. Therefore, RSA 507:7-e, I(b), by its terms, allows for the
disparate treatment of similarly situated persons.
Applying rational basis scrutiny, we conclude that the classification
created by RSA 507:7-e, I(b) bears a rational relationship to the furtherance of
a legitimate governmental purpose. Cf. Gary S., 374 F.3d at 22. As we noted
above, the legislative history of RSA 507:7-e plainly demonstrates that an
underlying purpose of the 1989 amendment was to relieve defendants involved
in personal injury lawsuits from damages liability exceeding their percentage of
actual fault. See N.H.S. Jour. 286 (1989). Specifically, the legislature sought
to alleviate the burden imposed by joint and several liability upon “deep
pocket” defendants targeted because of their potential financial resources
rather than their degree of culpability. See id. Rather than adopt pure several
liability, however, the legislature reserved the joint and several liability rule for
application to tortfeasors fifty percent or more at fault, reflecting an intention
to balance the interests of injured plaintiffs with those of defendants bearing
relatively low fault percentages.
The problem of “deep pocket” suits is one that jurisdictions throughout
the United States have recognized. See, e.g., Estate of Hunter, 729 So. 2d at
1273. Many jurisdictions have supplanted the joint and several liability
doctrine with pure several liability or a hybrid rule that employs a percentage
threshold, much like RSA 507:7-e. See Restatement (Third) of Torts:
Apportionment of Liability § 17 Reporters’ Note at 149. Legislatures in a
number of such jurisdictions have noted the inequity of “deep pocket” suits as
13
a factor underlying the amendment of their respective states’ tort liability
regimes. See, e.g., Smiley v. Corrigan, 638 N.W.2d 151, 152 n.3 (Mich. Ct.
App. 2002) (bill abolishing joint and several liability in favor of several liability
intended as a means of providing fair treatment for defendants, including
unjustly burdened “deep pockets”); Erny v. Estate of Merola, 792 A.2d 1208,
1219 (N.J. 2002) (amendment limiting joint and several liability to only those
tortfeasors found to be more than sixty percent responsible intended to reduce
cost of general liability insurance by eliminating “deep pocket” sought by
defense attorneys in lawsuits with multiple defendants). We hold, therefore,
that the New Hampshire legislature enacted RSA 507:7-e, I(b) in pursuit of a
legitimate end.
Furthermore, we believe that the distinction created by RSA 507:7-e, I(b)
is rationally related to the object of the legislation. The New Hampshire
legislature first enacted a comparative negligence statute in 1969, motivated by
“a deep conviction that the contributory negligence rule was so basically unfair
and illogical that it should have no further place in [the State’s] law.” Nixon,
The Actual “Legislative Intent” Behind New Hampshire’s Comparative
Negligence Statute, 12 N.H.B.J. 17, 17-18 (1969). By doing away with the
doctrine of contributory negligence, the legislature bestowed a considerable
benefit upon injured plaintiffs. However, the statute abolished not only
contributory negligence, but joint and several liability as well. See Laws 1969,
225:1; see also Nixon, supra (“New Hampshire’s comparative negligence statute
was . . . intended to limit the damages responsibility of each defendant against
whom recovery is allowed to his proportionate amount of fault . . . . [There was
a] clearly intended abolition of joint and several liability . . . .”). Thus, the 1969
comparative negligence statute clearly demonstrates a legislative objective to
balance the interests of plaintiffs and defendants.
With the 1986 passage of the “Act Relative to Tort Reform and
Insurance,” the legislature established a system for contribution among
tortfeasors and reinstituted joint and several liability. See Laws 1986, 227:2.
Three years later, the legislature, concerned with the unfair treatment of
certain entities under the revived joint and several liability rule, reenacted
507:7-e, I(b) in its present form. See N.H.S. Jour. 286 (1989).
From the inception of comparative negligence in New Hampshire, the
legislature has sought to balance the interests of injured plaintiffs and the
interests of defendants. It plainly believed that contribution among tortfeasors
did not effectively protect the interests of defendants bearing less than fifty
percent of fault for a plaintiff’s injuries, and that those defendants were
unfairly prejudiced by the comparative negligence regime enacted in 1986.
Though the plaintiff argues that the legislature was required to establish
certain “procedural safeguards” within RSA 507:7-e, I, we need not hypothesize
alternative measures that the legislature could have taken to better establish
14
the desired balance of interests, as we believe that the introduction of several
liability for tortfeasors less than fifty percent at fault was rationally related to
that object. Boulders at Strafford v. Town of Strafford, 153 N.H. ___, ___
(decided June 15, 2006) (least restrictive means analysis not part of rational
basis test).
In light of our analysis, we conclude that, to the extent it differentiates
between two classes of plaintiffs, RSA 507:7-e, I(b) does not violate the equal
protection provisions of the Federal Constitution.
III. Remittitur
Finally, the plaintiff contends that the trial court erred by granting
remittitur as to the damages award. Direct review of a damages award is the
responsibility of the trial judge, who may disturb a verdict as excessive if its
amount is conclusively against the weight of the evidence and if the verdict is
manifestly exorbitant. Kelleher v. Marvin Lumber & Cedar Co., 152 N.H. 813,
838 (2005). The proper standard for the trial court’s review of a jury award is
whether the verdict is fair. Id. Whether remittitur is appropriate rests with the
trial court’s sound discretion. Id. Absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, we will not reverse the trial court’s decision. Id.
In reducing the damages award from $5.3 million to $3.8 million, the
trial court concluded that “awarding three million dollars for pain and suffering
and loss of enjoyment of life [was] excessive,” and that “the evidence would
support a maximum damage finding for pain and suffering of $500,000, and a
maximum damage finding for loss of enjoyment of life of one million dollars.”
The plaintiff does not contest the trial court's ruling limiting “pain and
suffering” damages to $500,000. Rather, the plaintiff asserts that it was
impossible to conclude, based upon the evidence, that no reasonable jury could
have awarded approximately $2.5 million for “loss of enjoyment of life”
damages.
The plaintiff argues that the trial court “misconstrued the legal standard
for considering remittitur, i.e., whether, considering the evidence in the light
most favorable to the plaintiff, no reasonable jury could possibly award the
amount in question.” (Emphasis added.) While we have said that we will not
overrule a trial court’s discretionary refusal to grant remittitur unless a verdict
is “so manifestly exorbitant that no reasonable person could conclude that the
jury was not influenced by partiality or prejudice, or misled by some mistaken
view of the merits of the case,” Bennett v. Lembo, 145 N.H. 276, 282 (2000)
(emphasis added), that is merely an articulation of the unsustainable exercise
of discretion standard that we apply upon appellate review. We have never said
that the trial court’s initial discretionary review of a jury verdict is confined to a
“no reasonable person” standard.
15
The plaintiff offers various studies and law review articles purporting to
“objectively assign a value to the enjoyment of life” consistent with the original
jury verdict. These materials were not offered as evidence at trial, and do not
influence our review of the trial court’s decision to grant remittitur. Having
reviewed the record, we conclude that the trial court could reasonably have
determined that the jury’s damages award was punitive, rather than
compensatory, in nature, and therefore both manifestly exorbitant and
conclusively against the weight of the evidence. As such, we find no
unsustainable exercise of discretion in the trial court’s grant of remittitur.
IV. RayCor and Cormier
CLD, on cross-appeal, argues that the trial court erred when it did not
instruct the jury that it could apportion fault to settling defendants RayCor and
Cormier. We agree with CLD that a court should instruct a jury to consider
settling parties when apportioning fault pursuant to RSA 507:7-e, I(b). See
Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 394, 396. Prior to trial, CLD submitted a proposed jury
instruction concerning apportionment:
There are a number of parties in this case, including those that are
absent from this trial . . . . [Y]ou should decide what percentage of
fault lies with each of the alleged tortfeasors, whether they are here
or not. . . . [Y]ou may attribute liability to an absent party.
However, in its order on apportionment on fault, the trial court noted:
CLD agreed that there was not enough evidence produced to show
that named but settling defendants Ray Cor Development, Yvon
Cormier Construction, MHF Design Consultants and Leo Roy were
negligent to any degree and thus CLD did not ask to have the jury
apportion their legal fault. CLD wanted the jury to apportion the
legal fault of . . . Doris Christous, . . . East Coast Signals, Inc., and
. . . the State of New Hampshire, . . . as well as CLD itself. The
Court adopted CLD’s position and the jury was instructed to
apportion any legal fault found among these four entities.
Thus, the trial court characterized the final jury instruction as one of CLD’s
own design. CLD, however, now asserts that it “never agreed” that RayCor and
Cormier should be omitted from the jury verdict.
We are bound by a trial court’s findings of fact unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of law. See Prof’l
Firefighters of N.H. v. HealthTrust, 151 N.H. 501, 507 (2004); see also
Beaudoin v. Beaudoin, 118 N.H. 325, 327-28 (1978). The burden of presenting
a record sufficient to allow this court to decide an issue presented on appeal
16
falls upon the moving party. Brown v. Cathay Island, Inc., 125 N.H. 112, 115
(1984) (citing Sup. Ct. R. 13, 15). CLD is unable to point to any evidence in the
record that contradicts the trial court’s specific finding in its order on
apportionment of fault as to CLD’s position on the jury instruction regarding
apportionment. As such, we cannot disturb the trial court’s finding that CLD
agreed to the omission of RayCor and Cormier from the trial court’s instruction
to the jury on apportionment of fault.
We note, moreover, that if CLD believed that the trial court’s jury
instruction was erroneous, and that the trial court misrepresented its position
in the order on apportionment of fault, CLD could have raised the issue in a
motion for reconsideration. CLD failed to do so. Because this issue was never
presented to the trial court, we cannot review it on appeal. See N.H. Dep’t of
Corrections v. Butland, 147 N.H. 676, 679 (2002).
V. Apportionment of Fault to ECS and NHDOT
CLD next argues that the jury verdict, insofar as it apportioned only two
percent of the fault to NHDOT and no fault at all to ECS, was against the
weight of the evidence. Following the jury verdict, CLD submitted post-trial
motions to set aside the verdict, for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, and
for remittitur, as well as a memorandum of law in support of those motions. In
its memorandum, CLD took the position that the jury’s finding that CLD was
forty nine percent at fault was “decidedly against the weight of the evidence”
and should be set aside. However, CLD did not, in any of its post-trial motions
or its memorandum of law, raise for the trial court the issue of the jury’s
findings as to NHDOT and ECS. Thus, we cannot review it on appeal. See id.
VI. Motion for Directed Verdict
At the end of the plaintiff’s case, CLD moved for a directed verdict on the
grounds that the State, as the owner of the intersection, had knowledge of the
defect and the dangers it posed. In support of its motion, CLD relied upon
Russell v. Whitcomb, 100 N.H. 171 (1956), which adopted a rule holding
independent contractors to a “general standard of reasonable care for the
protection of third parties who may be foreseeably endangered by the
contractor’s negligence” following an employer’s acceptance of the work, but
exempting the contractor from liability when that employer “discovers the
danger, or it is obvious to him.” Id. at 173. In such instances, we said, the
responsibility of the employer would supersede that of the contractor. Id. The
trial court, noting that there was “a question . . . as to what the State knew and
when,” concluded that the issue was not as “clear-cut” as the defense
contended, and as such was appropriate for consideration by the jury. The
trial court accordingly denied CLD’s motion for a directed verdict. CLD now
contends that it was error for the trial court to do so.
17
A party is entitled to a directed verdict only when the sole reasonable
inference that may be drawn from the evidence, which must be viewed in the
light most favorable to the nonmoving party, is so overwhelmingly in favor of
the moving party that no contrary verdict could stand. Carignan v. N.H. Int’l
Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 413 (2004). Our review of a trial court’s denial of a
motion for directed verdict is extremely narrow. Id. We will uphold a denial of
the motion where sufficient evidence in the record supports the ruling. Id.
Thus, absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will not reverse a trial
court’s ruling on a motion for directed verdict.
The only evidence offered by CLD in support of its contention is
testimony elicited from a NHDOT employee regarding a “trouble call” received
by NHDOT on May 3, 1999. According to the employee, he was asked to check
the timing at the Wal-Mart exit because “[s]omeone felt there was a problem
with it.” He further testified that, upon arriving at the scene, he discovered
that “[e]verything seemed to be working just fine,” that he searched for
equipment problems and found none, and that the loops were operating
properly. Summing up his visit to the intersection following the “trouble call,”
the NHDOT employee stated:
I looked for all the physical problems. I didn’t find anything. The
intersection was operating. No one was backed up. No one was
waiting. Everything seemed to work.
Rather than support CLD’s contention that a directed verdict was proper,
the proffered testimony tends to seriously undermine it. We conclude that the
State’s alleged superseding responsibility was plainly a jury issue, and that the
record supports the trial court’s determination. Therefore, we conclude that
the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by denying the
plaintiff’s motion for directed verdict.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred.
18