THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-796
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SEAN BROWN
Argued: February 27, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 6, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Elizabeth J. Baker, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Sean Brown, appeals his conviction for
hindering apprehension under RSA 642:3, I(a) (1996), following a jury trial in
Superior Court (Groff, J.). He argues that the trial court improperly expanded
the statutory definition of the crime when it responded to a jury question and
erred in denying his motion to suppress. We affirm.
The record supports the following. On May 25, 2004, the Nashua Police
Department was informed of a robbery allegedly committed by two males. One
of the alleged perpetrators was described as a Hispanic male wearing a blue
bandana. The two suspects left the scene together in a blue or green
Volkswagen Jetta automobile. Officer William Adamson located a green Jetta
parked in front of an apartment building, two blocks from the robbery. The
vehicle’s hood was still warm and it was registered to Mark Soto. Adamson,
along with two uniformed officers, entered the apartment building to
investigate and speak with residents.
While knocking on doors, Adamson heard an individual from an
apartment yell through the door, “[W]hat do you want?” Adamson asked if the
individual knew who owned the Jetta and whether he knew Soto. Without
opening the door, the individual responded “no” to both questions. Adamson
left the building and noticed inside the Jetta a blue bandana and a hat with the
Puerto Rican flag on it. The three officers reentered the building and
encountered the defendant exiting his apartment.
The officers confronted the defendant in the hallway. Adamson asked if
he was the man to whom he had spoken earlier from behind the door. The
defendant said that he was and that he did not open the door because he was
“afraid of the police.” Adamson explained that he was investigating a crime
that had occurred in the area, requested the defendant’s identification, and
called for a criminal record check. Adamson then inquired if anyone else was
in his apartment, if he knew anything about the Jetta, and if he knew Soto.
The defendant answered “no” to all three questions.
When Adamson learned from dispatch that the defendant was known to
carry firearms, he conducted a pat-down search for weapons, which revealed
two sets of car keys, one of which belonged to a Jetta. Meanwhile, another
officer saw a man attempting to climb out of the defendant’s apartment
window. The defendant continued to deny that there was anyone in his
apartment and refused to allow the police to enter. Adamson told the
defendant that he was not under arrest, but placed him in handcuffs as a
protective measure while the other officers entered the defendant’s apartment
where they found Soto lying on the floor. The entire encounter in the hallway
lasted approximately thirty to forty-five minutes. The defendant was charged
with two alternative theory counts of being a felon in possession of a deadly
weapon, RSA 159:3, I (2002) and one count of hindering apprehension, RSA
642:3, I(a).
At trial, the defendant moved to suppress evidence obtained as a result
of his seizure upon the basis that the officers lacked reasonable suspicion
when they first encountered him in the hallway. The trial court denied the
motion, ruling that “the detention of the defendant was lawful as a valid
investigatory stop and was reasonable in scope and duration.”
At the close of the State’s case, the trial court dismissed the felon in
possession charges. During deliberations, the foreperson submitted a question
to the court relating to the hindering apprehension statute, asking: “Is it
reasonable to interpret . . . that ‘commission of a crime’ could be ‘suspicion of
commission of a crime?’” The court discussed the question with counsel and
2
over the defendant’s objection, responded, “Yes.” The jury convicted the
defendant of hindering apprehension.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court impermissibly
expanded the definition of the crime of hindering apprehension by replying
affirmatively to the jury’s inquiry. We disagree.
The response to a jury question is left to the sound discretion of the trial
court and we will uphold the response unless the court unsustainably
exercised its discretion. State v. Poole, 150 N.H. 299, 301 (2003).
RSA 642:3, I(a) provides in pertinent part: “A person is guilty of an
offense if, with a purpose to hinder, prevent or delay the discovery,
apprehension, prosecution, conviction or punishment of another for the
commission of a crime, he: (a) Harbors or conceals the other.” In construing
this statute, we draw guidance from RSA 625:3 (1996), which provides: “The
rule that penal statutes are to be strictly construed does not apply to this code.
All provisions of this code shall be construed according to the fair import of
their terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3; State v. Williams, 143 N.H.
559, 561-62 (1999).
New Hampshire’s “Hindering Apprehension or Prosecution” statute is
drawn from section 242.3 of the Model Penal Code (MPC). Id.; State v.
Maloney, 126 N.H. 235, 237-38 (1985). Consistent with the MPC, the State
must prove that the defendant’s purpose was to hinder apprehension,
prosecution or conviction. State v. Kelley, 120 N.H. 14, 17 (1980).
The offense, as defined in the MPC, “covers the common-law category of
accessory after the fact but breaks decisively with the traditional concept that
the accessory’s liability derives from that of his principal. Thus, under the
Model Code provision [242.3], one who harbors a murderer is not made a party
to the original homicide but is convicted, as he should be, for an independent
offense of obstruction of justice.” Model Penal Code, Introductory Note for
Article 242, at 199 (1980). “[This] approach dispenses with many of the
common-law elements[,] [including] knowledge of the identity of the
perpetrator, knowledge of the underlying felony, and . . . even the requirement
that a felony actually have been committed . . . .” Commonwealth v. Perez, 770
N.E.2d 428, 433 (Mass. 2002) (parentheses omitted) citing Model Penal Code &
Commentaries § 242.3, comment 3, at 229, 230. The approach “focuses
instead upon whether the defendant purposely hindered law enforcement.”
Perez, 770 N.E.2d at 433.
3
The court instructed the jury that the State needed to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt “that the defendant harbored Mark Soto in his residence
while members of the Nashua Police Department were searching for Mr. Soto in
connection with a robbery, [and] that the defendant acted with a purpose to
hinder the apprehension of Mark Soto for commission of a crime.”
The defendant argues that the court’s response to the jury’s question
“reduced the State’s burden of proof with regard to [the defendant’s] culpable
knowledge, and permitted the jury to convict him of a crime not specified by
statute.” We disagree. The required mental state under RSA 642:3 does not
require that the defendant or anyone else know that the person he aided in fact
committed a crime. Instead, the mental state required is the intent to hinder
apprehension or prosecution. RSA 642:3, I. The defendant need only act with
the intent to harbor or conceal a person from apprehension and discovery.
Here, the defendant harbored Mark Soto, an individual who police
suspected in the commission of a robbery, within his apartment. Police
informed the defendant that they were investigating a crime that occurred in
the area and asked him whether he knew Mark Soto, whether he knew who
owned the Jetta parked out front, and whether there was anyone else in his
apartment. The defendant answered “no” to all three questions. This line of
questioning was sufficient to alert the defendant that the police suspected Soto
had committed a crime. The police found the car keys to a Jetta in the
defendant’s pocket. More importantly, they discovered Soto lying on the
defendant’s apartment floor. The court’s response to the jury question was
entirely accurate and appropriate given the evidence at trial.
The defendant next argues that he was subject to an unlawful seizure in
violation of Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the
Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution when police confronted
him in the hallway because they lacked reasonable suspicion of criminal
activity. We disagree.
We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution,
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance
only. Id. at 232-33. In reviewing the trial court’s rulings, we accept its factual
findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State
v. Beauchesne, 151 N.H. 803, 809 (2005). Our review of the trial court’s legal
conclusions, however, is de novo. Id.
It is well settled that “in order for a police officer to undertake an
investigatory stop, the officer must have a reasonable suspicion – based on
specific, articulable facts taken together with rational inferences from those
facts – that the particular person stopped has been, is, or is about to be,
engaged in criminal activity.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted). “The
suspect’s conduct and other specific facts must create a ‘significant possibility
4
of criminality.’” State v. Wiggin, 151 N.H. 305, 308 (2004) (quoting State v.
Vadnais, 141 N.H. 68, 70 (1996)). However, a police encounter with a citizen
does not always amount to a seizure of the person. Beauchesne, 151 N.H. at
809. A seizure does not occur simply because a police officer approaches an
individual and asks a few questions, or asks to examine the individual’s
identification or for consent to search the individual or his belongings. Id. So
long as a reasonable person would feel free to leave, State v. Riley, 126 N.H.
257, 263-64 (1985), or to terminate the encounter, State v. McKeown, 151 N.H.
95, 97 (2004), the citizen is not seized under Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution. “[A seizure] occurs when an officer, by means of physical force or
show of authority, has in some way restrained the liberty of the person.”
Beauchesne, 151 N.H. at 810.
Circumstances indicating a “show of authority” might
include the threatening presence of several officers,
the display of a weapon by an officer, some physical
touching of the person, or the use of language or tone
of voice indicating that compliance with the officer’s
request might be compelled.
Id. This is an objective test where the court considers how a reasonable person
in the defendant’s position would have understood his situation. Id.
Looking at the totality of the circumstances, as well as the “show of
authority” factors we applied in Beauchesne, we hold that the defendant was
not seized when the three officers initially approached the defendant in his
hallway. Nashua police were investigating a robbery and began questioning
residents of the apartment building in an attempt to discover information
regarding the suspect and the Jetta. When the three officers encountered the
defendant in the hallway, Adamson initially engaged in limited conversation
with him as to why he did not open his apartment door. Adamson then asked
the defendant a series of questions and asked for his identification. This police
contact took only a short period of time. As the trial court found, the officers’
actions in the hallway did not transcend a mere request to communicate and
would not have led a reasonable person to believe that he must submit to
Adamson’s requests; it was therefore a consensual encounter. See id. at 815.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. Florida v. Bostick, 501
U.S. 429, 436 (1991); Terry, 392 U.S. at 29-31; McKeown, 151 N.H. at 97.
Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5