THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2005-405
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RAYMOND PAUL THOMAS
Argued: May 10, 2006
Opinion Issued: September 27, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Andrew Winters and Theodore M. Lothstein, assistant appellate
defenders, of Concord (Mr. Winters on the brief, and Mr. Lothstein orally), for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Raymond Paul Thomas, appeals his conviction
of one count of attempted murder, see RSA 629:1 (Supp. 2005), and one count
of first degree assault, see RSA 631:1 (1996), following a jury trial in the
Superior Court (Hampsey, J.). He argues that the trial court erred by refusing
to instruct the jury on the ostensibly lesser-included offenses of attempted first
degree assault, see RSA 631:1, I(a) (1996); RSA 629:1, and reckless conduct,
see RSA 631:3, I (1996). We reverse and remand the conviction for attempted
murder.
The record supports the following facts. On March 24, 2002, the
defendant used a knife to repeatedly stab his girlfriend, Rebecca McKenzie, in
their apartment after accusing her of having an affair the night before. The
defendant also stabbed McKenzie’s friend, Cheryl Ann Voight, after she entered
the apartment to help McKenzie.
At trial, McKenzie testified that she had stayed out all night and returned
to the apartment around 6 a.m. on the morning of March 24. The defendant
was waiting for McKenzie and appeared to have been drinking throughout the
night. The defendant and McKenzie argued about where she had been. The
argument continued into the afternoon, when McKenzie called Voight to come
get her. McKenzie testified that they continued arguing and she ended up on
the floor with the defendant on top of her. She further testified that she was
unsure what happened after that, but she woke up on the floor, unable to
move her head and with the taste of blood in her mouth. She testified that
while still kneeling on her back, the defendant told her that he wanted her to
die.
Voight testified that she arrived a few minutes later and, after breaking
into the apartment, pulled the defendant off McKenzie. She testified that the
defendant took the knife out of McKenzie’s back and turned on her, slashing
her on the arm. Voight ran into the kitchen where she continued to struggle
with the defendant who followed her. She testified that the defendant stabbed
her two more times, repeatedly saying that he was going to kill the women.
Voight ran outside to call 911, where she saw Officer McNulty’s cruiser
approaching and flagged him down. Voight explained that she and her friend
had been stabbed and that McKenzie was still in the apartment with the
defendant.
McNulty approached the apartment, announced his presence and
ordered the defendant to surrender. The defendant claimed that he had a gun
and would kill McNulty if he entered. Officer Donahue arrived at the scene.
The two officers entered the apartment and found McKenzie on the floor,
unresponsive in a pool of blood. The defendant yelled that McKenzie was badly
hurt and needed an ambulance. The defendant, however, repeatedly refused to
surrender, telling the officers he would kill them if they came after him.
Other officers arrived on the scene, including Sergeant Timothy Goulden.
Concerned about McKenzie’s condition, Goulden decided to advance on the
defendant, who was hiding in a back bedroom. As the officers entered the
bedroom, the defendant held his right hand behind his back and refused to
surrender. The defendant walked towards the officers, refusing to obey their
orders. Goulden pushed the defendant to throw him off balance and punched
him three times in the face, stunning him. The defendant was then taken into
2
custody, allowing the paramedics to enter the apartment and care for
McKenzie.
At the hospital, McKenzie was treated for stab wounds, a fractured nose
and considerable blood loss. The most serious stab wounds were those to her
back, which had punctured a lung. McKenzie’s treating surgeon testified that
McKenzie would have died without treatment.
Voight was taken to the hospital and treated for cuts on her hands, a
puncture wound in her back, a superficial cut on her left upper arm, and a
deep cut on her left forearm.
The defendant was taken to a different hospital and treated for minor
injuries, including a minor concussion and cuts to his fingers. At the hospital,
the defendant seemed confused and smelled of alcohol. A blood sample
showed that his blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was .278. The treating
physician at the hospital testified that the defendant’s speech was slurred and
that he was sedate, although it was uncertain whether these symptoms were
due to alcohol, his concussion or both. Both the treating physician and
Goulden testified that it was difficult to determine what the effect of the .278
BAC was because seasoned alcoholics can function almost normally with a
BAC equal to or greater than the defendant’s.
Detective George McCarthy waited until the following day to question the
defendant, who was intoxicated and babbling on the day of the incident. In the
interview, the defendant said that he loved McKenzie “completely.” He claimed
to have consumed only four or five beers by the time McKenzie returned home
that morning. The defendant said that McKenzie had started the fight by
punching him in the right eye, at which point he “flipped out” and pushed her
away. She then came after him and he stabbed her.
The defendant was indicted for attempted murder for stabbing McKenzie
and first degree assault for stabbing Voight. At trial, the defendant requested
an instruction on attempted first degree assault and reckless conduct as
lesser-included offenses of the indictment for attempted murder. The trial
court rejected this request and instructed the jury as to attempted murder for
stabbing McKenzie and first degree assault with the lesser-included offense of
second degree assault for stabbing Voight.
The jury convicted the defendant of attempted murder for stabbing
McKenzie and first degree assault for stabbing Voight. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by refusing to
instruct the jury on attempted first degree assault and reckless conduct as
lesser-included offenses of the attempted murder of McKenzie.
3
Whether the defendant is entitled to a lesser-included offense instruction
involves two distinct inquiries. First, the lesser offense must be embraced
within the legal definition of the greater offense. In re Nathan L., 146 N.H. 614,
617 (2001). This entails a comparison of the statutory elements of each offense
without reference to the evidence. Id. Second, the evidence adduced at trial
must provide a rational basis for a finding of guilt on the lesser offense rather
than the greater offense. Id.
A person is guilty of attempted murder if he “does or omits to do
anything which . . . is an act or omission constituting a substantial step
toward,” RSA 629:1, purposely causing the death of another. State v. Allen,
128 N.H. 390, 396 (1986). A person is guilty of attempted first degree assault if
he “does or omits to do anything which . . . is an act or omission constituting a
substantial step toward,” RSA 629:1, “purposely caus[ing] serious bodily injury
to another.” RSA 631:1, I(a). Finally, a person is guilty of reckless conduct if
he “recklessly engages in conduct which places or may place another in danger
of serious bodily injury.” RSA 631:3, I.
Because the State concedes for the purposes of this appeal that the
statutory elements of attempted first degree assault and reckless conduct are
subsumed within the elements of attempted murder, we assume without
deciding that attempted first degree assault and reckless conduct are lesser-
included offenses of attempted murder. We express no opinion on the
propriety of attempted first degree assault and reckless conduct as lesser-
included offenses of attempted murder.
The second part of the analysis requires us to examine whether the
evidence furnished a rational basis for a finding of guilt on the lesser-included
offenses. State v. O’Brien, 114 N.H. 233, 236 (1974). The element of intent
distinguishes attempted murder from attempted first degree assault and
reckless conduct. Attempted murder requires intent to kill, see RSA 629:1;
Allen, 128 N.H. at 396, while attempted first degree assault requires only intent
to cause serious bodily injury, see 631:1, I(a), and reckless conduct requires no
purposeful mens rea, see RSA 631:3, I. Consequently, the defendant was
entitled to an instruction on the lesser-included offenses of attempted first
degree assault and reckless conduct only if the evidence provided a rational
basis for the jury to conclude that he stabbed McKenzie recklessly or with the
intent only to cause serious bodily harm.
The defendant first argues that the evidence supports the conclusion
that he intended only to cause serious bodily injury to McKenzie, not to kill
her, providing a rational basis for the jury to convict on the lesser-included
offenses. The defendant points out that he told the investigating detective that
he loved McKenzie “completely” and never mentioned that he intended to kill
4
her during the interview the day after the stabbing. Moreover, the defendant
argues that he was under duress from McKenzie’s apparent infidelity and
stabbed her in the heat of the moment.
The State responds by arguing that the evidence forecloses any rational
conclusion that the defendant intended only to harm McKenzie. The State
points to testimony establishing that the defendant pushed McKenzie to the
floor, put his arm around her neck, his knee in her back, and repeatedly cut
and stabbed her in the neck and back with a knife. McKenzie’s testimony
established that while stabbing her, the defendant repeated that he wanted her
to die. Voight’s testimony established that the defendant said he was going to
kill both women. The testimony of the treating physician established that the
resulting wounds were life-threatening. Further, the testimony of the
responding police officers established that the defendant was aware of
McKenzie’s severe injuries, but held officers at bay by threatening to shoot
them if they came inside. The defendant never denied the intent to kill in his
interview with McCarthy.
Based upon the evidence adduced at trial, we find that the issue of intent
was sufficiently disputed to provide a rational basis for the jury to conclude
that the defendant acted only recklessly or with a purpose to cause only
serious bodily injury. It is well settled that the jury has substantial latitude in
determining the credibility of witnesses. Morrill v. Tilney, 128 N.H. 773, 778
(1986). It is the jury which observes the witnesses, judges their credibility and
hears their testimony, accepting or rejecting it in whole or in part. Id. In
determining witness credibility, the jury may accept some parts and reject
other parts of testimony, and adopt one or the other of inconsistent statements
by witnesses. Id. Accordingly, the defendant’s statement to police that he
“flipped out” in the face of McKenzie’s infidelity and stabbed her after she came
towards him provided a rational basis for the jury to conclude that the
defendant acted recklessly or with a purpose only to cause serious bodily
injury.
The defendant alternatively argues that he was so intoxicated as to
negate any culpable intent, thereby providing a rational basis for a jury to
convict on the lesser-included offenses. The defendant had a .278 BAC shortly
after the stabbing and gave incoherent remarks to police and paramedics. The
defendant argues this indicia of intoxication provided a rational basis for the
jury to convict on the lesser-included offenses because the defendant’s
intoxication negated his intent to purposely kill McKenzie.
The State responds that the defendant’s level of intoxication was not so
severe as to negate the intent to murder. The State relies on State v.
Guglielmo, 130 N.H. 240 (1987). There, we held that the jury could have
rationally found that the defendant was not too intoxicated to act with the
5
purpose to kill where he had responded coherently and logically during
negotiations with police, was aware of the seriousness of the situation, had
fired in the direction of officers after saying he knew where they were, and said
he would “kill them all.” Id. at 246-47. The State points out that here the
defendant understood the statements of police instructing him to surrender.
While threatening to kill the officers, he acknowledged that McKenzie had been
“gravely hurt” and required an ambulance. Medical and police witnesses
testified that a chronic alcoholic such as the defendant could function normally
with high levels of intoxication. The State also points to testimony that
established the defendant spoke coherently later on the day of the stabbing
when officers in the hospital mentioned McKenzie’s condition in front of him.
Lastly, the State points to several beer cans with red smudges found in the
apartment, suggesting the defendant may have become more intoxicated
following the stabbing.
RSA 626:4 (1996) provides that:
Intoxication is not, as such, a defense. The defendant
may, however, introduce evidence of intoxication whenever it is
relevant to negate an element of the offense charged, and it
shall be taken into consideration in determining whether such
element has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Considering the entire record, we cannot say there was no rational basis
for a jury to find that the defendant’s intoxication negated any purpose to kill
McKenzie. The defendant’s conduct following his arrest and his .278 BAC both
indicate severe intoxication. Moreover, the State’s reliance on State v.
Guglielmo is misplaced. Although the defendant here displayed somewhat
similar conduct, Guglielmo stands for the proposition that the jury could
reasonably have found the defendant’s intoxication did not negate his intent to
kill, not that it was the only rational conclusion. See Guglielmo, 130 N.H. at
247. In the instant case, the testimony of medical and police experts failed to
foreclose the possibility that the defendant, although a seasoned alcoholic, was
severely affected by his intoxication. Similarly, it was for the jury to resolve
whether the defendant’s conduct was brought on by intoxication or by his
minor concussion. Finally, several beer cans with red smudges do not
conclusively prove that the defendant consumed more alcohol after the
stabbing.
We are not persuaded that the evidence precluded any rational basis for
the jury to find that the defendant’s intoxication negated his ability to form a
purposeful intent to kill. Considering the defendant’s BAC and his conduct
following the stabbing, the jury could have convicted on the lesser-included
offenses by rationally concluding that the defendant, albeit too intoxicated to
6
form the intent to kill, still acted recklessly or with the intent only to cause
serious bodily harm.
After reviewing the record, we find that there was a rational basis for the
jury to convict on the lesser-included offenses. Accordingly, the defendant was
entitled to jury instructions on attempted first degree assault and reckless
conduct as lesser-included offenses of attempted murder. We reverse and
remand the defendant’s conviction for attempted murder. The conviction for
first degree assault is affirmed, as it was not appealed.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred;
DALIANIS, J., concurred specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. Because I agree that the evidence
furnished a rational basis for the jury to find the defendant guilty of attempted
first degree assault and/or reckless conduct instead of attempted murder, I
concur in the majority opinion. I write separately because it is not obvious to
me that the statutory elements of attempted first degree assault and reckless
conduct are subsumed within the elements of attempted murder. Because the
State conceded this issue for the purposes of this appeal, the majority properly
does not analyze it; however, it seems to be an issue that we should decide in a
future case.
Although it appears that few courts have addressed whether attempted
first degree assault is a lesser-included offense of attempted murder, several
have addressed whether first degree assault is a lesser-included offense of
murder and have reached different conclusions. Compare Hayes v. State, 368
So. 2d 374, 376 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App.) (assault is not lesser-included offense of
murder; “the only lesser included offenses which must be instructed upon in a
homicide case [are] those offenses that involve[] a lawful or unlawful death”),
cert. denied, 378 So. 2d 345 (Fla. 1979), with People v. Williams, 374 N.W.2d
158, 162 (Mich. Ct. App. 1985) (offenses of assault with intent to murder,
assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder and assault with
dangerous weapon are “cognate lesser offenses” of first degree murder), appeal
denied, 430 N.W.2d 148 (Mich. 1988).
Courts have also disagreed regarding whether reckless conduct is a
lesser-included offense of attempted murder. Compare State v. Feliciano, 618
P.2d 306, 308 (Haw. 1980) (reckless endangering in the second degree is
lesser-included offense of attempted murder because, in both crimes, the
victim does not die but is placed in jeopardy of being injured, and legislative
scheme places reckless endangerment in same classification as murder and
attempted murder), and Guzman v. State, 188 S.W.3d 185, 189-90 (Tex. Crim.
7
App. 2006) (deadly conduct, which requires proof that defendant recklessly
engaged in conduct that placed victim in imminent danger of serious bodily
injury, is lesser-included offense of attempted murder), with Wilson v. State,
697 N.E.2d 466, 477 (Ind. 1998) (trial court correctly refused to instruct on
criminal recklessness as a lesser-included offense of attempted murder), and
State v. Rush, 50 S.W.3d 424, 430-31 (Tenn. 2001) (neither reckless
aggravated assault nor felony reckless endangerment are lesser-included
offenses of attempted second-degree murder, but misdemeanor reckless
endangerment is such a lesser-included offense).
8