THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2005-694
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DONALD W. MORRILL a/k/a "SAM" W. MORRILL
Argued: October 3, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 19, 2006
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Donald W. Morrill, appeals his conviction
for aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, III (1996), arguing
that the Trial Court (Fauver, J.) erred by admitting hearsay evidence and by
allowing the prosecutor to improperly comment upon his decision not to testify.
We reverse and remand.
The jury could have found the following facts. In 1998, the defendant’s
stepdaughter, N.N., reported to her biological father, L.N., that the defendant
had sexually abused her. In late April 1998, L.N. reported N.N.’s disclosure to
the authorities. The New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families
(DCYF) began investigating the allegations. Approximately one week after the
disclosure N.N. recanted, claiming that she had lied about the abuse because
her father had convinced her to do so. Eventually, the case was closed without
any prosecution. In June 1998, L.N. petitioned for custody of N.N., citing the
investigation of the defendant as justification for granting him custody. L.N.
obtained temporary custody, but within days custody was returned to N.N.’s
mother. This custody dispute remained unresolved when L.N. died in October
1998.
In December 2000, DCYF received, from N.N.’s mother, a second report
that the defendant had abused N.N. DCYF attempted to interview N.N., but
she was unresponsive. Without further meaningful contact between DCYF and
N.N. or her mother, the case was closed in November 2001.
In December 2001, N.N. made a third disclosure of abuse, this time to
her guidance counselor. That disclosure was reported to the Strafford County
Attorney’s Office, which, in January 2002, conducted a videotaped interview of
N.N. Following this interview, the defendant was indicted for sexually abusing
N.N.
In 2003, the defendant was convicted of aggravated felonious sexual
assault. That conviction was reversed and remanded. See State v. Morrill, 151
N.H. 331 (2004). Upon remand, the defendant was again convicted of sexually
abusing N.N. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court erred by: (1)
allowing the State to introduce inadmissible hearsay evidence; (2) violating his
rights under the State and Federal Constitutions by admitting this hearsay;
and (3) permitting the prosecutor to comment upon his decision not to testify.
As to the first issue, after N.N.’s first disclosure was reported to the
authorities, L.N. was interviewed by Sergeant Erin Commerford, formerly of the
New Hampshire State Police. During that interview, it appeared to Sergeant
Commerford that N.N. might have reported the abuse to her father some time
before he contacted the authorities. Therefore, she asked him why he had
delayed in reporting the abuse. He responded that he had been unsure about
what to do and did not want to “get anyone in trouble.” Because he died before
the matter was brought to trial, the State sought to introduce, through
Sergeant Commerford, L.N.’s statements regarding the timing of his report to
the authorities.
The defendant objected, arguing that the statements were inadmissible
hearsay and, in addition, barred by Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36
(2004). The State countered that the statements were admissible because they
fell within an exception to the rule against hearsay, and, even if they did not,
the defendant had “opened the door” to their admission. The trial court ruled
2
that the statements were not hearsay because they were not offered for their
truth. Additionally, the trial court ruled that the defendant had opened the
door to the statements and that the statements were not barred by Crawford.
On appeal, the State conceded at oral argument that the statements were
offered for their truth, and does not contend that they fall within an exception
to the hearsay rule. Accordingly, we conclude that L.N.’s statements to
Sergeant Commerford were hearsay and, thus, inadmissible under the rules of
evidence. See State v. Bennett, 144 N.H. 13, 19 (1999) (noting that narratives
of past state of mind or belief are incompetent hearsay).
Having concluded that the statements were inadmissible hearsay, we
must determine whether the trial court properly admitted them under the
“opening the door” theory. We note that the term “opening the door” is
conclusory. State v. Rogan, 151 N.H. 629, 631 (2005). At one time the phrase
referred to the doctrine of “curative admissibility.” Id. Under that doctrine, a
trial judge has discretion to admit otherwise inadmissible evidence in order to
rebut prejudicial evidence that has already been erroneously admitted. State v.
Benoit, 126 N.H. 6, 20 (1985). The doctrine applied “only when inadmissible
evidence has been allowed, when that evidence was prejudicial, and when the
proffered testimony would counter that prejudice.” Id. We have, however,
expanded the meaning of the phrase “opening the door” beyond the doctrine of
“curative admissibility.” Id.
“Opening the door” is now more broadly applied to situations in which
one party has created a misleading advantage, and the opponent is then
permitted to use previously suppressed or otherwise inadmissible evidence to
directly counter the misleading advantage. State v. Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 56
(2001); see also Gilligan & Imwinkelried, Bringing the “Opening the Door”
Theory to a Close: The Tendency to Overlook the Specific Contradiction
Doctrine in Evidence Law, 41 Santa Clara L. Rev. 807 (2001). This doctrine,
sometimes known as the doctrine of “specific contradiction,” applies when one
party introduces evidence that provides a justification beyond mere relevance
for an opponent’s introduction of evidence that may not otherwise be
admissible. Rogan, 151 N.H. at 631. The initial evidence must have
reasonably created a misimpression or misled the fact-finder in some way. Id.
The rule thus prevents a party from successfully excluding evidence favorable
to his opponent and then selectively introducing this evidence for his own
advantage, without allowing the opponent to place the evidence in proper
context. Carlson, 146 N.H. at 56. The fact that the “door has been opened,”
however, does not, by itself, permit all evidence to pass through. State v.
Trempe, 140 N.H. 95, 99 (1995). The doctrine is intended to prevent prejudice
and is not to be subverted into a rule for injection of prejudice. Id.
3
We acknowledge that our prior decisions have, to some degree, blurred
the distinction between the two doctrines described above. See Estabrook,
Opening the Door: New Hampshire’s Treatment of Trial Court Rebuttal
Evidence, 46 N.H.B.J. 30 (2005). To prevent confusion that might arise from
the use of the term, when a party uses the term “opening the door” or its
equivalent as justifying the admission of otherwise inadmissible evidence, the
party should make clear which of the above doctrines is being invoked. This is
so because the two doctrines are invoked by different types of evidence –
“curative admissibility” is triggered by the erroneous prior admission of
inadmissible evidence, while “specific contradiction” is triggered by the
introduction of misleading admissible evidence. Identifying the particular
doctrine will permit more focused discussions between litigants and judges and
will prevent further erosion of the unique requirements of each doctrine.
Turning to the matter before us, we note that the admissibility of
evidence is generally within the trial court’s sound discretion. Rogan, 151 N.H.
at 631. Because the trial court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial
impact of particular testimony, we will not upset its ruling absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. at 631-32. To show that the trial
court’s exercise of discretion was unsustainable, the defendant bears the
burden of establishing that the decision was clearly unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id. at 632.
We conclude first that the doctrine of “curative admissibility” does not
apply. The State contends that the defendant’s arguments, and the testimony
he elicited, made L.N.’s statements relevant and necessary. The State does not
contend, however, that the arguments and testimony presented by the
defendant were themselves inadmissible. As the erroneous admission of
evidence is required to invoke curative admissibility, the doctrine of curative
admissibility is not applicable here.
We also conclude that the doctrine of “specific contradiction” does not
apply. That doctrine applies where one party creates a misleading advantage
and the opponent may use previously suppressed or otherwise inadmissible
evidence to counter the misleading advantage. Rogan, 151 N.H. at 631. As
noted previously, the initial evidence must have reasonably created a
misimpression or have misled the fact-finder in some way. Id. Based upon our
review of the record, we conclude that the defendant did not create a
misleading advantage.
When ruling on the admissibility of L.N.’s statements during trial, the
trial court found that the defendant’s theory of the case was that L.N. had
fabricated the allegations against him in order to gain an advantage in his
custody dispute over N.N. The trial court then determined that the defendant
“is creating a false impression because he is presenting a theory of the case
4
that is directly controverted by statements of the person he is implicating in his
allegations of wrongdoings.” Thus, the trial court permitted the State to
introduce L.N.’s statements because they “would give a more complete picture
of [L.N.’s] involvement in this case, and place[] the defendant’s statements and
insinuations in the proper context.” In other words, because the State had
evidence directly contrary to the defendant’s theory of the case, the defendant
created a false impression and the State was entitled to introduce its evidence
to give proper context. Notably absent from the trial court’s ruling is any
finding that the defendant’s initial theory or supporting evidence had
reasonably created a misimpression or had misled the jury in some way.
Instead, the trial court found that the defendant must have misled the jury
because the State had evidence directly contrary to his theory. The mere
existence of contrary evidence does not, however, mean that the defendant’s
initial theory and supporting evidence were misleading.
On appeal, the State argues that the defendant’s theory at trial was that
L.N. had delayed reporting the matter to the authorities until doing so was
advantageous to him in his custody dispute. According to the State, this
theory and its supporting evidence left the jury with a misleading impression
about L.N.’s motivations for delaying his report, and, therefore, it was justified
in introducing L.N.’s statements as an alternative explanation for the delay.
We disagree.
Prior to Sergeant Commerford taking the stand, the jury had heard the
testimony of L.N.’s sister. She testified that before L.N. informed the
authorities of the abuse, he had asked her to speak with N.N. regarding N.N.’s
allegations against the defendant. In response to questioning from the State,
L.N.’s sister testified that after speaking with N.N., she told L.N. that he should
report the matter, but that he said he was afraid to do so because reporting it
might “backfire” on him and cause N.N. to be taken from him. Therefore, the
State presented the jury with admissible evidence directly contradicting the
defendant’s theory, which placed any potentially misleading evidence into
proper context, without resort to inadmissible hearsay. Because the State had
presented admissible evidence supporting its alternative explanation for L.N.’s
delay, introducing L.N.’s inadmissible hearsay for the same purpose was
unnecessary. See Trempe, 140 N.H. at 99 (the opening the door rule is not to
be subverted into a rule for the injection of prejudice). As each side had
presented admissible evidence regarding L.N.’s motivation to delay, the
defendant did not create a misleading advantage and did not open the door.
We conclude, therefore, that the trial court erred when it admitted L.N.’s
hearsay testimony. Rogan, 151 N.H. at 632.
The State contends that the trial court’s error was not an unsustainable
exercise of discretion because the defendant has failed to demonstrate that it
was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. The State does not argue
5
that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, however. We hold that
the defendant has carried his burden of demonstrating prejudice.
The central issue in this case was whether N.N. was truthful when she
initially disclosed the abuse or when she later recanted it. L.N.’s statements to
Sergeant Commerford tended to show that N.N. was truthful when she initially
disclosed the abuse. These statements tended to establish that N.N. disclosed
the abuse before L.N. reported the abuse to the police. These statements thus
tended to disprove the defendant’s theory that L.N. fabricated the abuse
allegation to gain advantage in the custody dispute. As the defendant argues:
“[T]he testimony prejudiced [him] because it impermissibly bolstered N.N.’s
credibility on the central issue in the case – whether her initial disclosure, or
her subsequent recantation, constituted the truth.”
We conclude that, in this way, the defendant has met his burden of
demonstrating that the trial court’s error was clearly unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Accordingly, we hold that the trial court’s error
constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Because the State has not
argued harmless error, we reverse and remand for a new trial.
In light of our holding, we need not reach the defendant’s remaining
appellate arguments.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6