THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-709
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
THOMAS LAROSE
Argued: February 13, 2008
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karin M. Eckel, attorney, on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Thomas Larose, by brief, pro se.
Kacavas, Ramsdell & Howard, PLLC, of Manchester (John P. Kacavas
orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Thomas Larose, appeals his conviction
after a jury trial in Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) of five counts of selling cocaine
to an undercover police officer. See RSA 318-B:2 (2004). We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant has had a
drug problem since he was young; in approximately 1999, he became addicted
to crack cocaine. In 2001, he was convicted in New Hampshire of possession of
marijuana. He was also convicted of a drug offense in Massachusetts.
In late winter of 2004, after a relapse, the defendant promised his family
that he would “be done with dealing and done with cocaine.” In April 2005,
however, the defendant felt “the urges” to use cocaine again because he had
seen “some former associates” at the hotel where he was residing.
On April 27, 2005, a police informant reported to the police that the
defendant was selling cocaine in Nashua. The informant and the defendant
had known each other since 2002 or 2003, and had used drugs together.
They had a mutual friend to whom the defendant had once sold drugs in the
informant’s presence.
On April 27, at an undercover police officer’s direction and in his
presence, the informant called the defendant and asked if he would sell drugs
to her. The defendant said that he wanted to think about it and invited the
informant to meet him at a local restaurant. During the same telephone
conversation, she again asked him if he would sell her drugs, and he said
“okay.” He testified that as of that date, he “hadn’t been partying at all in the
several days coming” and had not seen the informant since October 2004 when
they used drugs together.
He told the informant to pick him up at the restaurant and drive him to
the Red Roof Inn where he would purchase cocaine to sell to her. The
defendant testified that he agreed to sell the informant drugs because he had
been feeling like using cocaine again. As he explained, “At that point I guess I
was already thinking about, you know, doing some.” He anticipated being able
to keep one of the cocaine packages that he would procure for the informant.
The informant drove to the restaurant, with the undercover officer
following her. The defendant came out of the restaurant and got into the
informant’s car. As she began driving towards the Red Roof Inn, the defendant
told her that, instead, they had to go to the Extended Stay Hotel. When they
arrived at the Extended Stay Hotel, the defendant took the informant’s money
and went into the hotel. When he emerged, he returned to the car and gave
her cocaine. He kept one package of cocaine for himself and later snorted it.
The informant drove the defendant back to the Red Roof Inn and, later, gave
the undercover officer the cocaine she had just purchased.
That evening, the informant, a friend of hers, and the defendant smoked
crack cocaine together in the defendant’s hotel room. Although the defendant
testified that for the next week, he and the informant used drugs together “at
least two dozen times,” the informant denied this. The informant testified that
between April 27 and May 2, she visited the defendant at his room at the Red
Roof Inn “[m]aybe twice.” In that week, the defendant testified that he sold the
informant drugs. The defendant testified that he believed that the police did
not authorize the informant to use drugs with him. The undercover officer
testified that, after April 27, he did not authorize the informant to buy cocaine
2
from the defendant. The officer further testified that, after May 2, he and the
informant had no further contact.
On May 2, the informant called the defendant and gave him the phone
number of her friend “Nick,” the undercover police officer. She told the
defendant that “Nick” was “in need of something” and asked the defendant to
“help him out for [her] today.” The defendant then called “Nick,” who asked the
defendant if he would sell him cocaine. The defendant testified that he “ma[d]e
the mistake of calling [“Nick”]” because he was “completely strung out on drugs
and looking for a way to make some money.”
The defendant told the officer to meet him at a Nashua restaurant, which
he did. The defendant and the officer went to the officer’s car, where the officer
told the defendant that he wanted to buy $200 worth of cocaine. The
defendant said, “no problem.” They went to the Red Roof Inn, the officer gave
the defendant money and the defendant went into the hotel and returned with
four “baggies” of cocaine. The officer then drove the defendant to a bar in
downtown Nashua.
On May 12, the officer left a message for the defendant on his cell phone.
Five minutes later, the defendant returned the call and the officer told him that
he wanted to buy another $200 worth of cocaine. The officer met the defendant
and, after driving him to a laundromat, gave him $200. The defendant sat on a
nearby bench until a car picked him up. Shortly thereafter, the defendant
emerged from the car, got back into the officer’s vehicle, and eventually gave
the officer cocaine after taking some for himself.
The officer called the defendant again on May 24, and left a message
asking the defendant to call him back. Within five minutes, the defendant
returned the call and asked the officer if he was “looking for the same thing.”
The officer said that he was and the defendant said “no problem.” As with the
prior transactions, the defendant instructed the officer to pick him up at a
certain location at which he was waiting, and drive him to another location at
which he purchased cocaine, which he then sold to the officer. Before the
police arrested the defendant, he and the officer completed two additional
cocaine transactions on June 2 and June 7. The defendant was indicted for
the five drug sales that he made to the undercover officer; he was not indicted
for the April 27 sale to the informant.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by: (1) failing
to instruct the jury on entrapment; (2) denying his motions to dismiss; and (3)
denying his request for a continuance and initially denying without prejudice
his motion for additional discovery about the informant.
3
II. Analysis
A. Jury Instruction on Entrapment
The defendant first argues that he sold cocaine to the undercover officer
because of police entrapment. He asserts, therefore, that the trial court erred
when it denied his request for a jury instruction on entrapment.
1. General Principles
“A trial court must grant a defendant’s requested jury instruction on a
specific defense if there is some evidence to support a rational finding in favor
of that defense.” State v. Lavoie, 152 N.H. 542, 547 (2005). “Some evidence”
means more than a minutia or a scintilla of evidence. Id. “To be more than a
scintilla, evidence cannot be vague, conjectural, or the mere suspicion about
the existence of a fact, but must be real and of such quality as to induce
conviction.” State v. Graham, 614 N.W.2d 266, 272 (Neb. 2000). A court need
not “give weight to allegations which are intrinsically improbable or flatly
contradicted by irrefutable evidence.” United States v. Rodriguez, 858 F.2d
809, 815 (1st Cir. 1988). Moreover, while “conclusory and self-serving
statements, standing alone, will not suffice,” United States v. Ortiz, 804 F.2d
1161, 1165-66 (10th Cir. 1986), “a defendant’s account, though self-serving,
may have weight if it is interlaced with considerable detail and has some
circumstantial corroboration in the record.” United States v. Joost, 92 F.3d 7,
12 (1st Cir. 1996) (quotation omitted); see State v. Haycock, 146 N.H. 5, 9–11
(2001) (court erred by not giving requested instruction on self-defense even
though “defendant testified inconsistently on numerous occasions”).
Without the necessary quantum of evidence to support the defense, jury
instructions are not grounds for reversal if read as a whole they fairly cover the
issues of law in the case. State v. Letourneau, 133 N.H. 565, 568 (1990). We
review the trial court’s failure to give an instruction for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Lavoie, 152 N.H. at 547.
Pursuant to RSA 626:5 (2007):
It is an affirmative defense that the actor committed the
offense because he was induced or encouraged to do so by a law
enforcement official or by a person acting in cooperation with a law
enforcement official, for the purpose of obtaining evidence against
him and when the methods used to obtain such evidence were
such as to create a substantial risk that the offense would be
committed by a person not otherwise disposed to commit it.
However, conduct merely affording a person an opportunity to
commit an offense does not constitute entrapment.
4
The general purpose of the affirmative defense of entrapment “is to prevent a
defendant from being convicted of a crime manufactured by law enforcement
officers.” State v. Bacon, 114 N.H. 306, 308 (1974). While ordinarily
entrapment raises an issue of fact to be determined by the jury, if the
defendant fails to meet his burden of producing some evidence in support of
the defense, the trial court should not submit the issue to the jury. See id. at
309; see also Lavoie, 152 N.H. at 547.
“Generally, the determination of whether a defendant has been
entrapped is made by reference to one of two criteria, one a subjective test and
the other an objective test.” State v. Little, 121 N.H. 765, 769 (1981). The
subjective test focuses upon the intent or predisposition of the defendant to
commit the crime. Id. Under the subjective test, if the defendant is found to
have been predisposed to commit the crime, the defense will fail. Id. Under
the subjective test, the actions of government officials “are not critical factors”
unless their conduct is so outrageous as to offend due process. Id. By
contrast, the objective test focuses exclusively upon the conduct of law
enforcement officials and their agents in providing the defendant with an
opportunity to commit the crime. Id. at 770. Under the objective test, evidence
of the defendant’s predisposition to commit the alleged crime is irrelevant. Id.
In New Hampshire, “the determination of whether a legitimate
entrapment defense exists . . . involve[s] elements of both the subjective and
objective test.” Id. at 771. Thus, we look at the conduct of law enforcement
officials and their agents to determine whether they engaged in “the kind of
conduct . . . [that] may . . . have induced the accused to commit the crime
charged.” State v. Groulx, 106 N.H. 44, 47 (1964) (quotation omitted). We also
examine the defendant’s “own conduct and predisposition,” Little, 121 N.H. at
772 (quotation omitted), to determine whether he was “ready to commit the
crime” and the police only furnished him an opportunity to do so, State v.
Campbell, 110 N.H. 238, 241 (1970).
Under New Hampshire law, therefore, the entrapment defense consists of
two elements: (1) government inducement; and (2) the lack of predisposition on
the part of the defendant to engage in the alleged criminal conduct. See Little,
121 N.H. at 771-72. In this respect, New Hampshire law comports with the law
in the majority of jurisdictions. See Mathews v. United States, 485 U.S. 58, 62-
63 (1988); United States v. Daniel, 3 F.3d 775, 778 (4th Cir. 1993); United
States v. Jackson, 345 F.3d 59, 66 (2d Cir. 2003), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 1157
(2004), and cert. denied, 541 U.S. 956 (2004); United States v. Ryan, 289 F.3d
1339, 1343 (11th Cir. 2002), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 927 (2002); United States v.
Tejeda, 974 F.2d 210, 217 (1st Cir. 1992); State v. Verrecchia, 766 A.2d 377,
387 (R.I. 2001). See generally 2 W. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 5.2(a),
at 562-64 (3d ed. 2007).
5
Because it is an affirmative defense, see RSA 626:5, the defendant bears
the burden of proving entrapment by a preponderance of the evidence, see RSA
626:7 (2007). Little, 121 N.H. at 772. Thus, to be entitled to an instruction on
entrapment, a defendant must produce “some evidence” on both prongs of the
defense. See Lavoie, 152 N.H. at 547; see also Tejeda, 974 F.2d at 217; Sparks
v. State, 603 A.2d 1258, 1283 (Md. Ct. Spec. App.), cert. denied, 610 A.2d 797
(Md. 1992). He must produce “some evidence” to support a rational finding
that: (1) the charged offense was induced by government officials; and (2) he
was not predisposed to engage in it. See Lavoie, 152 N.H. at 547; Little, 121
N.H. at 771-72. With these general principles in mind, we now analyze
whether the trial court erred when it ruled that the defendant failed to meet
this burden.
2. Inducement
“[I]nducement . . . goes beyond providing an ordinary opportunity to
commit a crime.” United States v. Gendron, 18 F.3d 955, 961 (1st Cir.)
(quotations omitted), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1051 (1994); see Jacobson v.
United States, 503 U.S. 540, 550 (1992); RSA 626:5 (“merely affording a person
an opportunity to commit an offense does not constitute entrapment”). “An
inducement, by its very nature, contemplates more than a request and an
affirmative response.” Sparks, 603 A.2d at 1283. “It is more than a
solicitation. It is more even than a successful solicitation.” Id. (citation
omitted). “Thus, an agent deployed to stop the traffic in illegal drugs may offer
the opportunity to buy or sell drugs and, if the offer is accepted, make an
arrest on the spot or later.” Jacobson, 503 U.S. at 549.
“An ‘inducement’ consists of an ‘opportunity’ plus something else –
typically, excessive pressure by the government upon the defendant or the
government’s taking advantage of an alternative, non-criminal type of motive.”
Gendron, 18 F.3d at 961.
Courts have found a basis for sending the entrapment issue to the
jury (or finding entrapment established as a matter of law) where
government officials: (1) used intimidation and threats against a
defendant’s family; (2) called every day, began threatening the
defendant, and were belligerent; (3) engaged in forceful solicitation
and dogged insistence until defendant capitulated; (4) played upon
defendant’s sympathy for informant’s common narcotics
experience and withdrawal symptoms; (5) played upon sentiment
of one former war buddy for another to get liquor (during
prohibition); (6) used repeated suggestions which succeeded only
when defendant had lost his job and needed money for his family's
food and rent; [and] (7) told defendant that she (the agent) was
suicidal and in desperate need of money. The background and
context of each example illustrate possible government
6
overreaching -- of its having acted unfairly by employing methods
of persuasion or inducement which create a substantial risk that
such an offense will be committed by persons other than those
who are ready to commit it.
Id. at 961-62 (quotations, citations, brackets and ellipsis omitted).
Here, even if we view the evidence in the light most favorable to the
defendant, it did not constitute “some evidence” to support a rational finding
that the defendant was induced to commit the charged offenses. With respect
to the charged offenses, there is no evidence at all that the undercover officer
engaged in any improper inducement. Rather, even taking the defendant’s
testimony as true, the officer merely asked him for drugs. Mere solicitation is
not inducement as a matter of law. See Sparks, 603 A.2d at 1283; see also
RSA 626:5.
While the defendant implies that he would never have sold cocaine to the
officer had the police informant not induced him to return to his drug addiction
by repeatedly doing drugs with him, his own testimony establishes that even
before the informant contacted him, he had been “partying.” This case is, thus,
distinguishable from Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369, 373 (1958),
where the Court found inducement as a matter of law.
First, in Sherman, the informant targeted the accused after meeting him
at a doctor’s office where they were being treated for narcotics addiction.
Sherman, 356 U.S. at 371. By contrast, the informant here knew the
defendant because she had used drugs with him in the past and had observed
him selling drugs to a mutual friend. Moreover, while the accused in Sherman
was being treated for drug addiction and was trying to avoid drugs before being
induced to sell them to the informant, the defendant had been using drugs
within several days of the informant’s first contact. Id. at 371, 376.
Further, in Sherman, before ever asking the accused to sell him drugs,
the informant cultivated a relationship with the accused by running into him
accidentally and allowing their conversation gradually to progress to their
mutual attempts to overcome narcotics addiction. Id. at 373. Conversely, the
informant here, knowing that the defendant had sold drugs in the past, called
him “out of the blue” and asked him to sell drugs to her.
Also, in Sherman, the accused agreed to sell the informant drugs only
after “a number of” repeated requests and after the informant solicited the
accused’s sympathy by feigning physical suffering due to withdrawal
symptoms. Id. at 371. Here, the informant merely asked the defendant twice if
he would sell drugs to her. The first time he was asked, the defendant said
that he was not sure that he wanted to do it and that he had to think about it.
7
The second time he was asked, within moments of the first time, he said
“okay.” He never said “no.”
Additionally, in Sherman, the informant notified the police about the
accused only after repeatedly buying drugs from him, while here, the informant
notified the police before any sales took place. Id. Finally, in Sherman, the
Court found inducement as a matter of law based upon the uncontroverted
testimony of the government’s witnesses, while here, the sole evidence
supporting the defendant’s entrapment defense is his own self-serving account.
Id. at 373.
The only other inducement to which the defendant points concerns the
sale to the informant for which he was never charged. The alleged inducement,
viewed in the light most favorable to the defendant, is that the police informant
asked him twice if he would sell cocaine to her, telling him that she had a
“really good customer, Nick, who got a ball [of cocaine] every week,” for whom
she could not procure cocaine as usual because of time constraints. He
testified that he assented because he believed that if he “helped her out” by
selling her cocaine (to give to “Nick”), the amount of cocaine involved would
enable him to keep a package for himself. As he testified:
In the way of doing things at the time, generally speaking, you buy
something for somebody and you take a piece for yourself. And,
you know, when the amount is a ball, two hundred dollars, well
that’s enough to be able to give someone, another wholesaler, a
good deal and still keep some for yourself. . . . So, the anticipation
was that I could help her out. I could keep a package. She could
keep a package. And that would be the case. Not to say that once
you start using drugs, you know, any purchase, any chance to get
a hit is enough. But for someone out of the blue to call you, two
hundred dollars would be like a minimum amount, you know. It’s
just, you know, that you could do it.
None of this constitutes improper inducement. That the informant asked
the defendant twice is not inducement. See Sparks, 603 A.2d at 1283; see also
State v. Trujillo, 883 P.2d 329, 332 (Wash. Ct. App. 1994), rev. denied, 892
P.2d 1088 (Wash. 1995). Nor is it inducement that the defendant was lured by
the promise of a good cocaine customer and the ability to keep some of the
cocaine for himself.
The defendant’s failure to produce “some evidence” that he was induced
to commit the charged offenses is fatal to his claim that he was entitled to a
jury instruction on entrapment. Accordingly, we need not address the
sufficiency of the defendant’s proof that he was not predisposed to commit the
charged offenses.
8
B. Motions to Dismiss
1. State Constitution
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred by denying his
motion to dismiss on the ground that the police violated Part I, Article 8 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. Part I, Article 8, however, concerns open
government and is not pertinent here. This argument, therefore, lacks merit
and warrants no extended consideration. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321,
322 (1993).
2. Federal Constitution
The defendant also argues that dismissal was required because the
police violated his due process and equal protection rights under the Federal
Constitution by not arresting him after the first sale, thereby permitting him to
continue to sell and consume drugs, which damaged his health and society
generally. “There is no [federal] constitutional right to be arrested,” and the
police need not halt a criminal investigation as soon as they have the minimum
evidence necessary to establish probable cause. Hoffa v. United States, 385
U.S. 293, 310 (1966). We conclude, therefore, that the trial court did not err
when it denied the defendant’s motions to dismiss.
C. Motions for Continuance and Discovery
Finally, the defendant contends that the trial court erred when it denied
his request for a continuance and initially denied without prejudice his motion
for additional discovery about the informant. “The trial court has broad
discretion in managing the proceedings before it,” In the Matter of Connor &
Connor, 156 N.H. ___, ___, 931 A.2d 1252, 1254 (2007), including pre-trial
discovery, State v. Emery, 152 N.H. 783, 789 (2005). We will disturb decisions
about pre-trial discovery and motions to continue only if the defendant
demonstrates that the decision was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. See State v. Jaroma, 137 N.H. 562, 571-72 (1993); Emery, 152 N.H. at
789. We conclude that the denials of his request for a continuance and his
motion for more discovery were not unsustainable exercises of discretion.
The record reveals that one week before trial, the trial court granted the
defendant’s request to proceed pro se and to retain his attorney as stand-by
counsel. At the hearing on this request, the defendant asked for a one-month
continuance so that he could “review courtroom procedures” and file certain
discovery motions. The trial court denied the request for a continuance
because the defendant had a week before the trial to prepare, almost all of the
motions for discovery that he had filed lacked merit, and his attorney was still
available to assist him as stand-by counsel. We hold that this was not an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
9
With respect to his motion for additional discovery about the informant,
the record shows that once the State opened the door to her testimony, the trial
court granted the defendant’s request for discovery and gave him time to review
it before any questioning. Given this record, the defendant has failed to
demonstrate that the trial court’s initial denial without prejudice of his motion
for additional discovery constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Although on appeal, the defendant contends that by denying his request
for a continuance and motion for additional discovery, the trial court deprived
him of due process, he has failed to demonstrate that he preserved this
argument for our review. We therefore decline to consider it. See Petition of
State of N.H. (State v. San Giovanni), 154 N.H. 671, 677 (2007).
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10