THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2006-236
JOY A. CHASE
v.
AMERIQUEST MORTGAGE COMPANY
Argued: January 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: February 21, 2007
Gregory M. Sorg, of Franconia, on the brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
McNicholas Law Offices, P.A., of Concord (Patrick J. McNicholas on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Joy A. Chase, appeals an order of the Trial
Court (Burling, J.) requiring her to pay a portion of an outstanding mortgage
held by the defendant, Ameriquest Mortgage Company (Ameriquest). We
affirm.
I. Background
The facts are undisputed. The plaintiff and her ex-husband, George
Chase, purchased a home at 55 Main Street in Rumney in August 1996. Using
their home as collateral, they later executed a mortgage note and deed with
Bankers Trust Company of California. In April 2002, again utilizing the home
as collateral, Mr. Chase entered into a mortgage with Ameriquest in the
amount of $90,000. The parties stipulated, for purposes of the hearing before
the trial court, that Mr. Chase forged the plaintiff’s name when he executed the
mortgage instrument with Ameriquest. As part of the mortgage agreement,
Ameriquest paid off the Bankers Trust mortgage.
Pursuant to a divorce agreement later executed between the plaintiff and
her husband, the plaintiff became the “sole owner of the parties’ marital
residence subject to any indebtedness legally secured thereby.” At some point,
the plaintiff did not meet the obligations of the mortgage with Ameriquest and
foreclosure proceedings began. The plaintiff then sought to enjoin the
foreclosure. The proceedings at issue here followed, with Ameriquest seeking
$74,439.78 from the plaintiff, the amount it paid to Bankers Trust.
After a hearing, the trial court ruled that Ameriquest’s mortgage
constituted a charge on the homestead and the doctrines of equitable
subrogation and unjust enrichment required the plaintiff to pay the
$74,439.78. The plaintiff appealed, arguing that the trial court erred in
applying the doctrines of equitable subrogation and unjust enrichment because
the statutory homestead exemption relieves her from any obligation to pay
Ameriquest under the terms of the mortgage.
II. Statutory Homestead Exemption
We begin with the interpretation and application of the statutory
homestead exemption as set forth in RSA 480:1, :4 and :5-a. The
interpretation and application of statutes present questions of law, which we
review de novo. See, e.g., Town of Hinsdale v. Town of Chesterfield, 153 N.H.
70, 72 (2005). In conducting our review, we accord deference to the trial
court’s findings of historical fact, where those findings are supported by
evidence in the record. Elwood v. Bolte, 119 N.H. 508, 510 (1979).
RSA 480:1 (Supp. 2006) establishes the homestead right by providing
that “[e]very person is entitled to $100,000 worth of his or her homestead, or of
his or her interest therein, as a homestead.” The plaintiff argues that RSA
480:1 generally protects her, up to $100,000, from having to make payment on
the mortgage with Ameriquest. Neither side disputes that the plaintiff’s house
constitutes a homestead within the meaning of RSA 480:1. Thus, we assume
for purposes of our analysis the correctness of that position. However, the trial
court held that the homestead right in RSA 480:1 did not apply in the plaintiff’s
case because the Ameriquest mortgage fell within the exception contained in
RSA 480:4, III (2001), which provides:
The homestead right is exempt from attachment
during its continuance from levy or sale on execution,
and from liability to be encumbered or taken for the
payment of debts, except in the following cases:
2
. . .
III. In the enforcement of mortgages which are
made a charge thereon according to law . . . .
The trial court ruled that RSA 480:4, III applied because Ameriquest
discharged the Bankers Trust mortgage, and thereby became entitled to treat
the Bankers Trust mortgage as if it were a charge on the homestead that had
been assigned to Ameriquest. The plaintiff contends that RSA 480:4, III does
not apply because the Ameriquest mortgage is not a charge on the homestead
“according to law” since it was not created with the formalities required by
either RSA 477:3 (2001) or RSA 480:5-a (2001). We agree with the plaintiff.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Town of Hinsdale, 153 N.H. at 72. When examining the language of the
statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Appeal
of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 911 A.2d 1, 5 (2006). We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. We do not construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to
do so in harmony with the overall statutory scheme. Soraghan v. Mt.
Cranmore Ski Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005). When interpreting two or
more statutes that deal with a similar subject matter, we construe them so that
they do not contradict each other, and so that they will lead to reasonable
results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the statutes. Id.
RSA 480:4, III requires: (1) a mortgage; (2) which is made a charge on a
homestead; (3) according to law. Even if we assume arguendo that the first two
requirements are satisfied, the third is not. The Ameriquest mortgage does not
satisfy the requirements of at least two applicable statutes.
First, the Ameriquest mortgage does not satisfy the requirement of RSA
477:3 that “[e]very deed or other conveyance of real estate shall be signed by
the party granting the same and acknowledged by the grantor before a justice,
notary public or commissioner and shall show the mailing address of the
grantee.” Although the Ameriquest mortgage constitutes a conveyance of real
estate, see Black’s Law Dictionary 1031 (8th ed. 1999) (defining mortgage), the
party (or parties) granting the conveyance at issue here did not sign and
acknowledge it before a justice, notary public or commissioner. See RSA
477:3. That is, the trial court found that both the petitioner and her husband
owned the home; they were thus the parties who could grant the conveyance.
However, for purposes of this case, both parties stipulated that the plaintiff’s
3
husband forged her name on the mortgage instrument. Accordingly, the
statutory formalities of execution were not satisfied.
Second, the Ameriquest mortgage does not satisfy the requirements of
RSA 480:5-a. It dictates that “[n]o deed shall convey or encumber the
homestead right, except a mortgage made at the time of purchase to secure
payment of the purchase money, unless it is executed by the owner and wife or
husband, if any, with the formalities required for the conveyance of land.”
There can be no dispute that the Ameriquest mortgage was not “a mortgage
made at the time of purchase to secure payment of the purchase money.” Nor,
given our discussion of RSA 477:3, can there be any dispute that the
Ameriquest mortgage was not “executed by the owner and wife or husband, if
any, with the formalities required for the conveyance of land.” See RSA 480:5-
a; see also In re St. Onge, 317 B.R. 39, 42 (Bankr. D.N.H. 2004) (explaining
that homestead exemption can be waived where husband and wife both
execute mortgage deed with formalities required by law). Accordingly, the
Ameriquest mortgage cannot constitute a charge on the homestead according
to law because at least two crucial provisions of the law were not followed.
Thus, we conclude that RSA 480:4, III does not apply, and the trial court erred
by ruling to the contrary.
III. Equitable Subrogation
Although the language of the statutory homestead exemption supports
the plaintiff’s position, we decline her invitation to end our analysis here. The
plaintiff is in the somewhat unenviable position of having invoked the superior
court’s equitable powers to enjoin the foreclosure, but then arguing that the
court erred in exercising those same powers to balance the equities and
exigencies of this particular case. We are mindful of the trial court’s
observation that, despite the forgery, “[a] benefit was conferred on Ms. Chase
when Ameriquest paid her valid mortgage. Ms. Chase is aware of the benefit
because she took out the original mortgage and lives on the property. It is
inequitable for Ms. Chase to retain the property free and clear of all liens.” As
the Florida Supreme Court noted in a case quite similar to this one, “The
homestead exemption is intended to be a shield, not a sword.” Palm Beach
Sav. & Loan v. Fishbein, 619 So. 2d 267, 271 (Fla. 1993). Accordingly, we now
consider whether to uphold the trial court’s exercise of its equitable powers.
RSA 498:1 (1997) (amended 2006) confers equitable jurisdiction upon
the superior court in several types of cases, including those dealing with fraud
and mortgage foreclosure. The plaintiff initiated this case in equity to enjoin a
mortgage foreclosure and she stipulated to the existence of forgery. See Owen
v. Stewart, 111 N.H. 350, 352 (1971) (“Plaintiff’s petition alleged fraud and the
power of the superior court to exercise its equitable jurisdiction in the case of
fraud has long been recognized.”). Although it was not the plaintiff herself who
4
perpetrated the forgery, “the superior court’s equitable jurisdiction extends to
granting relief from the effects of another person’s fraud when the party
wronged seeks other than damages . . . .” Fisher v. Koper, 127 N.H. 330, 336,
(1985).
“[I]t is the historic purpose of equity to secure complete justice . . . .”
N.H. Donuts, Inc. v. Skipitaris, 129 N.H. 774, 783 (1987) (quotation omitted).
The court has broad and flexible equitable powers
which allow it to shape and adjust the precise relief to
the requirements of the particular situation. A court
of equity will order to be done that which in fairness
and good conscience ought to be or should have been
done. It is the practice of courts of equity, having
jurisdiction, to administer all relief which the nature of
the case and facts demand.
Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Costs and Attorney’s Fees), 144 N.H. 590,
594 (1999) (quotations, citations and brackets omitted). The propriety of
awarding equitable relief rests in the sound discretion of the trial court to be
exercised according to the circumstances and exigencies of the case. Gutbier v.
Hannaford Bros. Co., 150 N.H. 540, 541 (2004). We will uphold a trial court’s
equitable order unless it constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Id. at 541-42.
The Florida Supreme Court dealt with similar facts and issues in Palm
Beach Savings and Loan v. Fishbein. See Fishbein, 619 So. 2d at 267. There,
Mr. Fishbein took title to a house in Palm Beach in his own name, assumed an
existing mortgage on the house, and executed a purchase money mortgage. Id.
at 268. Later, both Mr. Fishbein and his wife executed a second mortgage on
the Palm Beach house, acknowledged the existence of the previous mortgages,
and then lived in the house for several years. Id. Approximately three years
after the second mortgage was executed, Mr. Fishbein took out yet another
mortgage, again using the Palm Beach house as collateral. Id. This time the
mortgage was for $1,200,000 and he obtained it by forging Mrs. Fishbein’s
name on the mortgage instrument. Id.
As part of a subsequent divorce proceeding, Mr. Fishbein executed a
quitclaim deed, granting Mrs. Fishbein title to the house and representing that
it was free and clear of liens. Id. The mortgage (obtained via the forgery) then
went into default and the bank commenced foreclosure proceedings, which
Mrs. Fishbein challenged. Id. at 269.
As a result of Mrs. Fishbein’s challenge, the trial court ruled that the
bank could not foreclose on the mortgage, but that it could have an equitable
5
lien on the house to the extent that its funds were used to satisfy the
preexisting mortgages and taxes. Id. The trial court also stayed any
foreclosure sale on the equitable lien so that Mrs. Fishbein could have an
opportunity to try to sell the home privately. Id. An intermediate appellate
court affirmed the trial court’s conclusion that the house was Mrs. Fishbein’s
homestead, and as such not subject to foreclosure by the bank, but reversed
the imposition of the equitable lien, reasoning that such a lien could “only be
imposed against homestead real property where the beneficiary of the
homestead protection is guilty of fraudulent or otherwise egregious conduct.”
Id.
The Florida Supreme Court reversed the intermediate court, holding that
despite the forgery, equity would not allow Mrs. Fishbein to use the homestead
exemption to receive a “windfall.” Id. at 270-71. The court acknowledged the
section of the Florida Constitution that creates a homestead exemption:
There shall be exempt from forced sale under process
of any court, and no judgment, decree or execution
shall be a lien thereon, except for the payment of taxes
and assessments thereon, obligations contracted for
the purchase, improvement or repair thereof, or
obligations contracted for house, field or other labor
performed on the realty, the following property owned
by a natural person: (1) a homestead . . . .
Id. at 269. The court reasoned, however, that under imposition of an equitable
lien,
Mrs. Fishbein [stood] in no worse position than she
stood before the execution of the mortgage. When the
bank made its loan, one of the prior mortgages was
already overdue. Mr. Fishbein testified that by that
time he had no other assets which could be used to
pay off the preexisting liens, and Mrs. Fishbein
testified that she had no funds with which to pay
them. Of course, Mrs. Fishbein should not be made to
suffer because the bank was not more careful in
ensuring that her signature on the mortgage was
genuine. This is why the bank can make no claim
against the property for the [money] not used to
benefit the homestead. On the other hand, Mrs.
Fishbein is not entitled to a . . . windfall. The
homestead exemption is intended to be a shield, not a
sword.
6
Id. at 270-71.
Relying upon Havoco of America, Ltd. v. Hill, 790 So. 2d 1018 (Fla.
2001), the plaintiff argues that Fishbein is not persuasive because it has
essentially been narrowed to an “anomalous” holding by subsequent decisions
of the Florida Supreme Court. According to the plaintiff, Havoco and related
cases stand for the proposition that in order “to impose an equitable lien on the
homestead right, the case must involve situations that fall within one of the
three stated exceptions to the Florida [C]onstitution’s homestead right” – and
apparently fraud or forgery in the procurement of a mortgage, alone, is not one
of them. We do not share the plaintiff’s reading of Havoco. The Havoco court
discussed Fishbein and related cases in great detail, see id. at 1024-28, and
ultimately reaffirmed the holding in Fishbein that the court will “invoke[ ]
equitable principles to reach beyond the literal language of the exceptions only
where funds obtained through fraud or egregious conduct were used to invest
in, purchase, or improve the homestead.” Id. at 1028 (emphasis added). Just
such fraud and egregious conduct are at issue here, where it has been
stipulated that the plaintiff’s husband used forgery to obtain funds from
Ameriquest to pay off the existing Bankers Trust mortgage and thereby invest
in the homestead.
Thus, given the close factual similarities between the present appeal and
the Fishbein case, and in light of the broad equitable powers that rest with the
superior court in this state, we are persuaded that the Florida Supreme Court’s
decision to apply principles of equity struck the proper balance between the
purpose of the homestead exemption and the circumstances or exigencies of
the case. Cf. Skipitaris, 129 N.H. at 783 (“[A] court sitting in equity may even
devise a remedy which extends or exceeds the terms of a prior agreement
between the parties, if it is necessary to make the injured party whole.”
(quotation omitted)). Accordingly, we conclude that equitable principles should
be applied here; therefore, we must decide whether the trial court properly
applied the doctrine of equitable subrogation.
Generally,
the doctrine of subrogation has its origins in equity. A
party’s right to subrogation can arise either by
contract, statute, or common law or equitable
principles. The doctrine of subrogation presupposes
the payment of a debt by a party secondarily liable
therefor, who thereby acquires an equitable right to be
reimbursed by the principal debtor and for the
purpose of making this right effective is invested with
all the rights which the creditor had against him (the
principal debtor). The purpose behind subrogation is
7
to place the responsibility where it ultimately should
rest by compelling payment by the one who in good
conscience ought to pay it. It also prevents
[individuals] from recouping a windfall . . . . In any
subrogation case, the burden of proving entitlement is
on the subrogee, which generally includes proof of: the
existence and applicability of equitable principles or
contractual provisions as to subrogation and
reimbursement.
Wolters v. Am. Republic Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 599, 601 (2003) (quotations,
citations and brackets omitted). Claims for subrogation are generally made
against a wrongdoer, but need not necessarily be limited to such an individual.
73 Am. Jur. 2d Subrogation § 2 (2001).
Equitable subrogation, in particular, is a broad doctrine, which is given
liberal application. Id. § 5. “It applies where one who has discharged the debt
of another may, under certain circumstances, succeed to the rights and
position of the satisfied creditor.” Id. In order for equitable subrogation to
apply, we hold that all of the following conditions must be met: (1) the
subrogee cannot have acted as a volunteer; (2) the subrogee must have paid a
debt upon which it was not primarily liable; (3) the subrogee must have paid
the entire debt; and (4) subrogation may not work any injustice to the rights of
others. See id. Although the trial court held that equitable subrogation
required satisfaction of a fifth element, namely, that payment by the subrogee
have been made to protect its own interest, we conclude that the definition of
“volunteer,” set forth below, adequately takes this consideration into account.
Therefore, inclusion of this fifth element in the test for equitable subrogation is
unnecessary.
With respect to the first element, the question is whether Ameriquest
acted as a volunteer in paying off the Bankers Trust mortgage. For purposes of
equitable subrogation, “one is a volunteer if he pays while under no obligation
to pay or when no interest of his is protected by payment.” Norfolk & Dedham
Fire Ins. Co. v. Aetna Cas. & Sur. Co., 318 A.2d 659, 661 (Vt. 1974); accord
Rawson v. City of Omaha, 322 N.W.2d 381, 384-85 (Neb. 1982) (“[O]ne who
pays the debt of another in order to protect his own property or interest is not
considered a volunteer for purposes of equitable subrogation.”). Here,
Ameriquest paid the Bankers Trust mortgage in order to protect its interest in
the homestead as collateral to secure the debt. As the trial court held, by
paying off the mortgage note to Bankers Trust, “Ameriquest became the
primary note holder on the property at 55 Main Street. Ameriquest secured the
sole right of foreclosure on the property, which operated as collateral in the
event Mr. and Ms. Chase did not meet the terms in the Security Instrument.”
Accordingly, the first factor is satisfied.
8
As the trial court properly noted, the next two “elements are not in
dispute. The debt paid was not one that Ameriquest was primarily liable on
and the entire debt owed by Mr. and Ms. Chase to Bankers [T]rust was paid.”
The fourth element is likewise satisfied. The trial court found both that
the plaintiff and her husband executed the Bankers Trust mortgage in the
amount of $71,300 and that some payments thereon had not been made,
resulting in the total amount of the debt increasing to $74,439.78. Neither
side challenged these findings. Further, although Ameriquest was allegedly
negligent in failing to uncover the forgery, we have held that negligence on the
part of a surety does not invalidate the right to subrogate. Fifield v. Mayer, 79
N.H. 82, 85 (1918). Accordingly, we discern nothing unjust about allowing
Ameriquest to obtain relief for the $74,439.78 because that is the amount for
which the plaintiff would have been liable under the Bankers Trust mortgage.
To hold otherwise would potentially yield a windfall for the plaintiff and could
encourage collusive deception against lenders.
We acknowledge that Ameriquest issued a mortgage in the amount of
$90,000; however, the plaintiff should not be made to bear an increased
financial burden because Ameriquest was not vigilant in making certain that
all of the signatures on the mortgage instrument complied with the
requirements of RSA 477:3 and RSA 480:5-a. The amount recoverable by
operation of equitable subrogation is limited by the “general rule . . . that a
subrogee is entitled to indemnity to the extent only of the money actually paid
by him to discharge the obligation, or the value of the property applied for that
purpose.” 73 Am. Jur. 2d Subrogation § 67. Therefore, we agree with the trial
court that Ameriquest is not entitled to recover the difference between the
amount outstanding on the Bankers Trust mortgage and the amount it
ultimately lent.
IV. Conclusion
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, we disagree with the trial court’s
conclusion concerning the applicability of RSA 480:4, III, but uphold its
application of the doctrine of equitable subrogation under the facts of this case.
Having upheld the trial court’s application of equitable subrogation, we need
not reach arguments concerning its application of the doctrine of unjust
enrichment.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9