THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2006-011
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WALTER BEEDE
Submitted: March 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 28, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
James T. Brooks, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief, for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Walter Beede, appeals his conviction of seven
class A felony counts, one class B felony count and two misdemeanor counts of
theft by unauthorized taking, see RSA 637:3, :11 (2007), after a jury trial in the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.). He argues: (1) the trial court improperly admitted
various bank records under the business records exception to the hearsay rule,
N.H. R. Ev. 803(6); and (2) the trial court erred in sentencing him to a probation
term exceeding that permitted by statute for his misdemeanor convictions, see
RSA 651:2, V(a) (2007). We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following. In 1994, Jay Howland Enterprises
(JHE), which was under the sole ownership of Jay Howland (Howland), invested
in land in New Hampshire for purposes of developing and selling it. JHE
contracted with the defendant to manage the development, marketing and sale of
properties purchased in Laconia. Howland subsequently created Jay Howland
Realty (JHR) under JHE, through which the developed lots were sold. The
defendant worked primarily out of the local office JHE maintained in Gilford.
The contract between JHE and the defendant provided that: “All sums and
payments relating to sales of portions of the Parcels shall be paid to Owner
[Howland].” Initially, the defendant deposited payments to JHE into the
company’s Citizens Bank account in New Hampshire, but later Howland required
that all payments be sent to the corporate office in Massachusetts. Howland
alone had authority to open bank accounts for JHE and JHR, but the defendant
had authority to access the two business accounts to pay his own salary, to
reimburse himself for the costs of running the office and to pay contractors and
others hired in developing the properties.
On April 1, 1997, an account was opened under the name “Walter F[.]
Beede [d/b/a] Jay Howland Realty” at Gilford Village Bank & Trust (GVB), which
was subsequently purchased by Laconia Savings Bank (LSB). Howland was
unaware of the existence of this account, although checks made payable to JHE
were deposited into the account. Two checks bearing the defendant’s signature
were also written from the account for purposes totally unrelated to the business
of JHE, including one to the defendant’s former girlfriend and another to a
building supply company. The account was closed in September 1999.
Upon dissolution of the business relationship between the defendant and
Howland in 1999, Howland’s bookkeeper, Mary Adams, realized that neither
Howland nor either of his companies had received payment for Lot 209, which
was sold to David Ames for $31,325.50, or for a boatslip that was sold to Steven
LeBoeuf for $25,801.74. Howland contacted an attorney who subsequently
contacted the Belknap County Sheriff’s Department to investigate. A detective
with the sheriff’s department discovered that the Ames and LeBoeuf payments
along with nine other checks written to JHE had been deposited into the GVB
account. Howland received none of the money deposited into the GVB account.
At trial, the State called Shaun Sanborn (Sanborn), vice president of
security at LSB, as a witness. Through Sanborn, the State introduced several
records created at GVB and subsequently transferred to LSB. That evidence
included: a business account agreement and a sole proprietorship resolution
form; two checks drawn from the account; seven checks and two money orders
deposited into the account; and nine pages of monthly account statements. LSB
acquired GVB in October 2005. While LSB held GVB’s records, Sanborn never
worked for GVB and lacked knowledge of their practices. The defendant objected
2
to the introduction of each bank record as hearsay. The court, however, admitted
the records under the business records exception to the hearsay rule over the
defendant’s objection that the exception did not apply because Sanborn was not
qualified to testify under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 803(6).
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial judge erred in admitting the
aforementioned documents under Rule 803(6) because the records themselves as
well as information contained within them each constituted hearsay, resulting in
inadmissible double hearsay. He contends that the records’ admission
prejudiced his case because the prosecutor relied upon them heavily in his
closing argument.
We review the trial court’s decisions on the admissibility of evidence under
an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Ainsworth, 151 N.H.
691, 694 (2005). Therefore, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial
court's rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. Id.
II. Business Account Agreement, Sole Proprietorship Resolution Form, Checks
and Money Orders
The trial court’s application of the business records exception to the seven
checks and two money orders deposited into the account and the two checks
written from the account was unnecessary because these documents, as well as
the signatures contained therein, are not hearsay.
“‘Hearsay’ is a statement, other than one made by the declarant while
testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the
matter asserted.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(c). However, as one court has explained in the
context of the identical federal rule of evidence, “out-of-court statements that are
offered as evidence of legally operative verbal conduct are not hearsay. They are
considered ‘verbal acts.’ Checks fall squarely in this category of legally–operative
verbal acts that are not barred by the hearsay rule.” United States v. Pang, 362
F.3d 1187, 1192 (9th Cir.) (citations omitted), cert. denied, 543 U.S. 943 (2004).
Therefore, the checks and money orders made out to JHE and the checks drawn
from the GVB account are legally operative statements that were admissible as
such. Likewise, the business account agreement and the sole proprietorship
resolution form were themselves admissible as legally operative verbal conduct for
the limited purpose of establishing that some individual submitted the forms to
GVB. Cf. United States v. Marrinson, No. 85 CR 225, 1986 WL 2123, at *3 (N.D.
Ill. Feb. 3, 1986) (mem.) (“[A]n [account] application may be admitted to prove
that an individual submitted the application to the particular business.”); see also
Kepner-Tregoe, Inc. v. Leadership Software, Inc., 12 F.3d 527, 540 (5th Cir. 1994)
(“Signed instruments such as wills, contracts, and promissory notes are writings
that have independent legal significance, and are nonhearsay.” (quotation
omitted)).
3
The defendant further argues, however, that the information contained
within these records, such as the signature “Wal[ly] Beede,” is inadmissible
hearsay because it consists of “out-of-court statements that were made by the
person who completed the forms” and were “offered to prove the truth of the
matter[s] asserted, i.e., that the account’s owner was Walter Beede.” This
argument addresses two types of information: (1) that which is written or typed
on the records; and (2) the signatures contained within the records. We assume,
without deciding, that the information written and typed on the records is
hearsay.
We next address the signatures contained in these records. While we
question whether a signature can be considered a “statement” under the
definition of hearsay, we recognize the overwhelming weight of authority from the
federal courts, interpreting the identical federal rule of evidence, holding that it
is. See, e.g., United States v. Vigneau, 187 F.3d 70 (1st Cir. 1999); United States
v. Cestnik, 36 F.3d 904 (10th Cir. 1994). For purposes of this case, therefore, we
proceed under the assumption that a signature can be considered hearsay unless
it falls under an exception to the hearsay rule.
We find that the signatures contained within the checks and money orders
constitute party-opponent admissions under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
801(d)(2) and are therefore admissible. The defendant argues that since the
records were admitted under the business records exception to the hearsay rule
and the prosecution did not raise Rule 801(d)(2) below, it cannot be raised for the
first time on appeal. We disagree, because “where [the] trial court reaches [the]
correct result on mistaken grounds, we will affirm if valid alternative grounds
support the decision.” Cohoon v. IDM Software, 153 N.H. 1, 4 (2005); see also
State v. Berry, 148 N.H. 88, 93 (2002) (“[E]ven though the trial judge did not
conduct [the correct evidentiary] analysis . . . its decision to admit the evidence
reached the correct result and reversal is not warranted.”).
A signature falls under the exception in Rule 801(d)(2) if it is otherwise
authenticated such as through “independent evidence that the writer was [the
defendant].” Vigneau, 187 F.3d at 74-75. New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
902(9) provides that “[c]ommercial paper, signatures thereon, and documents
relating thereto to the extent provided by general commercial law” do not require
“[e]xtrinsic evidence of authenticity as a condition precedent to admissibility.”
Accordingly, the signatures contained within the checks and money orders, which
are commercial paper, are self-authenticating under Rule 902(9) and therefore
satisfy the above test to be admitted as an exception to the hearsay rule as a
party-opponent admission. See N.H. R. Ev. 801(d)(2).
The State argues that the signatures on the business account agreement
and the sole proprietorship resolution form also constitute admissions under
Rule 801(d)(2) because there was sufficient independent evidence to prove the
defendant had signed the records. We disagree. Upon review of the record, we
4
can find no such evidence. The State argues that there were several records
admitted without objection that contain the defendant’s signature and that this
was sufficient to prove that it was also the defendant’s signature on the account
agreement and the sole proprietorship resolution form. The record, however,
does not reveal that such a comparison was ever made at trial by any witness.
We find, therefore, that the signatures in these records do not meet the party-
opponent admission exception under Rule 801(d)(2).
Redacting the statements and signatures contained in the business
account agreement and sole proprietorship resolution form before admitting them
would have cured this problem; however, since the trial court admitted the
records in their entirety based erroneously upon the business records exception,
this information was not redacted. However, as we discuss below, the admission
of the statements and signatures on these records was harmless error.
III. Bank Account Statements
We next address whether the bank account statements were properly
admitted as evidence under the business records exception to the hearsay rule.
Rule 803(6) excepts from the definition of hearsay:
A memorandum, report, record, or data
compilation, in any form, of acts, events, conditions,
opinions, or diagnoses, made at or near the time by, or
from information transmitted by, a person with
knowledge, if kept in the course of a regularly conducted
business activity, and if it was the regular practice of
that business activity to make the memorandum, report,
record, or data compilation, all as shown by the
testimony of the custodian or other qualified witness, . . .
unless the source of information or the method of [or]
circumstances of preparation indicate lack of
trustworthiness.
Where a party seeks to admit business records under this exception that
have been transferred from one business to another, the party must establish
that the records were integrated into the second business’s records and are
“relied upon in [the] day-to-day operations” of the business into which they are
subsumed. United States v. Mendel, 746 F.2d 155, 166 (2d Cir. 1984), cert.
denied, 469 U.S. 1213 (1985); see also United States v. Doe, 960 F.2d 221, 223
(1st Cir. 1992).
The trial court heard the following testimony before admitting the account
statements:
5
[Counsel:] Do you recognize [these] nine pages?
[Sanborn:] Yes, I do.
[Counsel:] Can you tell us what [they] are?
[Sanborn:] They’re copies of Village Bank and Trust account
statements in the name of Walter F. Beede d/b/a Jay Howland
Realty.
[Counsel:] And did you have an opportunity to review the bank
statements of Mr. Beede before coming to court today?
[Sanborn:] Yes.
There was no other evidence of integration. The trial judge overruled the
defendant’s objection to admission of these account statements and the records
were admitted. We agree with the defendant that this testimony was insufficient
to establish that LSB had integrated GVB’s records and relied upon them. We
further note that even if integration had been established, the balance of the
foundational requirements of Rule 803(6) were not met. Accordingly, the trial
court erred in admitting the account statements under the business records
exception, and we can find no other hearsay exception that applies.
However, “[t]he admission of inadmissible evidence does not always require
reversal.” State v. Hammell, 155 N.H. ___, ___, 917 A.2d 1267, 1271 (March 6,
2007). The State argues that even if the account statements were inadmissible
hearsay, their admission was harmless. We agree.
IV. Harmless Error
An error is harmless if we can say beyond a reasonable doubt that it did
not affect the verdict. State v. Barnes, 150 N.H. 715, 717 (2004). The State
bears the burden of proving that an error is harmless. Id. The evaluation
of whether the State has met its burden involves consideration of the alternative
evidence presented at trial and the character of the contested evidence. Id. An
error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of
the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity or weight, and if the
contested evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id. In making this determination, we
consider the alternative evidence presented at trial as well as the character of the
inadmissible evidence itself. State v. Pseudae, 154 N.H. 196, 202 (2006).
In this case, evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming; the bank
account statements, and the information in the business account agreement and
the sole proprietorship resolution form were merely cumulative in relation to the
other evidence introduced at trial.
6
Howland testified that he had the sole authority to open bank accounts for
JHE and JHR, and had never done so at GVB. The evidence contained seven
checks and two money orders made out to JHE which Howland testified were
never received by his business, although all such payments were supposed to be
deposited into one of his accounts. Each check and money order bore a stamp
showing it was deposited into the GVB account on a certain date. They also bore
the following handwritten endorsement: “Jay Howland Ent.” The defendant
stipulated that Howland did not write those endorsements.
David Ames testified that he had personally handed a check to the
defendant, in the amount of $31,325.80 and dated October 28, 1998, for the
purchase of Lot 209 from JHE. Mary Adams testified that Steven LeBoeuf
purchased a boat slip in December 1998, priced at $28,000, from JHE but that
JHE never received the money. The drawers of the remaining checks at issue
each testified that he or she wrote a particular check, that the check was written
out to and intended for JHE, and all but one testified that the check was either
mailed to the New Hampshire office or personally handed to the defendant.
Howland testified that he never received these payments.
The two checks written from the GVB account contain the signature “Wally
Beede,” as well as the dates they were processed by the banks where they were
deposited. When shown one of these checks, in the amount of $1,800 and made
payable to the defendant’s ex-girlfriend, she testified that she had endorsed and
cashed the check and that the signature on it appeared to be the defendant’s.
The accountant for the building supply company, to which the other check drawn
on the account was made payable, testified that the check was received by his
company as payment on an account opened by the defendant.
Given this evidence, any evidence of transactions shown on the GVB
account statements was merely cumulative. Similarly, the admission of the
information in the business account agreement and the sole proprietorship
resolution form for purposes of proving that the defendant opened and
maintained the account with GVB was cumulative because the jury had before it
two checks written from this account and signed by the defendant. Had these
records been excluded, the jury would still have had before it “uncontroverted
and overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s” guilt. Id. at 203. Therefore, any
error the trial court may have made in admitting them in their entirety was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
We need not address the defendant’s argument that the trial court
erred when it sentenced him to concurrent three-year probation terms for
the class A misdemeanors because the trial court granted the defendant’s
motion to amend his probation sentence to two years.
Affirmed.
7
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8