THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-418
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL KING
Argued: June 14, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
James T. Brooks, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Daniel King, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his motion to suppress the victim’s in-
court identifications. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Between 7:00 and 7:30 p.m. on
October 11, 2003, fifteen-year-old K.C. was working at the Dunkin’ Donuts
drive-through window on Loudon Road in Concord. A man ordered a large
coffee. When K.C. approached the window, she noticed that the man’s genitals
were exposed. K.C. turned around to put money in the register and turned
back towards the man to give him his coffee. She again noticed that the man’s
genitals were exposed. K.C. informed her supervisor, Derrick Williams, of what
she had seen and he advised her to write down the man’s license plate number.
She leaned out the window, saw a car parked in front of a trashcan and wrote
down the plate number. Williams contacted the police and Sergeant Ranee
Boyd arrived shortly thereafter. K.C. provided Sergeant Boyd with a
description of the man and his license plate number. The number was
registered to a Ford Taurus wagon owned by the defendant. Loudon Police
Corporal Barrett Moulton spoke with the defendant at his residence that night.
The defendant denied driving into Concord that day.
On October 16, 2003, Concord Police Detective John Thomas met with
K.C. at her school and showed her a photo array containing eight black and
white pictures. Although K.C. was unable to positively identify a suspect, she
narrowed her choices to two suspects, one of whom is the defendant. K.C.
expressed her uncertainty in further narrowing her choice, but ultimately
selected the photograph of the other suspect.
Concord Police Detective Todd Flanagan later interviewed the defendant
at his workplace, at which time he admitted being at Dunkin’ Donuts on
October 11, 2003, but claimed that he merely turned around in the parking lot.
When the detective questioned whether he could have accidentally exposed his
genitals when he went through the drive-through, the defendant acknowledged
that he might have done so accidentally.
On May 7, 2004, K.C. attended the defendant’s trial for indecent
exposure in Concord District Court. She was sitting in the gallery when the
defendant entered the courtroom. According to K.C., when she saw the
defendant at the court, she had “a flashback to the night of Dunkin Donuts
and it just clicked that that was the man.” During her trial testimony in the
district court, she identified the defendant as the man who had exposed
himself to her. The defendant was convicted in the district court and he
appealed to the superior court for a de novo trial.
Prior to the trial, the defendant filed a motion to suppress K.C.’s district
court identification and prevent her from testifying. The defendant argued that
since K.C. failed to identify the defendant from the photo array, any in-court
identification of the defendant was impermissibly suggestive and unreliable
under the due process analysis set forth in Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188, 199-
200 (1972). The court held that K.C.’s identification was not unnecessarily
suggestive because the court proceedings were necessary to the trial and the
defendant “had a constitutional right to be confronted by his accuser . . . and
in fact his rights would have been compromised had he not been confronted by
his accuser.”
K.C. testified at the trial de novo and again identified the defendant as
the man who had exposed himself to her. The jury found the defendant guilty.
2
On appeal, the defendant argues, citing Part I, Article 15 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution, that the admission of K.C.’s identifications of him violated his
due process rights. We first address the defendant’s claims under our State
Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231, 233 (1983).
In general, “[i]t is the likelihood of misidentification which violates a
defendant’s right to due process.” Biggers, 409 U.S. at 198. The defendant
contends that “the conditions surrounding K.C.’s identification of him at
Concord District Court were unnecessarily suggestive, rendering [that]
identification, as well as any future identification, unreliable.” The district
court identification raises two questions: first, whether it was unnecessarily
suggestive on its own; and second, whether it was tainted by the prior photo
array.
The defendant first challenges the conditions of the district court
identification itself. He asserts that “[w]hat occurred there was a one-man
showup”:
When K.C. arrived at the Concord District Court, she knew what
the proceeding was about, and she fully-expected [sic] to see the
perpetrator. Aside from people directly involved in [the
defendant’s] case, the courtroom was empty. While K.C. sat in the
courtroom, she observed a sheriff bring [the defendant] into the
courtroom. She saw that [the defendant] was wearing a prison
jumpsuit, and she saw him escorted to the defendant’s table.
(Citations omitted.)
The defendant also contends that the propriety of the district court
identification should be analyzed under the two-step analysis “commonly
referred to as the ‘Biggers’ test.” See Biggers, 409 U.S. 188. We described the
two-step analysis as follows in State v. LaRose, 127 N.H. 146 (1985):
Initially, we inquire into whether the identification procedure was
impermissibly or unnecessarily suggestive. At this stage of the
inquiry, the defendant has the burden of proof. Only if the
defendant has met his burden must we then consider the factors
enumerated in Neil v. Biggers . . . to determine whether the
identification procedure was so suggestive as to render the
identification unreliable and, hence, inadmissible. At this stage of
the inquiry, the State bears the burden.
3
LaRose, 146 N.H. at 150 (citations omitted); see Biggers, 409 U.S. at 199-200
(listing, among the “factors to be considered in evaluating the likelihood of
misidentification,” the witness’ opportunity “to view the criminal at the time of
the crime, the witness’ degree of attention, the accuracy of the witness’ prior
description of the criminal, the level of certainty demonstrated by the witness
at the confrontation, and the length of time between the crime and the
confrontation”).
As we noted in LaRose, this test is used to determine “the admissibility of
an out-of-court identification.” LaRose, 127 N.H. at 150 (emphasis added). We
have also noted that if an out-of-court identification is found inadmissible
under this test, a subsequent in-court identification will also be inadmissible,
id., unless it “did not result from the earlier confrontation . . . but was
independent thereof.” State v. Ober, 116 N.H. 381, 383 (1976). We have not
yet, however, explicitly considered whether this two-step analysis applies to a
strictly in-court identification not preceded by an impermissibly suggestive pre-
trial confrontation. Cf. id. at 383-84 (applying Biggers factors to determine
whether witness had grounds to identify defendant independent of challenged
procedure at the outset of trial in which defendant was asked by the court
clerk to stand).
Other courts have noted that Biggers and the line of United States
Supreme Court cases preceding it dealt with the exclusion of impermissible
pretrial identifications and the in-court identifications that follow them. See,
e.g., United States v. Domina, 784 F.2d 1361, 1368 (9th Cir. 1986), cert.
denied, 479 U.S. 1038 (1987). “None of these cases has set any guidelines for
in-court identification procedures nor indicated that in-court identification
must be made in a way that is not suggestive.” Id. Accordingly, “the majority
of courts have [concluded] that Neil v. Biggers does not apply to in-court
identifications.” State v. Lewis, 609 S.E.2d 515, 518 (S.C. 2005). But see
United States v. Hill, 967 F.2d 226, 232 (6th Cir.) (holding “that the Biggers
analysis applies to . . . in-court identifications for the same reasons that the
analysis applies to impermissibly suggestive pre-trial identifications”), cert.
denied, 506 U.S. 964 (1992).
The court in Domina explained the differences between initial pretrial
and in-court identifications that justify different treatment in determining their
admissibility:
The concern with in-court identification, where there has
been suggestive pretrial identification, is that the witness later
identifies the person in court, not from his or her recollection of
observations at the time of the crime charged, but from the
suggestive pretrial identification. Because the [fact finder is] not
present to observe the pretrial identification, [the fact finder is] not
4
able to observe the witness making that initial identification. The
certainty or hesitation of the witness when making the
identification, the witness’s facial expressions, voice inflection,
body language, and the other normal observations one makes in
everyday life when judging the reliability of a person’s statements,
are not available to the [fact finder] during this pretrial proceeding.
There is a danger that the identification in court may only be a
confirmation of the earlier identification, with much greater
certainty expressed in court than initially.
When the initial identification is in court, . . . [t]he [fact
finder] can observe the witness during the identification process
and is able to evaluate the reliability of the initial identification.
Domina, 784 F.2d at 1368 (citation omitted).
In addition to affording the fact finder the opportunity to observe and
assess the identification itself, an initial in-court identification is subject to
immediate challenge through cross-examination. See Baker v. Hocker, 496
F.2d 615, 617 (9th Cir. 1974). “Where a witness first identifies the defendant
at trial, defense counsel may test the perceptions, memory and bias of the
witness, contemporaneously exposing weaknesses and adding perspective in
order to lessen the hazards of undue weight or mistake.” People v. Rodriguez,
480 N.E.2d 1147, 1151 (Ill. App. Ct. 1985), cert. denied, 475 U.S. 1089 (1986).
Counsel can also “argue in summation as to factors causing doubts as to the
accuracy of the identification – including reference to . . . any suggestibility in
the identification procedure.” Manson v. Brathwaite, 432 U.S. 98, 113-14 n.
14 (1977) (quotation omitted).
This reasoning comports with our treatment of in-court identifications in
prior cases. In Ober, we concluded that it was not “intolerably prejudicial” for
an identification witness to be made cognizant of the defendant’s identity prior
to testifying. Ober, 116 N.H. at 384. We noted that “[i]n terms of fairness there
has been no abuse. Not only is counsel present, but the jury has full
opportunity to view the circumstances and assess evidentiary worth.” Id.
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). Similarly, in State v. Cross, 128 N.H. 732
(1986), we contrasted an in-court identification untainted by improper pretrial
procedure with one allegedly so tainted. We noted:
[T]here was adequate opportunity at trial to address the serious
issue of the soundness of the identifications. Because the sources
of concern were clearly brought out through cross-examination
and subjected to the jury’s scrutiny, the case is unlike the classic
instances in which pretrial procedure effectively bars the defendant
from any opportunity for effective cross-examination to
5
demonstrate a causal connection between undue police
suggestiveness and final witness identification.
Cross, 128 N.H. at 735.
Based upon the different considerations involved in pretrial and in-court
identifications, we join the apparent majority of courts in concluding “that Neil
v. Biggers does not apply to in-court identifications and that the remedy for any
alleged suggestiveness of an in-court identification is cross-examination and
argument.” Lewis, 609 S.E.2d at 518. The inherent suggestiveness in the
normal trial procedure employed here does not rise to the level of constitutional
concern. Rather, as stated by the court in State v. Smith, 512 A.2d 189, 193
(Conn. 1986), “[t]he manner in which in-court identifications are conducted is
not of constitutional magnitude but rests within the sound discretion of the
trial court.” See also United States v. Bennett, 675 F.2d 596, 598 (4th Cir.)
(noting that propriety of in-court identification procedure is determined in the
exercise of trial court’s discretion), cert. denied, 456 U.S. 1011 (1982).
Similar precedent answers the defendant’s contention that the district
court identification was inadmissible because the State could have arranged a
pretrial corporeal lineup. “[T]here is no constitutional entitlement to an in-
court line-up or other particular methods of lessening the suggestiveness of in-
court identification, such as seating the defendant elsewhere in the room.
These are matters within the discretion of the court.” United States v. Curtis,
344 F.3d 1057, 1063 (10th Cir. 2003) (quotation omitted), cert. denied, 540
U.S. 1157 (2004); see also Cross, 128 N.H. at 735 (noting that court, in its
discretion, could have ordered a line-up, but “it does not follow from these
possibilities for better procedures that the actual identifications were unreliable
to the point of inadmissibility”). “A defendant simply does not have the right to
a lineup, whether conducted before or during trial.” Maxwell v. State, 10
S.W.3d 785, 787 (Tex. Ct. App. 2000).
We now consider whether the district court identification was tainted by
the prior photographic array. We note that the defendant makes no claim that
the photographic array was itself improper. In fact, “[g]iven that [the witness]
was unable to select Defendant from the [photographic array], the Court will
presume that the pretrial identification procedure was not so impermissibly
suggestive as to cause the substantial likelihood of misidentification.” United
States v. Beeler, 62 F. Supp. 2d 136, 141 (D. Me. 1999).
As the photographic array was not unduly suggestive, we again conclude
that the Biggers analysis does not apply. In addition, in accordance with our
discussion above, the general rule is that absent an unduly suggestive pretrial
identification procedure, “questions as to the reliability of a proposed in-court
identification affect only the identification’s weight, not its admissibility.”
6
United States v. Matthews, 20 F.3d 538, 547 (2d Cir. 1994), superseded by
statute on other grounds.
The defendant relies upon Beeler and United States v. Emanuele, 51
F.3d 1123 (3d Cir.1995), which held that an in-court identification by a witness
who did not make a prior positive identification “would be impermissibly
suggestive in and of itself.” Beeler, 62 F. Supp. 2d at 141; see Emanuele, 51
F.3d at 1127, 1130. With due respect to the Beeler and Emanuele courts, we
are not persuaded by their analyses and are not bound by their decisions.
Instead, we agree with the courts holding that “a witness’s prior inability to
identify a defendant goes to the credibility of the in-court identification and not
to its admissibility, and thus raises a proper question of fact for the jury to
determine.” United States v. Briggs, 700 F.2d 408, 413 (7th Cir.), cert. denied,
461 U.S. 947, and cert. denied, 462 U.S. 1110 (1983); see also Johnson v.
Sublett, 63 F.3d 926, 929 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 516 U.S. 1017 (1995).
Having found that the district court identification need not be excluded,
either on its own or as a result of the inconclusive photographic array, we
conclude that the superior court identification was properly admitted. Under
the reasoning outlined above, the Biggers analysis does not apply because the
district court identification, even if considered a pretrial procedure, was not
improper. In addition, because it was not improper, the district court
identification did not taint the subsequent identification in superior court.
In the alternative, if we applied the Biggers analysis, we would conclude
that the district court identification was not unnecessarily suggestive for the
reasons stated above. Thus, we would not need to apply the Biggers reliability
factors, and would again reach the conclusion that the superior court
identification was admissible. See LaRose, 127 N.H. at 151 (noting that where
defendant had not met his burden of showing that the out-of-court
identifications were impermissibly suggestive, it was not necessary to reach the
second step of the analysis).
We reach the same result, based upon the same analysis, under the
Federal Constitution. See Domina, 784 F.2d at 1368; Briggs, 700 F.2d at 413.
Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court court’s denial of the defendant’s
motion to suppress.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7