THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2006-381
CHARLES KALIL & a.
v.
TOWN OF DUMMER ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Argued: February 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 19, 2007
Cooper, Deans & Cargill, P.A., of North Conway (Randall F. Cooper and
Claudine C. Safar on the brief, and Mr. Cooper orally), for the plaintiffs.
Law Office of James E. Michalik, of Berlin (James E. Michalik on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, Charles and Brenda Kalil, appeal an order of
the Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) remanding this matter to the defendant, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) for the Town of Dummer (Town). We affirm
in part and remand.
I. Background
The following facts appear in the record. The plaintiffs own a parcel of
land situated in both the Town’s conservation and conservation overlay zones.
On November 3, 2004, they filed applications with the Town’s selectmen for
building permits to construct a barn, a bird barn with flying pen, and a
farmhouse. The selectmen denied the applications, ruling that the building of
new structures is not permitted in the conservation overlay zone and that the
proposed structures were not permitted uses.
The plaintiffs appealed to the ZBA. At the same time, they sought a
variance from the ZBA to construct a fish and game farm, which would include
the barn, bird barn and farmhouse that were the subject of the building permit
applications. The ZBA conducted a hearing on March 23, 2005, to consider the
plaintiffs’ appeal and their application for a variance. After the hearing, the
ZBA voted to deny both the building permits appeal and the variance
application. After unsuccessfully moving for rehearing, the plaintiffs appealed
to the superior court. Describing the record as “meager,” the superior court
ruled that the ZBA’s decision was “under developed”; therefore, it remanded the
matter to the ZBA for further proceedings. This appeal followed.
II. Variance
The plaintiffs first argue that the superior court should not have
remanded the matter to the ZBA, but instead should have weighed the evidence
in the record to determine whether the requirements for a variance were
satisfied. The superior court’s review in zoning cases is limited. Garrison v.
Town of Henniker, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 907 A.2d 948, 950 (2006). Factual
findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable and will not
be set aside by the superior court absent errors of law, unless the court is
persuaded by a balance of probabilities on the evidence before it that the ZBA
decision is unreasonable. Id. The party seeking to set aside the ZBA decision
in the superior court bears the burden of proof. Id. We, in turn, will uphold
the superior court’s decision unless it is not supported by the evidence or is
legally erroneous. Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005).
The superior court ruled that “the ZBA’s explanations for why the
application failed to satisfy the variance criteria are not fully developed and in
some instances do not state a definitive conclusion.” To the extent this ruling
means the superior court reversed the ZBA’s decision because it found the
decision lacked findings, the ruling constitutes error. “Although disclosure of
specific findings of fact by a board of adjustment may often facilitate judicial
review, the absence of findings, at least where there is no request therefor, is
not in and of itself error.” Thomas v. Town of Hooksett, 153 N.H. 717, 724
(2006); see also Pappas v. City of Manchester Zoning Bd., 117 N.H. 622, 625
(1977).
On the other hand, to the extent the superior court intended to vacate
and remand the matter because it found the text of the decision unclear, we
2
see no error. We emphasize that this is a case about the superior court’s
authority. This is not a case about the procedures the ZBA must follow.
The superior court, consistent with its statutory authority, could have
approached this case in any of several ways. It could have conducted its review
based upon the decision and record before it, see RSA 677:6 (1996), or it could
have taken additional evidence, see RSA 677:10, :13 (1996); Robinson v. Town
of Hudson, 149 N.H. 255, 258 (2003). The court did not take either of these
steps. Instead, the court found the ZBA’s decision unclear and remanded to
permit clarification. Thus, the question becomes whether the superior court is
without authority to do so by operation of either the plain language of the
statutory scheme or our case law.
We discern nothing in either the plain language of the statutes or our
case law that would preclude the superior court from remanding this matter to
the ZBA for clarification. RSA 677:6 contains no such express restriction. It
does, however, require the superior court to treat the findings of the ZBA as
prima facie lawful and reasonable. See RSA 677:6. Requiring the ZBA’s
findings to be treated as prima facie lawful and reasonable clearly envisages
some amount of deference to the local zoning boards. Rather than review text
that it found to be unclear, the superior court opted to follow a more cautious
approach, remanding to permit the ZBA to clarify its decision. Significantly,
the superior court’s order does not direct the ZBA to make findings. See
Thomas, 153 N.H. at 724.
In addition, RSA 677:10 and :13 expressly allow the superior court to
take additional evidence on appeal and provide a means “to assist the court in
evaluating the action of the board.” Robinson, 149 N.H. at 258 (quotation
omitted); see also Pappas, 117 N.H. at 625 (holding, under the predecessor to
RSA 677:10, “to the extent the record of the evidence before the board is
incomplete or nonexistent, the aggrieved party may . . . present evidence to the
trial court. Such additional evidence may be taken into consideration even
though it was not before the board.”). If the statutory scheme contemplated a
review process wherein the superior court were required to review only the
decision and record presented to it initially – and could not take steps to assist
it in evaluating the decision – then it would make little sense for the legislature
to allow the court to take additional evidence.
Furthermore, RSA 677:11 (1996) provides:
The final judgment upon every appeal shall be a decree
dismissing the appeal, or vacating the order or
decision complained of in whole or in part, as the case
may be; but, in case such order or decision is wholly
or partly vacated, the court may also, in its discretion
3
remand . . . for such further proceedings, not
inconsistent with the decree, as justice may require.
To the extent the superior court intended to vacate the ZBA’s decision and to
remand for clarification, its order is consistent with the above-quoted
provisions of RSA 677:11.
Having examined the statutory scheme, we turn to the case law.
Although we have held that a ZBA’s failure to make factual findings is not
reversible error, Thomas, 153 N.H. at 724, it does not necessarily follow that
the superior court is without authority to remand a decision for clarification
where it determines that the decision is unclear. A remand to permit
clarification does not necessarily mean that the court is either ordering the
ZBA to make findings or finding error where findings are absent. Nor does it
mean that the court has reversed the ZBA’s decision. It simply means that the
court opts not to reach the merits of the appeal because it is uncertain as to
the board’s rationale or conclusions. So it is here. The superior court’s order
states, “[T]his Court cannot determine whether the ZBA’s decision is lawful and
reasonable.” Presumably in the interest of justice, the court vacated the ZBA’s
decision and remanded to permit the ZBA to clarify its decision. See RSA
677:11.
The plaintiffs, citing Vigeant v. Town of Hudson, 151 N.H. 747, 750-51
(2005), contend both that the superior court erred by failing to review the
evidence in the record and that we should overrule our decisions in Chester
Rod & Gun Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 583 (2005), and Lone Pine
Hunters’ Club v. Town of Hollis, 149 N.H. 668, 670-71 (2003), to the extent
that those cases hold “that superior courts are precluded from weighing the
evidence.” We disagree.
First, the instant case is not one in which the superior court reviewed a
ZBA decision to determine whether it was supported by the evidence, see
Vigeant, 151 N.H. at 750, or committed error in the course of that review, see
Lone Pine, 149 N.H. at 670-71. Instead, here, the superior court held that the
decision itself was unclear and remanded it to the ZBA to permit clarification
so that review could then take place. Thus, the superior court’s decision here
did not effectively deny the plaintiffs judicial review of the ZBA’s decision and
we reject their argument to the contrary.
Second, in both Chester Rod & Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 583, and Lone
Pine, 149 N.H. at 670, we held that the superior court may not conduct a de
novo review in zoning appeals. See also Lake Sunapee Protective Assoc. v. N.H.
Wetlands Bd., 133 N.H. 98, 106-07 (1990) (purpose of RSA 677:10 is not to
afford a trial de novo, but to assist the court in evaluating the action of the
board). We did not depart from the plain language of RSA 677:6 or hold that
4
the superior court is prohibited from determining, by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, whether the ZBA’s decision is
unreasonable. To the contrary, in both cases, we recited the familiar standard
of review, indicating that the superior court should engage in precisely that
inquiry. Chester Rod & Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 580; Lone Pine, 149 N.H. at
670.
Thus, based upon our review of the statutory scheme and our case law,
we find no basis upon which to conclude that the superior court is without
authority to remand a matter for clarification. It is not surprising that there is
no such limitation on the superior court’s authority because once a ZBA’s
decision is clear to the court, the court is in a much better position to evaluate,
by a balance of the probabilities, whether the decision is unreasonable. See
RSA 677:6; cf. Alcorn v. Rochester Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 114 N.H. 491,
495 (1974). Accordingly, discerning no error, we uphold the superior court’s
decision to remand the matter to the ZBA.
However, our inquiry does not end here. The scope of the remand is in
dispute. The plaintiffs contend that the statutory scheme does not create “a
system that merely remands the matter to the ZBA as many times as necessary
in order to allow the ZBA to elicit testimony or modify its record in order to
sustain a denial of a variance.” We agree.
The scope of the remand is limited by the nature of the error or issue
identified. For example, where the superior court determined that a local
zoning board applied an incorrect legal standard, we held that the court “was
obliged to remand to the ZBA to reconsider the evidence against the correct
legal standard,” unless it “could find, as a matter of law, that the correct legal
standard was met.” Chester Rod & Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 583. Here,
however, the superior court ruled that the decision was unclear. The scope of
a remand for that issue is for the ZBA to be given an opportunity to clarify its
decision based upon the pre-existing record. The remand is not an opportunity
for the Town, the abutters or any other party to enlarge the record or to
introduce new evidence or testimony. 3 Zeigler, Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning
and Planning § 62:48, at 62-134 to 62-135 (2006) (the court may authorize the
ZBA “to merely come forward with a statement of its findings and its
conclusions”); RSA 677:10 (authorizing the court to take new evidence).
III. Building Permits
The plaintiffs argue that even if it was proper for the superior court to
have remanded the matter to the ZBA on issues pertaining to the variance
application, it was error for the court not to have ruled upon the portion of the
5
appeal relating to the building permits. The plaintiffs frame their argument in
the following terms:
The Court should have addressed whether the
applicant’s proposed uses of the property, to include a
farmhouse, barn and bird barn with flying pen, were
permitted uses within the Conservation Zone and
Conservation Overlay Zone. This question was a
strictly legal question and did not turn on the
sufficiency of the evidence within the record. If the
court found that the proposed uses were permitted
uses under the Ordinance, [the building permits would
have been granted and] the Applicant’s need for a
variance would have been rendered moot.
We agree with the plaintiffs. If both the selectmen and the ZBA
incorrectly interpreted the Town’s ordinance, and if a proper interpretation of
the ordinance would mean that the plaintiffs’ proposed uses are permitted
within the two conservation zones, then there would be no need for the
plaintiffs to seek a use variance. Thus, the interpretation of the Town’s
ordinance presents a significant – and perhaps even threshold – legal issue,
which the superior court did not address.
Since we would review any ruling on the interpretation of the ordinance
de novo, Duffy v. City of Dover, 149 N.H. 178, 181 (2003), we could simply
interpret the ordinance here. We decline to do so, however, because: (1) the
plaintiffs did not raise as an issue on appeal how (as opposed to just whether)
the superior court should have interpreted the ordinance; and (2) the parties’
briefs do not contain sufficient substantive discussion of this issue. See
Appeal of AlphaDirections, 152 N.H. 477, 483-84 (2005).
Accordingly, we remand this matter to the superior court. On remand,
the superior court should either address the merits of the issues surrounding
the building permits or explain why it is reserving decision upon those issues.
Once a ruling or explanation upon issues relating to the building permits is
made, the superior court may, consistent with this opinion, remand this matter
to the ZBA.
Affirmed in part and
remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6