THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2006-564
JAMES J. LACHANCE & a.
v.
UNITED STATES SMOKELESS TOBACCO CO. & a.
Argued: March 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 24, 2007
Shaheen & Gordon, of Dover (Christine M. Craig and D. Michael Noonan
on the brief, and Ms. Craig orally), for the plaintiffs.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Bruce W.
Felmly and Jennifer L. Parent on the brief), and Latham & Watkins, LLP, of
Washington, D.C. and Los Angeles, California (Margaret M. Zwisler and Charles
H. Samel on the brief, and Mr. Samel orally), for the defendants.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, James J. LaChance and Chad Crossan,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.), denying their motion for
class certification and granting judgment on the pleadings to the defendants,
United States Smokeless Tobacco Company, United States Tobacco Sales and
Marketing Company, United States Tobacco Manufacturing Company, and
UST, Inc. We reverse and remand.
I. Background
The following facts appear in the record. The defendants sell smokeless
tobacco products using in-store display racks and advertising mechanisms.
The plaintiffs are purchasers of smokeless tobacco products from retailers
across New Hampshire. Following a verdict unfavorable to the defendants in
antitrust litigation in another jurisdiction, see Conwood Co. L.P. v. United
States Tobacco Co., 290 F.3d 768, 777 (6th Cir. 2002), cert. denied, 537 U.S.
1148 (2003), the plaintiffs filed a civil action in the superior court, alleging that
the defendants also violated the New Hampshire Consumer Protection Act
(CPA), see generally RSA chapter 358-A (1995 & Supp. 2006). More
specifically, they contended that the defendants engaged in conduct that
excluded competitors, limited customers’ product choices, and negatively
affected the advertising and display of competing brands. According to the
plaintiffs, the defendants “intentionally and routinely” removed competitors’
racks from retail stores and entered into agreements with store retailers to
restrict the sale, advertising and display of competing brands, as well as gave
retailers incentives to exclude competing brands from stores. The defendants
also are alleged to have “increase[ed] . . . the price and limit[ed] and reduc[ed]
the supply of moist snuff tobacco products[,] [acts which] constitute[d] and
w[ere] intended to constitute unfair and deceptive competition and unfair and
deceptive business acts and practices within the meaning of RSA 358-A.” The
plaintiffs argued that, as a result of the defendants’ conduct, they sustained
actual damages and non-economic harm because their “product choice ha[d]
been limited and each plaintiff ha[d] been wrongfully denied the free choice to
purchase a lower-priced consumer product.”
Over the course of litigating their case in superior court, the plaintiffs
moved to certify “a class of similarly situated New Hampshire purchasers of
moist snuff smokeless tobacco.” For their part, the defendants moved for
judgment on the pleadings, arguing, among other things, that the plaintiffs’
claims were barred by our decision in Minuteman, LLC v. Microsoft Corp., 147
N.H. 634 (2002). The superior court denied the plaintiffs’ motion and granted
the defendants’ motion, ruling that the plaintiffs, as indirect purchasers, could
not pursue their claims. The plaintiffs appeal both rulings.
II. Procedural Posture
Before reaching the parties’ substantive arguments, we must resolve a
preliminary procedural issue. In their objection to the defendants’ motion for
judgment on the pleadings, the plaintiffs argued, among other things, that RSA
358-A:2, XIV (Supp. 2006) provided the authority needed to bring their claims
under the CPA. RSA 358-A:2, XIV makes unlawful the “[p]ricing of goods or
services in a manner that tends to create or maintain a monopoly, or otherwise
harm competition.” The superior court “acknowledge[d] the legislature
2
expressly authorize[d] a plaintiff to bring an action for anticompetitive practices
under the CPA by the specific language of [RSA 358-A:2, XIV]” but nevertheless
concluded that “the plaintiffs’ claims are barred by Minuteman.”
In their opening brief, the plaintiffs did not address the applicability or
effects of RSA 358-A:2, XIV. The defendants cited it as part of their argument
against class certification, but did not discuss whether it has any effect on
whether indirect purchasers may pursue claims. Recognizing the potential
importance of RSA 358-A:2, XIV, we ordered the parties to submit
supplemental memoranda addressing the following two issues:
(1) Whether this court should consider RSA 358-A:2,
XIV in assessing whether the plaintiffs may bring
their claims under the CPA; and
(2) Assuming this court should consider RSA 358-A:2,
XIV, what effect, if any, RSA 358-A:2, XIV should
have in determining whether the plaintiffs may
bring their claims under the CPA.
In their memoranda, the plaintiffs, not unexpectedly, argue that RSA
358-A:2, XIV buttresses the argument that they may pursue their claims under
the CPA. The defendants make two rejoinders. First, citing Derosia v. Warden,
N.H. State Prison, 149 N.H. 579, 580 (2003), among other cases, they contend
that the plaintiffs waived consideration of RSA 358-A:2, XIV by failing to raise it
in their opening brief. Second, they contend that, even if we consider RSA 358-
A:2, XIV, it supports affirming the superior court’s judgment.
The defendants’ first argument is well-taken. Generally, we do not
consider arguments that have not been briefed. See Derosia, 149 N.H. at 580.
However, the instant case is somewhat unusual in that we ordered the parties
to address the effects of the statutory provision at issue, and they have done
so. Moreover, the issue was presented to the superior court, and thus should
not come as a surprise to either side.
Faced with this procedural posture, we could decide the case without
reference to RSA 358-A:2, XIV. That approach, however, is an empty one
because we would be ignoring a critical statutory provision in order to render
an opinion that would be essentially meaningless outside the context of this
case. This would be a waste of judicial resources, a result we typically attempt
to avoid. See Rochester School Bd. v. N.H. PELRB, 119 N.H. 45, 50 (1979).
We could also remand to the superior court for it to consider, in the first
instance, how RSA 358-A:2, XIV affects the application of Minuteman with
respect to whether the plaintiffs may bring claims under the CPA. This, too,
would be a waste of judicial resources and unnecessarily burden the parties
3
because no matter what conclusion the superior court might reach, the parties
likely would appeal, and we would once again be called upon to decide the
issue.
Finally, we could decide the matter in the first instance. This approach
is the most sensible, so we opt for it. The issue is now thoroughly briefed and
ready for our consideration. Deciding it now will avoid unnecessarily
burdening the parties with additional steps in the litigation process. Moreover,
since the issue of who may bring claims under the CPA is one of statutory
interpretation, we would review the matter de novo in any event. Lower
Bartlett Water Precinct v. Murnik, 150 N.H. 690, 692 (2004).
III. Discussion
A. Whether Indirect Purchasers May Bring Claims under the CPA
The question presented by this case – whether consumers, as indirect
purchasers, may bring a cause of action under the CPA – arises from a
controversy that began gathering steam in 1977. At that time, in Illinois Brick
Co. v. Illinois, 431 U.S. 720 (1977), the United States Supreme Court held that
indirect purchasers may not bring claims under the federal antitrust laws. For
purposes of the Illinois Brick rule, indirect purchasers are those who acquire a
product not directly from a manufacturer, but from some intermediary in the
chain of distribution. Id. at 724-27. In support of its holding, the Court cited
the unique nature of antitrust litigation, issues of multiple recovery, and the
problem of allocating damages if indirect purchasers were allowed to bring suit.
Id. at 737-38. Later, the Court held that federal antitrust laws do not,
however, preempt states from enacting statutes that allow indirect purchasers
to recover damages for their injuries. See California v. ARC America Corp., 490
U.S. 93, 101-02 (1989) (rejecting argument that California’s antitrust law,
which specifically allows indirect purchaser actions, was preempted by federal
law).
In the wake of Illinois Brick and ARC America, states have been
grappling with issues involving whether, and in what context, indirect
purchasers may pursue their claims. For example, at least thirty-three states
and the District of Columbia have passed so-called Illinois Brick repealer
statutes, permitting plaintiffs to bring their claims under state antitrust
statutes. Elkins v. Microsoft Corp., 817 A.2d 9, 18 (Vt. 2002). Our legislature
has not. Other jurisdictions have ruled that Illinois Brick applies in both the
antitrust and the consumer protection realms. See, e.g., Sickles v. Cabot
Corp., 877 A.2d 267, 274 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div.), cert. denied, 884 A.2d
1267 (N.J. 2005). These courts reason that antitrust-type claims are unique
and should be resolved under antitrust – as opposed to consumer protection –
laws and principles. Id. They note that reaching a contrary conclusion would
4
undermine state antitrust acts and the jurisprudence construing such acts.
Id. By contrast, Vermont, Massachusetts and Florida follow a different
approach. Courts in all three states have allowed antitrust-type claims to be
brought under the state’s consumer protection act. See Elkins, 817 A.2d at
16-17, 19-20; Ciardi v. F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Ltd., 762 N.E.2d 303, 311
(Mass. 2002); Mack v. Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., 673 So. 2d 100, 104 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1996), rev. dismissed, 689 So. 2d 1068 (Fla. 1997).
We have never been called upon to decide whether indirect purchasers
may bring claims under the CPA. We have, however, held that indirect
purchasers may not bring claims under the state antitrust statute, RSA
chapter 356 (1995 & Supp. 2006). Minuteman, 147 N.H. at 639. In
Minuteman, we adopted the reasoning of Illinois Brick, citing the unique
nature of antitrust litigation and the potential complexities that would arise in
awarding damages to indirect purchasers. Id. at 638-39.
Against this backdrop, we turn to the case at hand. As referenced above,
the superior court granted judgment on the pleadings, holding that Minuteman
applied to consumer protection claims and that the plaintiffs therefore could
not pursue their claims. In general, a motion seeking judgment based solely on
the pleadings is in the nature of a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.
Jenks v. Menard, 145 N.H. 236, 239 (2000). In reviewing a motion to dismiss
for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, we assume the
truth of the facts alleged by the plaintiffs and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to them. Paul v. Sherburne, 153 N.H.
747, 749 (2006). If the facts do not constitute a basis for legal relief, we will
uphold the granting of the motion to dismiss. Id.
The plaintiffs contend that the superior court erred in granting judgment
to the defendants because the plain language of the CPA supports their
position. The defendants counter that if we allow the plaintiffs to bring their
claims under the CPA, we will be encouraging litigants to reframe antitrust
claims as CPA claims, and thereby be enabling end runs around Minuteman.
Citing public policy considerations and principles of statutory construction, the
defendants urge us to reject the plaintiffs’ arguments and to hold that the
Minuteman rule applies in the CPA context. They argue that such a result will
produce a harmonious statutory scheme.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. 314, 319 (2006). When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id.
5
We begin with the defendants’ contention that antitrust claims should be
brought and decided under antitrust statutes and principles. The plaintiffs do
not contend that they are not indirect purchasers within the meaning of
Minuteman and Illinois Brick. Indeed, it would seem to be because of our
decision in Minuteman that the plaintiffs brought CPA – as opposed to
antitrust – claims in the first place.
At first blush, the defendants’ argument has some appeal. Requiring
antitrust-type actions to be brought under the state antitrust statute would be
straightforward and simple. However, the CPA does not envisage such rigidity.
Under the CPA, “[a]ny person injured by another’s use of any method, act or
practice declared unlawful under this chapter may bring an action for
damages.” RSA 358-A:10, I (1995). For purposes of the CPA, “unfair method[s]
of competition or unfair or deceptive act[s] or practice[s] shall include . . . [the]
[p]ricing of goods or services in a manner that tends to create or maintain a
monopoly, or otherwise harm competition.” RSA 358-A:2, XIV. By allowing
consumer protection actions for the type of monopolistic or anticompetitive
conduct set forth in RSA 358-A:2, XIV, it seems indisputable that our
legislature intended to make actionable under the CPA at least some types of
conduct that typically are associated with the antitrust realm. Thus, we turn
to the plain language of the CPA to determine whether indirect purchasers may
assert these types of claims.
By allowing “any person injured” to bring an action, the plain language of
RSA 358-A:10, I (emphasis added) does not suggest any legislative intent to
limit who may bring a CPA claim to persons sustaining direct injuries. See
Remsburg v. Docusearch, 149 N.H. 148, 159-60 (2003) (“The statute defines
who may bring a private action broadly, and by its plain meaning does not limit
the class of persons who have standing to those in privity with the defendant.”
(citation omitted)). The defendants, however, contend that in order to allow
indirect purchasers to fall within the ambit of “any person injured,” we would
have to read the phrase “directly or indirectly” into the statute as a qualifier of
“injured.” We disagree.
“Any person injured” is broad. Cf. Chroniak v. Golden Investment Corp.,
133 N.H. 346, 349 (1990) (definition of lender as “‘any person making a loan
secured by a mortgage’” is “quite broad”); Estate of Gordon-Couture v. Brown,
152 N.H. 265, 270-71 (2005) (phrase “any person” is “broad and unqualified”
but should be interpreted in its statutory context). It does not differentiate
between consumers directly and indirectly injured. If we were to conclude, as
the defendants urge, that the legislature intended to allow only those directly
injured to bring suit, we would have to find some way to limit the statute’s
scope, most likely by reading the word “directly” into it, i.e. “any person directly
injured.” This is not what the statute says, and it is not our practice to add
words to statutes. Bethlehem, 154 N.H. at 319.
6
Furthermore, we have never held that the CPA allows consumers to bring
suit only against those from whom they have directly purchased a product.
The defendants’ argument essentially asks us to do just that, for if we read the
word “directly” into the CPA for purposes of RSA 358-A:2, XIV or
anticompetitive conduct generally, then we must do so for all private actions
brought under RSA 358-A:10. It would make no sense for the CPA to allow
indirect actions under some circumstances but not others, yet not set forth in
its text a basis upon which this distinction can be made. Either the statute
requires privity, or it does not. We have held that it does not. See Remsburg,
149 N.H. at 159-60.
The defendants also argue that even if we conclude that indirect
purchasers may bring claims under the “any person injured” language of RSA
358-A:10, the plaintiffs still have failed to state a claim to the extent they rely
upon RSA 358-A:2, XIV because their allegations concern anticompetitive
agreements or combinations, while RSA 358-A:2, XIV is narrowly concerned
with anticompetitive or predatory pricing instead. Thus, citing federal
authority, the defendants argue that in the absence of allegations of predatory
pricing practices, the plaintiffs’ complaint “is simply a naked attempt to re-
package . . . anticompetitive conduct allegations as pricing claims while
ignoring the text and purpose of the [consumer protection] statute.”
The plain language of the statute is not, on its face, limited to predatory
pricing. Instead, it makes unlawful the “[p]ricing of goods or services in a
manner that tends to create or maintain a monopoly, or otherwise harm
competition.” RSA 358-A:2, XIV (emphasis added.) To be sure, predatory
pricing, one definition of which is “pricing below some appropriate measure of
cost,” Matsushita Elec. Industrial Co. v. Zenith Radio, 475 U.S. 574, 585 n.8
(1986), is among the types of conduct prohibited by RSA 358-A:2, XIV.
However, since our CPA generally is given broad sweep, and since “or otherwise
harm competition” is, on its face, broad, it would seem anomalous for us to
hold that RSA 358-A:2, XIV contemplates only narrow protection. We do,
however, agree with the defendants that in order to prevail at trial on a claim
brought under RSA 358-A:2, XIV, the plaintiffs will have to prove that pricing
tended to create a monopoly, maintain a monopoly, or otherwise harm
competition. See RSA 358-A:2, XIV.
Here, the plaintiffs have alleged that the defendants’ conduct in, among
other things, “increasing . . . the price and limiting and reducing the supply of
moist snuff tobacco products . . . constitute[d] and was intended to constitute
unfair and deceptive competition and unfair and deceptive business acts and
practices within the meaning of RSA 358-A.” At this early stage of the
litigation, this allegation must be taken in a light most favorable to the
plaintiffs. Paul, 153 N.H. at 749. Thus, to the extent the defendants argue
that the plaintiffs will not be able to actually prove a violation of RSA 358-A:2,
XIV, their argument is for summary judgment or trial.
7
Another aspect of the CPA’s language also supports the conclusion that
indirect purchasers may bring suit. RSA 358-A:2 makes it unlawful to “use
any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice in
the conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” RSA 358-A:1, II
(Supp. 2006), defines “[t]rade” and “commerce” to “include any trade or
commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of this state.” (Emphasis
added.) Citing Blewett v. Abbott Laboratories, 938 P.2d 842, 846 (Wash. Ct.
App. 1997), rev. denied, 950 P.2d 475 (Wash. 1998), the defendants contend
that the phrase “directly or indirectly” has no bearing on who may bring suit
and instead defines the types of business conduct regulated. Even if we adopt
the defendants’ position, it cannot be denied that the plaintiffs’ allegations
encompass conduct which was part of trade or commerce that had direct or
indirect effects on the people of this state. Thus, if nothing else, “directly or
indirectly” is further evidence of the broad sweep the legislature intended for
the CPA. Similarly, in Ciardi, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court
noted that Massachusetts’ consumer protection statute “regulates trade and
commerce ‘directly or indirectly affecting the people of this commonwealth,’”
Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 308. It then concluded that although indirect
purchasers are barred from bringing suit under the state antitrust act, they are
not barred from bringing consumer protection claims.
The defendants try to distinguish Ciardi by pointing out that
Massachusetts’ Antitrust Act contains a provision stating that it should have
“‛no effect’” upon the state consumer protection statute, while our antitrust act
does not. Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 311. Although neither RSA chapter 356 nor
RSA chapter 358-A contains a provision similar to the one described in Ciardi,
it is also true that neither chapter indicates that interpretations of one bind
interpretations of the other.
Beyond the plain meaning of the statutory language, the defendants also
argue that since our legislature has not passed an Illinois Brick repealer
statute, it must have agreed with Minuteman, and therefore we should apply it
in the context of the CPA. However, as the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court has persuasively reasoned,
[t]he fallacy in the argument is that no one knows why
the legislature did not pass [such a] . . . measure. The
practicalities of the legislative process furnish many
reasons for the lack of [passage] . . . of a measure
other than legislative dislike for the principle involved
in the legislation. One such reason is the belief that
the matter should be left to be handled by the normal
processes of judicial development of decisional law,
including the overruling of outstanding decisions to
the extent that the sound growth of the law requires.
8
Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 310 n.15 (quotations, citation, brackets and ellipsis
omitted). Moreover, any repealer statute that our legislature could have
enacted would have modified RSA chapter 356, not the CPA. See id. It is also
worth noting that the legislature approved RSA 358-A:2, XIV on May 18, 2002,
and it became effective on July 17, 2002. Laws 2002, 276:1. Minuteman was
decided on April 19, 2002. Minuteman, 147 N.H. at 634.
The defendants also assert that general rules of statutory construction
require us to decide in their favor. Citing Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski
Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005), the defendants argue that since both RSA
chapter 358-A and RSA chapter 356 seek to protect “person[s] injured,” see
RSA 356:11, II (1995); RSA 358-A:10, it follows that, consistent with our
practice of attempting to construe statutes that deal with similar subject
matter harmoniously, we must extend Minuteman and construe both statutes
as precluding indirect purchaser actions. We disagree. For one thing, neither
RSA chapter 356 nor RSA chapter 358-A contains a provision indicating that
one is dependent upon the other. Additionally, the legislature’s purpose in
enacting the CPA supports our plain meaning analysis. The purpose of the
CPA is to provide broad protection for consumers. See Hughes v. DiSalvo, 143
N.H. 576, 578 (1999). Accordingly, although the defendants correctly note that
RSA chapter 356, like the CPA, uses the phrase “any person injured” to
describe who may bring suit, see RSA 356:11, II, we cannot interpret a phrase
in a statute without regard for the context in which it is found. In the context
of the CPA, which is to be construed broadly, see Hughes, 143 N.H. at 578,
“any person injured” must encompass consumers, who are often the ultimate
purchasers of goods and services in the marketplace.
Furthermore, to the extent RSA 358-A:2, XIV is at issue, its enactment
demonstrates the legislature’s clear desire to promote the consumer protection
policy of competitive pricing. To adopt the defendants’ position and hold that
indirect consumers are prohibited from bringing CPA claims would be to
prevent the real victims – those who purchase goods at higher prices – from
recovering damages for the injuries caused by an alleged violation of RSA 358-
A:2, XIV. Such a result would seriously undermine or erode the expansive
remedial goals of the CPA. See Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 313-14 n.19 (“[P]ermitting
only direct purchasers to bring a cause of action and retain as damages the
amount that they passed along to indirect purchasers . . . [would produce] a
windfall at the expense of the true victims further down the distribution
chain . . . .”).
Our reasoning is supported by the holding in Mack. There, the court
f[ou]nd that there is no plain inconsistency or
repugnancy between the Florida [consumer protection
statutes] and Antitrust Act which must be
9
harmonized. . . . ARC America establishes that two
statutes, both of which prohibit anticompetitive
conduct, are not inconsistent merely because one
allows indirect purchasers to sue for damages and the
other does not. . . . [T]o accept the argument of the
defendants, which would eliminate a remedy provided
to an entire class of consumers – indirect purchasers
who have been damaged by alleged illegal price-fixing –
would be wholly contrary to the legislature’s intent in
enacting [Florida’s consumer protection statutes].
Mack, 673 So. 2d at 110.
The defendants argue, as a matter of public policy, that allowing indirect
purchasers to bring suit will have the effect of introducing complex issues of
duplicative liability. Although this is a legitimate concern, we find persuasive
the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court’s response to this argument:
[I]t is the province of the . . . Legislature to make its
own policy decisions about whether to permit claims
by indirect purchasers for antitrust violations under
[state] law. We read the language of [the consumer
protection act] as a clear statement of legislative policy
to protect . . . consumers through the authorization of
such indirect purchaser actions. Any disagreement
with the statute should be directed to the Legislature.
Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 314 (footnote omitted). Ciardi also noted that the
Massachusetts legislature, like ours, eliminated some of the perceived difficulty
in apportioning damages between direct and indirect purchasers by allowing
consumers who prevail under the consumer protection statutes to recover
actual damages or a set dollar amount, whichever is greater. See id. at n.20;
RSA 358-A:10 (actual damages or $1,000). Thus, “[t]o the extent that the
plaintiff is able to prevail on the issue of liability but is unable to prove actual
damages, the Legislature has decided that she [or he] is entitled to a specified
remedy.” Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 314 n.20.
Our overall analysis finds support in the Vermont Supreme Court’s
decision in Elkins. Elkins, 817 A.2d at 9. There, a plaintiff brought a class
action suit against Microsoft under the Vermont Consumer Fraud Act (VCFA),
alleging that it had obtained monopoly power over the computer operating
systems market. Id. at 11. After analyzing the VCFA and its legislative history,
as well as Illinois Brick, the court concluded that indirect purchaser suits were
allowed under the VCFA. Id. The Elkins decision is persuasive, in part
because the VCFA and RSA chapter 358-A share similar attributes. For
example, both are broadly worded, id. at 13; Milford Lumber Co. v. RCB Realty,
10
147 N.H. 15, 17 (2001); neither contains an express privity requirement,
Elkins, 817 A.2d at 12; Remsburg, 149 N.H. at 159-60; and both have a similar
purpose, Elkins, 817 A.2d at 13 (“‘protect the public’”); Chase v. Dorais, 122
N.H. 600, 601 (1982) (“consumer protection”). The defendants are correct to
point out that Vermont does not have an antitrust act and does have an Illinois
Brick repealer statute, but this circumstance does not render the case any less
persuasive. Although Vermont had a statutory provision authorizing indirect
purchaser suits under the VCFA, the court analyzed the issue as if it did not
because the provision became effective after the plaintiff’s alleged injury.
Elkins, 817 A.2d at 17.
Although the defendants correctly note that courts in other jurisdictions
have concluded that indirect purchasers may not bring consumer protection
claims, their decisions are not persuasive in light of our statutory scheme. For
example, in Davidson v. Microsoft, 792 A.2d 336 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2002),
cert. denied, 801 A.2d 1032 (Md. 2002), and Sickles, 877 A.2d at 267, the
Maryland Court of Special Appeals and the Appellate Division of New Jersey’s
Superior Court concluded that indirect purchaser suits are barred under each
state’s consumer protection statute. However, both courts based their
decisions upon their respective consumer protection statute’s failure to specify
antitrust violations as actionable conduct. Davidson, 792 A.2d at 344-45;
Sickles, 877 A.2d at 276-77. RSA 358-A:2, XIV, however, expressly includes
antitrust violations under the CPA.
In Abbott Laboratories, Inc. v. Segura, 907 S.W.2d 503, 506 (Tex. 1995),
the Texas Supreme Court held that indirect purchasers may not bring claims
under the state antitrust act, and that allowing indirect purchaser suits under
the consumer protection statutes “would essentially permit an end run around
the policies allowing only direct purchasers to recover under the Antitrust Act.”
The court determined that the reasoning of Illinois Brick applied in the context
of claims under the consumer protection statutes because those claims “are in
essence antitrust claims.” Id. at 507.
The Segura decision is not particularly persuasive for several reasons.
First, the Texas Consumer Protection Act defines who may bring suit much
more narrowly than RSA chapter 358-A. Compare TEX. BUS. & COM. CODE ANN.
§ 17.50 (Vernon 2002 & Supp. 2006) (“A consumer may maintain an action
where any of the following constitute a producing cause of economic damages
or damages for mental anguish . . . .”) with RSA 358-A:10, I (“Any person
injured”). Second, Texas’ consumer protection statutes did not cover
monopolistic and price-related conduct, see Segura, 907 S.W.2d at 513
(Gonzalez, J., concurring), whereas at least RSA 358-A:2, XIV does. Third, two
judges persuasively dissented, noting that just because conduct gives rise to an
antitrust action should not mean that consumers are denied a remedy under a
statute that was designed to protect them, whether they are direct or indirect
consumers. Id. at 516 (Gammage & Spector, JJ., dissenting).
11
Finally, the defendants rely upon Vacco v. Microsoft Corp., 793 A.2d
1048, 1050 (Conn. 2002). There, the Connecticut Supreme Court held that a
“plaintiff is barred from bringing a claim under [the Connecticut Unfair Trade
Practices Act (CUTPA)] because his alleged injuries are too remote with respect
to the defendant’s alleged conduct.” Id. The Vacco Court based its conclusion
upon a three-part test for remoteness and proximate causation. Id. at 1066-
67. To the extent the defendants argue that these particular plaintiffs cannot
show a sufficiently close connection between themselves and the defendants’
alleged conduct, their arguments relate to whether the plaintiffs can prove their
claim under the CPA – not to whether they are entitled, as indirect purchasers,
to bring that claim in the first place. See Illinois Brick, 431 U.S. at 728 n.7
(explaining that who is “injured” is “analytically distinct from the question of
which persons have sustained injuries too remote to give them standing to sue
for damages . . . .”); accord Ciardi, 762 N.E.2d at 313.
Accordingly, given the broad protections afforded by RSA chapter 358-A,
we conclude that the plaintiffs set forth sufficient allegations to survive the
defendants’ motion for judgment on the pleadings.
B. Class Certification
RSA 358-A:10-a (1995 & Supp. 2006) governs when a class action may
be maintained under the CPA. It provides, “Persons entitled to bring an action
under RSA 358-A:10 may, if the unlawful act or practice has caused similar
injury to numerous other persons, institute an action as representative or
representatives of a class of persons . . . to recover actual damages . . . .” RSA
358-A:10-a, I.
The superior court observed that “RSA 358-A:2 expressly includes ‘unfair
method[s] of competition’ in the types of claims that may be brought under the
CPA. In contrast . . . RSA 358-A:10-a . . . omits ‘unfair method[s] of
competition’ in its statement of the types of claims that may be brought as
class actions.” Thus, the court reasoned, if the plaintiffs’ allegations involve
only methods of competition, they may not bring a class action. The superior
court then determined that the plaintiffs’ allegations did indeed encompass
only unfair methods of competition, and therefore the plaintiffs were precluded
from bringing a class action. On appeal, the plaintiffs contend that their
allegations need not be pigeonholed into a category of “unfair methods”
because the conduct they allege against the defendants also constitutes
unlawful acts and practices.
As the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court reasoned, “antitrust
violations are actionable under [the consumer protection act] not only because
they are unfair methods of competition, but also because they constitute unfair
acts or practices, and because the Legislature did not explicitly preclude
12
antitrust activity as a violation of” the consumer protection act. Ciardi, 762
N.E.2d at 311 n.17 (citation omitted). This reasoning is compelling, given our
statutory scheme. RSA 358-A:10-a, I, permits class actions for “unlawful act[s]
or practice[s].” RSA 358-A:2 defines “Acts Unlawful” as “any unfair method of
competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice.” Thus, by its plain
terms, “Acts Unlawful” includes “unfair method[s] of competition.” RSA 358-
A:2; RSA 358-A:10-a, I.
Furthermore, to the extent the parties argue over the applicability of RSA
358-A:2, XIV, the statute specifically states that “unfair method of competition
or unfair or deceptive act or practice shall include, but [not be] limited
to . . . [the] [p]ricing of goods or services in a manner that tends to create or
maintain a monopoly, or otherwise harm competition.” Thus, the legislature
made no effort to force this type of antitrust activity into an “unfair method”
category for purposes of the CPA. To the contrary, the plain language of the
statute indicates that “acts or practices” includes the conduct set forth in RSA
358-A:2, XIV. We discern no principled reason to pigeonhole the conduct here
alleged into the category of “unfair method” for purposes of the CPA. To
conclude otherwise would erode the broad remedial goals of the CPA and
elevate form over substance.
Accordingly, we conclude that the superior court erred in ruling that the
allegations against the defendants are not susceptible to class certification.
Thus, we reverse its ruling in this regard and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons we conclude that indirect purchasers may
bring claims under the CPA. We also conclude that they are not precluded
from attempting to certify a class of indirect purchasers under RSA 358-A:10-a.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
13