THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-613
SCOTT A. MURLEY
v.
HANOVER INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: April 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 8, 2007
Jensen & Zumbado, of Hampton Falls (John P. Elmore and Hector E.
Zumbado on the brief, and Mr. Zumbado orally), for the plaintiff.
Horn & Lauretti, of Boston, Massachusetts (Michael S. Kinson on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
Normand & Associates, P.A., of Manchester (James A. Normand on the
memorandum of law), for MaryBeth St. Laurent, as amicus curiae.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Hanover Insurance Company, appeals the
decision of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) finding that an exclusion in the
policy issued by the defendant was void and ordering the defendant to pay the
plaintiff, Scott A. Murley, $5,000 for medical payments. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The plaintiff purchased an
insurance policy providing $100,000 in personal liability, $100,000 in
underinsured motorist coverage and $5,000 in medical payments coverage
from the defendant. In February 2002, he sustained injuries in a motor vehicle
accident caused by William Martino in Manchester. The plaintiff collected the
$5,000 policy limit from the defendant in medical payments coverage and
obtained $25,000 from Martino’s insurance company, which was the limit of
his liability coverage. Because the plaintiff suffered more than $25,000 in
damages, he pursued an underinsured motorist claim against the defendant
for the remaining damages. Through arbitration, the value of the plaintiff’s
damages was determined to be $52,500. The $25,000 that the plaintiff
collected from Martino’s policy was deducted from the arbitration award,
leaving a balance of $27,500. The defendant, however, paid only $22,500,
relying upon the fact that it had already paid $5,000 in medical payments and
upon an exclusion in the policy that prohibits duplicate payments for a single
element of loss.
The plaintiff brought suit to recover the remaining $5,000 under his
underinsured motorist coverage. The superior court ruled that the exclusion in
the policy limiting recovery for a single element of loss was void under RSA
264:15, I (2004) and RSA 259:61, I (2004). This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the exclusion violates neither
statutory policy nor statutory requirements under RSA 264:15, I, and RSA
259:61, I. “In matters of statutory interpretation, this court is the final arbiter
of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered
as a whole.” Swain v. Employers Mut. Cas. Co., 150 N.H. 574, 576 (2004). We
first look to the statute’s language itself, and, unless the statutory scheme
defines the words used, we ascribe to them their plain and ordinary meanings.
Id.
The insurance policy at issue provides:
PART A – LIABILITY COVERAGE
. . . .
LIMIT OF LIABILITY
. . . .
C. No one will be entitled to receive duplicate payments for the
same elements of loss under this coverage and:
1. Part B or Part C of this policy; or
2. Any Underinsured Motorists Coverage provided by this
policy.
2
. . . .
PART B – MEDICAL PAYMENTS COVERAGE
. . . .
LIMIT OF LIABILITY
. . . .
B. No one will be entitled to receive duplicate payments for the
same elements of loss under this coverage and:
1. Part A or Part C of this policy; or
2. Any Underinsured Motorists Coverage provided by this
policy.
. . . .
PART C – UNINSURED MOTORISTS COVERAGE
. . . .
LIMIT OF LIABILITY
. . . .
B. No one will be entitled to receive duplicate payments for the
same elements of loss under this coverage and:
1. Part A or Part B of this policy; or
2. Any Underinsured Motorists Coverage provided by this
policy.
The parties agree that this language purports to prohibit the plaintiff from
recovering both $5,000 under the medical payments coverage and $5,000 for
the same injury under the underinsured motorist claim.
Absent public policy or statutory provisions to the contrary, insurers
have the right to limit their liability by exclusions written in terms appropriate
to convey their meaning and effect to a reasonable person in the position of the
insured. Empire Ins. Co. v. National Union Fire Ins. Co., 128 N.H. 171, 175
(1986). Exclusions are void only when their application defeats a statutory
policy or violates a statutory requirement. Id. at 174. Neither party argues
that a reasonable person would not understand the meaning and effect of the
exclusion. Thus, we must determine whether the exclusion violates statutory
policy or requirements.
3
We first address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred in
finding the exclusion void under RSA 264:15, I. RSA 264:15, I, states, in
pertinent part: “When an insured elects to purchase liability insurance in an
amount greater than the minimum coverage required by RSA 259:61, his
uninsured motorist coverage shall automatically be equal to the liability
coverage elected.” Uninsured motorist statutes, like RSA 264:15, I, are
designed to provide an innocent victim with a source of restitution when he
cannot recover the full amount of damages from the tortfeasor. Swain, 150
N.H. at 576. The legislature intended RSA 264:15, I, to allow policy holders to
protect themselves against injury from an uninsured motorist to the extent that
they protect themselves against liability. Turner v. St. Paul Prop. & Liab. Ins.
Co., 141 N.H. 27, 29 (1996); Bertolami v. Merchants Mutual Ins. Co., 120 N.H.
308, 312 (1980) (applying predecessor statute).
The case before us presents the same issue that we decided in Bertolami.
In Bertolami, the plaintiff’s minor daughter was injured by an uninsured
motorist. Bertolami, 120 N.H. at 309. The plaintiff’s insurance policy provided
that medical payments could be deducted from payments made to a policy
holder who was injured by an uninsured motorist, but did not provide for such
a deduction under liability coverage. Id. at 310. Under the policy, the
plaintiff’s insurance company deducted $500 from the plaintiff’s $7,000
uninsured motorist coverage recovery because the insurer had already made a
$500 medical payment to the daughter. Id. at 309-10. We held that the
policy’s deduction of medical payments violated RSA 268:15-a (Supp. 1970),
which was the predecessor statute to RSA 264:15, I, because the exclusion
placed the daughter in an inferior position to that which she would have been
in had the plaintiff, rather than the uninsured motorist, been liable for her
injuries. Id. at 312. We described the inequality created by the policy in the
following manner:
The exclusion relates only to uninsured motorist coverage and not
liability coverage. Thus, if the plaintiff and her daughter had been
riding in the plaintiff’s insured automobile, and [the daughter] had
been injured through the plaintiff’s negligence, [the daughter]
could have settled with the defendant for $7,000 and still
recovered $500 in medical payments. If the medical payments
deduction clause is given effect, however, [the daughter] gets her
$7,000 settlement and no more.
Id. at 312.
The defendant attempts to distinguish Bertolami by stating that the
defendant’s policy deducts medical payments from both underinsured motorist
and liability coverage, thus eliminating the inequality created by the policy in
4
Bertolami. The defendant asserts that, under its policy, had the mother and
daughter from Bertolami been riding in the mother’s insured automobile, and
had the daughter been injured through the mother’s negligence, the daughter
would have received a total of only $7,000, rather than $7,500, because the
defendant’s policy prevents double recovery under liability coverage as well as
under uninsured motorist coverage. Such a policy would violate a different
statute, however.
RSA 264:17 (2004) prohibits subrogation, stating: “The right of
subrogation against any third party shall not exist or be claimed in favor of the
insurer who has paid or reimbursed, to or for the benefit of the insured,
medical costs under coverage provided for pursuant to RSA 264:16.” In
Bertolami, had the mother’s negligence injured her daughter, the daughter
would have been treated as the “insured,” as that term is used in RSA 264:17,
while the mother would have been treated as the “third party” who injured the
insured. The mother’s insurance company thus would play two roles: (1) it
would be the “insurer” of the daughter, paying the daughter the medical
payments she is due; and (2) it would provide liability coverage to the mother,
paying damages to the daughter to compensate her for the mother’s negligence.
Under this scenario, if the insurance company, in its role as provider of liability
coverage to the mother, paid $7,000 in damages to the daughter, the insurance
company, in its role as insurer of the daughter, could not deduct or otherwise
withhold $500 from that amount to offset the $500 in medical benefits that it
paid to the daughter. To do so would violate the statutory policy stated in RSA
264:17, because it would, in effect, constitute subrogation. Because such a
provision would violate statutory policy, it would be void, and the defendant’s
insurance policy in this case would not eliminate the inequality condemned in
Bertolami. Because RSA 264:17 prohibits subrogation against a liability claim,
the daughter would receive $7,500 if she were injured by her mother’s
negligence. If the insurer could enforce the double recovery exclusion where
the daughter was injured by an uninsured motorist, then the daughter would
receive only $7,000. This result is prohibited by the statutory policy stated in
RSA 264:15, I, and interpreted in our decision in Bertolami.
To the extent that the defendant’s insurance policy prohibits duplicate
payments for the same element of loss under its liability and medical benefits
coverages, the provision is void. Once that prohibition of duplicate payments
under liability coverage is void, the same inequity that arose in Bertolami
arises here. The policy permits duplicate medical benefits payments under a
liability claim, but prevents duplicate medical benefits payments under an
uninsured motorist claim. This inequity violates RSA 264:15’s “legislative
intent to allow a person to protect himself against injury from uninsured
motorists to the extent that he protects himself against ordinary personal
liability.” Bertolami, 120 N.H. at 312. Accordingly, we agree with the trial
court’s ruling that the defendant’s policy violates RSA 264:15.
5
The defendant argues that allowing the plaintiff to recover both the
medical payments and uninsured motorist payments would require rewriting
the insurance policy because it would allow the plaintiff to recover benefits in
excess of what he purchased. We disagree. Where a plaintiff pays a separate
premium for each type of coverage, we see nothing unjust in allowing the
plaintiff to recover under each endorsement. Id. at 310. Further, the illegality
of the clause does not require rewriting the policy. The policy is simply now
read as if the offending language were not there. Id. at 313.
Because we agree with the superior court’s determination that the
exclusion invoked by the defendant is void, we need not determine whether the
exclusion violates RSA 259:61, I.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6