THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-548
STEVEN NAULT
v.
MICHELLE TIRADO
Argued: April 17, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 15, 2007
MacMillan Law Offices, of Bradford, Massachusetts (Thomas K.
MacMillan on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gary M. Burt and Doreen F.
Connor on the brief, and Mr. Burt orally), for the defendant.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Steven Nault, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Morrill, J.) dismissing his writ of summons for failure to have
properly served it on the defendant, Michelle Tirado. We affirm.
The parties were involved in an automobile accident in South Hampton
on November 27, 2002. On November 23, 2005, a deputy sheriff attempted to
perfect service of a writ alleging negligence in connection with the accident by
leaving a copy of it at an address in Exeter listed in the 2002 accident report as
the defendant’s address.
The defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that service was defective
because she no longer resided in Exeter. In support of the motion, she
submitted an affidavit asserting that more than a year before January 13,
2006, she moved to Massachusetts in connection with her employment, and
had not lived at the Exeter address since the move. She claimed she was made
aware of the action by her counsel, who had learned of it because a courtesy
copy of the writ had been sent to her insurer. Because the writ was neither
served nor entered with the court prior to November 27, 2005, the defendant
argued it was time-barred. See RSA 508:4, I (1997); Super. Ct. R. 2.
To counter the motion, the plaintiff submitted a voter registration list for
Exeter bearing the town clerk’s stamp with a date of February 1, 2006, and
identifying the Exeter address as the defendant’s address. The plaintiff also
submitted proof that the post office did not have a forwarding address for the
defendant. The plaintiff argued that service was timely made at the defendant’s
last and usual place of address. The trial court granted the motion, and this
appeal followed.
Strict compliance with the statutory requirements for service of process
is required to provide the defendant with constitutionally sufficient notice of
the action, and to vest the trial court with jurisdiction over the defendant. See
Estate of Lunt v. Gaylor, 150 N.H. 96, 97 (2003); Duncan v. McDonough, 105
N.H. 308, 309 (1964). Service on a New Hampshire resident is accomplished
by either giving a copy of the writ to the defendant within the state, or by
“leaving [it] at his abode.” RSA 510:2 (1997); see South Down Recreation
Assoc. v. Moran, 141 N.H. 484, 489 (1996). Because both parties’ arguments
on appeal suggest that the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard
applies, we review the trial court’s finding that the Exeter address did not
constitute the defendant’s abode in accordance with this standard.
The plaintiff argues that the sheriff’s return showing that service had
been made at the defendant’s “last and usual place of abode” was entitled to a
presumption of correctness, and that the defendant’s assertion, without more,
that she had not resided there for more than a year was insufficient to
overcome the presumption. The defendant counters that RSA 510:2 requires
“abode” service to be made at a defendant’s present place of residence, and that
the unrefuted proof established that the defendant did not reside in Exeter at
the time of the attempted service.
“The place of abode . . . is that designated by a person as his principal
place of physical presence for the indefinite future to the exclusion of all
others.” RSA 21:6-a (2000). Construing the term “abode” in RSA 510:2 in this
manner is consistent with the statute’s overall purpose of affording the
defendant constitutionally sufficient