THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-598
TOWN OF RYE BOARD OF SELECTMEN
v.
TOWN OF RYE ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Argued: April 3, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 26, 2007
Michael L. Donovan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Bosen & Springer, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Jonathan S. Springer on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John F. Bisson and John G.
Cronin on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the intervenor, 228 Maple
Street, LLC.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, the Town of Rye Board of Selectmen
(Selectmen), appeals an order of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) upholding a
decision of the Town of Rye Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) to allow the
intervenor, 228 Maple Street, LLC (228 Maple), to convert buildings that it
owns to condominiums. We affirm.
The following facts are undisputed. 228 Maple owns a 1.29-acre parcel
in Rye on which ten cottage-style buildings and one building containing a
rental office and an apartment are located. The cottage-style buildings range in
size from 347 to 766 square feet and have been rented seasonally. The Town of
Rye Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance) classifies the cottage-style buildings as
“tourist cabins” or “tourist camps,” which are excluded from the general
residential zone in which they sit. The cabins were constructed prior to Rye’s
adoption of the Ordinance, however; thus, they are prior non-conforming uses.
Aside from not conforming to the use requirements, the cottages also do not
conform to the lot-size requirements of the general residential zone.
In January 2004, 228 Maple applied to the ZBA for a special exception to
convert the eleven buildings to condominium ownership. In its application,
228 Maple agreed to limit the use of the tourist cabins to seasonal use. The
ZBA dismissed the application for lack of jurisdiction because the Ordinance
only permitted condominium conversion of “dwelling units,” and tourist cabins
were not included in that definition.
228 Maple appealed to the superior court, and sought a declaratory
ruling that the special exception criteria in the Ordinance conflicted with RSA
chapter 356-B (1995 & Supp. 2006), the Condominium Act. The trial court
ruled in July 2005 that the Ordinance’s prohibition of condominium conversion
for any building not classified as a “dwelling unit” conflicted with the
Condominium Act. The court reversed the ZBA’s dismissal of 228 Maple’s
application and remanded for a determination of whether the proposed
condominium conversion would result in a change in use of the property.
On remand, the ZBA determined that no change in use would occur and
granted 228 Maple’s application for a special exception. The Selectmen
appealed the ZBA’s decision to the superior court, claiming that the court’s
first decision placed the ZBA in the untenable position of deciding a matter
over which it had no jurisdiction. Citing its prior decision, the trial court ruled
in June 2006 that the Ordinance’s prohibition of condominium conversions for
any structures other than “dwelling units” conflicted with the Condominium
Act. The court found that the only way the ZBA could deny the special
exception would be for the condominium conversion to result in a change in
land use, and the Selectmen had not met their burden to demonstrate that the
ZBA’s determination regarding change in use was unlawful or unreasonable.
The Selectmen appeal the trial court’s rulings. We address each issue
raised by the Selectmen in turn.
2
I. Preemption
The Selectmen argue that the superior court erred in ruling that the
Ordinance conflicts with the Condominium Act by prohibiting condominium
conversion of “tourist cabins.” They argue that the legislature did not intend
the Condominium Act to completely control land use regulation of
condominiums because the Act expressly provides for local land use regulation.
An issue of state preemption is essentially one of statutory interpretation.
Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. Town of Wilton, 153 N.H. 234, 236 (2006).
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. In the Matter of
Giacomini & Giacomini, 151 N.H. 775, 776 (2005).
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in
the words of the statute considered as a whole. We first examine
the language of the statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain
and ordinary meanings to the words used. When a statute’s
language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for
further indication of legislative intent, and we refuse to consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to incorporate in the statute.
Id. (citations omitted).
It is well settled that towns cannot regulate a field that has been
preempted by the State. Thayer v. Town of Tilton, 151 N.H. 483, 487 (2004).
The preemption doctrine flows from the principle that municipal legislation is
invalid if it is repugnant to, or inconsistent with, State law. Id. One way in
which municipal legislation will be preempted is if it expressly contradicts State
law. Id. State law expressly preempts local law when there is an actual
conflict between State and local regulation. N. Country Envtl. Servs. v. Town of
Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 611 (2004). An actual conflict exists when a
municipal ordinance or regulation permits that which a State statute prohibits,
or vice versa. Id.
The Selectmen challenge the trial court’s finding of an actual conflict
between the Condominium Act and the Ordinance. The Ordinance states, in
pertinent part:
Section 503 Condominium Conversions.
503.1 Permitted by Special Exception: In any district,
conversion of existing dwelling units to condominium ownership
shall be permitted as a special exception granted by the Board of
Adjustment, only if all the provisions herein are met.
3
. . . .
503.3 Criteria for Special Exceptions.
A. The dwelling units which are subject to the request for
condominium conversion must, at the time of the request
for condominium conversion, exist as legal dwelling units
pursuant to the ordinances of the Town of Rye. The
burden shall be on the petitioner to demonstrate that the
units sought to be converted have legal status.
B. Each dwelling unit of the condominium shall contain a
minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
The ordinance defines a “dwelling unit” as:
One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more persons
living together as a single housekeeping unit, and having cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities, but not including hotel,
motel, tourist cabin (camp), lodging house, institutional home,
residential club units or other similar commercial accommodations
offered for occupancy.
There is no dispute that the ten cottage-style buildings at issue in this case are
“tourist cabins” under the Ordinance. There is also no dispute that the above-
quoted language from the Ordinance prohibits conversion of tourist cabins to
condominiums. The trial court ruled that this language in the Ordinance
conflicts with RSA 356-B:5 (1995), which states, in pertinent part:
No zoning or other land use ordinance shall prohibit
condominiums as such by reason of the form of ownership
inherent therein. Neither shall any condominium be treated
differently by any zoning or other land use ordinance which would
permit a physically identical project or development under a
different form of ownership. . . . Nevertheless, cities and towns may
provide by ordinance that proposed conversion condominiums and
the use thereof which do not conform to the zoning, land use and
site plan regulations of the respective city or town in which the
property is located shall secure a special use permit, a special
exception, or variance, as the case may be, prior to becoming a
conversion condominium.
We agree with the trial court that section 503.3 of the Ordinance actually
conflicts with RSA 356-B:5. On its face, the Ordinance prohibits buildings that
4
are not dwelling units, such as tourist cabins, from being converted to
condominiums. This restriction directly conflicts with the language of RSA
356-B:5 that provides, “Neither shall any condominium be treated differently
by any zoning or other land use ordinance which would permit a physically
identical project or development under a different form of ownership.” Because
the Ordinance prohibits the conversion of non-dwelling units to the
condominium form of ownership, without any physical change to the units, the
Ordinance prohibits that which a State statute permits. Accordingly the
Ordinance directly conflicts with, and is preempted by, the Condominium Act.
The same analysis applies to the Selectmen’s argument that 228 Maple
does not comply with various requirements for a special exception for
condominium conversion, particularly the requirement that each dwelling unit
of the condominium must contain at least 600 square feet of floor area. The
Ordinance allows buildings with less than 600 square feet of floor area to exist,
but prohibits such structures from being converted to condominiums. Because
section 503.3 B of the Ordinance excludes condominiums of 600 square feet or
less based upon their form of ownership, this provision of the ordinance also
conflicts with, and is preempted by, the Condominium Act.
This case is similar to Cohen v. Town of Henniker, 134 N.H. 425, 426
(1991), in which the owner of two apartment buildings wished to convert them
to condominiums. The property did not satisfy the lot-size and frontage
requirements for its zone; but, because the apartments were constructed before
the Town of Henniker had adopted zoning ordinances, the apartments were
legal nonconforming uses. Id. The apartment owner applied for subdivision
approval to convert the units into condominiums and the Town denied it
because the proposal did not conform with the lot-size requirements for its
zone. Id. The trial court denied the owner’s appeal. Id. In reversing the trial
court, we quoted the same language from the Condominium Act quoted above
and observed that the existing rental units were physically identical to the
proposed condominiums. Id. at 428. “Thus,” we stated, “RSA 356-B:5 would
indicate that condominium conversion would have to be allowed to avoid
disparate treatment.” Id. We reach the same conclusion on the facts before us
today. Because the Ordinance, on its face, prohibits the conversion of the
tourist cabins at issue, while the physically identical structures are permitted
under a different form of ownership, the ordinance conflicts with RSA 356-B:5.
II. The ZBA’s Findings of Fact
The Selectmen next argue that the ZBA erred in finding, and the trial
court erred in affirming, that 228 Maple’s proposed condominium conversion
would not result in a change in use of the property. The conversion will result
in a change in use, the Selectmen argue, because: (1) the change in use from
5
tourist occupancy to owner occupancy will increase traffic, waste, and
consumption of water; (2) the applicants will physically change the property by
adding more parking spaces; and (3) the current septic system serving the
tourist cabins is insufficient to serve condominiums and will not receive
condominium subdivision approval from the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (DES) without the installation of an entirely new
system.
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152
N.H. 74, 77 (2005). “The factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie
lawful and reasonable, and will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors
of law, unless the court is persuaded, based upon a balance of the
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision is
unreasonable.” Id. The party seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision bears the
burden of proof on appeal to the trial court. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s
decision on appeal unless it is not supported by the evidence or is legally
erroneous. Id.
The trial court affirmed the ZBA’s determination that the conversion
would not affect the use of the land based in part upon 228 Maple’s agreement
to restrict the condominiums to seasonal use only, thus maintaining the same
time period of use as tourist cabins. The trial court recognized the possibility
that four parking spaces may be added, but also recognized that the additional
parking was not required and was simply a suggestion made by the Rye
Planning Board. The trial court considered evidence presented that the cabins
themselves would not change in size or be altered at all; thus, they would not
accommodate more people. Further, the trial court considered the substantial
evidence presented to the ZBA that no impact on the land would occur,
including a traffic study done by a traffic engineer, which showed that there
would be no change in traffic impact. The trial court also considered the
extensive discussion before the ZBA of updating the septic system, but found
that this was insufficient to constitute a change in use.
Pursuant to our limited review in zoning cases, we cannot conclude that
the Selectmen have shown that the trial court’s decision was unsupported by
the evidence or legally erroneous. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s
decision.
III. The ZBA’s Authority
The Selectmen raise two arguments regarding the trial court’s 2005
decision to remand to the ZBA. They first argue that the trial court erred in
remanding to the ZBA because the ZBA does not have the authority to
determine whether the Ordinance conflicts with the Condominium Act. We
6
disagree with the premise of this argument. In its 2005 order, the trial court
ruled that the Ordinance and the Condominium Act conflict, stating: “Here,
the Ordinance, as written, results in an effective barrier against certain kinds
of accommodations, which it does not define as ‘dwelling units,’ being
converted to condominiums; thus, the intent of the RSA 356-B:6 [sic] to limit
discrimination against condominiums solely as a form of ownership is
thwarted.” The trial court determined, before remanding to the ZBA, that
section 503.3 A of the Ordinance conflicted with the Condominium Act. Thus,
the ZBA was not required to determine whether the Ordinance conflicted with
the Condominium Act because the trial court had already done so.
The Selectmen’s second argument asserts that the trial court erred in
remanding to the ZBA because the ZBA does not have the authority to waive
any conditions for a special exception, and the criteria that an applicant’s
property be an existing dwelling unit was a requirement for a special exception.
We disagree. As explained above, the trial court ruled that Section 503.3 A
conflicted with the Condominium Act and was preempted. Accordingly, the
ZBA did not “waive” the dwelling unit condition for a special exception; the ZBA
properly did not consider the dwelling unit condition in light of the trial court’s
ruling.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DUGGAN,
J., concurred specially.
DUGGAN, J., concurring specially. I concur with the majority’s decision
to affirm the superior court’s order upholding the ZBA’s decision to allow 228
Maple to convert the buildings it owns into condominiums. I write separately,
however, because I would employ a different analysis concerning the interplay
between the Town’s Zoning Ordinance and RSA 356-B:5 (1995).
To start, the majority opinion does not fully acknowledge the language in
RSA 356-B:5 which plainly states:
Nevertheless, cities and towns may provide by ordinance that
proposed conversion condominiums and the use thereof which do
not conform to the zoning, land use and site plan regulations of the
respective city or town in which the property is located shall secure
a special use permit, a special exception, or variance, as the case
may be, prior to becoming a conversion condominium.
(Emphasis added.) This language suggests that in the event that proposed
conversion condominiums do not conform to the Town’s local land use
7
regulations, the Town can require the developer to apply for a special
exception.
This language has been examined in Cohen v. Town of Henniker, 134
N.H. 425, 428 (1991). Citing the language from RSA 356-B:5 quoted above, the
court explains:
[A] municipality may require such a permit, exception, or variance
prior to conversion even where there exists a protected
nonconforming use. However, to be consistent with the rest of the
statute, such a requirement may only be denied if the conversion
would have an actual effect on the use of the land.
Id. (citation omitted). As explained in the majority opinion, Cohen involved a
situation where the owner of two apartment buildings, which were legal
nonconforming uses, wished to convert them into condominiums. Id. at 426.
The owner applied for subdivision approval to convert the apartment units into
condominiums, and the Town denied the application because the proposal did
not conform with the lot-size requirements for its zone. Id. In holding that the
Town erred in denying the application, the Cohen court further explained that:
Interpreting RSA 356-B:5 to preclude denial of a special use
permit, special exception, or variance where there is no change in
land use is supported by our cases on nonconforming
uses. . . . The conversion of apartment units into condominium
units is not necessarily a change in use. If the conversion would in
fact have an effect on the land use, this may constitute a change or
expansion of use; in such a case, preventing conversion would not
conflict with the doctrine of nonconforming uses, and would not
violate RSA 356-B:5.
Id. at 429.
The analysis set forth in Cohen controls in this case. Here, the cottage-
style buildings owned by 228 Maple are legal nonconforming uses. As the
majority points out, they do not meet the definition of “dwelling unit,” and most
of the cottages do not meet the minimum square footage requirement specified
in section 503.3 of the Town’s Ordinance. However, the ZBA determined, and
the superior court agreed, that the proposed condominium conversion would
not result in a change in the use of the property. Consequently, it was proper
for the ZBA to grant 228 Maple’s application for a special exception. I would
therefore affirm the superior court’s order upholding the ZBA’s decision.
8