THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Health and Human Services
No. 2006-510
PETITION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE DIVISION FOR
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND FAMILIES
(New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services)
Argued: April 3, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 15, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Suzan M. Lehmann, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Orr and Reno, P.A., of Concord (Lisa Snow Wade on the brief and orally),
for the respondents.
GALWAY, J. The New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and
Families (DCYF) has petitioned for a writ of certiorari, see Sup. Ct. R. 11,
challenging a decision of the New Hampshire Department of Health and
Human Services Administrative Appeals Unit Hearing Panel (hearing panel)
pertaining to rates set for state fiscal year 2006 (SFY 2006) for the respondents,
Hannah House, NFI North, and Pine Haven Boys Center. We affirm in part and
vacate in part.
The respondents are New Hampshire residential childcare providers who
serve children referred for residential placement pursuant to RSA chapters
169-B (Supp. 2006), 169-C (Supp. 2006), and 169-D (Supp. 2006). The New
Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) is required to
set the annual rates at which such providers are compensated for their
services. See RSA 170-G:4, XVII, XVII-a (2002). DHHS has adopted
Residential Child Care Facilities Rate Setting Rules (rate setting rules), which
determine how the rates are calculated. See RSA 170-G:5 (2002); N.H. Admin.
Rules, He-C 6422 (Rule 6422). DCYF is responsible for setting the rates
pursuant to the rate setting rules. See N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 6422.04.
After DCYF computes the rates, they take effect at the beginning of the next
state fiscal year, and remain in effect for twelve months. Id. 6422.22(b)-(c).
Providers may challenge the rates by filing an appeal with the hearing panel.
See RSA 170-G:4-a (2002); N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 6422.25.
After DCYF set the residential rates for fiscal years 2004 and 2005,
various providers, including the respondents, appealed, arguing that the rates
were improperly calculated or that the amounts actually paid were too low.
Following the decisions of the hearing panels, the providers petitioned this
court for a writ of certiorari to challenge the hearing panels’ decisions. See
Petition of Chase Home for Children, 155 N.H. __ (decided June 8, 2007).
While the case relative to the 2005 rates was pending before the hearing
panel, DCYF calculated the rates for SFY 2006 in accordance with Rule 6422.
DCYF, however, determined that it would not pay those rates because of
budget restrictions imposed by Laws 2005, chapter 176 (Budget Bill) and Laws
2005, 177:117 (Trailer Bill). DCYF construed the Budget and Trailer Bills as
requiring it simply to increase the provider rates it actually paid in 2005 by five
percent, regardless of the rates called for by Rule 6422. The respondents
appealed, arguing that DCYF was required to pay the rate calculated in
accordance with Rule 6422, or, alternatively, that the Budget and Trailer Bills
required DCYF to base the five percent increase upon the rates determined as a
result of the 2005 rate appeal (2005 calculated rates), rather than upon the
rates it actually paid in 2005 (2005 paid rates).
The hearing panel agreed with DCYF that the Budget and Trailer Bills
required a five percent increase in reimbursement rates. The hearing panel
agreed with the respondents, however, that the increase should have been
applied to the 2005 calculated rates, not the 2005 paid rates. The hearing
panel stated that “basing the 2006 paid rates on the 2005 paid rates, which
were the subject of the 2005 appeal, [would] essentially nullif[y] the entire 2005
appeal process.” Additionally, the hearing panel determined that the newly
calculated rates took effect on July 1, 2005, the start of SFY 2006. In so
ruling, the hearing panel acknowledged that it was ordering “retroactive”
payments. The hearing panel stayed its decision for thirty days to allow DCYF
to show cause why the order for “retroactive” payments, requiring DCYF to
reimburse the respondents at the new rate for the entire fiscal year, should not
be enforced.
2
DCYF moved for either reconsideration or a stay; the respondents also
moved for reconsideration. The hearing panel denied both motions to
reconsider, and DCYF’s motion for a stay. As to the show cause order, based
upon the evidence submitted by DCYF, the hearing panel determined that
DCYF had sufficient funds to pay the newly calculated rates for the entire fiscal
year, and ordered DCYF to make such payments prior to the end of SFY 2006.
DCYF then sought a writ of certiorari here.
Review on certiorari is an extraordinary remedy, usually available only in
the absence of a right to appeal, and only at the discretion of the court.
Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Campbell), 152 N.H. 515, 517 (2005).
Because there is no statutory provision for appellate review of the hearing
panel’s decision on the respondents’ rate appeal, a petition for a writ of
certiorari is the proper vehicle for obtaining review. Petition of Perkins, 147
N.H. 652, 653-54 (2002). We exercise our power to grant such writs sparingly
and only where to do otherwise would result in substantial injustice. Petition
of State of N.H., 152 N.H. at 517.
In its petition, DCYF argues that: (1) the Budget and Trailer Bills require
DHHS to pay five percent rate increases over the 2005 paid rates and not the
2005 calculated rates; (2) the hearing panel violated the doctrine of separation
of powers; and (3) the hearing panel lacked authority to adjudicate the
sufficiency of funds appropriated by the legislature. The respondents counter
that the hearing panel correctly interpreted the Budget and Trailer Bills and
that DCYF’s other arguments are not preserved for our review.
Before addressing DCYF’s first argument, we briefly review the authority
of the hearing panel. We recently held that “establishing the actual residential
rate for a childcare provider and determining when the rate becomes effective
fall within the jurisdiction the legislature conferred upon the hearing panels.”
Chase Home, 155 N.H. at __. Moreover, we concluded that although “the
hearing panels have the authority to establish residential rates and determine
when the rates become effective . . . [they do not] have the authority to order
DHHS to make . . . payments at the recalculated rate levels.” Id. Thus, in this
case the hearing panel had the authority to establish the rates at which the
respondents would be paid and the date upon which such rates would become
effective. On certiorari, no party challenges the 2006 hearing panel’s
determination that the effective date should be July 1, 2005. Accordingly, we
do not address that issue.
Having made clear that the hearing panel had authority to establish the
rate for providers, we now consider whether it properly did so. We are mindful
that our review is limited to whether the hearing panel acted illegally with
respect to jurisdiction, authority or observance of the law or unsustainably
3
exercised its discretion or acted arbitrarily, unreasonably or capriciously.
Petition of Perkins, 147 N.H. at 653-54.
The hearing panel accepted DCYF’s argument that the rate setting rules
were superseded by the Budget and Trailer Bills. Because no party challenges
that determination, we accept that it was proper. Moreover, because no party
contends that the Budget and Trailer Bills limit the authority or jurisdiction of
the hearing panel, we address only the parties’ arguments relative to the
hearing panel’s interpretation of those bills.
DCYF argues that the Budget and Trailer Bills require a five percent
increase over the 2005 paid rate, while the hearing panel determined that the
bills required an increase over the 2005 calculated rate. The Trailer Bill states:
For the biennium beginning July 1, 2005, the commissioner of the
department of health and human services shall set rates paid to
providers consistent with the operating budget appropriations
allotted to pay providers in each program including any rate
increases provided in the operating budget. Notwithstanding any
law to the contrary or the provisions of any rule adopted pursuant
to RSA 541-A, concerning rate setting, the commissioner shall
establish rates that reflect appropriations for the current fiscal
year by August 1. Such rates shall reflect legislative decisions to
provide specific rate increases as footnoted in the operating
budget. The commissioner shall report quarterly to the fiscal
committee of the general court, the governor, the speaker of the
house of representatives, and the president of the senate
concerning the status of appropriations for payments to providers
and the rates established by the department.
The footnote referenced in the Trailer Bill is contained in the Budget Bill and
states:
The appropriation in Class 093 “Residential” includes $417,351 for
a 5% provider rate increase in fiscal year 2006 and $1,137,016 for
5% provider rate increase in FY 2007. The appropriations for the
non-residential providers include $1,433,032 for a 5% rate
increase in fiscal year 2006 and $2,421,798 for a 3% rate increase
in Fiscal Year 2007.
According to DCYF, the Trailer Bill caps the respondents’ SFY 2006 rates
at the limit imposed by appropriations from the legislature, and DCYF argues
that requiring it to pay the respondents the 2005 calculated rate plus five
percent will cause it to exceed those appropriations. Therefore, DCYF argues,
because the SFY 2006 rates were capped at the amount appropriated, and the
4
hearing panel’s interpretation would require DCYF to exceed that amount, the
hearing panel erred in interpreting the Budget and Trailer Bills to require a
greater amount. The respondents counter that DCYF has not demonstrated
that the hearing panel’s decision was legally erroneous or otherwise improper.
While we agree that the Trailer Bill fixes a limit upon rate increases, it
does so by stating that expenditures are to reflect and be consistent with
appropriations. The requirement that an agency not spend funds beyond those
appropriated by the legislature is codified in RSA 9:19 (2003). Thus, the Trailer
Bill did not set a new, lower limit on expenditures. Nor does the language of
the Trailer Bill provide any particular method for establishing rates within the
confines of the appropriations. The hearing panel determined that the
language of the Trailer Bill “makes it clear that rates must be set to reflect the
appropriations.” This interpretation is consistent with the terms of the Trailer
Bill, and is not legally erroneous.
The hearing panel rejected DCYF’s argument that the cap in the Trailer
Bill created a responsibility to set a low rate:
It is the panel’s position that if the rates are to reflect the
appropriations as required by [the Trailer Bill], setting rates low
and under spending the account is just as contrary to [the Trailer
Bill] as exceeding the appropriation. The evidence in this case
suggests that DCYF under spent the Class 93 residential
appropriation [the appropriation covering the respondents] in SFY
2004 and SFY 2005, raising a question about the accuracy of
DCYF’s claim that it lacks the funding needed to pay [respondents]
higher rates in SFY 2006.
The hearing panel’s factual findings are supported by the record. The hearing
panel took testimony from Dague Clark, the administrator of the Fiscal Unit of
DCYF, who stated that paying all of the providers, or even some of them, at the
higher rate, i.e., at five percent above the 2005 calculated rate, would cause
DCYF to exceed its appropriations. The hearing panel noted that the
information provided by Clark was incomplete and therefore was “of little
value” in determining whether the appropriations were, in fact, sufficient.
Furthermore, the hearing panel noted that there was evidence that DCYF had
underspent its appropriations in previous years and, therefore, it had reason to
doubt DCYF’s claim that it would exceed the budget by paying the respondents
at the higher rates. Because the Trailer Bill did not provide any particular
limitation on rates, other than that set by the amount of appropriations, and
because there was evidence demonstrating that rates could be set higher than
proposed by DCYF without exceeding appropriations, we find no error in the
hearing panel’s determination that DCYF could pay the 2005 calculated rate
plus five percent without exceeding its appropriations.
5
DCYF contends that the hearing panel disregarded evidence that funding
was insufficient to pay the rate ordered. In support of this argument, DCYF
contends that a review of the Program Appropriation Unit (PAU) relating to the
respondents demonstrates that paying the rate ordered by the hearing panel
would cause it to exceed the available appropriation.
The PAU at issue relates to the respondents and other service providers.
According to DCYF, when making its budget request for the PAU, it based its
request upon an expectation that Class 93 expenditures – those covering the
respondents – would require a certain allotment of funds out of the total
amount appropriated in the PAU. DCYF contends that: “Payment to the
Residential Providers in SFY 2006 using the [2005 calculated rates] as a basis
for the 5% increases would have required the Department to exceed its
available appropriations for Residential Providers in the PAU by over a million
dollars.” The evidence relied upon by DCYF, however, does not necessarily
demonstrate that paying the rate set by the hearing panel would exceed the
amount appropriated in the PAU. Furthermore, the hearing panel had other
evidence that DCYF would not exceed its appropriations and the hearing panel
was within its authority to give that evidence more weight than the evidence
advanced by DCYF. Thus, we find no error in the hearing panel’s
determination that DCYF could pay the higher rate without exceeding its
appropriation.
DCYF next contends that the hearing panel erred because requiring
DCYF to pay the 2005 calculated rate plus five percent would result in
payments exceeding those the respondents would have received if the rates had
been calculated according to the rate setting rules. Regardless of whether this
statement is accurate, it is irrelevant. DCYF argued, and the hearing panel
agreed, that the rate setting rules were superseded by the Trailer Bill.
Therefore, it does not matter what the rate might have been under the rules.
Further, DCYF contends that its interpretation and application of the
Trailer Bill was entitled to deference that the hearing panel failed to give.
Under the Trailer Bill, the commissioner is required to report quarterly to the
legislature and the Governor about the status of the appropriations for
payments to providers. According to DCYF, the commissioner’s initial report
for SFY 2006 indicated that most providers would receive a five percent
increase over the rates established and paid in 2005. DCYF contends that no
person or entity objected to the commissioner’s report and, therefore, the
hearing panel ought to have deferred to it.
Requiring the hearing panel to defer to the commissioner’s report would
limit its authority, granted by statute and rule, to render decisions “relative to
rates.” The commissioner’s report indicating an intent to provide an increase
6
over the 2005 paid rate, as opposed to the 2005 calculated rate, is a decision
“relative to rates.” The hearing panel could choose whether or not, within the
limit of its authority, to defer to DHHS’ determination based upon its review of
the relevant law and facts. Because the hearing panel did not err in its
interpretation of the Trailer Bill, and properly found that DCYF could pay the
newly established rate without exceeding its appropriation, we conclude that
the hearing panel did not err in not deferring to DHHS. For the above reasons,
we conclude that the rate established by the hearing panel was proper and
within its authority.
DCYF next contends that the hearing panel’s decision violated the
doctrine of separation of powers. DCYF contends that the hearing panel’s
order required payment in excess of available funds, and thereby usurped the
legislature’s authority to appropriate those funds. We need not decide this
issue. In Chase Home, we determined that DHHS hearing panels have
authority only to establish the relevant rates and to determine when the rates
become effective. Chase Home, 155 N.H. at ___. Their statutory authority does
not extend to requiring DCYF to render payment. Id. at __. Because the
hearing panel’s authority is limited by statute and does not include the power
to order payment, that portion of its decision must be vacated. Because that
portion of the hearing panel’s order is vacated, we need not determine whether
it violated the doctrine of separation of powers by ordering payment, regardless
of whether that payment would exceed appropriations.
DCYF’s final argument is that the hearing panel lacked the authority to
adjudicate the sufficiency of appropriated funds. DCYF argues that the
commissioner of DHHS has authority to administer the budgets of DHHS and
DCYF, as is necessary for their efficient management, within the limits of the
appropriation set by the legislature. According to DCYF, by reviewing the
sufficiency of available funding, the hearing panel, “in effect, transformed itself
into an auditor of the Department’s budget . . . .” As noted above, however, the
hearing panel had the authority to review decisions relative to rates. Because
DCYF’s justification for the rates it set was the limitation placed upon its
budget by the legislature, the hearing panel appropriately reviewed the budget
and the allocations made thereunder to determine whether those rates were
properly set. Thus, we conclude that the hearing panel did not act outside its
jurisdiction in determining whether DCYF had sufficient funding.
As we said in Chase Home, we need not decide what further remedies, if
any, are available to the respondents, such as whether they can obtain relief in
a civil action in superior court. Chase Home, 155 N.H. at __. We conclude, in
the exercise of our limited review on certiorari, that the hearing panel’s
decisions to establish the rate at the 2005 calculated rate plus five percent,
and to set the effective date of the rate at July 1, 2005, were proper and are
7
affirmed, but that its order requiring DCYF to render payment was beyond the
scope of its authority and is vacated.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8