THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-079
RANDY DUQUETTE
v.
WARDEN, NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE PRISON
Argued: October 3, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 19, 2007
Orr and Reno, P.A., of Concord (Pamela E. Phelan and Phillip Rakhunov
on the brief, and Ms. Phelan orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Randy Duquette, pro se, by brief.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Richard J. Lehmann on
the brief), for Kenneth Violette, as amicus curiae.
Steven Pelletier & a., pro se, by brief, as amici curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Randy Duquette, appeals from an order of
the Superior Court (Brennan, J.) dismissing his petition for writ of habeas
corpus. We affirm.
The petitioner asked the court to correct the “illegal” consecutive
sentences imposed upon him following his 1997 convictions on six counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2 (1996) (amended 1997,
1998, 1999, 2003), and one count of felonious sexual assault against a victim
under the age of thirteen, see RSA 632-A:3, III (1996) (amended 2003). The
court imposed three consecutive prison terms of ten to twenty years, stand
committed, as well as three terms of ten to twenty years and one term of three-
and-one-half to seven years to run concurrently with the last of the three
consecutive terms. State v. Duquette, 153 N.H. 315, 315-16 (2006).
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the superior court has no statutory
authority to impose consecutive sentences. He further argues that imposing
consecutive sentences violates state and federal due process guarantees, the
state guarantee of proportionality in sentencing and the constitutional doctrine
of separation of powers.
While the State contends that the petitioner did not preserve his
appellate arguments because they differ from those he raised in the trial court,
it urges us to address them “because the appeals of the amici, which have been
stayed pending resolution of this appeal, raise the same types of issues, and
because these issues are likely to be properly raised in the future.” In light of
these pending cases and the importance of the issue raised, we address, in
turn, the petitioner’s statutory and constitutional arguments.
I. Statutory Arguments
The petitioner first argues that the superior court lacks statutory
authorization to impose consecutive sentences. He observes that the plain
language of RSA 651:2 (1996) (amended 1996, 1998, 1999, 2006), which is the
statute the trial court relied upon when dismissing his habeas corpus petition,
RSA 632-A:10-a (1996) (amended 1998, 2006), which is the statute under
which he was sentenced, and RSA 651:3 (1996), which pertains to the
calculation of sentences, does not authorize the superior court to impose
consecutive sentences. The State concedes that “there is no general explicit
statutory authority” for consecutive sentences, but counters that the trial court
has inherent common law authority to impose such sentences.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Debonis v. Warden, N.H. State Prison, 153 N.H. 603, 605 (2006). We
2
construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair import of their
terms and to promote justice. See RSA 625:3 (1996); Petition of State of N.H.,
152 N.H. 185, 187 (2005). In doing so, we must first look to the plain language
of the statute to determine legislative intent. Petition of State of N.H., 152 N.H.
at 187. Where more than one reasonable interpretation of the statutory
language exists, we review legislative history to aid our analysis. Id.
We begin by examining the plain language of RSA 651:2, which provides
in pertinent part:
I. A person convicted of a felony or a Class A misdemeanor may
be sentenced to imprisonment, probation, conditional or
unconditional discharge, or a fine.
II. If a sentence of imprisonment is imposed, the court shall fix
the maximum thereof which is not to exceed:
(a) Fifteen years for a class A felony,
(b) Seven years for a class B felony,
(c) One year for a class A misdemeanor,
(d) Life imprisonment for murder in the second degree, and, in the
case of a felony only, a minimum which is not to exceed 1/2 of the
maximum, or if the maximum is life imprisonment, such minimum
term as the court may order.
RSA 651:2, I, II.
While this language is silent with respect to whether a trial court may
impose consecutive sentences in cases such as this one, RSA 651:2, II-b
provides for consecutive sentences for those convicted of felonious use of a
firearm. It requires the court to impose a minimum mandatory sentence in
addition to any punishment provided for the underlying felony. “Neither the
whole nor any part of the additional sentence of imprisonment hereby provided
shall be served concurrently with any other term nor shall the whole or any
part of such additional term be suspended.” RSA 651:2, II-b.
The plain language of RSA 632-A:10-a is also silent as to whether
consecutive sentences may be imposed. That statute provides, in pertinent
part:
3
Notwithstanding RSA 651:2:
I. A person convicted of aggravated felonious sexual assault under
the provisions of RSA 632-A:2, I shall be sentenced to a maximum
sentence which is not to exceed 20 years and a minimum which is
not to exceed 1/2 of the maximum.
RSA 632-A:10-a, I.
Similarly, RSA 651:3 does not address whether the trial court may
impose consecutive sentences. That statute provides that a sentence of
imprisonment “commences when it is imposed if the defendant is in custody or
surrenders into custody at that time.” RSA 651:3, I. “Otherwise, it commences
when he becomes actually in custody.” Id.
Thus, we agree with the parties that there is no explicit statutory
authority for consecutive sentences, except under RSA 651:2, II-b, which
pertains only to those convicted of felonious use of a firearm, and various
penalties narrowly applicable to prisoners and parolees. See RSA 597:14-b
(2001); RSA 642:8 (1996); RSA 642:9 (Supp. 2006). The State argues, however,
that the repeal of former RSA 651:3, III (1974) (repealed 1975) revived the
court’s common law authority to impose consecutive sentences. Former RSA
651:3, III provided for all sentences to run concurrently except those of persons
convicted of a felony either during imprisonment or an escape from
imprisonment. The State relies upon State v. Rau, 129 N.H. 126 (1987), to
support its argument:
RSA 651:3, III, repealed in 1975, provided in pertinent part
that “any multiple sentences of imprisonment imposed on any
person shall be served concurrently.” Since its repeal, New
Hampshire law no longer specifies whether multiple sentences
imposed run concurrently or consecutively. The legislature repealed
RSA 651:3, III to afford a judge, with discretion, the option to impose
consecutive sentences in order to deal with that group of criminals
who need the deterrent of consecutive sentences. The legislature
additionally indicated that in the remainder of cases “[judges] should
almost always impose sentences concurrently.” N.H.S. Jour. 306
(1975).
Rau, 129 N.H. at 129-30 (citation omitted). The petitioner contends that this
language is dicta. He further asserts that the repeal of former RSA 651:3, III
did not revive the superior court’s authority to impose consecutive sentences.
We assume solely for the purpose of this appeal that the language from Rau
upon which the State relies is dicta. We therefore first address whether the
judiciary had common law authority to impose consecutive sentences.
4
“Firmly rooted in common law is the principle that the selection of either
concurrent or consecutive sentences rests within the discretion of sentencing
judges.” A. W. Campbell, Law of Sentencing 278 (2d ed. 1991). The common
law precedent for consecutive sentencing can be traced to pre-Revolutionary
England, such law being therefore the common law model for New Hampshire
and her twelve “sisters” at the beginning of the Republic. See State v.
Mahaney, 62 A. 265, 265-66 (N.J. 1905) (collecting cases). American
jurisprudence traces a court’s discretion to impose consecutive sentences to
the pre-Revolution English case of Rex v. Wilkes, 98 Eng. Rep. 327 (K.B. 1770).
Id. at 265. In Rex v. Wilkes, a writ of error was brought to the House of Lords
protesting the imposition of consecutive sentences for libel. The consecutive
sentences were affirmed by all the law lords, and the common law principle
was born. Wilkes, 98 Eng. Rep. at 355.
The petitioner argues that the source of the authority to impose
consecutive sentences is not the common law, but rather RSA chapter 607
(1955) (repealed 1973). His reliance upon RSA chapter 607 is misplaced,
however, as he concedes that it did not “include a specific provision on the
imposition of consecutive sentences.”
Having concluded that, absent statutory dictates to the contrary, courts
have the common law authority to impose consecutive sentences, we next
examine whether, when repealing former RSA 651:3, III, the legislature did not
intend to restore this common law authority. “It is a general principle that the
repeal of a statute which abrogates the common law operates to reinstate the
common-law rule, unless it appears that the legislature did not intend such
reinstatement.” 73 Am. Jur. 2d Statutes § 271 (2d ed. 2001).
Because the repeal of a statute is at issue, we examine legislative history
to analyze whether the legislature intended to reinstate the common law
authority of courts to impose consecutive sentences See Opinion of the
Justices, 121 N.H. 429, 432 (1981). In addition, the statutory scheme
remaining after the repeal of former RSA 651:3, III is subject to more than one
reasonable interpretation, further necessitating review of legislative history.
See State v. Yates, 152 N.H. 245, 255 (2005). The remaining statutory
sentencing scheme, read one way, recognized the general authority of courts to
impose either consecutive or concurrent sentences except in certain situations
where consecutive sentences were required. Read another way, the scheme
restricted judicial authority to impose consecutive sentences only to those
situations where such sentences were statutorily mandated.
RSA 651:3, III was repealed pursuant to Senate Bill (SB) 144. SB 144
was introduced by Senator David H. Bradley at the request of the superior
court, which unanimously recommended repeal. N.H.S. Jour. 306 (1975).
5
One of the superior court judges drafted the language of the bill. Id. At a
hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge Martin Loughlin aired
the frustration of the trial judges who believed that the concurrent system was
not effective in the case of habitual offenders. He testified that, “[c]oncurrent
sentences are becoming a farce.” Senate Comm. on Judiciary, Hearing on SB
144 (April 23, 1975).
On the Senate floor, Senator Bradley spoke about the purpose of the
repeal:
Mr. President, this bill was requested by the Superior Court.
All of the judges met on this and unanimously voted to favor this
legislation and the bill was drafted by one of the judges. . . . One of
the changes is to repeal a section [of the Criminal Code] with
respect as to whether sentences imposed for multiple offenses
would be concurrent or consecutive. Historically, it was within the
discretion of the judge. Usually, they were imposed concurrently.
The thinking behind the new criminal code is that you should
almost always impose sentences concurrently. However, the judges
have found a number of cases in which they felt that it was
inappropriate where the defendant should have the sentences
imposed consecutively. The judges feel that they should have the
discretion to impose the sentences consecutively.
N.H.S. Jour. 306 (1975). On May 7, 1975, the House Judiciary Committee
took up the bill and once again Judge Loughlin spoke on behalf of the trial
judges. House Comm. on Judiciary, Hearing on SB 144 (May 7, 1975).
According to the minutes of the committee meeting, Loughlin noted that “a
deterrent for the habitual offender” was needed. Id. That deterrent was the
restoration of the common law authority of judges to impose consecutive
sentences. See id. This legislative history demonstrates that the legislature
intended to revive the common law through this repeal. Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not exceed its statutory authority by imposing
consecutive sentences in this case.
II. Constitutional Arguments
A. Due Process
The petitioner next asserts that because neither RSA 651:2 nor RSA 632-
A:10-a “clearly delineate whether or under what circumstances consecutive
sentences may be imposed,” the imposition of such sentences violates the
Federal and State Due Process Clauses. See U.S. CONST. amend. XIV; N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15. He further asserts that although RSA 651:3 addresses
6
the calculation of sentences, it does not “clearly delineate the possibility of
consecutive sentences.” Thus, the petitioner argues that the statutes are “void
for vagueness.”
We are the final arbiter of the State Constitution’s due process
requirements. See In re Baby K., 143 N.H. 201, 204 (1998). We first address
the petitioner’s claim under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance only, id. at 232-33.
“It is a fundamental tenet of due process that no one may be required at
peril of life, liberty or property to speculate as to the meaning of penal
statutes.” United States v. Batchelder, 442 U.S. 114, 123 (1979) (quotation
and brackets omitted). Thus, a criminal statute is impermissibly vague if it
“fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to
understand what conduct it prohibits” or if it “authorizes or even encourages
arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.” State v. Porelle, 149 N.H. 420, 423
(2003) (quotations omitted). “So too, vague sentencing provisions may pose
constitutional questions if they do not state with sufficient clarity the
consequences of violating a given criminal statute.” Batchelder, 442 U.S. at
123. “The necessary specificity, however, need not be contained in the statute
itself, but rather, the statute in question may be read in the context of related
statutes, prior decisions, or generally accepted usage.” Porelle, 149 N.H. at 423
(quotation omitted). “Mathematical exactness is not required in a penal
statute, nor is a law invalid merely because it could have been drafted with
greater precision.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The party challenging the statute
as void for vagueness bears a heavy burden of proof in view of the strong
presumption of a statute’s constitutionality.” Id. (quotation omitted).
We conclude that a person of ordinary intelligence would understand
that a person guilty of multiple counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault
could be subject to separate sentences for each count. RSA 632-A:10-a gives
notice to a person of ordinary intelligence that “[a] person convicted of
aggravated felonious sexual assault under the provisions of RSA 632-A:2 shall
be sentenced to a maximum sentence which is not to exceed 20 years and a
minimum which is not to exceed ½ of the maximum.” Further, in State v.
Horner, 153 N.H. 306, 310 (2006), we observed that when reviewing RSA
chapter 651 as a whole, “we are confident that the word ‘sentence’ plainly and
unambiguously denotes the punishment prescribed by a court in relation to a
conviction on a single offense.”
The language of RSA 632-A:10, RSA chapter 651 and our judicial
construction of that language puts a person of ordinary intelligence on notice
that a person guilty of aggravated felonious sexual assault may receive the
maximum statutory sentence for each aggravated felonious sexual assault
conviction. See LaVallee v. Perrin, 124 N.H. 33, 40 (1983). We therefore hold
7
that the notice requirements of the Due Process Clause of the State
Constitution are satisfied.
We reach the same result under the Federal Constitution because the
Federal Constitution affords no greater protection than does the State
Constitution with regard to whether a statute is unconstitutionally vague.
Porelle, 149 N.H. at 423; see Hill v. Colorado, 530 U.S. 703, 732-33 (2000).
B. Proportionality in Sentencing
The petitioner next contends that because there are no objective criteria
pursuant to which a court may impose a consecutive sentence, “there is
nothing in the statutory framework to ensure that such sentences are not
arbitrarily or disproportionately imposed” in violation of Part I, Article 18 of the
State Constitution. He does not argue that his own sentence was
disproportionate; rather, he vaguely asserts, without support, that the lack of
objective criteria “foster[s] a system of arbitrary and disproportionate
sentencing decisions that essentially end run the requirements of existing
sentencing statutes.”
We must presume that the sentencing scheme is constitutional and we
cannot declare it unconstitutional except upon inescapable grounds. See
Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H. 124, 133 (2005). For a sentence to
violate Part I, Article 18 of the State Constitution, it must be “grossly
disproportionate to the crime.” State v. Enderson, 148 N.H. 252, 259 (2002)
(quotation omitted). Here, the petitioner has failed to persuade us that the
sentencing scheme is unconstitutional because it necessarily results in
sentences that are “grossly disproportionate to the crime.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
We reject the petitioner’s assertion that there are no objective criteria to
guide a judge’s sentencing decision. The State Constitution requires the trial
court to consider numerous objective factors before imposing any sentence,
whether consecutive or not. Part I, Article 18 of the State Constitution requires
the trial court to “consider all the relevant factors necessary to the exercise of
its discretion.” Id. (quotation omitted). These factors include whether the
sentence imposed will meet the traditional goals of sentencing – punishment,
deterrence and rehabilitation. See State v. Hammond, 144 N.H. 401, 408
(1999).
In light of the commands of Part I, Article 18, and as the petitioner has
failed to cite any relevant authority for his assertion that for a sentencing
scheme to be constitutional, objective factors must be set forth by statute to
guide judicial discretion in sentencing, we conclude that the sentencing
scheme does not violate the State Constitution for the reasons he posits.
8
C. Separation of Powers
The petitioner next argues that the imposition of consecutive sentences
violates the doctrine of separation of powers because it is the legislature that
fixes the degree, extent and method of punishment, including the
“extraordinary terms of imprisonment” that might result from imposing
consecutive sentences. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 37. He asserts that by
imposing consecutive sentences, trial courts “impermissibly encroach[ ] on the
legislature’s role.”
The separation of powers among the legislative, executive and judicial
branches of the government is an important part of its constitutional fabric.
Opinion of the Justices, 102 N.H. 195, 196 (1959). Part I, Article 37 of the
State Constitution provides:
In the government of this state, the three essential powers
thereof, to wit, the legislative, executive, and judicial, ought to be
kept as separate from, and independent of, each other, as the
nature of a free government will admit, or as is consistent with that
chain of connection that binds the whole fabric of the constitution
in one indissoluble bond of union and amity.
Separation of the three co-equal branches of government is essential to protect
against a seizure of control by one branch that would threaten the ability of our
citizens to remain a free and sovereign people. Petition of Governor &
Executive Council, 151 N.H. 1, 9 (2004). Thus, each branch is prohibited by
the Separation of Powers Clause from encroaching upon the powers and
functions of another branch. Id. The drafters of Part I, Article 37 recognized,
however, that a complete separation of powers would disrupt the efficient
operation of government, see Cloutier v. State Milk Control Board, 92 N.H. 199,
203 (1942), and, thus, they did not provide for impenetrable barriers between
the branches, Opinion of the Justices, 113 N.H. 287, 290 (1973). To the
contrary, the three branches should move in concert, and the doctrine is
violated only when one branch usurps an essential power of another. Petition
of Governor, 151 N.H. at 9. Accordingly, we must consider whether the
judiciary, by imposing consecutive sentences, is usurping an essential power of
the legislature. See id.
“[S]entencing is an exclusively judicial function.” Bussiere v.
Cunningham, Warden, 132 N.H. 747, 755 (1990). The legislature, however,
may choose to constrict the independent exercise of judicial discretion in
sentencing. See State v. Dean, 115 N.H. 520, 523 (1975). For instance, “the
exercise of the judicial privilege of suspension can be withdrawn by statutory
language expressing a clear legislative intent that a sentence is to be
9
mandatorily imposed.” Id. Similarly, “the legislature may circumscribe the
court’s power to suspend [a sentence] to a greater or lesser degree, provided
that the sentencing process as a whole complies with the requirements of due
process and with other constitutional constraints.” Petition of State of N.H.
(State v. Fischer), 152 N.H. 205, 211 (2005).
In this case, the legislature has not acted to circumscribe the trial courts’
power to impose consecutive sentences; indeed, it had earlier done so, but
repealed that statute. Therefore, the trial courts retain the common law
authority to impose such sentences. Because no usurpation of essential
legislative functions has been effectuated, the separation of powers doctrine
has not been violated.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10