THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2006-577
MARIANNA L. CAYTEN & a.
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES & a.
Argued: March 15, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 13, 2007
Conservation Law Foundation, of Concord (Bradford W. Kuster on the
brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jennifer J. Patterson, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for respondent New Hampshire
Department of Environmental Services.
Normandin, Cheney & O’Neil, PLLC, of Laconia (Regina A. Nadeau on the
brief and orally), for intervenor Laurie J. Hall, Trustee of the Cambi Squam
Lake Realty Trust.
Nixon Peabody LLP, of Manchester, (Kevin M. Fitzgerald and Paul M.
Lanagan on the brief), for Squam Lakes Association, as amicus curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. In this case, we are called upon to delineate the
relationship between New Hampshire’s wetlands statute, RSA chapter 482-A
(2001 & Supp. 2006), and the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act (CSPA),
RSA chapter 483-B (2001 & Supp. 2006), in the context of an abutter’s
challenge to the issuance of a dredge and fill permit for the construction of a
dug-in boathouse. Specifically, intervenor Laurie J. Hall, as trustee of the
Cambi Squam Lake Realty Trust (Cambi), appeals a decision of the Superior
Court (O’Neill, J.) overturning a decision of the New Hampshire Wetlands
Council (wetlands council or council) to affirm the decision of the wetlands
bureau (wetlands bureau or bureau) of the New Hampshire Department of
Environmental Services (DES) to issue a dredge and fill permit to Cambi. That
permit would allow Cambi to dredge a portion of the Squam Lake lakebed,
excavate a portion of the bank, and construct a dug-in boathouse. Cambi also
appeals the trial court’s denial of its motion to strike certain parties. We
reverse and remand.
I
The following facts are not in dispute. Cambi owns a parcel of real estate
along the shore of Squam Lake in Bean Cove. In August 2002, Cambi filed a
standard dredge and fill application with the wetlands bureau pursuant to RSA
chapter 482-A and RSA 485-A:17 (2001). In its application, Cambi proposed to
dredge 310 square feet (twenty-three cubic yards) of lakebed, excavate 240
square feet (thirty-six cubic yards) of bank, and install ninety square feet of rip-
rap, for a total impact of 640 square feet. The proposed dredging and
excavation were part of a larger project, which included the construction of a
918-square-foot dug-in boathouse. A dug-in boathouse is one located over an
inlet dredged into the shoreline as opposed to one located in or over the water.
In response to the bureau’s request for more information, Cambi
submitted revised project specifications that included: (1) changing the
location of the boathouse so that it was located in an upland area landward of
the bank of the lake rather than over the lake; (2) increasing the amount of
lakebed dredging to 600 square feet (forty-five cubic yards); (3) decreasing the
amount of bank excavation to 156 square feet (twenty-three cubic yards); and
(4) adding 400 square feet of temporary impacts during construction. The net
result was an overall increase in impacts on protected wetlands to 1,156
square feet.
In April 2003, the bureau granted Cambi a dredge and fill permit,
explaining:
The Department of Environmental Services (DES) Wetlands
Bureau has reviewed and approved [Cambi’s] application to . . .
dredge 45 [cubic yards] from 600 [square feet] of lakebed and
excavate 1064 [square feet] along 23 linear [feet] of shoreline to
2
construct a 1 slip 24 [foot] x 32 [foot] dug-in boathouse with 140
[square feet of] storage/entry space on the southeast corner of the
boathouse, [and] install 30 linear [feet] of rip-rap to stabilize the
edges of the dredged inlet . . . .
The 1,064 square feet of excavation includes: (1) 156 square feet of bank
excavation; (2) 768 square feet for the footprint of the boathouse itself; and (3)
140 square feet of storage/entry space. In its decision granting approval, the
bureau found, among other things:
2. The need for the proposed impacts has been demonstrated by
the applicant per [New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Env-]Wt
302.01.
3. The applicant has provided evidence which demonstrates that
this proposal is the alternative with the least adverse impact to
areas and environments under the department’s jurisdiction per
[Rule Env-]Wt 302.03.
4. The applicant has demonstrated by plan and example that each
factor listed in [Rule Env-]Wt 302.04(a), Requirements for
Application Evaluation, has been considered in the design of the
project.
In addition, as a condition of approval, the bureau required that “[a]ll activity
shall be in accordance with the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, RSA
483-B.”
After the bureau approved Cambi’s application, Marianna and Gene
Cayten, who are abutting property owners, asked the bureau to reconsider its
issuance of Cambi’s permit. The motion for reconsideration did not raise the
issue of inadequate notice to other alleged abutters. The bureau affirmed its
approval. Among other things, the bureau ruled that “[t]he Applicant has
satisfied the requirements of [New Hampshire Administrative] Rule[s], [Env-]Wt
402.09(b) [currently Rule 402.08(b)] relative to allowing the construction of a
boathouse over a dredged inlet.”
Subsequently, and purportedly on behalf of themselves and
approximately forty “supporting individuals,” the Caytens filed a petition of
appeal with the wetlands council, asking it to rescind the dredge and fill permit
for Cambi’s boathouse. The council denied the appeal as well as the Caytens’
motion for reconsideration. Then, in an action captioned “In re: Appeal of
Marianna L. and C. Gene Cayten, et al[.],” the Caytens and “other property
owners on Squam Lake within ¼ mile of the proposed project” petitioned the
superior court pursuant to RSA 482-A:10, I, VIII. In the superior court, the
Caytens prevailed on the merits. Specifically, the trial court ruled that “the
3
Bureau and the Council are required as a matter of law to apply the standards
laid out in the wetlands permitting regulations, to the upland areas indicated
in the plans for the . . . Cambi propert[y].”
We now turn to the facts concerning the proper parties to this action.
The petition of appeal to the wetlands council began by stating: “We, the
following individuals, hereby appeal . . . .” The term “following individuals”
referred to a list of supporting individuals that includes Rev. Richard R. and
Dr. Happy Craven Fernandez, Thomas S. and Cynthia S. Stewart, and Donald
and Linda Hartrick (collectively “disputed petitioners”). The petition identified
the supporting individuals as “lakefront owners in and around Bean Cove and
in and around the subject property of the proposed dug-in boathouse.”
However, only the Caytens signed the petition. Unlike the Caytens, who Cambi
had listed as abutters and who had received notice of Cambi’s application and
approval, the disputed petitioners were not listed as abutters and did not
receive notice. However, the issue of notice was not raised in the petition to the
wetlands council.
While the Caytens’ appeal was pending before the council, Cambi moved
to dismiss all the supporting individuals, including the disputed petitioners, for
lack of standing and for failure to abide by the procedural requirements for
filing an appeal. Specifically, Cambi argued that the supporting individuals:
(1) lacked standing because they were not abutters and, therefore, were not
“aggrieved parties”; and (2) were not entitled to file an appeal with the council
because they did not file with the bureau a motion to reconsider its decision to
grant the permit. Over the Caytens’ objection, the council granted Cambi’s
motion to dismiss the supporting individuals, explaining that “[t]he persons
listed as ‘supporting individuals’ do not have proper standing to be considered
as appellants in this appeal, nor have they abided by the procedural
requirements [of RSA 482-A:10, I, II and III].” Accordingly, the council ruled
that “Marianna and Gene Cayten are the only persons to be considered
appellants in this appeal.” Neither the Caytens nor any of the supporting
individuals moved for reconsideration. Subsequently, the disputed petitioners
moved to intervene. The council denied those motions, explaining that each of
the disputed petitioners had failed to carry his or her burden of
“demonstrat[ing] how [his or her] rights might be directly affected by the
outcome of [the] appeal.” None of the disputed petitioners moved for
reconsideration.
After the council granted Cambi’s motion to dismiss the supporting
individuals from the appeal and denied the motions to intervene, the Caytens
filed a pleading titled “Appellants[’] Motion Challenging Lack of Proper Notice to
Abutters in Interest,” in which they claimed that Cambi had failed to satisfy
statutory and regulatory notice requirements because it failed to provide notice
to all owners of waterfront property within a quarter mile of the proposed
project. Among other relief, the Caytens asked that “[t]he permit proceedings
4
be re-opened by providing notice to all abutters of the permit application and
proposed project [and that] [a]ll abutters be provided the opportunity to
participate in the permitting process as required by RSA 482-A and the
regulations promulgated thereunder.” The Caytens’ motion was initially denied
in a preliminary ruling. The Caytens requested a decision by the full council.
The council denied the motion on grounds that the Caytens failed to raise the
issue in their request for reconsideration before the wetlands bureau, and were
thus precluded from raising it on appeal to the council. See RSA 482-A:10, II.
The Caytens did not request reconsideration of the council’s decision and
order.
In their appeal to the superior court, the petitioners argued, among other
things, that Cambi and the bureau failed to provide proper notice to all
abutters as required by the wetlands statute and applicable rules. In the
caption of the appeal, the appealing parties are identified as “Marianna L. and
C. Gene Cayten, et al.” The section of the petition titled “Parties and
Jurisdiction” further explains:
The Appellants Marianna L. and C. Gene Cayten, et al.,
participated in the permit proceedings below, and filed on June 24,
2003 the appeal to the Wetlands Council docketed as No. 03-08
WtC. The Appellants also include other property owners on Squam
Lake within ¼ mile of the proposed project, defined as “abutters”
for notice purposes, found by the Wetlands Council not to have
standing to intervene, which is appealed below.
While the superior court appeal was pending, Cambi moved to strike: (1) the
disputed petitioners as parties to the appeal; and (2) two counts of the petition,
including the claim that Cambi and the bureau failed to provide proper notice
to all abutters. The trial court denied Cambi’s motion to strike the disputed
petitioners, relying upon RSA 482-A:10, XII. The trial court also denied
Cambi’s motion to strike the claim regarding notice, ruling “that the ‘notice’
issue merits a further hearing on the merits.”
On appeal, both Cambi and DES challenge the superior court’s decision
on the merits, and Cambi also challenges the trial court’s decision allowing the
disputed petitioners to be parties. However, neither Cambi nor DES challenges
the trial court’s decision not to strike the claim that Cambi and the bureau
failed to provide adequate notice to other abutters.
II
The trial court’s review of wetlands council decisions is governed by RSA
482-A:10, XI, which provides:
5
On appeal to the superior court, the burden of proof shall be
upon the party seeking to set aside the decision of the council to
show that the decision is unlawful or unreasonable. . . . The
council’s decision shall not be set aside or vacated, except for
errors of law, unless the court is persuaded, by a preponderance of
the evidence before it, that said decision is unjust or unreasonable.
We, in turn, will not disturb the trial court’s decision unless it is unsupported
by the evidence or legally erroneous. Greenland Conservation Comm’n v. N.H.
Wetlands Council, 154 N.H. 529, 533 (2006).
III
We begin with Cambi’s challenge to the trial court’s decision to deny its
motion to strike the disputed petitioners as parties to this action. According to
Cambi, the trial court committed legal error because it construed RSA 482-
A:10, XII in a manner that contradicts RSA 482-A:10, VIII.
The statutory provisions governing appeals from decisions of the
wetlands bureau provide, in pertinent part:
I. Any person aggrieved by a decision made by the department
under RSA 482-A:3 . . . may apply for reconsideration by the
department, and then may appeal to the wetlands council and to
the superior court as provided in this section. A person aggrieved
under this section shall include without limitation, the applicant
and any person required to be noticed by mail in accordance with
RSA 482-A:8 and RSA 482-A:9.
. . . .
VIII. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the council after
reconsideration may appeal to the superior court for the county
where the land in question is located by petition within 30 days of
issuance of such decision. . . . No ground not set forth in the
application for reconsideration shall be given any consideration by
the court unless the court for good cause shown shall allow the
appellant to specify additional grounds.
. . . .
XII. Any person whose rights may be directly affected by the
outcome of the appeal may appear and become a party, or the
court may order such persons to be joined as parties as justice
may require.
6
RSA 482-A:10. Regarding notice, the wetlands statute provides that at the
time of application, the applicant shall provide notice to “abutters, as defined in
the rules of the department,” RSA 482-A:3, I, and that during the public
comment and hearing phase of review, “notice shall be mailed to all known
abutting landowners,” RSA 482-A:9. The rules of the department define
“abutter” as follows:
“Abutter” means any person who owns property immediately
adjacent and contiguous to the property on which the project will
take place. This does not include those properties across a public
road. An abutter includes an owner of any flowage rights on or
immediately adjacent to the property on which the project will take
place. If the project is located on waterfront or another area which
by its configuration would cause the project to affect non-
contiguous properties, owners of those properties are considered
as abutters. The term does not include the owner of a parcel of
land located more than one-quarter mile from the limits of the
proposed project.
N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 101.02.
Based upon the language of RSA 482-A:10, XII, the trial court ruled that
notwithstanding the statutory requirement that a superior court appeal be
preceded by a motion to reconsider at the council level, the disputed petitioners
were entitled to be parties to the superior court appeal because the statute
allows “[a]ny person whose rights may be directly affected by the outcome of
the appeal [to] appear and become a party.” In so ruling, the trial court
necessarily determined that the disputed petitioners were “person[s] whose
rights may be directly affected by the outcome of the appeal,” an issue that had
been decided against them in a wetlands council decision of which they did not
move for reconsideration.
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Appeal of Lorette, 154 N.H. 271, 272 (2006). We are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 472, 479
(2006). We first examine the language found in the statute, and where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. In re
Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. 292, 300 (2006). However, we will not interpret
statutory language in a literal manner when such a reading would lead to an
absurd result. Id. at 300-01.
Citing Rye Beach Country Club v. Town of Rye, 143 N.H. 122 (1998),
Cambi urges us to rule that the trial court erred by failing to reconcile RSA
482-A:10, XII with the other paragraphs of RSA 482-A:10 that make a motion
7
for reconsideration filed with the wetlands council a prerequisite to superior
court review. We agree.
Construing RSA 482-A:10, XII as allowing the disputed petitioners to
reenter this case, after they failed to move for reconsideration of the council’s
multiple decisions to exclude them, would lead to a result the legislature could
not have intended. RSA 482-A:10, XII allows a person with rights that may be
directly affected by the appeal to become a party to the appeal. But here,
under the trial court’s construction, the disputed petitioners did not “become”
parties to the appeal; they regained a status that was expressly denied them by
the council. We do not believe that by using the phrase “[a]ny person” in RSA
482-A:10, XII, the legislature intended to create a bypass around the statutory
reconsideration requirement, see RSA 482-A:10, VIII, for persons aggrieved by
decisions of the council.
How a party enters a case has a significant bearing upon his or her
rights and obligations. Here, for example, had the question of the disputed
petitioners’ right to be parties come to the superior court through the usual
channel, i.e., in an appeal from a decision of the council, the question before
the court would have been whether the council acted lawfully and reasonably
when it determined that the disputed petitioners had failed to demonstrate that
their rights may be directly affected by the outcome of the appeal. However, by
relying upon RSA 482-A:10, XII, the superior court did not review the
reasonableness of the council’s fact-based decision; it decided for itself that the
disputed petitioners were “person[s] whose rights may be directly affected by
the outcome of the appeal.” That the trial court reached a different result than
the council does not make the council’s decision unreasonable, and only an
unreasonable decision by the council could have been properly set aside or
vacated by the superior court. Thus, by construing RSA 482-A:10, XII in the
way it did, the trial court reached an untenable result: it rewarded the
disputed petitioners for failing to follow the statutory reconsideration and
appeal process by placing them in a better position than they would have been
in had they followed the statutory process. The legislature could not have
intended such a result.
In the case before us, it is not necessary to determine precisely who the
legislature did intend to cover in RSA 482-A:10, XII. Rather, we limit ourselves
to holding that the statute was not intended to provide a bypass around the
statutory reconsideration and appeal process. Accordingly, the trial court
erred by ruling to the contrary, and its decision to allow the disputed
petitioners to join the appeal is reversed.
IV
Cambi and DES both argue that the trial court erred by ruling that “the
Bureau and the Council are required as a matter of law to apply the standards
8
laid out in the wetlands permitting regulations, to the upland areas indicated
in the plans for the . . . Cambi propert[y].” We agree.
Under the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act, “‘[p]rotected
shoreland’ means, for natural, fresh water bodies without artificial
impoundments, for artificially impounded fresh water bodies, and for coastal
waters and rivers, all land located within 250 feet of the reference line of public
waters.” RSA 483-B:4, XV. The CSPA further provides:
I. All state agencies shall perform their responsibilities in a
manner consistent with the intent of this chapter. State and local
permits for work within the protected shorelands shall be issued
only when consistent with the policies of this chapter.
II. When the standards and practices established in this
chapter conflict with other local or state laws and rules, the more
stringent standard shall control.
RSA 483-B:3. “Within the protected shoreland, any person intending to . . .
[c]onstruct a water-dependent structure, alter the bank, or construct or
replenish a beach shall obtain approval and all necessary permits pursuant to
RSA 482-A.” RSA 483-B:6, I(b). In addition, “[a] water dependent structure,
meaning one which is a dock, wharf, pier, breakwater, or other similar
structure, or any part thereof, built over, on, or in the waters of the state, shall
be constructed only as approved by the department, pursuant to RSA 482-A.”
RSA 483-B:9, II(c) (emphasis added). Finally, the CSPA defines “‘[w]ater
dependent structure’ [to] mean[ ] a structure that services and supports
activities that require direct access to, or contact with the water, or both, as an
operational necessity and that requires a permit under RSA 482-A, including
but not limited to a dock, wharf, pier, breakwater, beach, boathouse, retaining
wall, or launching ramp.” RSA 483-B:4, XXVI (emphasis added).
Based upon the foregoing statutory provisions, the trial court determined
that “the Bureau’s jurisdiction extended to the entire area of [Cambi’s]
proposed project[ ], [and] did not end at the bank of the lake” and that “by
extending jurisdiction to the upland areas of the project, the Bureau [was]
required to apply the strict standards of the wetlands regulations [i.e., New
Hampshire Administrative Rules, Env-Wt 302.03] to the upland areas.”
According to the Caytens: (1) Cambi wants to build a boathouse; (2) a
boathouse is a “water dependent structure”; (3) construction of a water
dependent structure requires a permit pursuant to RSA chapter 482-A; (4) the
RSA chapter 482-A permit process is more stringent than the requirements of
RSA chapter 483-B, and includes regulations requiring “avoidance and
minimization,” see N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt 302.03; and (5) because of the
CSPA’s “consistency” requirement in RSA 483-B:3, I, Cambi’s entire project,
including the boathouse construction work landward of the bank of the lake, is
9
subject to the DES avoidance and minimization regulations. The Caytens’
argument misapprehends the statutory and regulatory scheme.
Under the wetlands statute, a dredge and fill permit is required before
one can “excavate, remove, fill, dredge or construct any structures in or on any
bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state.” RSA
482-A:3, I. Geographically, and in the context of fresh water, the dredge and
fill permit requirement applies “to those portions of great ponds or lakes
created by the raising of the water level of the same . . . and to all surface
waters of the state as defined in RSA 485-A:2 which contain fresh water,
including the portion of any bank or shore which borders such surface waters.”
RSA 482-A:4, II. Moreover, the portion of the wetlands statute pertaining to
excavating and dredging in public waters provides that the provisions of that
subdivision “shall not apply to . . . [a]ny land above the natural mean high
water level of public waters.” RSA 482-A:21, II(a).
Here, Cambi received a dredge and fill permit for its proposed lakebed
dredging and bank excavation. As initially proposed, Cambi’s project also
involved a water dependent structure; the boathouse was positioned partially
over the water. Under the CSPA, such a boathouse would have required a
permit pursuant to RSA chapter 482-A, see RSA 483-B:6, I(b). But, at the
insistence of the bureau, which was enforcing the regulatory prohibition
against boathouses located over the water, see N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Wt
402.09(a) (currently Rule 402.08(a)), Cambi reconfigured the project, shifting
the location of the boathouse so that it was entirely landward of the bank.
Once the boathouse was relocated landward of the bank, it lost its status as a
water dependent structure because it was no longer located “over, on, or in the
waters of the state,” RSA 483-B:9, II(c) – it was now located over a dredged
inlet, and no longer required an RSA chapter 482-A dredge and fill permit, see
RSA 483-B:4, XXVI (defining “water dependent structure” as one “that requires
a permit under RSA 482-A”); RSA 482-A:3, I (requiring permits for the
construction of structures “in or on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and
adjacent to any waters of the state”). Moreover, as there was no statutory basis
for applying the Rule 302.03 avoidance and minimization requirements to a
boathouse that was not a water dependent structure, there was never any
statutory conflict of the sort necessary to trigger the CSPA consistency
provision. In short, we discern no legal basis for imposing the Rule 302.03
requirements on the boathouse in this case.
The permitting process in this case unfolded properly under the relevant
statutes and regulations. Cambi proposed a project with three wetland
impacts: lakebed dredging, bank excavation, and boathouse construction over
the water. The bureau foreclosed construction of the boathouse over the water,
approved the dredging and excavation under RSA chapter 482-A and Rule
302.03, and approved the boathouse construction under the CSPA and Rule
402.09(b) (currently Rule 402.08(b)) as required by RSA 483-B:3, I. The
10
bureau retained jurisdiction over the entire project, including the portion
conducted wholly landward of the bank, but, correctly, it applied the Rule
302.03 requirements only to those portions of the project within protected
wetlands. While the trial court correctly ruled that the bureau had jurisdiction
over the entire project, it erred in its conclusion that the bureau’s jurisdiction
over the entire project required application of RSA chapter 482-A and Rule
302.03 to the boathouse. Accordingly, its ruling on that issue is reversed.
In their brief, the Caytens observe that when Cambi’s project is
completed, the “entire excavated area [landward of the bank] will fill with lake
water and become newly exposed lake bottom to Squam Lake.” Thus, the
Caytens appear to argue that the dredging of an inlet into an area landward of
the bank transforms a piece of upland into a protected wetland and makes the
boathouse constructed above such inlet a structure constructed over the water,
subject to the more stringent requirements of RSA chapter 482-A and Rule
302.03. That argument presents an interesting legal and ecological question,
but one that has already been answered by the promulgation of regulations
banning boathouses located over state waters and establishing conditions for
the approval of boathouses constructed over dredged inlets. See N.H. Admin.
Rules, Env-Wt 402.08. Whether or not there is a sound ecological basis for
treating dredged inlets differently than the natural lakebed is for the legislature
or the administrative rulemaking process to determine, not this court. See
Greenland Conservation Comm’n, 154 N.H. at 535.
V
Based upon our disposition of the issues before us, we remand to the
trial court for further proceedings consistent with this opinion, and with
instructions to strike the disputed petitioners. In so doing, we note that
because neither Cambi nor DES appealed the trial court’s decision to allow a
further hearing on the merits of the notice claim, the correctness of that ruling
is not before us. While we are not certain that any party remaining in the case
has standing to raise that issue, that is a question for resolution, in the first
instance, in the trial court.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11