THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
Nos. 2006-329
2006-334
IN THE MATTER OF STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE AND ESTATE OF FRANK S.
CRABTREE, III
IN THE MATTER OF KATHERINE CRABTREE AND ESTATE OF FRANK S.
CRABTREE, III
Argued: March 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 15, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karen A. Schlitzer, assistant attorney
general, on the brief, and Elyse S. Alkalay, assistant attorney general, orally),
for the New Hampshire Division of Child Support Services.
Gawryl & MacAllister, of Nashua (Janine Gawryl on the brief and orally),
for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. In these appeals, the respondent, Estate of Frank S.
Crabtree, III (estate), challenges two recommendations of the Master (Love, M.),
approved by the Superior Court (Hampsey, J.), to deny requests for injunctive
relief and dollar for dollar credit toward child support obligations based upon
payments of Social Security dependency benefits to the children for whom the
decedent, Frank S. Crabtree, III (Crabtree), was obligated to provide child
support. We affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
I
The record supports the following. At the beginning of 2003, Crabtree
was under court orders to pay child support of $101 per week to Katherine
Crabtree and $70 per week to Reba Slade. Crabtree had two children with
Katherine and one child with Slade. Because Katherine received TANF
(Temporary Assistance to Needy Families) benefits, she assigned her right to
collect child support to the State. Crabtree’s obligation to Slade was payable
through the New Hampshire Division of Child Support Services (division), and
Slade specifically asked the division to enforce her child support order.
Crabtree became disabled and unable to work in November 2003. He
applied for Social Security disability insurance benefits, which were awarded in
June 2005. He received his first monthly benefit check that month, along with
a lump-sum payment of retroactive benefits. At the same time, all three of
Crabtree’s children received lump-sum payments of retroactive Social Security
dependency benefits and began receiving monthly benefit checks due to
Crabtree’s disability.
At the same time Crabtree was pursuing Social Security disability
benefits, he was also seeking to reduce his child support obligations. In July
2004, he moved to modify both of his child support orders, informing the court
that his circumstances had changed because he was “unemployed and [had]
filed for disability.” In May 2005, the trial court approved uniform support
orders modifying Crabtree’s support obligations. Specifically, the court ordered
Crabtree to pay $50 per month plus an arrearage “to be determined by
agreement” for the support of his children with Katherine and to pay $50 per
month for the support of his child with Slade. Although Crabtree was in
arrears on his obligation to Slade, the new order pertaining to Slade’s child did
not address that arrearage. Both modifications were retroactive to October 5,
2004, the date of service.
Shortly after the trial court approved the modifications of Crabtree’s child
support obligations, the division began taking various actions against Crabtree
to collect both his ongoing child support obligations and his arrearages. At
issue here are two collection actions: (1) the division’s garnishment of
Crabtree’s own direct Social Security disability benefits; and (2) its lien on his
Bank of America checking account.
In response to the division’s collection actions, and in reliance upon our
decision in In the Matter of Angley-Cook & Cook, 151 N.H. 257 (2004),
Crabtree asserted his right to have the division give him credit toward his
ongoing and past due child support obligations based upon the Social Security
dependency benefits his children were receiving. Among other things, he
argued that because his children received monthly benefits in excess of the
2
amount he was obligated to provide in child support, his ongoing support
obligations and arrearages were effectively satisfied by those benefits.
However, neither Crabtree nor the division ever requested the trial court to
modify his child support obligations.
The relevant facts concerning the lien on Crabtree’s bank account
demonstrate that in August 2005, the division’s office of child support provided
Crabtree with affidavits of arrearages reflecting $6,735.36 owed to Slade and
$10,311.24 owed to Katherine.
In two letters dated October 19, 2005, the division informed Crabtree of a
$14,006 TANF arrearage and a $3,190 non-TANF arrearage. As to enforcement
of those obligations, the letters discussed referral to the federal government for
collection by administrative offset and/or federal tax refund offset. Crabtree
contested both arrearages and requested administrative review.
By letter dated October 21, 2005, the Bank of America informed Crabtree
that it had “been served with a tax levy/child support notice in the amount of
$6885.36 naming [him] as judgment debtor.” The letter also said that the bank
was required to charge his account for up to the amount of the levy, and that
he was subject to a fifty-dollar service charge. According to Crabtree’s
December 12, 2005 account statement, “a transaction posted on October 21,
2005 showed the levy of $4,673.62 [and] [a] further transaction posted on
November 3, 2005 showed the funds being returned to his account.”
By ex parte order dated November 3, 2005, and issued in response to the
motion that gave rise to this appeal, the trial court restrained the division from
taking further collection actions against Crabtree and vacated the lien against
his bank account. In an order dated November 8, 2005, issued following a
hearing, the trial court reinstated the lien, with the proviso that Crabtree “shall
be able to access $1,500 per month to pay for his own living expenses pending
hearing on his [motion].” Crabtree’s monthly Social Security benefit was
$1,467 per month.
After the trial court reinstated the lien on Crabtree’s bank account, the
division served him with two notices of lien. According to those notices, the
liens arose under RSA 458:17 (2004) (current version at RSA 461-A:14 (Supp.
2006)). The notices also informed Crabtree that his bank had been served with
the notice of lien and an “order to withhold against all money . . . in [its]
possession that is due, owing or belonging to [him],” and that if he did not
make satisfactory arrangements to pay the stated arrearages within twenty
days, the division would “demand that BANK OF AMERICA, N.A. deliver all
withheld property or money that is not exempt from attachment, to [the
division].” As authority for the order to withhold and deliver, the division cited
RSA 161-C:12 (2002). Crabtree contested both notices of lien and requested
3
administrative review. According to the division, Crabtree’s account statement
indicated “that a transaction posted on November 18, 2005 showed a levy of
$2,837.70.” As of February 13, 2006, “those funds [were] still on hold at the
bank, and have not yet been disbursed to the State of [New Hampshire].” The
record contains no further information regarding the precise status of the
funds that are “on hold,” and it does not appear from the record that the
division has yet served the bank with a demand to deliver the withheld funds.
The trial court order that gave rise to this appeal resulted from Crabtree’s
“verified motion for ex parte injunction, accounting and to determine
arrearages (if any).” In that motion, Crabtree argued that: (1) he was paying
substantially more than the court-ordered $50 per month per order, due to his
children’s receipt of Social Security dependency benefits coupled with his
entitlement to a dollar for dollar credit toward his child support obligations on
account of those benefits; (2) the division’s garnishment of his direct Social
Security benefits to pay his child support obligations was “without legal
authority”; and (3) the division’s lien on his bank account was unlawful.
Subsequently, Crabtree also filed an ex parte motion to enjoin the deduction of
child support from his Social Security benefits in which he argued that his
children’s dependency benefits covered his ongoing obligations to them and
were sufficient to eliminate all of the arrearage he owed Katherine and some of
the arrearage he owed Slade, the balance of which was more than covered by
the lien on his bank account.
After a hearing, the trial court ruled that in the absence of any judicial
modification, Crabtree was subject to two support orders, each requiring
payments of $50 per month and until he sought judicial modification of those
support orders, he was not entitled to any credit for his children’s Social
Security dependency benefits toward either his ongoing support obligations or
his arrearages. Regarding the lien, the court explained:
[The division] was within its right to have a lien placed on the
monies in the respondent’s Bank of America account. There was
no evidence to support the petitioner’s contention that the monies
were withdrawn at the direction of [the division]. As a result of the
lien, Bank of America forwarded [a] check to [the division] in the
sum of $4,673.62 on October 21, 2005 and [the division] returned
those funds on November 3, 2005. The evidence also showed that
a second transaction was posted on November 18, 2005 showing a
levy in the sum of $2,873.70. These funds are still on hold at the
bank.
The court also denied Crabtree’s request for bank charges, attorney’s fees and
costs. This appeal followed.
4
During the pendency of this appeal, Crabtree died, and his estate
replaced him as a party. According to the estate, the appeal is not moot
because Crabtree’s claims in this case are assets of the estate. On appeal, the
estate argues that the trial court erred by: (1) ruling that Crabtree was
obligated to seek modification of his child support obligations before he was
entitled to credit for his children’s Social Security dependency benefits; (2)
denying Crabtree’s request to apply his children’s retroactive Social Security
dependency benefits to his child support arrearages; (3) ruling that the division
had the authority to garnish Crabtree’s Social Security benefits and place a lien
on his bank account without following the procedures in RSA chapter 161-C
(2002 & Supp. 2006); (4) denying Crabtree’s request to enjoin the garnishment
of his Social Security benefits; (5) ruling that Crabtree’s bank account was not
exempt from the imposition of a lien; and (6) failing to award attorney’s fees,
costs and bank charges.
We will uphold the trial court’s decision with regard to child support
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or tainted by an error of law. In the
Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 283 (2006).
II
Resolution of the estate’s first and second issues on appeal depends
upon whether the trial court correctly ruled that Crabtree was obligated to seek
modification of his child support obligations before he was entitled to credit for
his children’s Social Security dependency benefits. We hold that he was.
New Hampshire, like a majority of states, allows, as a per se rule, credit
toward a noncustodial parent’s child support obligation for Social Security
benefits paid to the obligor’s dependent children. Angley-Cook, 151 N.H. at
258-59. Our opinion in Angley-Cook includes the following discussion, which
is directly relevant to the question now before us:
Therefore, we find that Social Security . . . dependency benefits
constitute a payment in money for the purposes of satisfying the
obligor parent’s child support obligation under RSA 458-C:2, II.
Furthermore, the court shall consider the dependency
benefits as gross income to the respondent when calculating his
child support obligation. RSA 458-C:2, IV defines “gross income”
as “all income from any source,” and explicitly lists social security
benefits in the items that are to be included in income. . . . We
agree with the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court that the
fairest approach for calculating the credit here is to treat the
dependency benefits as if they were first paid directly to the
5
noncustodial parent, who then pays that same amount to the
custodial parent to satisfy some part of the support obligation.
Id. (citation, quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). Once we established the
general principle, we outlined the procedure by which the noncustodial
parent’s credit is to be allowed by the trial court after it has performed a child
support guideline calculation:
[T]he amount of the dependency benefits should be included in the
income of the noncustodial parent and the guidelines should then
be applied to that amount. The noncustodial parent is then
allowed a credit equal to the amount of the dependency benefits,
and the net amount of the noncustodial parent’s support obligation
is the difference between the support amount determined by the
court to be correct under the guidelines minus the amount of the
credit.
Id. at 260 (quotation, citations and ellipsis omitted). We recently revisited the
issue of dollar for dollar credit, explaining that in Angley-Cook, “we held that
the trial court must allow the noncustodial parent a dollar for dollar credit for
Social Security . . . benefits received by the child.” In the Matter of State &
Taylor, 153 N.H. 700, 709 (2006) (emphasis added). However, we said nothing
in Taylor to alter the principle, established in Angley-Cook, that credit for
Social Security dependency benefits may only be allowed, by the court, after
the amount of those benefits has been included in the noncustodial parent’s
income and the court has performed a guideline calculation that takes that
income into account.
According to the estate, our establishment of a per se rule regarding a
noncustodial parent’s right to dollar for dollar credit for Social Security
dependency benefits entitled Crabtree to some sort of self-executing credit, or a
credit allowed by the division, without his having to move for a modification of
his child support obligation. That is incorrect. For one thing, the division
lacks the authority to modify, and may only seek to enforce, a child support
order issued by the court. See In the Matter of Haller & Mills, 150 N.H. 427,
430 (2003) (explaining that child support “obligation remains in effect until it is
judicially modified”). Moreover, in both Angley-Cook and Taylor, we described
the dependency benefit credit as being allowed by the trial court after the
performance of a new calculation under the child support guidelines. The
reason for this is obvious.
In the case before us, for example, Crabtree’s child support obligations
were based upon his income before he and his children began receiving Social
Security benefits. When those benefits commenced, his income rose by the
combined amount of the benefits paid to him and his children. Under the
6
estate’s theory, Crabtree was entitled to use part of his increased income to pay
a child support obligation based upon his previous, lower income. But, if
Crabtree’s income rose, it seems obvious that, absent special circumstances,
see RSA 458-C:5 (Supp. 2006), his child support obligations should also have
risen. The estate explains that “Crabtree did not wish to modify his child
support to a higher amount after his children’s receipt of social security
benefits in June 2005.” That may very well be, but by making that choice,
Crabtree exposed himself to at least one consequence: forfeiture of his right to
a credit for his children’s dependency benefits. Under our holding in Angley-
Cook, the per se credit is not self-executing, and a parent is not entitled to
credit for Social Security dependency benefits without also assuming a child
support obligation that reflects his new income. Because the only mechanism
provided by statute for initiating the modification of a child support order is an
application from either the obligor or the obligee, see RSA 458-C:7, I (2004), we
affirm the trial court’s ruling that Crabtree was required to move for a
modification of his child support obligations before he was entitled to the credit
we established in Angley-Cook.
Because credit for Social Security dependency benefits may be allowed by
the trial court only after it performs a child support guideline calculation that
takes into account the obligor’s new income, the benefits Crabtree’s children
received did not count toward his ongoing support obligations. That much is
established by Angley-Cook and Taylor.
In addition, Crabtree’s children’s receipt of Social Security dependency
benefits did not diminish Crabtree’s arrearages. Under our holding in Griffin v.
Avery, 120 N.H. 783 (1980), the trial court has the discretion to allow credit
toward a child support arrearage based upon dependency benefits received by
the obligor’s children, id. at 787. According to the estate, our decision in
Angley-Cook transformed the discretionary rule in Griffin into a mandatory
rule. We disagree. Angley-Cook did not involve the application of Social
Security dependency benefits to child support arrearages. Therefore, that
decision had no effect upon the rule we established in Griffin. Consequently,
as has been the case since we decided Griffin, the trial court in this case
theoretically had the discretion to apply some portion of Crabtree’s children’s
dependency benefits to Crabtree’s child support arrearage. But, as a practical
matter, the trial court had no way to exercise that discretion. Because
Crabtree never moved to modify his ongoing support obligations, as he was
obligated to do to receive credit for his children’s dependency benefits, the
court had no way of knowing how much of those dependency benefits would
remain after meeting properly calculated support obligations. Moreover, the
trial court was entirely correct when it explained that “[t]he ultimate effect of
granting [Crabtree’s] request [to have payments received by his children applied
toward his arrearages] would be to shift the responsibility for payment of the
7
arrears upon the obligee [because Crabtree] would be paying his arrears with
money rightfully includable in gross income for ongoing child support.”
In sum, the trial court committed no error by declining to allow Crabtree
a credit against his ongoing child support obligations and arrearages based
upon his children’s Social Security dependency benefits.
III
A portion of the estate’s third issue and all of its fourth issue pertain to
the garnishment of Crabtree’s direct Social Security benefits. Specifically, the
estate argues that the trial court incorrectly ruled that the division had the
authority to garnish Crabtree’s Social Security benefits and that the trial court
erroneously denied his request to enjoin the garnishment. On appeal, the
estate makes various statutory arguments concerning the legality of the
garnishment. But the only argument Crabtree presented to the trial court is
the one we have already rejected: that a child’s receipt of dependency benefits
automatically entitles the noncustodial parent to a self-executing credit toward
his child support obligations. Because the estate’s statutory arguments were
not raised in the trial court, they have not been preserved for our review. See
Warner v. Clarendon Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 331, 334 (2006). And because the
estate’s only properly preserved argument is without merit, we hold that the
trial court committed no error by declining to grant the requested relief
concerning the garnishment of Crabtree’s Social Security benefits.
IV
A portion of the estate’s third issue and all of its fifth issue pertain to the
action taken against Crabtree’s bank account before his death. Specifically,
the estate argues that the trial court incorrectly ruled that: (1) the division had
the legal authority to seize retroactive Social Security benefits paid into
Crabtree’s bank account and to place a lien on that account without following
the notice, due process, and assertion of lien requirements set forth in RSA
chapter 161-C; and (2) Crabtree’s bank account was not exempt from the
imposition of a lien under RSA 161-C:11 and RSA 511:2 (Supp. 2006). The
division contends that the action it took against Crabtree’s bank account was
entirely lawful. At issue here is the legal status of the $2,873.70 currently “on
hold” at the Bank of America.
When Crabtree died, his bank account passed to his estate by operation
of law. Cf. RSA 554:1 (2007). Thus, if the disputed funds were a part of that
account, they, too, would have passed to the estate, and their disposition
would be a question of probate law for resolution, in the first instance, in the
probate court. However, the disputed funds were not in Crabtree’s account;
they had been withheld by the bank but not delivered to the division.
8
Accordingly, to determine the proper disposition of those funds, we must
determine whether, at the time of Crabtree’s death, the division’s lien on his
bank account was lawful. If it was, then the division may make a demand for
delivery of any of those funds to which it is legally entitled. If not, then those
funds belong to the estate, subject, of course, to any claims the division might
make as a creditor of the estate and any defenses properly raised in the
probate court.
Crabtree’s argument that the division had no authority to place a lien on
his bank account because it contained Social Security disability benefits was
not raised below and, therefore, was not preserved for our review. See Warner,
154 N.H. at 334. Accordingly, we turn to the two arguments that were
preserved: (1) that the division provided inadequate notice of its collection
action; and (2) that the funds placed on hold by the bank were exempt from
collection pursuant to a lien.
We begin with the issue of notice, and we note that the only action by the
division we consider is the most recent one: i.e., the one that resulted in the
bank’s withholding the disputed funds from Crabtree’s bank account. As the
record indicates, Crabtree challenged the division’s first attempt to collect
money from him by means of a lien on his bank account and won an ex parte
injunction. However, the lien was reinstated by the trial court after a hearing,
and shortly thereafter the division issued the notices of lien that presaged the
most recent withholding of funds from Crabtree’s account.
According to RSA 461-A:14, VII, “[l]iens shall arise by operation of law
against real and personal property for child support arrearages owed by an
obligor who resides or owns property in the state and shall incorporate any
unpaid child support which may accrue in the future.” Thus, as soon as
Crabtree fell into arrears on his child support obligations, a lien arose against
his real and personal property. When, as here, the division is subrogated to a
legal order of support, the division’s collection actions upon a lien established
by RSA 461-A:14, VII are governed by RSA chapter 161-C. See RSA 161-C:4, I.
Chapter 161-C provides, in pertinent part:
I. An order to withhold and deliver property of any kind . . . may
be served on any person when the commissioner has reason to
believe that there is in the possession of any such person property
which is due, owing or belonging to the debtor.
II. The commissioner may serve an order to withhold and
deliver when a notice of debt has been served in accordance with
RSA 161-C:7 . . . .
. . . .
9
VI. Any person served with an order to withhold and deliver
shall withhold immediately any property . . . due to or belonging to
the responsible parent. After 20 days from the date of service of
this order and upon demand of the commissioner, the property of
the responsible parent shall be delivered forthwith to the
commissioner.
RSA 161-C:12 (emphasis added). RSA 161-C:7, in turn, contains a list of
information that must be provided in a notice of debt, see RSA 161-C:7, II, and
provides that “[a]ctions to collect any debt accrued or accruing under RSA 161-
C:4 may commence after 20 days from the date of service of the notice of debt
described in this section,” RSA 161-C:7, III.
While the estate’s argument on the notice issue is somewhat difficult to
follow, it appears to claim that the division violated RSA 161-C:7, III because:
(1) Crabtree was not informed of the amount of his debt, see RSA 161-C:7, II(a);
(2) procedures for contesting the action were not provided to him, see RSA 161-
C:7, II(f); and (3) the division initiated a collection action less than twenty days
after Crabtree received notice, see RSA 161-C:7, III, before he received
administrative review and before his arrearages were properly determined. The
estate is incorrect on all counts. The estate also argues, in passing, that
because the division failed to comply with the RSA chapter 161-C notice
requirements, it effected an unconstitutional taking of Crabtree’s property
under Part I, Article 12 of the State Constitution.
As the estate concedes, Crabtree was notified of the division’s
determination of the amount of his arrearages in early August 2005. That
Crabtree disagreed with the division’s determination does not mean that his
arrearages had not been determined. Procedures for contesting the lien were
provided to Crabtree on three occasions, and each time he sought
administrative review pursuant to the procedures that were communicated to
him. Moreover, as the division points out, Crabtree’s most recent requests for
administrative review were followed by court action, which obviated the need
for administrative review. Finally, the estate is incorrect in claiming that the
division undertook collection action less than twenty days after Crabtree
received