THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-567
IN RE TOYOTA AVALON VIN # 4T1BJ18BXWU251611
Submitted: June 20, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 19, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jane E. Young, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the State.
Dervon Benedict, by brief, pro se.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Dervon Benedict, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) granting the State’s petition for forfeiture of his
Toyota Avalon. See RSA 318-B:17-b (2004). We affirm.
In early 2005, the Concord Police Department received information that
the defendant had been distributing crack cocaine in Concord and surrounding
areas. Through a confidential informant, the police learned of a meeting
involving the defendant at which a crack cocaine transaction would occur. The
defendant traveled to the meeting in the Toyota Avalon that is the subject of
the State’s forfeiture petition. When the defendant arrived at the meeting, he
was arrested and seventy-eight baggies of crack cocaine were found on his
person. It was later determined that the defendant was carrying 28.7 grams of
crack cocaine, a felony level offense. See RSA 318-B:26, I(a)(3) (2004).
The State charged the defendant with possession with the intent to
distribute. Prior to prosecution, however, the State referred the case to the
United States Attorney’s Office for federal prosecution. On March 16, 2006,
the defendant pled guilty in federal court to possession with intent to distribute
more than five grams of cocaine base. See 18 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1) (2000).
On May 4, 2005, prior to referring the case for federal prosecution, the
State filed a petition for forfeiture of the defendant’s Toyota Avalon alleging that
the defendant had used the vehicle in “the procurement, trafficking, delivery or
distribution of a controlled drug in felonious violation of RSA 318-B:2.” On
June 8, 2006, the superior court held a hearing on the State’s petition.
Because the defendant’s answer to the State’s petition did not comply with
Superior Court Rule 133, the superior court deemed the allegations in the
State’s petition as admitted. Following the hearing, the superior court granted
the petition, finding that the defendant’s vehicle was subject to forfeiture under
RSA 318-B:17-b and that its forfeiture was not excessive in relation to the
underlying criminal offense. This appeal followed.
On appeal the defendant argues: (1) because the State turned
prosecution of his case over to the federal government, it could not pursue
forfeiture; (2) forfeiture violated the terms of his plea agreement; and (3) the
forfeiture was excessive in relation to the underlying offense. We address each
argument in turn.
The defendant first contends that RSA 318-B:17-b permits the State to
seek forfeiture only of those items used in connection with an offense that is,
“or at least could be,” prosecuted under RSA chapter 318-B (2004 & Supp.
2006). According to the defendant, when the State referred his case for federal
prosecution, it could not prosecute him, and, therefore, could not seek
forfeiture of his vehicle.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. We
first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. When
a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that
the legislature did not see fit to include.
Woodview Dev. Corp. v. Town of Pelham, 152 N.H. 114, 116 (2005) (citations
omitted). Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme. Hughes v. N.H. Div. of Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 38-39
(2005).
2
RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(a) states:
The department of justice may petition the superior court in the
name of the state in the nature of a proceeding in rem to order
forfeiture of items or property interests subject to forfeiture under
the provisions of this section. Such petition shall be filed in the
court having jurisdiction over any related criminal proceedings
which could be brought under this chapter.
The defendant argues that under RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(a), when the State
referred his prosecution to the federal government, the superior court no longer
had jurisdiction over the criminal prosecution for his possession of crack
cocaine. Also, the defendant contends that once he entered his guilty plea in
federal court, the State lacked authority to prosecute him because to do so
would violate double jeopardy. Therefore, because the State could not
prosecute him, it could not maintain the forfeiture action.
Regarding the defendant’s statutory argument, RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(a)
neither grants nor removes jurisdiction from the state courts when a case is
referred to the federal system. Instead, the statute requires that if the State
files a forfeiture petition, it must do so in the court having jurisdiction over any
related criminal proceeding which could be brought. The statute is phrased
broadly to apply not only when criminal proceedings have actually been
brought, but also when criminal proceedings could be brought as a result of
violations of RSA chapter 318-B.
In this case, the State alleged, and the trial court accepted as admitted,
that the defendant had used this vehicle when traveling from Boston to areas
in Merrimack County to conduct drug sales in violation of RSA chapter 318-B.
Therefore, because the defendant had used this vehicle to engage in criminal
activities in Merrimack County, it is in that county that criminal proceedings
could be brought for violation of the statute. Indeed, criminal proceedings had
in fact been brought against the defendant and were pending in Merrimack
County when the petition for forfeiture was filed. In any event, because the
statute, by its plain language, does not require that a criminal proceeding
actually be brought, but only defines the proper court in which the forfeiture
petition should be brought, the superior court had jurisdiction since the
forfeiture petition was brought in the court with jurisdiction over related
criminal proceedings that could have been brought.
As to the defendant’s argument that maintaining the forfeiture petition
violated double jeopardy, the New Hampshire Constitution prevents the
duplication of trials in two jurisdictions for the same offense. State v. McNally,
122 N.H. 892, 895 (1982); State v. Hogg, 118 N.H. 262, 266 (1978). We have
held, however, that RSA 318-B:17-b is a civil, non-punitive statute, and that
3
enforcing its provisions, even after a guilty plea, does not offend double
jeopardy. In re 1994 Chevrolet Cavalier, 142 N.H. 705, 709 (1998). While In re
1994 Chevrolet Cavalier involved a guilty plea in state court, we see no need to
apply a different reasoning when the plea is entered in federal, rather than
state, court. Accordingly, we conclude that double jeopardy does not bar the
State’s forfeiture petition following the defendant’s guilty plea in federal court.
We address the defendant’s remaining arguments briefly. The defendant
contends that forfeiture was a breach of his plea agreement. The defendant’s
plea agreement, however, states, in relevant part:
The defendant acknowledges and understands that this Plea
Agreement is limited to the undersigned parties and cannot bind
any other federal authority, or any state or local authority. The
defendant acknowledges that no representations have been made
to the defendant with respect to any civil or administrative
consequences that may result from the defendant’s plea of guilty,
because such matters are solely within the discretion of the
specific administrative or government agency involved.
A forfeiture action is a civil suit, see RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(b); In re 1994
Chevrolet Cavalier, 142 N.H. at 709, and is therefore explicitly exempt from the
terms of the defendant’s plea agreement. Thus, this forfeiture action did not
violate the defendant’s plea agreement.
Next, the defendant contends that forfeiture of his vehicle was excessive
in relation to the underlying offense because the vehicle was purchased with
legitimate funds, his criminal activities were not extensive, and the value of the
vehicle vastly outweighs the value of the drugs seized. Regarding the
defendant’s argument that the vehicle was purchased with legitimate funds,
and not the proceeds of drug sales, the State argued that forfeiture was proper
because the defendant used the vehicle in the trafficking, delivery or
distribution of a controlled drug. Such use of a vehicle is grounds for forfeiture
under RSA 318-B:17-b, I(b). Thus, even if the funds used to purchase the
vehicle were not the proceeds of drug sales, the defendant’s vehicle could
properly be the subject of forfeiture.
Regarding the other arguments made by the defendant, RSA 318-B:17-b,
IV(e) required the trial court to first determine whether the property at issue is
subject to forfeiture. The trial court then had to determine whether the
forfeiture was excessive in relation to the underlying offense. RSA 318-B:17-b,
IV(e). In so doing, the trial court was to consider, among other things, the
connection of the property to the crime, the extent of the criminal activities
conducted by or through the use of the property, and the value of the property
in relation to the value of the drugs, the costs of investigation and prosecution
4
and the harm caused by the criminal conduct. RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(e). Here,
the trial court found that the defendant’s vehicle was properly the subject of
forfeiture, and that forfeiture was not excessive based upon virtually
uncontested facts that: the value of the drugs seized was about $4,000; the
investigation cost between $3,000 and $6,000; the defendant’s vehicle was
worth $10,000 to $11,000; and this vehicle was used extensively in the
trafficking and distribution of drugs, including in the underlying crime here.
The trial court’s findings under RSA 318-B:17-b, IV(e) are supported by the
record and will not be overturned.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5