THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-900
PETITION OF BAYVIEW CREMATORY, LLC & a.
Argued: June 14, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 8, 2007
Wiggin & Nourie, of Manchester (Doreen Connor and Mary Ann Dempsey
on the joint brief) for petitioners Derek Wallace, Hart Wallace Funeral Home
and Simplicity Funeral Home.
Hoefel, Phoenix & Gormley, of Portsmouth (Lawrence Gormley on the
joint brief) for petitioners Linda Stokes, individually and as trustee of the Dekes
Realty Trust, and Larry Stokes.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, PA, of Bedford (Andrew R.
Schulman and Dona Feeney on the joint brief, and Mr. Schulman orally) for
petitioner Bayview Crematory, LLC.
David H. Charlip, of Hollywood, Florida, by brief and orally, and Boynton,
Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth (Christopher E. Grant
on the brief), for the respondents.
GALWAY, J. The petitioners filed a petition for original jurisdiction
pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 11 after the Superior Court (Morrill J.) denied
their request for an interlocutory appeal of its order certifying as a class action
the lawsuit of the respondents, who are clients of funeral homes that
contracted with petitioner Bayview Crematory (Bayview). We reverse the class
certification order.
The record supports the following. Petitioner Derek Wallace was the
owner and operator of Bayview. He was also the funeral director at petitioner
Hart Wallace Funeral Home and the owner and operator of petitioner Simplicity
Funeral Home. Decedents interred at Hart Wallace Funeral Home were
transported to Bayview for cremation. Bayview also provided cremation
services to five other funeral homes and crematoria that are defendants in the
underlying litigation.
The respondents, who are the plaintiffs in the underlying litigation,
brought suit against the petitioners and other funeral homes that contracted
with Bayview, asserting, inter alia, negligence and negligent infliction of
emotional distress (NIED). Under the negligence claims, the respondents
alleged that the petitioners, along with other funeral homes and funeral
directors, breached their duties to ensure that the cremations at Bayview were
authorized by the State and performed in accordance with the standard of care
for a crematorium, resulting in emotional suffering, stigma damages, and other
injuries. Under the NIED claim, the respondents alleged that the defendants’
negligent handling of bodies of decedents caused the respondents to know,
suspect or believe that the remains of a deceased loved one had not been
properly cremated.
The respondents later moved for class certification, alleging that “it is
believed that there are hundreds of putative Class Members whose next-of-kin
or loved ones were cremated at the Bayview Crematory as the result of funeral
directing services performed by one of the Funeral Home Defendants.” This
motion requested that the court certify six subclasses, with each subclass
containing all New Hampshire residents who contracted with one of the
defendant funeral homes and whose decedent was cremated at Bayview.
The motion provided additional factual allegations regarding the
petitioners’ conduct: Bayview used the services of medical examiners who were
not licensed to practice medicine in New Hampshire. Bayview was never
certified by the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services.
Many of the documents used in the day-to-day operations of Bayview were
forged, including authorizations to perform cremations, medical examiner
cremation certificates, and a death certificate. A body was left decomposing in
an inoperative refrigerator. “Multiple bodies” were placed in retorts and
cremated simultaneously. Metal tags used to identify bodies were placed in the
2
decedents’ files rather than affixed to their bodies. Cremations were performed
for which the next of kin had signed an authorization form for another
crematorium.
These allegations, the respondents argued, supported emotional distress
claims of all next of kin whose decedents were cremated at Bayview. Because
there is no method for determining whether the remains received by the
respondents were of their respective decedents, the improper procedures and
certifications at Bayview caused the respondents severe emotional distress.
The respondents also argued that the funeral homes are vicariously liable for
Bayview’s breaches of the standard of care for a crematory.
The trial court ruled that “certain negligence issues are appropriate for
class treatment.” Specifically, these issues were:
(1) the nature and duration of Defendant Bayview’s alleged
mishandling of human remains; (2) the standard of care in the
funeral industry – alleged to apply to all defendants – for providing
and supervising cremation services; and (3) the nature of
defendants’ alleged breach of that standard of care, either by
action or inaction.
The trial court certified the matter as a class action, and noted that the “order
shall have no impact on the ability of class members, should the class
representatives prevail at trial, to have damages determined individually.”
Before us, the petitioners argue that the trial court erred in ruling that
the common issues among the putative class members predominate over
individual ones on the issue of liability. The petitioners argue that individual
issues predominate over the common issues for two primary reasons. First, for
the putative class members to prove liability for NIED, each member must
prove through expert testimony that he suffered severe emotional distress and
a physical manifestation of that distress. Thus, the litigation will require
factual inquiry into each putative class member’s physical symptoms and such
an inquiry will predominate over the common issues. Second, for the members
of the various classes to recover, each putative class member must prove that
his decedent was mishandled. Because the respondents have no evidence of
consistent and longstanding mishandling of bodies, they cannot prove in one
trial that all putative class members’ decedents were mishandled.
In response to the petitioners’ first argument, the respondents argue that
the trial court did not rule on the merits of NIED liability in its order, but,
instead, ruled only that certain negligence issues are properly subject to class
treatment. In response to the petitioners’ second argument, the respondents
argue that the petitioners improperly inject considerations of the merits of the
3
underlying suit into our review of the trial court’s class certification. They
argue that a trial court should only consider procedural matters when deciding
whether to certify a class and not the merits of the claims asserted.
Both parties acknowledge that we have not established a standard of
review for a trial court’s class certification order. The petitioners suggest that
we adopt a mixed standard of unsustainable exercise of discretion and de novo
review. The respondents suggest that we adopt solely a standard of
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
We begin by addressing the standard of review. Although we have yet to
establish a standard for reviewing class certification orders, the federal courts
have done so. Because Superior Court Rule 27-A, which provides the criteria
for class certification, is similar to its federal counterpart, Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 23, we rely upon federal cases interpreting the federal rule as
analytic aids. Cantwell v. J&R Props. Unltd., Inc., 155 N.H. ___, ___, 924 A.2d
355, 358 (2007). The First Circuit Court of Appeals has consistently reviewed
decisions of class certification under an abuse of discretion standard, with de
novo review for purely legal questions. See McKenna v. First Horizon Home
Loan Corp., 475 F.3d 418, 422 (1st Cir. 2007); In re Polymedica Corp.
Securities Litigation, 432 F.3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 2005); Tardiff v. Knox County, 365
F.3d 1, 4 (1st Cir. 2004).
We review orders granting or denying class certification for abuse
of discretion. A district court abuses its discretion when a relevant
factor deserving of significant weight is overlooked, or when an
improper factor is accorded significant weight, or when the court
considers the appropriate mix of factors, but commits a palpable
error of judgment in calibrating the decisional scales. Within this
rubric, a district court necessarily abuses its discretion when its
decision or judgment depends upon an incorrect view of the law.
And, finally, a district court’s answer to an abstract legal question,
even though made in the course of reaching a generally
discretionary judgment, engenders de novo review.
McKenna, 475 F.3d at 422 (citations, quotations and brackets omitted). We
concur with the First Circuit’s reasoning and adopt this standard, with the
caveat that we apply the standard of “unsustainable exercise of discretion”
rather than “abuse of discretion.” See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining “unsustainable exercise of discretion” standard).
Accordingly, we will review the trial court’s decision for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, but review the court’s decisions on matters of law de
novo.
4
We now turn to the substantive issues. Superior Court Rule 27-A(a)
provides the following prerequisites to a class action:
(1) The class is so numerous that joinder of all members,
whether otherwise required or permitted, is impracticable;
(2) There are questions of law or fact common to the class
which predominate over any questions affecting only individual
members;
(3) The claims or defenses of the representative parties are
typical of the claims or defenses of the class;
(4) The representative parties will fairly and adequately protect
the interests of the class;
(5) A class action is superior to other available methods for the
fair and efficient adjudication of the controversy; and
(6) The attorney for the representative parties will adequately
represent the interests of the class.
Both questions presented by the petitioners focus on the second
prerequisite, that the common questions of law or fact “predominate” over the
questions affecting only individual putative class members. Again, we rely
upon federal case law to assist in our analysis.
Rule 27-A(a)(2) is a combination of the “commonality” requirement in
Federal Rule 23(a)(2) and the “predominance” requirement in Federal Rule
23(b)(3). Satisfying commonality requires meeting a relatively low threshold.
Chiang v. Veneman, 385 F.3d 256, 265, 273-74 (3d Cir. 2004); see also A.
Conte & H. Newberg, Newberg on Class Actions § 3:10, at 274, 277 (4th ed.
2002) (stating that the commonality requirement is easily met in most cases).
This requirement will be satisfied if the proposed class members share at least
one significant question of law or fact in common with each other. Dukes v.
Wal-Mart, Inc., 474 F.3d 1214, 1225 (9th Cir. 2007); In re Warfarin Sodium
Antitrust Litigation, 391 F.3d 516, 527-28 (3d Cir. 2004); Conte, supra § 3:10,
at 273-74.
The predominance requirement, however, is far more demanding.
Warfarin Sodium Antitrust Litigation, 391 F.3d at 528; Robinson v. Texas Auto.
Dealers Assoc., 387 F.3d 416, 421 (5th Cir. 2004), cert denied, 544 U.S. 949
(2005). To satisfy the predominance test, the issues common to the proposed
class must outweigh the issues that are particular to the individual class
members. Heerwagen v. Clear Channel Communications, 435 F.3d 219, 226
5
(2d Cir. 2006). The purpose of the predominance test is to promote the
“economies of time, effort, and expense, and promote uniformity of decision as
to persons similarly situated . . . .” In re Nassau County Strip Search Cases,
461 F.3d 219, 225 (2d Cir. 2006) (quotation omitted); see also Conte, supra
§ 4:23, at 155 (stating that judicial economy and advantages over other
methods for handling the litigation as a practical matter underlie the
predominance test). To achieve these pragmatic goals, the trial court must
consider how the case will be tried by identifying the substantive issues that
will control the outcome of the case, assessing which issues will predominate,
and determining whether those issues are common to the class. O’Sullivan v.
Countrywide Home Loans, Inc., 319 F.3d 732, 738 (5th Cir. 2003); see also
Klay v. Humana, Inc., 382 F.3d 1241, 1254-55 (11th Cir. 2004), cert. denied,
543 U.S. 1081 (2005) (holding that, to determine whether class or individual
issues predominate, the court must consider the claims, defenses, relevant
facts, and substantive law).
In the instant case, the trial court concluded that the substantive issues
that will control the outcome of the case were: (1) “the standard of care in the
funeral industry for providing and supervising cremation services”; (2) “the
nature of the defendants’ breach of the standard of care”; and (3) “whether the
class members suffered damage as a result of the acts or omissions committed
by the defendants . . . .” The order then certified the litigation as a class action
for those three issues. The court stated, “This order shall have no impact on
the ability of class members, should the class representatives prevail at trial, to
have damages determined individually.” The plain wording of this order
certified the issue of liability for class treatment and left damages as the only
issue not certified. The trial court thus removed the requirement of expert
testimony from the assessment of liability for NIED, which was error.
Further, we disagree with the trial court’s finding of predominance, as
there is an issue individual to each putative class member that will control the
litigation. NIED requires, as an element of liability, that the plaintiff prove that
physical injury resulted from the emotional distress caused by the defendant.
See Palmer v. Nan King Restaurant, 147 N.H. 681, 683 (2002). To ensure that
the emotional injury is sufficiently serious to warrant legal protection and
establish a cause of action, expert testimony is required to prove physical
symptoms suffered from alleged negligent infliction of emotional distress.
O’Donnell v. HCA Health Servs. of N.H., 152 N.H. 608, 611-12 (2005). Because
of these requirements for establishing a cause of action in NIED, each plaintiff
will have to demonstrate, with expert testimony, the physical symptoms that he
or she suffered. This will require an inquiry into the physical symptoms
claimed by each putative class member, each member’s prior medical and
psychological history, and the qualifications of each member’s experts. These
proceedings would undermine the economies of time, effort and expense that
class actions are designed to promote. In short, the questions relating to the
6
individual putative class members regarding NIED will predominate over those
common to all putative class members.
Having determined that the trial court erred in removing an element of
NIED from the liability determination and in ruling that the issues common to
the certified class will predominate over the individual issues, we need not
address the petitioners’ second argument. We conclude that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by certifying liability for class
certification.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
7