THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Tax and Land Appeals
No. 2006-631
APPEAL OF CITY OF NASHUA
(New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals)
Argued: March 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 11, 2007
Office of Corporation Counsel, of Nashua (David R. Connell on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (William J. Donovan
on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, City of Nashua (City), appeals a decision of
the board of tax and land appeals (BTLA) granting a religious tax exemption for
property owned by the respondent, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Manchester.
See RSA 72:23, III (2003). We reverse.
The following appears in the record. Beginning in about 2001, the
respondent began a process of reorganizing churches in the City due to
budgetary and staffing concerns. In connection with the reorganization
process, the respondent decided to “suppress” St. Francis and St. Casimir
parishes in 2003.
When St. Francis was suppressed, the church buildings were
deconsecrated and the parishioners became members of another parish. The
respondent, however, continued to maintain the buildings and to use them to
house items of religious significance such as marble altars, marble pulpits, a
cross, stained glass windows, organs, stations of the cross, statues, and pews,
among others. In March 2003, St. Francis was closed and placed for sale.
Litigation then ensued over whether the respondent had the authority to sell
the property. See Berthiaume v. McCormack, 153 N.H. 239 (2006). Despite
being located upon property that had been put up for sale, the rectory at St.
Francis remained open until the late summer of 2003, and continued
thereafter to be used for storage and by a local “Neighborhood Watch” group.
Likewise, when St. Casimir was suppressed, it was deconsecrated and its
parishioners became members of another parish. Both the church and its
rectory were used for storage before being sold on September 22, 2004.
Meanwhile, the respondent sought a tax exemption on the properties
containing both churches for the 2004 tax year. The City denied the exemption
applications, and the respondent appealed to the BTLA. In a two-to-one
decision, the BTLA ruled that the respondent was entitled to a tax exemption.
This appeal followed.
Appeals from BTLA decisions are governed by RSA chapter 541. Appeal
of Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. 455, 458 (2005). Findings of fact made by the
BTLA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id. The BTLA’s decision
will not be set aside or vacated except for errors of law, unless the City
establishes, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order
was unjust or unreasonable. Id. “The burden of demonstrating the
applicability of any exemption [is] . . . upon the claimant.” RSA 72:23-m
(2003).
Resolution of this appeal requires us to construe RSA 72:23, III. The
interpretation and application of statutes present questions of law, which we
review de novo. Town of Hinsdale v. Town of Chesterfield, 153 N.H. 70, 72
(2005).
RSA 72:23 provides, in pertinent part:
The following real estate and personal property shall,
unless otherwise provided by statute, be exempt from
taxation:
. . . .
III. Houses of public worship, parish houses, church
parsonages occupied by their pastors, convents,
monasteries, buildings and the lands appertaining to
them owned, used and occupied directly for religious
2
training or for other religious purposes by any
regularly recognized and constituted denomination,
creed or sect, organized, incorporated or legally doing
business in this state and the personal property used
by them for the purposes for which they are
established.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Town of Hinsdale, 153 N.H. at 72. When examining the language of the
statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Appeal
of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. 314, 319 (2006). We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. In
construing a religious exemption statute, we adopt neither a liberal attitude
because it is charity, nor a hostile attitude because it seeks exemption from
taxation. Appeal of Emissaries of Divine Light, 140 N.H. 552, 556 (1995).
According to the plain language of the statute, the land upon which the
exemption is sought must be “owned, used and occupied directly for religious
training or for other religious purposes by any regularly recognized and
constituted denomination . . . .” RSA 72:23, III; see also Alton Bay Camp
Meeting Asso. v. Alton, 109 N.H. 44, 48-49 (1968); E. Coast Conf. of the
Evangelical Covenant Church of America v. Town of Swanzey, 146 N.H. 658,
663 (2001). There is no dispute that both premises were owned by the
respondent. Nor is there any dispute that the respondent is a regularly
recognized and constituted denomination. However, ownership is only one part
of the tax exemption inquiry. We must also determine whether the premises
were being used and occupied directly for religious purposes. We conclude
that they were not.
With respect to the fact that the churches contained items “not in active
use,” the respondent contends that many organizations, such as hospitals,
have items that are not in constant use, and that the temporary disuse of
certain items at a given property should not result in the denial of a tax
exemption application. However, this is not a case in which a building
contains a few items that are not, at one time or another, in use. Rather, here,
each church was functioning as storage space for items, none of which was in
use. The respondent also contends that the churches were being used for a
religious purpose insofar as they were “preserv[ing] and protect[ing] the
religious objects of the church.” However, the mere storage of religious objects
in a deconsecrated church, on a temporary basis, does not rise to the level of
using or occupying the space for “religious purposes.” Instead, it amounts to
using the space for convenient interim storage during the pendency of an
anticipated sale, a use that is not altered by the fact that the items being stored
3
happen to have religious significance. Cf. Alton Bay, 109 N.H. at 50 (the fact
that religiously-affiliated persons were staying in the rooming building at issue
did not entitle camp to religious tax exemption). As the dissenting opinion
from the BTLA observed, “A locked facility used simply to store articles, some of
which may have religious significance, until such time as a future use can be
determined does not satisfy the requirements of the exemption statute.”
Furthermore, although the respondent was in the process of reorganizing
and restructuring its parishes, both churches had been suppressed or
deconsecrated and the parishioners already were conducting their worship and
church-related activities elsewhere. Thus, no one was occupying either
premises for religious purposes. Cf. Trustees of N.H. Conference v. Sandown,
87 N.H. 47, 48 (1934) (religious home considered “occupied” for charitable
purposes where retired Methodist clergyman lived on the property); Franciscan
Fathers v. Pittsfield, 97 N.H. 396, 400-01 (1952) (Catholic clergy occupied
premises at issue); Society of Cincinnati v. Exeter, 92 N.H. 348, 351 (1943)
(holding, under earlier version of charitable tax exemption statute, that it
contemplates occupancy as more than bare possession; if the building were
rented, it would be taxable, and it is no less so while it remains indefinitely
idle).
Although the BTLA majority opinion cited the use of the rectory at St.
Francis for a “Neighborhood Watch” program, this fact cannot, on this record,
satisfy the requirement that the property be used or occupied for religious
purposes. Nothing in the record links the Neighborhood Watch to any religious
activity of the Catholic Church. Nor, in our view, can the provision of
maintenance and security services be considered a use or occupation of the
premises for “religious purposes” within the meaning of the statute. See The
Dominican Nuns v. City of LaCrosse, 419 N.W.2d 270, 271-72 (Wis. Ct. App.
1987).
Our holding today is consistent with how we have interpreted the
legislative intent of the religious tax exemption statute in previous cases. “We
have previously held that the legislature, in drafting RSA 72:23, III, intended to
exempt land owned and occupied by a religious association that is a part of, or
used directly in conjunction with, buildings used principally for religious
purposes.” Emissaries, 140 N.H. at 556 (quotation omitted).
Our holding today is also consistent with case law from other
jurisdictions. For example, in Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Newark v. City of
East Orange, 18 N.J. Tax 649, 651 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2000), the court
upheld a tax exemption granted to two parish churches that had been closed
and suppressed by the Archdiocese due to “changing demographics.” However,
the facts of East Orange were more compelling than those in the instant case.
In East Orange, the two suppressed churches were, in addition to being used
4
for storage of church records and artifacts, also used for deanery meetings and
a youth basketball program. Id. Moreover, “a priest conduct[ed] a weekly mass
in the churches of each closed parish.” Id. Here, by contrast, the only activity
found to have occurred on the premises, aside from maintenance, was storage.
See also Our Savior Lutheran Church v. Dep’t of Revenue, 562 N.E.2d 1198,
1199 (Ill. App. Ct. 1990) (church entitled to tax exemption where it was used
not only for storage of religious artifacts, but also for bake sales, flea markets,
choir practice and as a site for accumulating clothing and other materials
before they were shipped to missionary sites). Thus, we conclude no exemption
is contemplated for “vacant land and buildings in the process of disposal.” The
Dominican Nuns, 419 N.W.2d at 272.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5