THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-911
JAMES M. STANKIEWICZ
v.
CITY OF MANCHESTER
Argued: November 8, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2007
McDowell & Osburn, P.A., of Manchester (Mark D. Morrissette and
Matthew G. Mavrogeorge on the brief, and Mr. Morrissette orally), for the
plaintiff.
City Solicitor's Office, of Manchester (Daniel D. Muller, Jr. on the brief,
and Thomas I. Arnold, III orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, James M. Stankiewicz, appeals the rulings of
the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) denying his motion for summary judgment
and granting the cross-motion for summary judgment of the defendant, the
City of Manchester (City). The City cross-appeals the denial of its motion to
dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
The record supports the following facts. The plaintiff was hired by the
Manchester Police Department in 1986. In 2000, he suffered a work-related
injury. In 2004, he underwent surgery, resulting in his being absent from work
from May 7, 2004, until October 17, 2004. Prior to his absence, the plaintiff
filed a workers’ compensation claim with the City alleging that his 2004
surgery was necessitated by his injury in 2000. The City denied his request for
workers’ compensation benefits, but permitted him to use his accumulated sick
leave credit for the time he was absent.
After his claim for workers’ compensation was denied by the City, the
plaintiff sought a hearing with the New Hampshire Department of Labor. On
February 2, 2005, following hearings with the department of labor and the New
Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board, the plaintiff was awarded workers’
compensation benefits. The City paid the award, but asked the plaintiff to
repay the sick leave money he received during his absence because he had now
received workers’ compensation benefits for that time. The City informed the
plaintiff that once he repaid the sick leave money, his sick leave credit would
be restored. The plaintiff refused to repay the money, and his sick leave credit
was not restored.
In September 2005, the plaintiff filed a declaratory judgment action
seeking restoration of his sick leave credit pursuant to section 33.064(B)(2) of
the Manchester Code of Ordinances (MCO), which states: “Pending
determination of compensation eligibility, the employee may receive sick leave
benefits. On a determination of eligibility for compensation benefits, sick leave
credit shall be restored.” According to the plaintiff, the MCO entitled him to
have his sick leave credit restored without having to repay the City. The City
counterclaimed for repayment of the sick leave money, and moved to dismiss
on the ground that the plaintiff’s claim arose under the collective bargaining
agreement (CBA) between the City and the police supervisors union and was,
therefore, governed by the CBA’s grievance procedures and arbitration
requirement. See Agreement Between the City of Manchester, N.H. and the
Manchester Association of Police Supervisors, Art. 7 (July 1, 2004 – June 30,
2007). We note that although the plaintiff’s claim spans the effective dates of
two collective bargaining agreements between the City and its police officers,
the provisions relevant to this appeal are identical, and we therefore cite only to
the 2004 through 2007 agreement.
The parties filed cross motions for summary judgment. The superior
court, after a hearing, denied the City’s motion to dismiss, ruling that it had
jurisdiction because the plaintiff’s claim was based upon the MCO, not the
CBA. In a later order, the trial court granted the City’s motion for summary
judgment and denied the plaintiff’s motion, ruling that the plaintiff’s sick leave
credit would be restored upon repayment of his sick leave money. The plaintiff
appeals the trial court’s rulings on the cross motions for summary judgment,
while the City cross-appeals the denial of its motion to dismiss.
2
I. Motion to Dismiss
The City contends that this dispute is governed by the CBA. Therefore,
the plaintiff is required to abide by its grievance procedures, including the
requirement that his claim be submitted to binding arbitration. Thus,
jurisdiction over this matter lies with an arbitrator and not the court.
The trial court determined that the MCO, and not the CBA, governed this
matter because: (1) contrary to the City’s argument, section 33.023 of the
MCO did not exempt the plaintiff’s claim from the coverage of the MCO; and (2)
the plaintiff’s claim could not be governed by the CBA because it does not
address the relief sought by the plaintiff. As to the first issue, the
interpretation of an ordinance is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 41 (2007).
Because the traditional rules of statutory construction generally govern our
review, we construe the words and phrases of an ordinance according to the
common and approved usage of the language. Id. When the language of an
ordinance is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance
itself for further indications of legislative intent, and we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words that they did not
see fit to include. Id.
Section 33.023 of the MCO states:
None of the provisions of §§ 33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter
shall amend or modify any existing legal and binding contract
between the city and employees’ groups unless or until such
contracts are renegotiated to conform with the provisions of §§
33.020 through 33.082 of this chapter.
City of Manchester, New Hampshire, Code of Ordinances, ch. 33, sec. 33.023.
According to the City, this section prevents certain provisions of the MCO,
including section 33.064, from applying to the plaintiff, unless the contract
covering him was renegotiated to conform with those provisions. The City
contends that because the CBA covering the plaintiff was not renegotiated to
conform with those provisions, and because the plaintiff’s rights are defined by
the CBA, the plaintiff may not avail himself of the benefits of the MCO. We do
not agree.
Municipalities have general authority to adopt ordinances for their
governance. See RSA 47:17 (2003 & Supp. 2007); RSA 49-B:8 (2003).
Pursuant to that authority, the City has adopted ordinances pertaining to
various aspects of the employment relationship with its employees. See
generally City of Manchester, New Hampshire, Code of Ordinances, ch. 33. The
3
City’s ordinances are valid local laws, see State v. Hayes, 61 N.H. 264, 330
(1881), which no party challenges in this appeal.
“[T]he laws which subsist at the time and place of the making of a
contract, and where it is to be performed, enter into and form a part of it, as if
they were expressly referred to or incorporated in its terms.” Trustees & c.
Academy v. Exeter, 90 N.H. 472, 484 (1940) (quotation omitted). Thus, when
the City and any employees’ groups enter into contracts, those contracts must
comply with the terms of the MCO, as it is the law subsisting at the time and
place of the contract’s formation and performance. Because the MCO is a set
of local laws existing at the time the CBA here was formed, its provisions,
including section 33.064, become part of the agreement of the parties and are
applicable to the plaintiff.
The City, despite its general authority to adopt ordinances for its
governance, may not, however, simply alter or abandon valid contracts with its
employees’ groups by adopting new ordinances. See, e.g., RSA 273-A:5, I(i)
(1999) (declaring it an unfair labor practice for a public employer to make any
law or regulation that would invalidate any portion of an agreement entered
into by that employer). Therefore, section 33.023 of the MCO states that
sections 33.020 through 33.082 of the MCO, do not amend or modify “any
existing legal and binding contract[s] . . . unless or until such contracts are
renegotiated.” City of Manchester, New Hampshire, Code of Ordinances, ch.
33, sec. 33.023 (emphasis added). Because section 33.023 is stated in the
present tense, it refers to those contracts existing at the time the provision was
enacted and exempts such contracts from complying with the MCO until they
are renegotiated. As section 33.023 exempts only those contracts existing at
the time it was adopted, contracts formed thereafter are subject to the MCO.
Because the CBA at issue was formed after the enactment of section 33.023, it
is subject to the MCO. We conclude, as did the trial court, that section 33.023
of the MCO did not exempt the plaintiff’s claim from the coverage of the MCO.
The City next contends that even if section 33.023 does not exempt the
plaintiff’s claim from the MCO, his claim is addressed by the terms of the CBA
and resort to the MCO is unnecessary. The trial court found that because the
plaintiff’s claim for restoration of his sick leave credit is not addressed by the
CBA, “[t]he grievance procedure of the CBAs is not the appropriate avenue for
[the plaintiff] to pursue his claim.” The City argues that this was error
because: (1) the trial court decided the arbitrability of the plaintiff’s claim, a
matter within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator; (2) the plaintiff cannot be
presumed to be entitled to the benefits of the MCO, even if the CBA is silent;
and (3) the impossibility of compliance with the CBA does not justify the court’s
exercise of jurisdiction.
4
As to the first argument, while the determination of arbitrability is
generally within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator or the New Hampshire Public
Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB), Appeal of Police Comm’n of City of
Rochester, 149 N.H. 528, 533-34 (2003), that rule applies when the relevant
claim arises under the CBA. Here, the plaintiff’s claim to the restoration of his
sick leave credit arises out of a right conferred by the MCO. Thus, the plaintiff
is seeking to vindicate a right that does not emanate from the CBA. See Fowler
v. Town of Seabrook, 145 N.H. 536, 540 (2000) (town’s argument that superior
court infringed upon the jurisdiction of the PELRB failed because it assumed
the plaintiff’s claim emanated from the collective bargaining agreement instead
of statute). Thus, the trial court did not err by determining the arbitrability of
the plaintiff’s claim because his claim was based only upon the MCO.
Indeed, the plaintiff’s claim could not have been brought under the CBA.
The CBA states how and at what rate sick leave credit may be accumulated,
and in what circumstances it may be used. See Agreement Between the City of
Manchester, N.H. and the Manchester Association of Police Supervisors, art.
16, secs. 16.1-16.4 (July 1, 2004 – June 30, 2007). The CBA, however, says
nothing at all about workers’ compensation benefits, or how the receipt of
those benefits would affect the use of, or credit for, sick leave credit.
The CBA itself limits an arbitrator’s jurisdiction to its express provisions,
see id., art. 7, sec. 7.6, and the plaintiff need follow the requirements of the
CBA regarding only those claims that arise out of the application or
interpretation of the express provisions of the CBA, see id., art. 7, sec. 7.1(A).
Because the CBA is silent on the issue of workers’ compensation and its
relation to sick leave, the plaintiff’s claim could neither be the subject of a
grievance under the CBA, nor fall within the jurisdiction of an arbitrator.
Also, for the above reasons we reject the City’s argument that the
plaintiff cannot be presumed to be entitled to the benefits of the MCO, even if
the CBA is silent. The CBA is silent on this issue, and the plaintiff may avail
himself of the MCO, which specifically addresses his claim.
The City next argues that the impossibility of complying with the CBA’s
grievance procedures, i.e., by not stating a violation of an express provision of
the CBA, does not justify the trial court’s exercise of jurisdiction. However, as
noted, the plaintiff’s claim is based upon the MCO, over which the trial court
may exercise jurisdiction, and not upon the CBA. Therefore, it is irrelevant
whether it is possible for the plaintiff to comply with the CBA’s grievance
procedures. Those procedures simply do not apply to the plaintiff’s claim.
Accordingly, for the above reasons, we conclude that the trial court did not err
in denying the City’s motion to dismiss.
5
II. Motions for Summary Judgment
Having determined that the trial court could exercise jurisdiction over
the plaintiff’s claim, we turn to its rulings on the parties’ cross-motions for
summary judgment. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in requiring
him to repay the City because his claim was based upon section 33.064(B)(2) of
the MCO, which does not contain a repayment obligation. The City contends
that the trial court properly denied the plaintiff’s summary judgment motion
and granted its motion on its counterclaim for repayment.
As noted previously, the interpretation of an ordinance is a question of
law, which we review de novo. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust, 155 N.H. at
41. Because the traditional rules of statutory construction generally govern
our review, we construe the words and phrases of an ordinance according to
the common and approved usage of the language. Id. When the language of
an ordinance is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the
ordinance itself for further indications of legislative intent, and we will not
guess what the drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add words
that they did not see fit to include. Id.
As we have previously determined that the ordinance governs the
plaintiff’s claim, we turn to the language of the ordinance. Section 33.064(B)(2)
states, “Pending determination of compensation eligibility, the employee may
receive sick leave benefits. On a determination of eligibility for compensation
benefits, sick leave credit shall be restored.” City of Manchester, New
Hampshire, Code of Ordinances, ch. 33, sec. 33.064(B)(2). The ordinance’s
plain language provides that while an employee’s eligibility for workers’
compensation benefits is undetermined, the employee may use accumulated
sick leave credit and that once the employee’s eligibility is determined, the sick
leave credit shall be restored. See In the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H.
351, 354 (2006) (generally use of “shall” makes enforcement of the provision
mandatory). These words require the City to reinstate the employee’s sick leave
credit, but nowhere in the ordinance does it require the employee to reimburse
the City. In fact, the ordinance speaks only to the restoration of “sick leave
credit.” Therefore, we conclude that the plain language of the ordinance
requires the City to restore the plaintiff’s sick leave credit, but does not require
the plaintiff to repay the City.
The City argues that section 33.064(B)(2) must be read in conjunction
with the preceding section and that such a reading leads to the conclusion that
the plaintiff must repay the sick leave money. The preceding section reads, in
relevant part:
6
Any employee of the city who sustains an injury which is
compensable under the Workers Compensation Law and who is
entitled to receive compensation benefits either by agreement of
[sic] award shall, in addition to workers compensation benefits,
receive supplemental pay benefits from the city so that combined
worker compensation and supplemental pay benefits shall equal
80% of regular gross salary if the employee is covered under Social
Security, and 87% if the employee is not covered under Social
Security.
City of Manchester, New Hampshire, Code of Ordinances, ch. 33, sec.
33.064(B)(1). The City contends that allowing the plaintiff to keep the sick
leave credit will permit him to receive benefits in excess of the eighty-seven
percent prescribed by the ordinance. The plain language of this section,
however, says nothing about an employee’s use of, or repayment for, sick leave
credit in relation to workers’ compensation. It states only that if an employee
sustains a compensable injury, he or she is entitled to receive supplemental
pay in addition to the compensation award. The only express terms regarding
sick leave credit are found in section 33.064(B)(2), and those terms impose no
responsibility upon the plaintiff to repay the City for the sick leave credit he
had used. Should the City disagree with our plain language construction of the
ordinances, it is free to amend them as it sees fit. See Marceau v. Concord
Heritage Life Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 216, 221 (2003).
Finally, the City contends that allowing the plaintiff to have his sick leave
credit restored without requiring him to repay the City will result in a windfall.
The trial court agreed with the City’s assessment, ruling that:
interpreting the Ordinance in the manner urged by [the plaintiff]
would lead to an illogical result, as he would, as the City asserts,
essentially be collecting workers’ compensation benefits,
supplemental benefits, and sick leave benefits for the same time
period, in addition to maintaining his sick leave credits. Nothing
in the Ordinance indicates that such a windfall was contemplated.
The superior court, therefore, determined that despite the language of section
33.064(B)(2), the plaintiff should repay the City.
Preliminarily, we note that the issue of whether the plaintiff is entitled to
collect “supplemental benefits” under section 33.064(B)(1) in addition to his
sick leave is not before us, and we express no opinion on that matter.
Nevertheless, to rule as the trial court did is to add words to the ordinance that
its drafters did not see fit to include. The trial court’s construction adds
language creating a repayment obligation as a condition to be fulfilled prior to
the restoration of sick leave credit, when the only condition stated in the
7
ordinance is that eligibility for workers’ compensation benefits be determined.
This it may not do. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust, 155 N.H. at 41. The
wording of the ordinance is clear on its face, and it is not for the courts to look
beyond its clear language, nor to guess at the possible intent of the body
enacting it. Id. Finally, while the plaintiff may be seen as recouping a windfall
to some degree, such a recovery arises only when the City wrongfully denies
workers’ compensation benefits. Construing the ordinance to permit such
recovery is consistent with the general rule that remedial statutes are liberally
construed in favor of the injured person. Appeal of Cote, 146 N.H. 705, 711
(2001).
Accordingly, we conclude that the plain language of the applicable
ordinance entitled the plaintiff to the restoration of his sick leave credit without
having to repay the City.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8