THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2006-050
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ALVIN V. DRAKE
Argued: February 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 6, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Law Office of David H. Bownes, P.C., of Laconia (David H. Bownes on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Alvin V. Drake, appeals his conviction for
possession of a controlled drug, see RSA 318-B:2 (2004); RSA 318-B:26 (2004)
(amended 2005, 2006), following a jury trial in Superior Court (Perkins, J.). We
affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On January 21, 2005,
Sergeant Christopher Ruel of the New Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles
witnessed a small pickup truck driven by the defendant heading north on
Route 3 in Lancaster. The defendant was traveling at a high rate of speed,
straddling the centerline and forcing other vehicles off the road. Sergeant Ruel
activated his blue lights and followed the defendant, who did not immediately
pull over. Sergeant Ruel gave “a couple of blasts of [his] air horn” and activated
his siren. The defendant eventually pulled over and parked on the side of the
road partially in a snow bank.
Sergeant Ruel approached the defendant’s truck, asked him to get out
and arrested him. As Sergeant Ruel searched the defendant, he felt a
cylindrical object in the defendant’s front pocket. At this point, the defendant
twisted, reached into his pocket, pulled out a prescription pill bottle and threw
it. Sergeant Ruel attempted to handcuff the defendant, but he fought with the
officer. After the defendant was handcuffed, Sergeant Ruel found two 2.5-
milligram oxycodone tablets in the defendant’s pocket and eventually located
the prescription bottle. It contained eleven 5-milligram diazepam tablets,
seventy-five 5-milligram oxycodone tablets, and thirty-eight 4.5-milligram
oxycodone tablets. The name on the prescription bottle label was Andreas
Wischlburger.
After the defendant waived his Miranda rights, see Miranda v. Arizona,
384 U.S. 436 (1966), he claimed that he was the only person who used the
truck and everything in it was his, but he did not know where the drugs had
come from. He stated that he had been really scared and that is why he threw
them. Later, the defendant claimed that the prescription bottle belonged to his
wife and that he knew he would be in trouble for having it. During the
inventory search of the defendant’s truck, Sergeant Ruel found two 4.5-
milligram oxycodone tablets in the center console, eleven 7.5-milligram
oxycodone tablets in a shaving kit inside a duffle bag, and five 7.5-milligram
oxycodone tablets in a black fanny pack. The defendant was indicted on one
count of possession of the controlled drug diazepam, one count of possession of
the controlled drug oxycodone, and one count of possession with intent to
deliver the controlled drug oxycodone. See RSA 318-B:2, :26.
At trial, Wischlburger, the owner of the prescription bottle, testified that
he had known the defendant for twenty years; that they both lived in Meredith;
and that in December 2004 and January 2005, he had been on the defendant’s
property cutting wood. During this time period, Wischlburger had been taking
diazepam, prescribed to him for pain, on a regular basis for eight or nine years.
He would take the diazepam at night in order to sleep. The prescription was
last filled on December 8, 2004, and at some point after that he misplaced the
bottle. Wischlburger testified that the defendant called and said that he found
the prescription bottle and would return it, but Wischlburger was unclear
about the time period regarding these events.
At the end of the State’s case, the court dismissed the two counts
alleging possession of oxycodone. The jury convicted the defendant on the one
count of possession of the controlled drug diazepam. On appeal, the defendant
argues: (1) that the superior court erred in giving the State’s requested jury
2
instructions regarding possession of prescription drugs under RSA 318-B:13
(2004) and RSA 318-B:14 (2004) because the instructions were confusing and
irrelevant; and (2) the evidence was insufficient to prove his guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
We first address the defendant’s assertion that the jury instructions were
confusing and irrelevant. The defendant first argues that the court’s charge
impermissibly amended the indictment. The defendant did not object on this
basis at trial, however, and we therefore decline to address this claim on
appeal. See State v. McCabe, 145 N.H. 686, 689-90 (2001). Second, he argues
that the jury instructions were misleading, which caused the jury to be
confused about the correct legal standard to be used in resolving the material
issues of the case. We disagree.
In addressing the defendant’s argument, we recognize:
The purpose of the trial court's charge is to state and
explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible language,
the rules of law applicable to the case. When
reviewing jury instructions, we evaluate allegations of
error by interpreting the disputed instructions in their
entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood
them, and in light of all the evidence in the case. We
determine if the jury instructions adequately and
accurately explain each element of the offense and
reverse only if the instructions did not fairly cover the
issues of law in the case.
State v. Bortner, 150 N.H. 504, 512 (2004) (quotations and citations omitted).
Whether or not a particular jury instruction is necessary, and the scope and
wording of jury instructions, are both within the sound discretion of the trial
court, see State v. Cook, 148 N.H. 735, 741-42 (2002); State v. Evans, 150 N.H.
416, 420 (2003), and we review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for
an unsustainable exercise of discretion, see State v. Poole, 150 N.H. 299, 301
(2003).
The court instructed the jury on the specific elements of the crime using
language that tracked RSA 318-B:2: “That . . . the defendant, knowingly had
the drug under his custody and control; That [he] knew the drug was under his
custody and control; That [he] knew that the controlled drug was in fact
Diazepam; and That the drug was in fact Diazepam.” The court’s instructions
adequately and accurately explained each element of the offense. The court
then recited RSA 318-B:13 (requirements for prescription labeling) and RSA
318-B:14 (requirements for lawful possession of prescription drugs), followed
by an instruction on the defendant’s theory of the case: “that the drug,
3
Diazepam, which was found, w[as] lawfully prescribed to a third person and
that the state ha[d] not proven beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
intended to unlawfully exercise possession or control over those drugs.”
RSA 318-B:13 and :14 could be reasonably understood as a general
overview of the defense’s theory of the case. In closing arguments, the defense
argued that the issue before the jury was whether the defendant unlawfully
possessed Wischlburger’s prescription. Moreover, the defense argued that
“these were lawfully prescribed pills to a third party and that [the defendant]
wasn’t possessing them to sell them or to use them or anything other than just
to return them to Mr. Wischlburger,” and that if the prescription pills lawfully
belonged to Wischlburger, then the defendant was not guilty. Reading RSA
318-B:13 and RSA 318-B:14 was likely helpful to the jury in determining
whether the defendant’s theory was sustainable.
We are unconvinced that reading RSA 318-B:13 and RSA 318-B:14 could
have misled or confused the jury on the legal standard to be applied. During
the jury’s charge, the court stated:
There are a couple of statutes that deal with drugs
that I’m going to read to you. The first is RSA 318-
B:13. . . . This law says in relative [sic] part, whenever
a pharmacist dispenses any controlled drug or
prescription issued by a practitioner, he or she shall
affix to the container in which said [sic] is dispensed a
label showing the name, address, and registry number
of the pharmacy name or initials of the pharmacist,
the name of the prescribing practitioner, the
prescription identifying number, the name of the
patient, the date dispensed, any directions as may be
stated on the prescription and the name and strength
and quantity of the drug dispensed. No person shall
alter, deface, or remove any label so affixed.
The second statute I want to read to you is RSA 318-
B:14, Authorized Possession of Controlled Drugs by
Individuals. This, in relevant part, reads: An
individual to whom or for whose use any controlled
drug has been prescribed, sold, or dispensed by a
practitioner or a pharmacist, may lawfully possess it
only in the container in which it was delivered to him
by the person selling or dispensing the same. And
then in section two of that statute reads in Section C:
Exceptions are made for those of non or reasonable
4
[sic] containers, which are medication organizers to aid
the person in carrying out the prescriber’s directions.
The court began its jury charge with the specific elements of RSA 318-B:2 as
charged, read RSA 318-B:13 and 14, and then explained the defendant’s theory
of defense, which was that the pills had been lawfully prescribed and that,
therefore, he could not be guilty of unlawful possession. Because, viewed in
their entirety, the trial court’s instructions provided the jury with a clear and
intelligible description of the applicable law in this case, we conclude that the
instructions were not confusing or irrelevant.
We next address the defendant’s argument that the evidence was
insufficient to support the jury’s finding of possession of a controlled drug
under RSA 318-B:2. “To prevail in a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant bears the burden of proving that no rational trier of
fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could have
found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Crie, 154 N.H. __, __, 913
A.2d 767, 772 (2006). “In reviewing the evidence, we examine each evidentiary
item in the context of all the evidence, not in isolation.” Id. “Circumstantial
evidence may be sufficient to support a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt.” Id. “Further, the trier may draw reasonable inferences from facts
proved and also inferences from facts found as a result of other inferences,
provided they can be reasonably drawn therefrom.” Id. “It is well settled that
the jury has substantial latitude in determining the credibility of witnesses.”
State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 680 (2005).
The defendant argues that the evidence demonstrated that he was in
lawful possession of the diazepam because “the prescription bottle, was
lawfully prescribed to Andreas Wischlburger, issued on 12/8/04 and contained
eleven (11) Diazepam pills. The pill bottle itself accurately described the
physician who prescribed the medication and provided the required
information as required by the Controlled Drug Act.” He claims that such a
defense arises out of RSA 318-B:6 (2004) entitled, “Possession Lawful.” As
explained further below, neither the facts nor the terms of RSA 318-B:6
support such a defense.
In the present case, Sergeant Ruel conducted a pat search of the
defendant and discovered a prescription bottle in the defendant’s front pocket.
When Sergeant Ruel went to recover the bottle, the defendant reached into his
pocket, removed the bottle and threw it away. When the prescription bottle
was confiscated, it contained eleven tablets of diazepam along with 113 tablets
of oxycodone. The defendant’s name was not on the prescription bottle’s label.
Sergeant Ruel testified that when questioned about the prescription bottle, the
defendant first stated that he didn’t know where the drugs had come from, but
later claimed that the prescription belonged to his wife and he would be in
5
trouble for having it. Viewing this evidence and all reasonable inferences from
it in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational trier of
fact could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was guilty
of being in unlawful possession of a controlled drug.
On appeal, the defendant argues that RSA 318-B:6 supports his theory
of defense that he was in lawful possession of the diazepam because the drug
was lawfully prescribed to a third party who allegedly authorized the defendant
to possess it. However, in this case, RSA 318-B:6 is not a proper defense for
the defendant because his possession of the diazepam does not satisfy the
statute. RSA 318-B:6 provides in part: “Possession of or control of controlled
drugs obtained as authorized shall be lawful if in the regular course of
business, occupation, profession, employment, or duty of the possessor.” The
defendant urges us to interpret RSA 318-B:6 to authorize the incidental
possession by third parties with the permission of the lawful possessor.
However, the defendant never specifically raised this issue below in a motion to
dismiss nor did he ask for a jury instruction on this issue. Assuming without
deciding that this issue was properly preserved, we rule that RSA 318-B:6
cannot be construed as proposed by the defendant. RSA 318-B:6 does not
contain the language suggested by the defendant. In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed
in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Town of Hinsdale v. Town of
Chesterfield, 153 N.H. 70, 73 (2005). When examining the language of the
statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We
interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include. Id.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6