THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-115
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JONATHAN STEIMEL
Argued: January 11, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Wilson, Durkin & Bush, P.C., of Nashua (Eric R. Wilson and Laura M.
Dudziak on the brief, and Mr. Wilson orally) for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The State appeals the Trial Court’s (Hampsey, J.) grant of
motions to suppress evidence filed by the defendant, Jonathan Steimel. The
State argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the defendant was in
custody when he confessed, and that no exigent circumstances justified taking
the defendant’s blood without a warrant. We reverse and remand.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or appear in the
record. The defendant was involved in a head-on collision around 10:00 p.m.
on the Sunday before Labor Day, 2004, on Route 13 in Milford. When Officer
William Bright of the Milford Police Department arrived at the scene, the
defendant told him that he had fallen asleep and run into the other vehicle.
The defendant explained that he had been working since 4:00 a.m. and was on
his way home. Bright asked if the defendant was injured and he pointed to a
cut on his knee. The defendant was taken to the hospital by ambulance where
he was met by Officer Garrett Booth of the Milford Police Department.
Booth arrived at the hospital at 10:57 p.m. and found the defendant on a
bed, attended by two nurses. Booth asked a nurse and the defendant for
permission to speak with him; both said yes. Booth informed the defendant
that he did not have to speak. When Booth asked the defendant if he was
injured, the defendant again pointed to the cut on his knee. Booth later
discovered that the defendant had also injured his foot. At some point during
their twenty to thirty minute conversation, the defendant was placed on an IV.
He remained on the hospital bed for the duration of his conversation with
Booth.
After speaking with the defendant, Booth believed that he was impaired.
Booth observed that he had difficulty keeping his eyes open, had droopy eyelids
and extremely small pupils. The defendant’s speech was slurred and at times
it appeared that he had no idea what he was saying. When Booth asked the
defendant if he normally slurred his speech, he replied that he did not realize
that he was doing so.
Booth, a certified drug recognition expert, believed that the defendant
was being affected by a narcotic analgesic. Booth explained that he believed
the defendant was impaired and was exhibiting characteristics associated with
heroin use. The defendant denied taking any drugs. Booth again told the
defendant that his observations were consistent with different types of drug use
and that he found it hard to believe the defendant had not taken any controlled
drugs that night. He emphasized that it was obvious to him that the defendant
was impaired. The defendant then told Booth that he had taken two Percocets
earlier in the evening.
The defendant was arrested for aggravated driving while intoxicated. See
RSA 265:82-a (2004) (current version at RSA 265-A:3 (Supp. 2006)). After his
arrest, the defendant was given an Administrative License Suspension form,
informed of his rights and a blood sample was taken.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to suppress his statements to Booth
and evidence related to his blood samples. The trial court ruled that when
Booth spoke with the defendant in the hospital, he was subjected to custodial
interrogation and not informed of his Miranda rights. Because the defendant
was subjected to custodial interrogation without the benefit of Miranda, the
trial court found that it was unnecessary to determine whether his statements
were voluntary. Lastly, the trial court found that seizing the defendant’s blood
without a warrant was unjustified under the circumstances. Accordingly, the
2
trial court granted the defendant’s motions to suppress. On appeal, we will
accept the trial court’s factual findings unless they lack support in the record
or are clearly erroneous. State v. Johnston, 150 N.H. 448, 451 (2004). Our
review of the trial court’s legal conclusions, however, is de novo. Id.
I. Motion to Suppress Statements
The State contends that the defendant was not in custody during his
conversation with Booth and that his statements were voluntary. Therefore,
the State argues, the trial court erred.
A. Custody
Miranda warnings are required when a defendant undergoes custodial
interrogation. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The trial court
found, and the State does not dispute, that the defendant was interrogated.
Thus, we need only determine whether the defendant was in custody during
that interrogation. We first consider the arguments under the State
Constitution, using federal cases only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 233 (1983).
Although we will not overturn the factual findings of the trial court
unless they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence, we review the
ultimate determination of custody de novo. State v. Locke, 149 N.H. 1, 6
(2002). Custody entitling a person to Miranda protections during interrogation
requires formal arrest or restraint on freedom of movement to the degree
associated with formal arrest. State v. Carpentier, 132 N.H. 123, 126 (1989).
The restraint on freedom of movement must be imposed by the police to
constitute custody. State v. Tucker, 131 N.H. 526, 530 (1989). In the absence
of formal arrest, the trial court must determine whether a suspect’s freedom of
movement was sufficiently curtailed by considering how a reasonable person in
the suspect’s position would have understood the situation. Carpentier, 132
N.H. at 126-27. In reaching its decision, the trial court should consider,
among other factors, the suspect’s familiarity with the surroundings, the
number of officers present, the degree to which the suspect was physically
restrained and the interview’s duration and character. Id. at 127.
In Tucker, we were confronted with a factual situation much like the one
before us here. In that case, a state trooper investigating the crash of a small
plane entered the hospital room of an injured suspect, the defendant, and
asked him who was piloting the plane. Tucker, 131 N.H. at 528. The
defendant gave a self-incriminating answer, and the trooper then advised him
of his Miranda rights. Id. On appeal, the defendant argued that “the physical
restraint imposed on him by his hospitalization in effect rendered him in
3
custody because he was not free to leave.” Id. at 529. We determined that
other jurisdictions addressing whether such confinement equates to custody
for the purposes of Miranda had reached varying results, dependent largely
upon the particular facts of each case. Id. We then held that “the better
reasoned approach is that taken by the majority of courts, that the restraint
contemplated by Miranda is that interference with the defendant's freedom
which is imposed by the police.” Id. at 530 (emphasis added). This approach
is entirely consistent with Miranda, which set out to eradicate the practice of
police officers imposing custody upon suspects to coerce confessions from
them. Miranda, 384 U.S. at 445-58. Where, as here, any restraint upon the
defendant was imposed solely by medical personnel, and the police did not take
advantage of the defendant in this situation, and the record “is devoid of
evidence to support an objective[ly] reasonable belief by the defendant that,
had he been physically free to leave, the police would not have heeded his
request to so do,” Tucker, 131 N.H. at 531, the defendant was not in custody
for Miranda purposes and the trial court erred by ruling to the contrary.
The trial court found that “the defendant was in custody at the time that
Booth explained to the defendant that he believed that, based upon his
observations, the defendant was impaired.” According to the trial court, it was
relevant that Booth testified that there was a chance that the defendant may
not have felt free to leave. Also, the trial court found it relevant that Booth did
not inform the defendant that he was free to leave and that the defendant
remained on the hospital bed for the duration of the interrogation. We disagree
with the trial court’s custody determination.
Prior to speaking with the defendant, Booth asked for permission to
speak with him. Booth also informed the defendant that he did not have to
speak. There was only one officer present and the entire conversation lasted
only twenty to thirty minutes, during which the defendant was never physically
restrained.
The defendant argues that he was in custody because he was unable to
leave the hospital during the interrogation. Assuming that the defendant could
not leave the hospital, it was because hospital staff had required him to
undergo certain tests, not because of any acts or statements by Booth. As
noted, interference with the defendant’s freedom of movement must be imposed
by the police to create custody. Tucker, 131 N.H. at 530; cf. State v. Lescard,
128 N.H. 495, 496 (1986) (defendant in custody in hospital because he was
handcuffed while being questioned).
The trial court found that the conversation was transformed into a
custodial interrogation when Booth confronted the defendant with his
suspicions. We agree that this is a relevant factor, but note that the
confrontation occurred near the end of an otherwise general and casual
4
conversation. We have previously held that confrontational questioning did not
constitute custody where it occurred briefly during an otherwise casual
conversation. See Carpentier, 132 N.H. at 127.
Finally, the defendant contends that Booth’s subjective belief that the
defendant was in custody is relevant to the custody determination. Booth’s
subjective beliefs, however, are not determinative of the issue. State v. Riley,
126 N.H. 257, 263 (1985). Custody is an objective test focused upon how a
reasonable person in the suspect’s position would have understood the
situation. State v. Baroudi, 137 N.H. 62, 65 (1993). Here, Booth asked the
defendant’s permission to speak to him and informed the defendant that he did
not have to speak. Additionally, the record demonstrates that to the extent
there was any physical restraint on the defendant’s movement, it was as a
result of the actions of hospital staff and not because of any acts or statements
by police. Finally, the conversation between Booth and the defendant was
mostly general and casual. After considering the totality of the circumstances,
accepting the trial court’s findings of fact, we conclude that the defendant was
not in custody during his conversation with Booth. See Locke, 149 N.H. at 6
(ultimate determination of custody reviewed de novo). Because the defendant
was not in custody during his conversation with Booth, the trial court erred in
granting the defendant’s motion to suppress on that ground.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution with regard to the defendant’s rights under
Miranda. State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 385 (2003). Accordingly we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
B. Voluntariness
Because of its ruling on the custody issue, the trial court specifically
declined to rule on the issue of whether the defendant’s statements to the
police were voluntary. Although the trial court has indicated that it was
inclined to find a lack of voluntariness, we find little support for this in the
record. A determination of voluntariness is initially a question of fact for the
trial court, whose decision will not be overturned unless it is contrary to the
manifest weight of the evidence. State v. Fleetwood, 149 N.H. 396, 402 (2003).
Here, because the trial court did not rule on the issue, and because resolving
the issue may require additional factual findings, we decline to address it. See
N. Country Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 619 (2004).
5
II. Motion to Suppress Results of Blood Test
The State next contends that the trial court erred in suppressing the
evidence of the defendant’s blood test results. As noted above, when reviewing
a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we defer to the trial court’s
factual findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous,
and we review the trial court’s legal conclusions de novo. Johnston, 150 N.H.
at 451. We confine our analysis to the State Constitution because neither
party makes a federal constitutional claim. State v. Stern, 150 N.H. 705, 708
(2004). We rely upon federal cases only to aid in our analysis. Id.
Withdrawing blood without a warrant and without consent is a search
and seizure under the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution
and under Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution. Schmerber v.
California, 384 U.S. 757, 768 (1966); Stern, 150 N.H. at 708-09. Warrantless
searches are prohibited unless they fall within the narrow confines of a
judicially crafted exception. See Stern, 150 N.H. at 708. The State bears the
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a search falls within
one of these exceptions. Id. Here, the State contends that the warrantless
search was justified by exigent circumstances.
Exigent circumstances “refer to those situations in which law
enforcement agents will be unable or unlikely to effectuate an arrest, search, or
seizure, for which probable cause exists, unless they act swiftly and, without
seeking prior judicial authorization.” State v. Graca, 142 N.H. 670, 673 (1998)
(quotation omitted). Whether exigent circumstances exist is judged by the
totality of the circumstances and is largely a question of fact for the trial court,
which we will not disturb unless clearly erroneous. Stern, 150 N.H. at 709.
The exigent circumstances exception is satisfied when: (1) the police
have probable cause; and (2) the delay caused by obtaining a search warrant
would create a substantial threat of imminent danger to life or public safety or
likelihood that evidence will be destroyed. Stern, 150 N.H. at 708-09. The trial
court found, and the parties do not dispute, that probable cause existed for
seizing the defendant’s blood. Thus, we only address whether the delay caused
by obtaining a search warrant would create a likelihood that the evidence
would have been destroyed.
We address first the defendant’s contention that the issue has not been
preserved. The defendant argues that the State is barred from arguing exigent
circumstances because the State failed to present evidence of exigent
circumstances during the hearing. Specifically, the defendant argues that the
State failed to present evidence that drugs metabolize such that a delay in
seizing the defendant’s blood would likely have resulted in the destruction of
evidence. The metabolization of drugs, however, was addressed in the trial
6
court’s order and in the State’s motion for reconsideration. Therefore, because
the evidentiary foundation for the issue is in the record and the trial court had
an opportunity to correct any error, the matter has been preserved for appeal.
State v. Tselios, 134 N.H. 405, 407 (1991).
The trial court found that the State failed to prove exigent circumstances
because it did not present evidence that the levels of the drug in the
defendant’s blood would dissipate so rapidly that Booth could not have
obtained a warrant. Also, the trial court found it relevant that Booth did not
attempt to locate a magistrate given the late hour.
As to the first issue, we have previously noted that alcohol is metabolized
in the body and any significant delay in taking a breathalyzer test may deprive
the State of an accurate indication of the driver’s condition and could result in
the loss of evidence. State v. Schneider, 124 N.H. 242, 245 (1983). We see no
reason to reach a different conclusion with regard to controlled drugs. “Making
a distinction between the ingestion of alcohol and that of drugs is a needless
refinement and distinction.” People v. Ritchie, 181 Cal. Rptr. 773, 775 (Ct.
App. 1982). Although some drugs may be detectable for long enough that
police can obtain a warrant, police officers cannot know with certainty which
drugs are affecting suspects, and even if a suspect discloses that he took a
particular drug, he may be lying. See, e.g., United States v. Edmo, 140 F.3d
1289, 1291 (9th Cir. 1998) (defendant told officers he consumed
methamphetamine and cocaine but urine test revealed only the presence of
marijuana).
A clear majority of jurisdictions that have addressed the issue make no
distinction between the metabolization of alcohol and controlled drugs.
Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives’ Assn., 489 U.S. 602, 623 (1989); Edmo,
140 F.3d at 1292; State v. Strong, 493 N.W.2d 834, 837 (Iowa 1992); Holloman
v. State, 820 So. 2d 52, 55 (Miss. Ct. App. 2002); State v. Hanson, 588 N.W.2d
885, 893 (S.D. 1999); Ritchie, 181 Cal. Rptr. at 775. Today, we join that
majority.
As for the trial court’s second concern, it noted that although obtaining a
search warrant at night creates delay, Booth should have attempted to locate a
magistrate. When an officer is trying to obtain a blood sample at night and the
evidence is time sensitive, however, locating a magistrate risks destruction of
the evidence. State v. Wong, 125 N.H. 610, 630 (1984). Moreover, it is
common knowledge that a warrant is considerably more difficult to obtain at
night than during working hours. Id. Here, this difficulty was even more
pronounced because it was late at night on a holiday weekend.
7
After reviewing the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that the
trial court’s finding of no exigent circumstances was unsupported by the
evidence.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8