THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-695
PAUL G. BLOUIN & a.
v.
KURT SANBORN & a.
Argued: May 9, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 18, 2007
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John F. Bisson and John G.
Cronin on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the plaintiffs.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris and Cathryn E. Vaughn on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the
defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The defendants, Kurt Sanborn and Manchester Downtown
Visions, LLC (MDV), appeal the jury verdict against them for breach of contract
and negligent misrepresentation. They challenge the Superior Court’s
(Mangones, J.) denial of their motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict
(JNOV) and remittitur. The plaintiffs, Paul G. Blouin and South Bedford Street
Holdings, LLC (collectively, Blouin), cross-appeal the trial court’s denial of
attorney’s fees. We affirm.
The following appears in the record: Blouin negotiated a “land swap” as
part of a larger development plan to bring a minor league baseball park to the
City of Manchester (City). It was agreed that the City would convey a certain
parcel of land to Blouin and that Blouin would convey a different parcel of land
to Roedel Partners of Manchester, LLC. It was also agreed that the defendants
would make certain improvements to Blouin’s real estate. When the City
conveyed its parcel to Blouin, however, the improvements had not been made.
Blouin sued the defendants under breach of contract and negligent
misrepresentation theories. After trial, the jury found that both defendants
breached their contract with Blouin, and that Sanborn made negligent
misrepresentations to Blouin while he was acting within his scope of authority
as an employee of MDV. Damages were assessed at $155,000. The defendants
moved for JNOV and remittitur; Blouin moved for attorney’s fees. The motions
were denied, and this appeal and cross-appeal followed.
The defendants first argue that Sanborn was entitled to JNOV on the
negligent misrepresentation claim because at all times relevant to the litigation
he was acting as a disclosed agent of MDV. We disagree.
A party is entitled to JNOV only when the sole reasonable inference that
may be drawn from the evidence, which must be viewed in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party, is so overwhelmingly in favor of the moving
party that no contrary verdict could stand. Boynton v. Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592,
602 (2006). In deciding whether to grant the motion, the trial court cannot
weigh the evidence or inquire into the credibility of witnesses. Id. If the
evidence adduced at trial is conflicting, or if several reasonable inferences may
be drawn, the court must deny the motion. Id. Our standard of review of a
trial court’s denial of a motion for JNOV is extremely narrow. Id. We will not
overturn the trial court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id.
“It is well settled that an agent may be liable for his own torts to a third
person who is injured.” Russell v. Downing, 114 N.H. 837, 839 (1974).
“Unless an applicable statute provides otherwise, an actor remains subject to
liability although the actor acts as an agent or an employee, with actual or
apparent authority, or within the scope of employment.” Restatement (Third) of
Agency § 7.01 (2006). In general, agency law “does not insulate an agent from
liability for his or her torts [ ] because an agent’s tort liability is not based upon
the contractual relationship between the principal and the agent, but upon the
common-law obligation that every person must so act . . . as not to injure
another.” 3 Am. Jur. 2d Agency § 298 (2002). Thus, Sanborn’s status as a
disclosed agent did not insulate him from liability on the negligent
misrepresentation claim. This was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
2
The defendants next assert that they were entitled to JNOV because the
contracts at issue failed to satisfy the statute of frauds, and, therefore, could
not form the basis of either the negligent misrepresentation or breach of
contract claims. The trial court denied the motion for JNOV, ruling that “the
totality of the parties’ various items of documentation and memorialization,
including e-mails, contracts, notes, applications and engineering plans”
satisfied the statute of frauds. Alternatively, the court ruled that the
transaction was divisible and that while the actual sale of real estate was
required to, and did satisfy the statute of frauds, the defendants’ promises to
make site improvements did not come within the statute of frauds.
We are unable to review the defendants’ arguments substantively
because they have failed to provide a record on appeal sufficient for our review.
As the appealing parties, the defendants had the burden of providing this court
with a record sufficient to decide their issues on appeal. See Rix v.
Kinderworks Corp., 136 N.H. 548, 553 (1992); see also Sup. Ct. R. 13. They
have failed, however, to provide as part of the record on appeal the “e-mails,
contracts, notes, applications and engineering plans” upon which the trial
court relied. Absent these materials, we must assume that the evidence
supported the trial court’s decision. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004). We review the trial court’s ruling on the statute of
frauds issue for legal errors only. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 397
(1997). As the defendants have failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s
ruling on this issue was erroneous as a matter of law, we uphold it.
Next, the defendants contend that the trial court erred in failing to grant
remittitur. New Hampshire law does not require that damages be calculated
with mathematical certainty, and the method used to compute them need not
be more than an approximation. Boynton, 154 N.H. at 606. Whether
remittitur should be granted is within the trial court’s sound discretion. Id.
Direct review of a damages award is the responsibility of the trial judge, who
may disturb a verdict as excessive (or inadequate) if its amount is conclusively
against the weight of the evidence. Id. The court may also order remittitur if
the verdict is “manifestly exorbitant.” Id. (quotation omitted). The amount of a
verdict is conclusively against the weight of the evidence only if no reasonable
jury could have reached it. Id.
Once the trial court has reviewed the amount of the verdict under this
standard, we will not disturb its finding unless no reasonable person could
have made it. Id. at 606-07. Our task upon review is not to attempt to
ascertain the one and only correct verdict. Id. at 607. Absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion, we will not reverse the trial court’s
decision. Id. The party seeking to modify the verdict bears a heavy burden.
Id.
3
The defendants’ own engineer testified that the site work at issue would
have cost $150,000. Another estimate prepared by a witness for Blouin put
the cost at $124,990. The witness testified that, as a result of changes in
asphalt and fuel prices, his estimate was no longer valid and should be
increased by ten percent. An award of $155,000 was, therefore, not
unreasonable.
On cross-appeal, Blouin argues that the trial court erred by failing to
award attorney’s fees because he was forced to seek judicial assistance to
secure a clearly defined right. We will not overturn the trial court’s decision
concerning attorney’s fees absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Grenier v. Barclay Square Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc., 150 N.H. 111,
115 (2003). In evaluating the trial court’s ruling on this issue, we must first
keep in mind the tremendous deference given to a trial court’s decision on
attorney’s fees. Daigle v. City of Portsmouth, 137 N.H. 572, 574 (1993). A
prevailing party may be awarded attorney’s fees when that recovery is
authorized by statute, an agreement between the parties, or an established
judicial exception to the general rule that precludes recovery of such fees.
Grenier, 150 N.H. at 117. Although parties generally are responsible for their
own attorney’s fees, we have recognized an exception where an individual is
forced to seek judicial assistance to secure a clearly defined and established
right if bad faith can be established. Id.
After reviewing the record, we find that the trial court’s exercise of
discretion in denying Blouin attorney’s fees is sustainable. As the trial court
noted, “There were numerous factual and legal issues that were in contest
concerning the parties’ undertakings” including “who may have made what
representations to whom; who may have agreed to what and in what form; and
whether or not liability attached to these matters.” We agree. The rights in
this case were far from “clearly defined.”
Blouin also argues that it would be the “proper approach” for the jury to
consider the issue of attorney’s fees. No authority is offered for this
proposition, and the determination of whether to award attorney’s fees is the
“historical province of the trial judge.” Maguire v. Merrimack Mut. Ins. Co.,
133 N.H. 51, 56 (1990). We find no error in the trial court’s adjudication of
attorney’s fees.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4