THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-558
J.G.M.C.J. CORP.
v.
C.L.A.S.S., INC. & a.
Argued: March 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 15, 2007
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John F. Bisson and John C.
Cronin on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the plaintiff.
The McCormack Firm, LLC, of Boston, Massachusetts (Joseph H.
Aronson on the brief and orally), for defendants C.L.A.S.S., Inc. and R. Bruce
Westaway, Barry Faye, Steve Larochelle, Bill Dahl, Ray G. Decker, Jr. and
Dennis DiZoglio, as members of the board of directors of C.L.A.S.S., Inc.
Jantzen & Associates, P.C., of Boston, Massachusetts (Christopher M.
Jantzen on the brief and orally), and Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord
(Timothy A. Gudas on the brief) for defendants R. Bruce Westaway, Barry Faye,
Steve Larochelle, Bill Dahl, Ray G. Decker, Jr. and Dennis DiZoglio, as
members of the board of directors of Goodwill Industries of Merrimack Valley,
Inc.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, J.G.M.C.J. Corp. (JGMCJ), appeals orders of
the Trial Court (Abramson, J.) granting the motions for summary judgment of
the defendants, C.L.A.S.S., Inc. (CLASS), the members of its board of directors,
and the members of the board of directors of Goodwill Industries of Merrimack
Valley, Inc. (Goodwill). We affirm.
The record supports the following: Goodwill is a charitable corporation
headquartered in Lowell, Massachusetts, which operates retail stores in
northern Massachusetts and southern New Hampshire. In 2001, Goodwill
sought to expand its retail operations. In October 2001, Ted Siegel, Goodwill’s
director of retail operations, presented his strategy to increase the number of
stores to the Goodwill board of directors. Although the board expressed
reservations about the strategy because Goodwill was experiencing financial
troubles, it permitted Siegel to pursue his strategy. Siegel, therefore, hired a
real estate broker to locate a property in Manchester for a new retail store.
In December 2001, Goodwill’s broker identified a property in the Cohas
Brook Shopping Center in Manchester, owned by JGMCJ. John B. Sullivan,
Jr. is the president, secretary, treasurer and sole shareholder of JGMCJ. In
the spring of 2002, Siegel began lease negotiations with Sullivan.
Meanwhile, Goodwill approached CLASS about the possibility of merging
their operations to improve Goodwill’s worsening financial position. CLASS is a
non-profit organization, headquartered in Lawrence, Massachusetts, which
provides vocational and other services to developmentally disabled individuals.
In May or June 2002, Stephen Celi, CLASS’ chief financial officer, met
with Siegel on numerous occasions to discuss Goodwill’s finances and the
terms of the proposed merger. On June 10, 2002, Siegel presented Goodwill’s
retail strategy to the CLASS board, which voted to proceed cautiously with the
merger. On June 14, 2002, Goodwill and CLASS executed a non-binding
Memorandum of Understanding summarizing the proposed terms of the
merger. The Memorandum states that it is not intended to be a binding
agreement between CLASS and Goodwill, but only outlines the terms of a
potential merger.
On June 26, 2002, the boards of Goodwill and CLASS, in separate
elections, elected the same individuals as directors of each board. Carol Amik,
Goodwill’s president, was dismissed and certain positions at the companies
were realigned. Celi became the chief financial officer of both companies, and
Robert Harris, CLASS’ president, became Goodwill’s chief executive officer.
Siegel apparently left Goodwill and took a position in the retail division at
CLASS. Additionally, on June 26, 2002, the CLASS board decided to execute
Siegel’s retail strategy, approved a motion for CLASS to co-sign store leases,
2
and authorized the completion of the merger with a proposed closing date of
August 16, 2002.
In July 2002, Goodwill and CLASS entered into a contract (“Service
Agreement”) under which Goodwill paid CLASS $32,395.00 per month to
administer Goodwill’s accounts. Pursuant to the Service Agreement, CLASS,
among other things, paid Goodwill’s expenses out of Goodwill’s bank account
and handled Goodwill’s accounts receivable.
In July or August 2002, Siegel and Celi informed Sullivan that, at his
request, they would provide consolidated financial statements for Goodwill and
CLASS. Also, at some point during the negotiations, Siegel and Harris
informed Sullivan that Goodwill and CLASS had merged.
On August 15, 2002, JGMCJ and Goodwill executed a 10-year lease for
the Cohas Brook Shopping Center property. The lease was signed by Sullivan
as president of JGMCJ and Harris as chief executive officer of Goodwill. The
lease does not contain a third-party guaranty provision, although Sullivan had
included such provisions in prior leases with other parties. At the time the
lease was signed, Sullivan had not received the consolidated financial
statements of Goodwill and CLASS, but testified that he believed CLASS was
bound by Harris’ signature on the lease. Prior to signing the lease, Sullivan
had received a Dunn & Bradstreet report for Goodwill, dated July 23, 2002,
that did not reflect a merger between Goodwill and any other company.
In September or October 2002, Goodwill and CLASS submitted merger
documents to the Secretary of State in Massachusetts and, in November 2002,
the documents were approved. Thereafter, Goodwill and CLASS prepared to
submit Articles of Merger. Also in November, Sullivan received the
consolidated financial information he had requested. In December 2002,
before the Articles of Merger had been submitted, CLASS developed
reservations about the merger because the Manchester store was not
generating the level of income Goodwill and CLASS had anticipated. Therefore,
the CLASS board voted to place the Articles of Merger in escrow while the
financial impact of the merger was reevaluated. Also around this time, Siegel
was dismissed.
In March 2003, merger discussions were terminated. The boards of the
two companies each held new elections and elected different members. Harris
resigned as chief executive officer of Goodwill but retained his position as
president of CLASS. On August 14, 2003, Goodwill filed for bankruptcy, listing
CLASS as a creditor.
Prior to the bankruptcy filing, JGMCJ began this action against Goodwill,
CLASS, and their boards of directors, for breach of the August 2002 lease
agreement. Although JGMCJ did not include its original writ of summons in
3
the record, the trial court’s orders state that JGMCJ brought a claim against
Goodwill for breach of contract, and claims against its board for negligent
misrepresentation and breach of fiduciary duty. Also, JGMCJ brought claims
against CLASS and its board for breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duties
and negligent concealment, breach of duties created by a de facto merger, and
negligent misrepresentation. JGMCJ’s claim against Goodwill was severed
from the remaining claims due to Goodwill’s bankruptcy. On the remaining
claims, CLASS, its board, and Goodwill’s board, moved for summary judgment,
which the trial court granted. JGMCJ moved for reconsideration, which was
denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, JGMCJ contends that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment when a fact finder could conclude that CLASS is liable
under Goodwill’s lease as Goodwill’s successor in a de facto merger. JGMCJ
also argues that the court erred in ruling that despite misrepresentations about
the merger by agents of CLASS: (1) it could not rely upon those
representations; (2) it had a duty to investigate the truth of the representations;
and (3) the lease should not be enforced against CLASS, regardless of the
Statute of Frauds.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. White v. Asplundh Tree
Expert Co., 151 N.H. 544, 547 (2004). If our review of the evidence does not
reveal a genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
JGMCJ first argues that the facts, when viewed in the light most
favorable to it, do not support the trial court’s determination that CLASS and
Goodwill did not complete a de facto merger. It contends that a reasonable fact
finder could find that Goodwill and CLASS completed a de facto merger,
thereby imposing successor liability upon CLASS.
Because the parties argue that this matter is governed by New
Hampshire law, we assume, without deciding, that it is. To complete a
statutory merger in New Hampshire, the merging entities must meet the
requirements of RSA 293-A:11.06 (a) (1999). “In contrast, a de facto merger
occurs when a company is completely absorbed into another through a sale of
assets; continues its operations by maintaining the same management,
personnel, assets, location and stockholders; but leaves its creditors without a
remedy for its outstanding debt.” Bielagus v. EMRE of N.H., 149 N.H. 635, 641
(2003). In such an instance, “successor liability will be imposed if the parties
have achieved virtually all of the results of a merger without following the
statutory requirements for merger of the corporations.” Id. at 640-41
(quotation omitted).
4
In Bielagus, we adopted a four-factor analysis to determine whether an
asset sale results in a de facto merger. Id. at 641. The factors are whether:
(1) There is a continuation of the enterprise of the seller
corporation, so that there is continuity of management,
personnel, physical location, assets, and general business
operations.
(2) There is a continuity of shareholders which results from the
purchasing corporation paying for the acquired assets with
shares of its own stock, this stock ultimately coming to be held
by the shareholders of the seller corporation so that they
become a constituent part of the purchasing corporation.
(3) The seller corporation ceases its ordinary business
operations, liquidates, and dissolves as soon as legally and
practically possible.
(4) The purchasing corporation assumes those obligations of
the seller ordinarily necessary for the uninterrupted
continuation of normal business operations of the seller
corporation.
Id. at 642. Additionally, “The fact-finder may look to other factors indicative of
commonality or distinctiveness with the corporations.” Id. at 641. “The
bottom-line question is whether each entity has run its own race, or whether
there has been a relay-style passing of the baton from one to the other.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
There is some question about the applicability of Bielagus to this case
because there was, as noted by the trial court, no sale or transfer of assets
between Goodwill and CLASS. This fact alone may defeat application of
Bielagus. Nonetheless, because the parties’ arguments rely upon Bielagus, we
assume for purposes of this opinion that Bielagus applies. Applying the
Bielagus analysis, we conclude that JGMCJ has not presented evidence
sufficient to justify overturning the trial court’s grant of summary judgment.
As noted, the first factor in the Bielagus analysis is whether there is a
continuation of the enterprise of the seller corporation, Goodwill, by the buyer
corporation, CLASS, so that there is continuity of management, personnel,
physical location, assets, and general business operations. Id. at 642. JGMCJ
contends that in addition to the companies’ “merged” boards, the two entities
operated out of the same location, all employees involved in the lease
negotiations became employees of CLASS, and, after the June 2002 board
meetings of Goodwill and CLASS, both companies were aware that Goodwill
5
was incapable of paying its bills and that it survived only because CLASS
infused it with cash. These facts, according to JGMCJ, demonstrate that there
was a continuity of management and operations sufficient to satisfy the first
Bielagus factor.
As to the companies’ boards, each entity held its own election for board
members and selected the same individuals. Therefore, the boards did not
“merge” but merely had common members. Having common members does not
necessarily demonstrate a continuity of management. Moreover, in looking at
the results of the transaction, once merger negotiations failed, the boards of
the companies held new elections in March 2003 and elected different
members. Thus, there was no continuity of board membership.
Next, although JGMCJ argues that the two companies operated from the
same physical location, it presented no evidence that they actually did so. In
opposing summary judgment, mere denials or vague and general allegations of
expected proof are not enough. See Blagbrough v. Town of Wilton, 145 N.H.
118, 121 (2000). The trial court concluded that each company maintained a
separate address in Massachusetts at all relevant times. Because JGMCJ
presented nothing other than general allegations that CLASS and Goodwill
operated from the same location, we cannot say that the trial court erred in
determining that they did not have a common physical location.
Next, JGMCJ contends that apart from the board members, all of the
employees involved in the merger negotiations became employees of CLASS.
The evidence demonstrates that few people altered their employment in relation
to this attempted merger. Celi and Harris, who were already executives of
CLASS, became executives of Goodwill, one Goodwill executive was dismissed,
and Siegel, a Goodwill employee, accepted a new position with CLASS.
Otherwise, JGMCJ does not allege that any other person altered employment in
response to this attempted merger. Thus, there was limited overlap in
management of the companies and only one non-management employee of
Goodwill became a CLASS employee. Furthermore, by March 2003, Harris had
returned exclusively to CLASS and Siegel had been released. Therefore,
looking at the results of this transaction, there was virtually no continuity of
management and personnel.
Next, JGMCJ argues that as of June 2002, Goodwill and CLASS knew
that Goodwill was in financial difficulty and that it could not meet its current
financial obligations, much less take on a new lease, without an infusion of
funds from CLASS. According to JGMCJ, this poor financial condition meant
that CLASS was forced to pay Goodwill’s bills. While Goodwill was clearly
financially unstable as of June 2002, the boards’ knowledge of this instability
does not mean that CLASS was forced to fund Goodwill’s financial existence.
Moreover, JGMCJ’s assertion that CLASS paid Goodwill’s bills ignores the
Service Agreement between Goodwill and CLASS that took effect in July 2002
6
and that required CLASS to manage Goodwill’s accounts and pay Goodwill’s
bills out of Goodwill’s accounts. JGMCJ offers no evidence that CLASS
manipulated Goodwill’s money outside the terms of the Service Agreement.
Also, the Service Agreement permitted CLASS to make loans to Goodwill so
long as they were documented on a separate general ledger and were due upon
demand. In fact, CLASS is listed as one of Goodwill’s creditors in bankruptcy,
claiming approximately $900,000 in unpaid loans. Thus, while some money
may have been transferred from CLASS to Goodwill, the evidence demonstrates
that any such transfers were made pursuant to the terms of the Service
Agreement.
JGMCJ contends that as of February 2003, the amount of the debt due
CLASS was approximately double what should have been due under the
Service Agreement and that this discrepancy creates a dispute of material fact
about the financial dealings of Goodwill and CLASS. JGMCJ, however,
presents no evidence of how much money Goodwill supposedly owed CLASS in
February 2003, nor does JGMCJ indicate whether this alleged discrepancy
accounts for loans CLASS may have made to Goodwill. It asserts, without
reference to any documents or other evidence, that there are different amounts
due and that the difference creates an issue of material fact. Such vague and
general allegations are insufficient to oppose summary judgment. See
Blagbrough, 145 N.H. at 121.
Finally, JGMCJ contends that Goodwill refinanced its building in Lowell
in order to extract equity that it transferred to CLASS, thus showing a transfer
of assets. CLASS contends that this allegation was not raised before the trial
court and is therefore waived, but, if it is not waived, the evidence shows that
any funds extracted from the Lowell property were used to repay the loans it
made to Goodwill. JGMCJ does not point to, and our review of the record does
not reveal, any place where this allegation was raised with the trial court, nor
that the trial court ever addressed the issue. Thus, because the record before
us reveals no indication that this argument was raised before the trial court
and the trial court’s order makes no finding of fact or ruling of law on the
issue, we decline to address the argument. Rayeski v. Gunstock Area, 146
N.H. 495, 497 (2001).
For the above reasons, we conclude that the trial court correctly found
that JGMCJ did not show a continuity of Goodwill’s operations by CLASS
sufficient to meet the first part of the Bielagus analysis.
The second part of the Bielagus test focuses upon the continuity of
shareholders from the prior enterprise to the current one. Bielagus, 149 N.H.
at 642. As noted by the trial court, neither CLASS nor Goodwill has shares or
shareholders. Thus, this factor is irrelevant.
7
The next factor is whether the seller company ceases its ordinary
business operations, liquidates, and dissolves as soon as legally and practically
possible. Id. Here, neither company ever ceased its business operations,
liquidated or dissolved. In fact, after merger negotiations ceased, CLASS
rebounded as a financially independent entity and Goodwill maintained its own
existence, and filed for bankruptcy as an independent entity. Thus, this factor
supports the conclusion that there was no passing of the baton from one entity
to the other, but that each entity ran its own race. Id. at 641.
The final factor is whether the purchasing company assumes the
obligations of the seller necessary to continue the seller’s normal business
operations. Id. at 642. CLASS never assumed any of Goodwill’s obligations.
While CLASS began servicing Goodwill’s accounts, it did so pursuant to a
contract between them and did not assume any of Goodwill’s obligations as its
own. Thus, this factor also supports the conclusion that there was no merger.
Lastly, under Bielagus the fact finder may look to other factors indicative
of commonality or distinctiveness between the corporations. Id. at 641.
JGMCJ contends that because the officers and employees of CLASS and
Goodwill thought that the companies had merged, and because Goodwill
required money from CLASS to continue its operations, there are elements of
commonality between them. We have already concluded that the evidence
demonstrates that any funds transferred between Goodwill and CLASS were
transferred under the terms of the Service Agreement. Further, while the
subjective beliefs of some of the officers and directors may, arguably,
demonstrate commonality, all other evidence relating to this transaction shows
that the companies maintained distinct corporate identities.
The Memorandum of Understanding states that it is only a preliminary
document meant to summarize the terms of a prospective merger and is not to
be read as binding upon Goodwill and CLASS. The only financial interactions
between them were pursuant to the Service Agreement and the documented
loans the Service Agreement authorized. Moreover, the Service Agreement
specifically states that the duties assumed by CLASS pursuant to its terms are
not to be construed as a commitment to merge. Goodwill and CLASS did not
commingle funds. No assets changed hands, neither company ceased
operations or liquidated, and CLASS did not assume Goodwill’s business
obligations. We agree with the trial court that until Goodwill and CLASS
submitted articles of merger, which they did not do, they were two separate
companies operating under a proposal to merge. For these reasons, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in determining, as a matter of law, that
Goodwill and CLASS did not complete a de facto merger.
Because the remaining issues raised by JGMCJ all relate to alleged
misrepresentations by agents and officers of CLASS, we address them together.
We note first that JGMCJ contends that in light of the trial court’s finding that
8
agents of CLASS may have knowingly misrepresented the status of the merger,
the lease ought to be enforced against CLASS. JGMCJ did not, however, raise
any claims of fraud or intentional misrepresentation in the trial court. Instead,
JGMCJ’s claims alleged negligent misrepresentations only. Therefore, we
address JGMCJ’s claims as they were presented to the trial court; i.e., as
claims based upon negligent misrepresentations, not knowing
misrepresentations as JGMCJ contends on appeal.
JGMCJ argues that because the trial court determined that prior to
signing the lease Harris and Siegel may have misrepresented to Sullivan that
the companies had merged, the lease ought to be enforced against CLASS
without regard to the Statute of Frauds. The Statute of Frauds provides: “No
action shall be maintained upon a contract for the sale of land unless the
agreement upon which it is brought, or some memorandum thereof, is in
writing and signed by the party to be charged, or by some person authorized by
him in writing.” RSA 506:1 (1997). Moreover, no action may be brought to
charge any person upon a special promise to answer for the debt, default or
miscarriage of another, unless the promise is in writing and signed by the
person to be charged. RSA 506:2 (1997). An agreement to lease land for a
term of years is a contract to convey an interest in land within the Statute of
Frauds. Byblos Corp. v. Salem Farm Realty Trust, 141 N.H. 726, 729 (1997).
Here, the lease states that it is a contract between JGMCJ and Goodwill
and is signed by Sullivan on behalf of JGMCJ and Harris on behalf of Goodwill.
The lease does not mention CLASS, its officers or its agents. Nor does it
contain a third-party guaranty provision or state that any entity other than
Goodwill is responsible under the lease. Thus, the Statute of Frauds bars
JGMCJ from enforcing the lease against CLASS.
As noted, however, JGMCJ contends that the lease still ought to be
enforced against CLASS because: (1) the doctrine of equitable estoppel applies;
and (2) CLASS’ agents negligently misrepresented the status of the merger to
induce Sullivan to sign the lease.
Equitable estoppel serves to forbid one to speak against his own act,
representations or commitments communicated to another who reasonably
relies upon them to his injury. Cohoon v. IDM Software, 153 N.H. 1, 9 (2005).
The party asserting estoppel must prove: (1) a knowingly false representation
or concealment of material facts; (2) a recipient who was intentionally, or
through culpable neglect, induced to rely upon the false representation or
concealment, ignorant of the truth; and (3) a resultant injury. Id. Reliance is
unreasonable when the party bringing the estoppel claim, at the time of his or
her reliance or at the time of the representation or concealment, knew or
should have known that the conduct or representation was either improper,
materially incorrect or misleading. The Cadle Co. v. Bourgeois, 149 N.H. 410,
418 (2003). Incorporated into the concept of reasonable reliance is the
9
requirement that the moving party exercise due diligence to learn the truth of a
matter relied upon. Id.
The trial court determined that equitable estoppel did not apply because
JGMCJ did not exercise due diligence, and, therefore, could not demonstrate
reasonable reliance. We agree. Sullivan, the president and sole shareholder of
JGMCJ, despite his extensive business experience, took no steps to verify
whether the merger between CLASS and Goodwill occurred. He had requested
combined financial statements of the two companies, but executed the lease
before receiving or reviewing them. He had requested and reviewed a Dunn &
Bradstreet report on Goodwill, generated near the time the lease was executed,
that did not mention that Goodwill had merged. In spite of this clear indication
that Goodwill had not merged, Sullivan did not verify the status of the merger
with the Massachusetts Secretary of State or undertake any other steps to
discover whether the merger had been consummated. Sullivan relied solely
upon the unverified statements of Siegel and Harris that the merger had
occurred. In such a case, with a businessman as sophisticated as Sullivan, we
cannot say that the trial court erred in determining, as a matter of law, that
JGMCJ did not exercise due diligence and that its reliance was therefore not
reasonable. Because JGMCJ’s reliance was not reasonable, the doctrine of
equitable estoppel does not bar the application of the Statute of Frauds.
JGMCJ argues that it is improper to impose upon it a duty to investigate
the veracity of the representations in order to justify its reliance. As stated
above, however, reliance is unreasonable when the party asserting the estoppel
claim, knew or should have known that the conduct or representation was
either improper, materially incorrect or misleading, or when the party did not
exercise due diligence to support its claim of reasonable reliance. Bourgeois,
149 N.H. at 418. Because reasonable reliance requires the relying party to
undertake due diligence to verify the truth of the matter relied upon, we find no
error in the trial court’s ruling that JGMCJ had a duty to investigate the truth
of the statements made by the representatives of CLASS.
Secondly, JGMCJ contends that Harris and Siegel represented to
Sullivan that the merger had occurred, and in so doing, induced Sullivan to
sign the lease on behalf of JGMCJ. Relying upon Maxwell Ice Co. v. Company,
80 N.H. 236 (1921), JGMCJ contends that because Harris and Siegel
volunteered this information with the intent that JGMCJ and Sullivan rely and
act upon it, they ought to have exercised reasonable care to verify the truth of
that information. Because they did not do so, JGMCJ argues that it should be
permitted to pursue its negligent misrepresentation claims without regard to
the Statute of Frauds.
In Maxwell Ice, we stated: “It is the duty of one who volunteers
information to another not having equal knowledge, with the intention that he
will act upon it, to exercise reasonable care to verify the truth of his statements
10
before making them.” Id. at 238. Further, “a person who acts upon a false
representation made for the purpose of inducing him to change his position
may recover the damages he sustains in an action of negligence when the
maker of the statement ought to have known it to be false.” Id. at 238-39; see
also Van Der Stok v. Van Voorhees, 151 N.H. 679, 681-82 (2005).
In Daley v. Blood, 121 N.H. 256 (1981), however, we determined that the
Statute of Frauds bars an action based upon a defendant’s negligent
misrepresentation of its intention to sell or lease real estate when the
agreement to sell or lease is not reduced to writing. Under Daley, “an action
based upon the intentional tort of deceit could be maintained even though the
promise that was alleged to have been breached was itself unenforceable due to
the Statute of Frauds.” Id. at 257. The reason for this holding is that to bar
such an action would not further the policy of the statute but on the contrary
would foster an injustice. Id. The same policy considerations do not apply,
however, when the action brought is based upon an unintentional, rather than
intentional, act. Id. “Certainly, to bar recovery in contract but to allow it
generally in negligence would subvert the policy of the Statute of Frauds and
open the door to the evils the statute is designed to avoid.” Id. “If we were to
allow [a] negligence action to be maintained in the face of the Statute of
Frauds, the practical effect would be to render that statute almost
meaningless.” Id. at 257-58.
Here, as we have noted, JGMCJ has brought only claims of negligent
misrepresentations. Further, JGMCJ did not have a written contract with
CLASS for the lease of land. JGMCJ’s lease was with Goodwill and did not
mention CLASS, and CLASS is not liable on the lease as the successor to
Goodwill. Therefore, despite JGMCJ’s reliance upon the general principles of
recovery for negligent misrepresentations in Maxwell Ice, Daley bars its
negligent misrepresentation claims in the face of the Statute of Frauds.
JGMCJ contends that the policy considerations in Daley do not apply here, and
thus Daley does not bar its negligent misrepresentation claims. We, however,
do not see any meaningful distinction between Daley and this case. Therefore,
we uphold the trial court’s grant of summary judgment on JGMCJ’s negligent
misrepresentation claims against CLASS and its board.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11