THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-049
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JEFFREY PEPIN
Argued: February 7, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 16, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Elizabeth A. Dunn, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Jeffrey Pepin, appeals his conviction by a
jury in Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) for first degree assault, second degree
assault and criminal restraint. See RSA 631:1, :2 (2007); RSA 633:2 (2007).
We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts: The defendant and the
victim were married in 1988, and have three daughters, the youngest of whom
was born in March 2004. The instant criminal charges arose from events on
October 15, 2004, the couple’s sixteenth wedding anniversary. The victim was
upset because she thought that the defendant had forgotten their anniversary.
After the family ate dinner together, the defendant went to his home office to
work. After a time, the victim went to the defendant’s office to find out when he
would be done and to tell him that she wanted to spend time with him. The
defendant was meeting with his office manager. When the defendant said that
he would be through in a few minutes, the victim left.
The defendant felt humiliated by the interruption. He left his office,
came into the room where the victim was, and began swearing and yelling at
her. The couple argued and the defendant eventually went upstairs to take a
shower.
Because of the defendant’s outburst, the victim felt nervous about
staying in the house with him and decided to spend the night elsewhere with
their baby. The couple’s two older daughters were with the defendant’s mother
and stepfather. The victim packed a few things for the baby and started to
gather items to launder. She began climbing the stairs to the laundry room
when the defendant met her halfway and refused to let her pass. He held onto
her and stood in her way so that she could not continue up the stairs. She
tried to go around him, but he blocked her way and continued to hold onto her.
The victim started to panic and tried to go downstairs to phone for help.
The defendant grabbed her by the arms and dragged her up the stairs saying,
“[O]h no, you don’t.” After dragging her up to the landing of the first stairway,
he said, “I don’t know why I even still bother with you, say good-bye,” put his
hands around her neck, and choked her. The victim tried to stop him, but
soon lost consciousness. After she regained consciousness, the victim jumped
up and tried to go downstairs, but the defendant stood in front of her and held
her arms so that she could not get past him. The victim then attempted to go
upstairs, but the defendant again held her arms from behind to prevent her
from doing so. Suddenly, he stopped holding her from behind and started
pushing her forward up the remaining stairs saying: “I’ve had it. I’ve f’ing had
it, I might as well finish it and end it now, it’s over for you bitch.” When they
reached the top of the stairs, the defendant grabbed her by the arm and the
back of the head and slammed her face into the wooden floor four or five times.
She was bleeding from her nose and in her mouth. He then choked her again
and she again lost consciousness.
When the victim awoke, the defendant was crying and telling her that he
loved her. The victim feigned unconsciousness, but after about ten minutes,
she felt the urge to vomit, told the defendant this and crawled up the remaining
stairs to the bathroom. She lay on the tile floor of the bathroom for a while
because she felt weak. At some point, she crawled over to the toilet and
2
vomited blood. Eventually, she walked into the bedroom and got into bed. She
was so weak that she barely made it to the bed.
As she lay there, the victim decided that she would wait until the
defendant was deeply asleep before trying to flee. She thought that if she tried
to leave while he was still awake, he would try to hurt her again. She worried
that if she tried to phone for help, he might kill her. She lay on top of the
covers so that the cold air would keep her awake. The defendant eventually
came to bed, put his arm around her and told her that he loved her. She
pretended to fall asleep. She lay in bed from 9:30 or 9:45 p.m. until 4:00 a.m.,
waiting for the defendant to fall into a deep sleep. During that time, she
struggled with whether to take the baby with her when she fled. She decided
to leave without the baby, afraid that if she took the baby with her, the baby
would cry and wake up the defendant and he would then beat her again.
At around 4:00 a.m., the victim began inching out of the bed. She moved
one limb at a time off the bed, and after each move, waited to see if the
defendant woke up. Eventually she was able to walk out of the bedroom and
go down the stairs. She took her cell phone to call the police and left the house
without a coat or shoes. She went to the garage, climbed into her car and
started it, locking the doors to the car because she was afraid that the
defendant might have followed her.
As she drove away, she called 911, frantic because she had left the baby
in the house with the defendant and worried that he would hurt the baby when
he realized that the victim had left. The dispatcher told her to drive to the
parking lot of the local post office and wait for the police to arrive. The victim
was afraid to stay there because she did not know whether the defendant had
been following her. The dispatcher stayed on the line with her until the police
arrived.
When the police arrived, the victim and dispatcher were still speaking;
the victim was still frantic about having left her baby in the house. An officer
noticed that the victim was crying and seemed to be “[v]ery nervous or afraid
for her safety.” He observed that her face had a lot of blood on it, some of
which seemed fresh, and that it looked swollen. He also saw that she had a
cut on her mouth and red marks on her neck “like if somebody put something
around [it].” The victim told the officer what had happened that night. She
also told the police that she had left her baby in the house because she was
afraid that the baby would cry and wake up the defendant and that he would
then beat her again. She told the police that she wanted her baby.
While the victim was taken by ambulance to the hospital, the police
drove to her residence. After knocking on the door and getting no response,
the police announced their presence and entered the home. The police
3
eventually found the defendant in a third-floor crawlspace, lying face down.
The defendant testified that he hid there because he “didn’t want to be found.”
In the meantime, the victim was treated at the hospital for a broken nose
and lip laceration. A piece of a broken tooth that had been embedded in her lip
was removed. She had a bruise on the left side of her neck. The treating
physician testified that the victim’s broken nose, broken tooth and swollen chin
were consistent with being forcibly slammed against a floor. He also testified
that the contusions on her neck were consistent with force having been applied
there.
For about a week after the incident, the victim was unable to eat
anything other than soft foods and could drink liquids only through a straw.
Her injuries required her eventually to wear braces on her teeth; she also had
to have a root canal because of her broken tooth. At the time of trial, nearly a
year after the incident, the victim’s lip was still tender, numb and tingling, and
she had a scar underneath it.
A grand jury indicted the defendant for two counts of attempted murder
and one count each of first degree assault, second degree assault and criminal
restraint. The jury acquitted him on the attempted murder charges and
convicted him on the remaining charges. This appeal followed.
II. Defendant’s Appellate Arguments
A. 911 Call
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it permitted
the jury to hear a tape of the victim’s 911 call. He contends that the trial court
erroneously ruled that the tape satisfied the excited utterance exception to the
hearsay rule.
We review a trial court’s decision to admit evidence under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Jordan, 148 N.H. 115,
117 (2002). To meet this standard, the defendant must demonstrate that the
court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. Id.
The excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule permits the
admission of hearsay statements “relating to a startling event or condition
made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the
event or condition.” N.H. R. Ev. 803(2). To qualify as an excited utterance, the
statement “must be a spontaneous verbal reaction to some startling or
shocking event, made at a time when the speaker was still in a state of nervous
4
excitement produced by that event and before [s]he had time to contrive or
misrepresent.” State v. Gordon, 148 N.H. 710, 720 (2002) (quotation omitted).
“The basis of the excited utterance exception rests with the spontaneity and
impulsiveness of the statement; thus, the startling event does not have to be
the actual crime itself, but rather may be a related occurrence that causes
such a reaction.” State v. Bean, 153 N.H. 380, 386 (2006) (quotation omitted).
Here, the trial court reasonably could have found that the victim’s
statements in the 911 call were excited utterances. The record supports a
finding that the victim made these statements immediately upon sneaking out
of the house to flee the defendant who had beaten her severely that evening. It
also supports the trial court’s finding that the events that caused the victim
extreme emotional upset were not only the beating, but also the decision to
leave her baby behind when she fled. It further supports the trial court’s
finding that, on the tape, the victim was “still clearly upset and out of control
and hysterical.” In light of these findings, which the record supports, we
conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by
ruling that the victim’s statements on the 911 call were excited utterances.
The defendant contends that the statements could not be excited
utterances because the victim made them several hours after the beating
stopped. “The timing of the statement is only a factor to be considered,”
however. MacDonald v. B.M.D. Golf Assocs., 148 N.H. 582, 585 (2002). More
importantly, “there is no requirement that the crime be the startling event.”
Bean, 153 N.H. at 385. In this case, the victim was still under the stress of
excitement caused by the beating, her flight from the defendant and her
decision to leave her baby behind, and these were the “startling or shocking”
events giving rise to her statements on the 911 call.
The defendant also asserts that permitting the jury to hear the tape was
error because the tape was more prejudicial than probative. See N.H. R. Ev.
403. We decline to address this argument because the defendant has failed to
demonstrate that he preserved it for our review.
In general, a defendant must make a specific and contemporaneous
objection during trial to preserve an issue for appellate review. State v. Hoag,
145 N.H. 47, 52 (2000). A motion in limine is sufficient to preserve an issue for
appeal without an objection at trial if the trial court definitively rules on the
issue before trial. Id.
In his motion in limine, the defendant specifically objected to admission
of the 911 tape on the ground that the victim’s statements were not excited
utterances, but did not mention New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403’s
balancing of probative and prejudicial effect. See State v. Croft, 142 N.H. 76,
80 (1997). Nor did he raise Rule 403 when arguing his motion to the trial
5
court. He also did not mention balancing probative and prejudicial effect
under Rule 403 when the trial court issued its ruling on his motion in limine.
Under these circumstances, we hold that the defendant failed to preserve his
argument that allowing the jury to hear the 911 tape was more prejudicial than
probative. See id. We therefore decline to address it.
B. May 2004 Threat
1. Background
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred by admitting
evidence of a threat he made to the victim in May 2004, approximately five
months before the events at issue. According to the victim, the defendant
threatened her when she caught him on the phone with a woman with whom
she suspected him of having an affair. When she confronted him, the
defendant told the victim: “[I]f you . . . let [the woman’s husband] know, then
I’ll put a gun to your head and shoot and kill you.” The victim testified that, at
a marital counseling session a few weeks later, the counselor questioned the
defendant about the incident and “he said I think anyone’s capable of doing
anything if their right buttons are pushed.” The parties’ marital counselor also
testified to this. Because of this incident, the defendant was eventually
charged with misdemeanor criminal threatening, to which he pled nolo
contendere.
Before trial, the State moved in limine to admit the above evidence, and
the defendant moved in limine to exclude it. In its pretrial order, the court
ruled that it would admit evidence of the threat as well as the defendant’s
statement to the marriage counselor, but would not admit evidence of the
criminal threatening charge and conviction. The trial court revisited this
decision during the parties’ opening statements, when defense counsel, over
the State’s objection, told the jury that the husband of the woman with whom
the victim suspected the defendant of having an affair threatened to shoot the
defendant in the head. Defense counsel explained to the court that the
defendant was going to testify that he did not threaten the victim in May 2004,
but was merely relating the threat that the husband of his alleged paramour
had issued to him. The State argued that, given this anticipated testimony, the
court should allow it to introduce evidence of the defendant’s conviction for
misdemeanor criminal threatening. The trial court took this under advisement
and then, after the defendant testified on direct, permitted the State on cross-
examination to elicit testimony about the conviction.
At the defendant’s request, the trial court specifically instructed the jury
about the May 2004 threat as follows:
6
Now, you’ve heard evidence in this case that the defendant
allegedly had threatened [the victim] in May of 2004. It is for you
to decide from the evidence presented whether or not this threat
was in fact made. If you find a threat was made, you may only
consider the threat for a specific purpose. And I’m going to tell you
right now. You may not consider the threat as evidence of the
defendant’s general character or as evidence that because the
defendant threatened the alleged victim, he must have therefore
committed the crimes on October 15, 2004.
You may, however, consider evidence of the threat as tending
to show whether or not the defendant had the specific intent to kill
or assault [the victim] on October 15, 2004.
2. Rule 404(b)
The defendant argues that admitting evidence of the May 2004 threat
violated Rule 404(b). We review the trial court’s admission of evidence
pursuant to Rule 404(b) for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v.
Sawtell, 152 N.H. 177, 181 (2005). Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). Evidence of other crimes is inadmissible unless: “(1) it is
relevant for a purpose other than to show the defendant’s bad character or
disposition; (2) there is clear proof that the defendant committed the other
crimes or acts; and (3) prejudice to the defendant does not substantially
outweigh the probative value of the evidence.” Sawtell, 152 N.H. at 182.
The defendant argues that the prior threat was relevant solely to show
his propensity to commit violence. We hold that, to the contrary, the record
supports the trial court’s determination that the May 2004 threat was relevant
to the defendant’s intent on October 15, 2004.
“To be relevant to intent, evidence of other bad acts must be able to
support a reliable inference, not dependent on the defendant’s character or
propensity, that the defendant had the same intent on the occasions of the
charged and uncharged acts.” State v. Bassett, 139 N.H. 493, 499 (1995). “We
will find sufficient support for a reliable inference of intent only if the
7
defendant’s intent in committing other bad acts and the defendant’s intent in
the charged offenses is closely connected by logically significant factors.” Id.
In State v. Richardson, 138 N.H. 162, 163 (1993), for instance, the
defendant was convicted of, among other things, simple assault. Over the
defendant’s objection, the trial court admitted evidence of his prior threats and
violent behavior towards the victim. Richardson, 138 N.H. at 164. We found
that this prior bad act evidence “was relevant to and probative of his intent
towards [the victim] and her own state of mind at the time of the charged
offenses.” Id. at 166. Although it may also have demonstrated his propensity
for violence, the prior bad act evidence “was relevant to his intent to act
towards this particular victim in an intimidating manner.” Id. The prior bad
act evidence “made it more probable than not that the defendant on the later
occasion acted with an intent to terrorize [the victim] and that those actions
placed her in fear for her physical safety.” Id.; see State v. Brewster, 147 N.H.
645, 649-50 (2002) (prior threats against victim admissible to prove
harassment and criminal threatening charges because probative of defendant’s
motive and intent and of victim’s state of mind); State v. Simonds, 135 N.H.
203, 207 (1991) (prior sexual contact with victim is admissible to show intent
to touch this victim for sexual gratification).
The defendant in Sawtell, 152 N.H. at 178, was convicted of first degree
murder. In that case, we ruled that evidence of his prior threats to the victim
with a gun were relevant to prove his intent because the prior conduct involved
the same parties, similar if not identical weapons and occurred under similar
circumstances. Sawtell, 152 N.H. at 182; see State v. Dukette, 145 N.H. 226,
230-31 (2000).
In the instant appeal, the trial court found, and the record supports, that
the May 2004 threat was relevant to the defendant’s intent to commit the
charged crimes. The defendant was charged with, among other crimes,
attempted murder and first degree assault. The attempted murder charges
required proof that he acted with the purpose to cause the victim’s death. See
State v. Brown, 128 N.H. 606, 614 (1986). The first degree assault charge
required proof that he “[p]urposely caused serious bodily injury to another.”
RSA 631:1, I(a). “A person acts purposely with respect to a material element of
an offense when his conscious object is to cause the result or engage in the
conduct that comprises the element.” RSA 626:2, II(a) (2007).
As the trial court found, and as the record supports, the May 2004 threat
and these charged offenses were closely connected by logically significant
factors. See Bassett, 139 N.H. at 499. As in Richardson and Sawtell, the prior
threat in this case was directed at the same victim and in a similar context as
the charged offenses; i.e., his efforts to intimidate the victim when she did
something he disliked. Moreover, the May 2004 threat showed the defendant’s
8
specific intent to kill the victim approximately five months before the charged
offenses occurred. Proof of this threat, therefore, made it more probable than
not that when the defendant said to the victim, “I’ve had it. I’ve f’ing had it, I
might as well finish it and end it now, it’s over for you bitch,” and then
assaulted her in October 2004, he did so with a purpose to cause her death, or
at the very least, to cause her serious bodily injury. The evidence of the May
2004 threat was not admissible to show the defendant’s propensity for violence,
but to demonstrate that when he acted violently in October 2004, he did so
with the purpose of causing the victim’s death or at least serious bodily injury.
The defendant concedes that “[p]rior threats are admissible to prove the
defendant’s intent . . . when their probative value outweighs their prejudicial
effect.” He implies, however, that the probative value of the May 2004 evidence
did not substantially outweigh the danger of unfair prejudice to him.
“We accord considerable deference to the trial court’s determination in
balancing prejudice and probative worth of evidence under Rule 404(b).”
Brewster, 147 N.H. at 650 (quotation omitted). Particularly pertinent to
determining this balance is whether the evidence is relevant to prove an issue
that is actually in serious dispute. Id. “When intent is not conceded by the
defense, and it is an element of the crime to be proven by the State, it is
sufficiently at issue to require evidence at trial.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted).
The record supports the trial court’s determination that the probative
value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed by its prejudicial effect.
As noted above, the May 2004 threat was probative of the defendant’s intent.
“Further, because the issue of the defendant’s intent was central to the trial of
this matter, the probative value was significant.” State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500,
513 (2006). The prejudicial impact to the defendant was limited; the trial court
“admitted the evidence for the sole purpose of determining the defendant’s
intent and so instructed the jury.” Id. Because we assume that the jury is
presumed to follow the trial court’s instructions, any prejudice from admitting
evidence of the May 2004 threat was slight. Id. For all of the above reasons,
therefore, we hold that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its
discretion when it admitted evidence of the May 2004 threat.
3. Rule 609(a)
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred by permitting the
State to introduce on cross-examination evidence that he pled nolo contendere
to the criminal threatening charge. He asserts that this violated Rule 609(a).
See N.H. R. Ev. 609(a). We decline to address this argument because the
defendant has failed to demonstrate that he preserved it for our review. While
the record demonstrates that the defendant objected based upon Rule 404(b), it
9
does not reflect that he did so based upon Rule 609(a). See Croft, 142 N.H. at
80.
C. Testimony of Marital Counselor
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred when it allowed the
couple’s marriage counselor to testify about his statements concerning the May
2004 threat. He asserts that permitting the counselor to testify violated the
counselor-client privilege under Rule 503(b). See N.H. R. Ev. 503(b).
Having reviewed the record submitted on appeal, we conclude that the
defendant has failed to demonstrate that he preserved this issue for our review.
On the second day of trial, the victim testified that she brought up the May
2004 threat at a counseling session. She testified that when the counselor
questioned the defendant about it, “he said I think anyone’s capable of doing
anything if their right buttons are pushed.” The defendant failed to object to
this testimony.
The following day, after the State informed the court that it intended to
call the counselor to testify about the same statement, the counselor’s attorney
raised concerns about the counselor-client privilege. Defense counsel did not.
While defense counsel may have raised issues related to the counselor-client
privilege at a bench conference to which the transcript alludes, the conference
was unrecorded. Under these circumstances, therefore, we conclude that the
defendant has failed to demonstrate that he argued to the trial court that the
counselor’s testimony violated the counselor-client privilege.
D. Sufficiency of Evidence
The defendant next asserts that the evidence was insufficient to convict
him of either criminal restraint or first degree assault. In a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of
fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could have
found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666, 673
(2005). We examine each evidentiary item in the context of all of the evidence,
not in isolation. Id. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must
exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416,
424 (2003). Under this standard, however, we still consider the evidence in the
light most favorable to the State and examine each evidentiary item in context,
not in isolation. Id.
1. Criminal Restraint
To convict the defendant of criminal restraint, the State had to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that: (1) the defendant unlawfully confined the
10
victim; (2) the circumstances of the confinement exposed the victim to a risk of
serious bodily injury; and (3) the defendant acted knowingly. See RSA 633:2, I.
Unlawful confinement “includes but is not limited to confinement accomplished
by force, threat or deception.” RSA 633:2, II. Serious bodily injury “means any
harm to the body which causes severe, permanent or protracted loss of or
impairment to the health or of the function of any part of the body.” RSA
625:11, VI (2007). To prove that the defendant acted knowingly, the State had
to show that he was aware that his conduct would cause unlawful
confinement. See RSA 626:2, II(b) (2007).
Considering all of the evidence and the inferences to be drawn from it in
the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that it was sufficient for a
rational juror to find, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant was guilty
of criminal restraint. The jury heard evidence that the defendant repeatedly
stopped the victim from going upstairs or downstairs by holding onto her arms,
standing in front of her, and physically restricting her movement. The jury also
heard evidence that, before the first choking incident, the defendant dragged
the victim upstairs when she was trying to go downstairs, and that before the
second choking incident, he pushed her upstairs when she was trying to go
downstairs. Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to the State, a
rational juror could have found that the defendant knowingly and unlawfully
confined the victim.
Additionally, the jury heard evidence that the defendant twice choked the
victim until she lost consciousness and slammed her face into the floor four or
five times, breaking her nose, breaking a tooth, and cutting her lip. This
evidence was more than sufficient for a rational juror to find, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the circumstances of the confinement exposed the
victim to the risk of serious bodily injury.
Viewing this evidence and all inferences to be drawn from it in the light
most favorable to the State, we hold that a rational juror could have found
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed the crime of criminal
restraint.
2. First Degree Assault
To convict the defendant of first degree assault, the State had to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that: (1) the defendant caused serious bodily
injury to the victim; and (2) he acted purposely. See RSA 631:1. To show that
he acted purposely, the State had to prove that he had the conscious object to
cause serious bodily injury to the victim. See RSA 626:2, II(a). As explained
previously, serious bodily injury “means any harm to the body which causes
severe, permanent or protracted loss of or impairment to the health or of the
function of any part of the body.” RSA 625:11, VI.
11
The defendant contends that the evidence was insufficient to support a
finding that he caused serious bodily injury to the victim. We disagree. The
jury heard evidence that the victim suffered a broken nose, a broken tooth and
a lacerated lip. Her neck was bruised and her chin was swollen. For about a
week after the incident, she was unable to drink, except through a straw, and
unable to eat anything other than soft foods. The jury also heard testimony
that, because of the beating, the victim had to have a root canal and,
eventually braces, and that, at the time of trial, nearly a year later, her lip was
still tender, numb and tingling. Viewing this evidence and all inferences to be
drawn from it in the light most favorable to the State, we hold that a rational
juror could have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the defendant caused
the victim to suffer serious bodily injury. See State v. Scognamiglio, 150 N.H.
534, 537 (2004) (broken nose, swollen discolored eyes, clogged breathing
passages and sinus infection constitute serious bodily injury); State v.
MacArthur, 138 N.H. 597, 598, 600 (1994) (victim suffered serious bodily
injury where she sustained severe facial lacerations, hemorrhage in right eye
and a swollen and bruised face).
E. Suppression
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by failing to
suppress evidence that the police found him lying down in a third-floor crawl
space. He contends that evidence about his location in the house constituted
the fruit of an unlawful search.
The record on appeal does not demonstrate, however, that the defendant
ever moved to suppress this evidence. Nor does it reveal that he ever objected
at trial to its admission. Accordingly, the defendant has not preserved this
issue for our review. We therefore decline to review it. Nor are we persuaded
by the defendant’s argument that admission of the evidence constitutes plain
error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
12