THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-043
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SCOTT W. VEALE
Argued: November 14, 2006
Opinion Issued: January 19, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The appellate defender has moved to withdraw from
representing the defendant, Scott W. Veale, in this matter due to an alleged
conflict of interest. For the reasons that follow, we deny the motion without
prejudice, and remand in part.
The following facts are not disputed. In June 2003, the defendant was
indicted for one count of timber trespass contrary to RSA chapter 227-J (2000
& Supp. 2003) and one count of theft by unauthorized taking contrary to RSA
637:3 (1996). Prior to his trial on those charges, the defendant’s court-
appointed public defender moved for, and was granted, a competency
evaluation. As a result of the evaluation and after a hearing, the Trial Court
(Barry, J.) found the defendant incompetent to stand trial and not restorable to
competence. In response to the defendant’s motion, the trial court dismissed
the charges. See RSA 135:17-a (2005).
The defendant filed a pro se notice of appeal in this court, claiming,
among other things, that his trial counsel had provided ineffective assistance.
The appellate defender was appointed to represent the defendant on appeal.
The appellate defender subsequently moved to withdraw, contending that
because the defendant had raised a claim of ineffective assistance against a
public defender, it could not represent the defendant due to a conflict of
interest. The State and the appellate defender submitted memoranda and
presented oral argument on the issue of whether the appellate defender may
represent a client who has raised a claim of ineffective assistance against a
public defender, an issue of first impression in this state.
The appellate defender argues, and the State agrees, that it may not
represent clients who have challenged the effectiveness of a public defender’s
assistance. According to the appellate defender, its office and that of the public
defender are, in essence, a single office or “firm,” and the rules of professional
conduct relating to conflicts of interest apply to its “firm” in the same way that
they apply to private firms. Therefore, because the conflict rules would require
the disqualification of the attorneys in a private firm in similar circumstances,
the appellate defender is disqualified in this case.
As to whether the appellate defender and the public defender constitute a
single firm, we note that we have never precisely defined the term “firm” for the
purpose of applying the rules of professional conduct. While we have not
defined the term, the ABA Model Code Comments to New Hampshire Rule of
Professional Conduct 1.10 do. We have not formally adopted the ABA Model
Code Comments, but we have previously looked to them for guidance, see, e.g.,
Franklin v. Callum, 146 N.H. 779, 783 (2001), and we do so here.
The definition in the comments to Rule 1.10 does not give a concise,
bright-line rule for determining what constitutes a firm. The comments note
that the term includes lawyers working in a legal services organization, but
that the actual existence of a firm depends upon the specific facts. Therefore,
it sets forth various characteristics to consider when determining whether a
firm exists. For instance, if a group of lawyers conducts itself in a manner
suggesting that it is a firm, or presents itself to the public in such a manner, it
ought to be considered a firm. Also relevant is whether the lawyers in the
group have mutual access to confidential information concerning the clients
they serve, because such access indicates that the group functions as a firm.
We think it obvious that the appellate defender and the public defender
are, individually, legal services organizations that qualify as firms. The
2
question, therefore, is whether the two offices are sufficiently intertwined that
they function as one firm. According to the appellate defender, the deputy
appellate defender and assistant appellate defenders are employees of the
public defender, and receive their salaries and benefits from the public
defender. Also, the offices of the public defender and appellate defender
regularly share personnel, with public defenders serving as appellate defenders
on rotations lasting not more than two years. Even when a public defender is
serving as an appellate defender, he or she might still be actively representing
clients at the trial level, and might retain administrative duties within the
public defender’s office. Additionally, public defenders and appellate defenders
work closely together and share confidential information. Attorneys in the two
offices are often trained and educated together using materials and services
available only to employees of the public defender. Accordingly, the appellate
defender contends, its office and the public defender’s office should be viewed
as a single firm.
Given the current structure of the offices of the public defender and
appellate defender, with their close, and often overlapping, personnel and
functions, we conclude that they qualify as a single firm for the application of
the rules of professional conduct. The attorneys of the offices regularly interact
with each other and share confidential information and resources. Also, the
attorneys of both offices are employed and paid by a common employer, the
public defender. Therefore, they conduct themselves as a single firm. Finally,
the public defender’s website states that it operates the appellate defender
program. See http://www.nhpd.org/aboutnhpd.htm (last visited Dec. 14,
2006). Thus, the offices hold themselves out to the public as a single firm.
The appellate defender next contends that the rules of professional
conduct regarding conflicts of interest ought to apply to it in the same manner
as they apply to private firms. As noted, this is an issue of first impression in
New Hampshire and therefore we look to other jurisdictions that have
addressed the issue for guidance. Some jurisdictions have concluded that the
conflict of interest rules do not apply to public defender organizations in the
same way, or to the same degree, as they do to private firms. See, e.g., People
v. Banks, 520 N.E.2d 617, 619 (Ill. 1987); Asch v. State, 62 P.3d 945, 953
(Wyo. 2003). Other courts have reached the opposite conclusion. See, e.g.,
Borden v. Borden, 277 A.2d 89, 92 (D.C. 1971); McCall v. District Court, 783
P.2d 1223, 1227 (Colo. 1989). Having reviewed these decisions, we believe the
better rule is not to exempt the public defender and appellate defender from the
operation of the conflict of interest rules for claims of ineffective assistance of
counsel.
Courts that do not apply the rules to public defender organizations in the
same way as to private firms often conclude that because there is no financial
interest at stake, a public defender or appellate defender will not be influenced
3
in the same way as a private attorney, and thus the conflict rules need not be
applied equally. See Banks, 520 N.E.2d at 620. Alternatively, those courts
find that disqualifying a public defender or appellate defender under the same
rules as private attorneys could deprive litigants of access to the most
competent counsel. See Asch, 62 P.3d at 953. We do not find either rationale
persuasive.
As to the first concern, financial interests are not the only interests that
could influence an attorney, and, arguably, are not the most powerful
influences.
It might be argued that there are no conflict of interest questions
in the public defender context because of the absence of economic
interest in challenging or refraining from challenging the conduct
of trial counsel. However, this view completely ignores the fact
that the same subtle but real non-economic pressures present in
private practice are equally operative in a public defender service.
After all, the rules concerning conflict of interest operate on and
are enforced against lawyers and not against public or private law
firms. By their nature, the non-economic conflicts – friendship,
loyalty, pride, fear of ostracism or retaliation – operate with equal
vigor on the individual lawyer in the public firm. It is he who feels
the conflict, not the form of his law association, upon whom the
ethical considerations must prevail.
State v. Lentz, 639 N.E.2d 784, 788 (Ohio 1994) (Wright, J., dissenting)
(quotation and emphasis omitted); see also Cannon v. Mullin, 383 F.3d 1152,
1173 (10th Cir. 2004) (“An understandable, although inappropriate, regard for
collegiality may restrain appellate counsel from identifying and arguing trial-
attorney error.”). Thus, although financial benefits might not be at stake, the
relations between the offices and the individual attorneys would be strained
and public confidence in the lawyers of the public defender and the appellate
defender would be undermined. Moreover, as noted by the Colorado Supreme
Court, “notwithstanding the vigor and skill with which the appellate division
attorney might present the ineffective assistance of counsel argument, the
conflict of loyalties inherent in the attorney’s role would make the quality of his
or her representation, and thus the fairness and impartiality of the appellate
process, necessarily suspect in the public eye.” McCall, 783 P.2d at 1228.
Therefore, we find unpersuasive the argument that a lack of economic interest
should exempt the public defender and appellate defender from the operation
of the conflict of interest rules when ineffective assistance of a public defender
is raised. See Restatement (Third) of The Law Governing Lawyers § 123 cmt.
d(iv) (1998).
4
Regarding the second concern, we do not agree that applying the conflict
rules to the appellate defender in situations such as this will deprive indigent
defendants of competent counsel. First, we note that our decision is limited
only to those instances where a defendant has raised an ineffective assistance
of counsel claim against a public defender. Also, although the specialized
training and experience of the appellate defender’s attorneys make them
desirable counsel, they are not the only attorneys capable of providing
adequate counsel on appeal. Therefore, we do not see the potential deprivation
of an appellate defender’s service in these limited circumstances as adequate
justification for applying a different set of conflict rules to that office.
Accordingly, we hold that when an ineffective assistance of counsel claim is
filed against a public defender, the offices of the public defender and the
appellate defender are subject to the same conflict rules as are attorneys in
private practice.
Having reached the above conclusion, we also conclude that a
straightforward application of the rules requires the appellate defender to be
disqualified from litigating claims of ineffective assistance against a public
defender. Under Rule 1.7(b), a lawyer shall not represent a client if that
representation would be adverse to, among other things, the lawyer’s own
interests. N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 1.7(b). This rule requires only the possibility
that the client’s interests may be materially limited by the lawyer’s interests.
Otis’ Case, 135 N.H. 612, 617 (1992). A public defender attempting to
represent a client who has charged that public defender with ineffective
assistance could, quite obviously, be representing a person with interests
adverse to his own. The public defender, instead of advocating fully for the
client, might be interested in protecting and preserving his own professional
reputation. Thus, he would “likely be hesitant to raise his own trial
inadequacies on appeal, or even inform the client of any inadequacies.” Mullin,
383 F.3d at 1173. Therefore, that public defender would be forced to withdraw
from any case alleging his ineffectiveness.
Rule 1.10 prevents any member of a firm from representing a client when
any one member of that firm is prohibited from doing so by Rule 1.7. See N.H.
R. Prof. Conduct 1.10(a). Thus, because Rule 1.7 would require the withdrawal
of a public defender who has allegedly provided ineffective assistance, that
prohibition would be, by operation of Rule 1.10, imputed to the remaining
members of the firm – in this case, the remaining attorneys of the offices of the
public defender and the appellate defender. Thus, the appellate defender’s
attorneys would be disqualified by Rules 1.7 and 1.10 from representing a
client who has claimed that a public defender rendered ineffective assistance.
While the rules appear to require the disqualification of the appellate
defender when a public defender is alleged to have provided ineffective
assistance, we must determine whether a claim of ineffective assistance,
5
standing alone, is sufficient to create a conflict requiring disqualification.
There is a split of authority as to whether the proper rule, when a claim of
ineffective assistance is raised, is per se disqualification, or a case-by-case
analysis of the nature of the conflict. Compare Asch, 62 P.3d at 953, with
McCall, 783 P.2d at 1228. Under the per se rule, the mere allegation of
ineffective assistance is sufficient to create a conflict of interest disqualifying
the public defender and the appellate defender. See McCall, 783 P.2d at 1228.
This is true even when the claim of ineffective assistance is without merit, or is
raised only for some illegitimate purpose. Thus, while such a rule is easy to
administer, it requires the appointment of independent counsel in cases where
there was, in fact, no ineffective assistance, and thus no conflict.
Alternatively, a case-by-case analysis could be employed to assess the
merits of the claim that the public defender provided ineffective assistance.
See Morales v. Bridgforth, 100 P.3d 668, 669-70 (N.M. 2004). Under this
approach, a preliminary determination of ineffectiveness is required. If it is
preliminarily valid, a conflict would exist. If it is not valid, the appellate
defender would not be disqualified. Such an approach would eliminate the
problem of disqualifying the appellate defender in cases involving frivolous or
meritless claims. However, this approach too is imperfect.
In those jurisdictions that apply the case-by-case approach, in order for
appellate counsel to be disqualified, an “actual conflict” must be shown. See,
e.g., Banks, 520 N.E.2d at 621. These jurisdictions do not, so far as we can
discern, define the term “actual conflict.” See id. More importantly, they do
not provide any guidance for determining whether there is a conflict and how
the conflict is to be measured. While either the public defender or the appellate
defender could identify potential conflicts, neither could determine whether a
potential conflict is an “actual conflict,” because permitting such decisions
would do nothing to counteract the appearance of impropriety created by the
collegiality of the offices. Therefore, the final determination ought to be left to a
disinterested party, most probably the courts. See, e.g., Lentz, 639 N.E.2d at
786 (requiring trial court to determine existence of an actual conflict).
Independent counsel would be necessary to represent the defendant when
determining the viability of the ineffective assistance claims. Should the claims
be preliminarily valid, that attorney, or new independent counsel, would be
retained to pursue the defendant’s claims on appeal. If the claims are not
valid, then the appellate defender could be reappointed. While frivolous claims
would be ferreted out, there would be increased costs to the State and the
judiciary for retaining independent counsel to determine the preliminary
validity of the claim. Additionally, such a process would result in substantial
delays in the disposition of defendants’ appeals.
Having reviewed the relevant authorities, we are not persuaded that
either a strictly per se, or a case-by-case rule ought to be adopted. Instead, we
6
believe the better rule to be a hybrid of the two approaches. Under this
“hybrid” approach, if, on appeal, a defendant has raised a claim of ineffective
assistance against a public defender and the appellate defender has been
appointed as appellate counsel, the appeal will, absent special conditions, be
stayed. This stay shall be automatic and shall take effect without regard to the
merits of the ineffective assistance claim. In this way, raising a claim of
ineffective assistance will act as a per se bar, at least temporarily, to continuing
representation by the appellate defender.
Following the imposition of the stay, a defendant’s ineffective assistance
claim will be adjudicated on its merits in the superior court. Thus, a claim of
ineffective assistance of counsel will maintain its proper place as a method of
collateral review, and will not prematurely be merged with a defendant’s claims
on direct appeal. See State v. McAdams, 134 N.H. 445, 448 (1991)(declining to
merge direct and collateral avenues of review). Once the trial court has
rendered a decision, the defendant may, if necessary, resume the litigation of
his original appeal with the aid of the appellate defender or with independent
counsel, whichever is required under the circumstances of the case.
This “hybrid” approach, therefore, requires a defendant to weigh the
consequences of raising a claim of ineffective assistance against a public
defender, e.g., possible delays in the disposition of his direct appeal, against
his desire for a prompt resolution obtained with the aid of the specially trained
attorneys of the appellate defender’s office. Thus, it is the defendant, and not
the public defender or the appellate defender who must, in the first instance,
consider whether a claim of ineffective assistance is sufficiently worthwhile to
pursue while a direct appeal is pending, and it is the defendant who will bear
the burden of that choice.
Turning to the case at hand, the defendant’s appeal includes claims that
the public defender who represented him in the trial court provided ineffective
assistance. Therefore, the defendant’s appeal is hereby stayed, but the
appellate defender shall remain counsel of record in this appeal. The
defendant’s claims of ineffective assistance are remanded to the superior court
for resolution. Following resolution in the superior court, the defendant may
resume the litigation of his appeal with proper counsel.
We also note that this case involves but one type of conflict of interest.
The standards for evaluating conflicts other than the type discussed, and the
remedies for such conflicts will be considered when such conflicts arise and
should be designed to meet the particular circumstances. McCall, 783 P.2d at
1229. We finally note that although Rule 1.7(b) provides that a conflict may be
waived in certain circumstances, we need not address whether the appellate
defender could obtain a waiver in this case because there is no indication that
the appellate defender has sought such a waiver or believes that seeking such
7
a waiver would be appropriate. Accordingly, for the reasons stated, we deny
the appellate defender’s motion to withdraw without prejudice, and remand the
defendant's claims of ineffective assistance to the superior court for resolution.
Motion denied without prejudice;
appeal remanded in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8