THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Portsmouth Family Division
No. 2006-038
IN THE MATTER OF
MARIE MANNION AND MICHAEL MANNION
Argued: January 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: March 6, 2007
Bailinson, Capuchino & O’Leary, of Manchester (David I. Bailinson and
Melanie M. Chaput on the brief, and Mr. Bailinson orally), for the petitioner.
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward & Loughman, P.L.L.C., of Salem (Jill A.
Desrochers on the brief, and David W. Sayward orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, Marie Mannion, appeals an order of the
Portsmouth Family Division (DeVries, J.) approving the final divorce decree
recommended by the Marital Master (Fishman, M.). We affirm.
The record supports the following. The petitioner and the respondent,
Michael Mannion, married in June 1989 and had one child. On January 9,
2004, the petitioner obtained an emergency restraining order against the
respondent for an alleged assault that occurred at their home earlier that day.
The petitioner filed for divorce based upon irreconcilable differences on
January 13, 2004. Following a final hearing held on January 21, 2004,
pursuant to RSA chapter 173-B (2004) (Supp. 2006), a finding of abuse was
entered by the Derry Family Division against the respondent for the
“unprivileged physical conduct” that allegedly occurred on January 9, 2004.
On March 22, 2004, the petitioner amended her divorce petition to assert fault-
based grounds as a result of a pattern of abusive conduct including the alleged
January 9 assault. The final contested divorce hearing occurred on November
3, 2005, after which the trial court awarded the respondent a divorce upon the
grounds of irreconcilable differences. The court found that there had been “no
domestic violence on January 9, 2004 nor was there prior verbal abuse by the
Respondent against the Petitioner.” The final decree awarded the respondent
sole parental decision-making responsibility and primary parenting time.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that the court erred when it: (1) failed
to apply the finding of abuse throughout the divorce and custody proceeding as
required by the doctrines of res judicata and collateral estoppel; (2) failed to
apply RSA 461-A:5, III (Supp. 2006) and awarded sole parental decision-
making responsibility to the respondent; and (3) awarded the respondent a
divorce on the grounds of irreconcilable differences. We address these
arguments in turn.
I. Res Judicata and Collateral Estoppel
The petitioner first argues that it was legal error for the trial court to find
that no assault occurred on January 9, 2004, in light of the final domestic
violence order which included a finding to the contrary. Specifically, she argues
that res judicata and collateral estoppel barred the trial court from finding that
no abuse occurred on January 9. The record reveals, however, that this issue
was not preserved for appellate review.
“The general rule in this jurisdiction is that a contemporaneous and
specific objection is required to preserve an issue for appellate review.” State v.
Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 246 (2003) (quotation omitted). The objection must
state “explicitly the specific ground of objection.” N.H. R. Ev. 103(b)(1). “This
requirement, grounded in common sense and judicial economy, affords the
trial court an opportunity to correct an error it may have made.” Id. (quotation
and ellipsis omitted).
“The appealing party bears the burden of demonstrating that it raised its
issues before the trial forum.” Tiberghein v. B.R. Jones Roofing Co., 151 N.H.
391, 393 (2004). “Parties are not entitled to take later advantage of error they
could have discovered or chose to ignore at the very moment when it could
have been corrected.” Id. (quotation omitted).
At trial, petitioner’s counsel questioned her about the alleged assault
that occurred on January 9, 2004. Respondent’s counsel then objected. The
following colloquy ensued:
[Respondent’s counsel]: I, I’m going to object. You
know, we’ve been through this and we’ll stipulate
there’s a finding before the Court. The Court can take
2
judicial notice there’s a finding, you know. No reason
to relitigate this trial.
[Court]: I don’t . . . think I can. I mean I think I have
to accept the fact that there was a finding.
[Petitioner’s counsel]: Oh, yes. But it’s also part of
our fault grounds so — I’ll be happy to move on if
there’s a stipulation there was abuse and then, and
then I’ll make a connection to our fault grounds and
I’ll just move on.
[Respondent’s counsel]: I will only stipulate that
Master DalPra made a finding under the statute that
this incident arose.
Aside from this discussion regarding the prior finding of abuse, no res
judicata or collateral estoppel argument was raised at the final hearing. At no
point during the trial did petitioner’s counsel assert that the doctrines required
the court to accept the finding of assault by the Derry Family Division and
apply the finding when making parental rights and responsibility
determinations. Nor did the petitioner, after the trial court issued the divorce
decree in which it first made its finding that no abuse had occurred, raise the
issue in a motion to reconsider. See LaMontagne Builders v. Bowman Brook
Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 274 (2003).
Because the petitioner neither made “a contemporaneous and specific
objection” to the respondent’s testimony nor raised her theory in a motion for
reconsideration, the issue is not preserved for our review. Id.; Winstead, 150
N.H. at 246.
II. RSA 461-A:5, III
The petitioner next argues that, collateral estoppel notwithstanding, the
court erred when, despite the prior finding of abuse against the respondent, it
awarded sole parental decision-making responsibility under RSA 461-A:5, III to
him. Specifically, she argues that the court was required to award sole
decision-making power to her because of the prior finding of abuse. We
disagree.
When determining matters of custody, a trial court’s overriding concern
is the best interest of the child. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154
N.H. __, __, 911 A.2d 14, 21 (2006).
In doing so, the trial court has wide discretion, and we
will not overturn its determination except where there
3
has been an unsustainable exercise of discretion. This
means that we review the record only to determine
whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the
trial court’s discretionary judgment. The trial court’s
determination in any custody case depends to a large
extent upon the firsthand assessment of the credibility
of witnesses, as well as the character and
temperament of the parents, and the findings of the
trial court are binding upon this court if supported by
the evidence.
Id. at 21-22 (quotations and citations omitted).
Pursuant to RSA 461-A:4 (Supp. 2006), the trial court formulated a
parenting plan for the parties because communication between them was not
possible. The trial court found that the petitioner remained “terrified of the
Respondent for events which did not occur and the Respondent [was]
mistrustful of the Petitioner since he [had] already been subjected to the
criminal justice system as a result of Petitioner’s unfounded allegations.”
When devising a parenting plan relating to decision-making
responsibility under RSA 461-A:5, there is a presumption that joint decision-
making responsibility is in the best interest of the child unless there has been
a finding of abuse. RSA 461-A:5.
RSA 461-A:5, III provides:
Where the court finds that abuse as defined in RSA
173-B:1, I has occurred, the court shall consider such
abuse as harmful to children and as evidence in
determining whether joint decision-making
responsibility is appropriate. In such cases, the court
shall make orders for the allocation of parental rights
and responsibilities that best protect the children or
the abused spouse or both. If joint decision-making
responsibility is granted despite evidence of abuse, the
court shall provide written findings to support the
order.
The trial court, however, found that no abuse had occurred. While the
court acknowledged that the Derry Family Division had made such a finding,
the statute is not triggered by a finding of another court that abuse has
occurred. The statute applies only when “the court” responsible for allocating
parental rights finds that abuse has occurred. It is clear from the context that
“the court” making orders for the allocation of parental rights must be the
same court that makes the finding of abuse. Here, that court was the
4
Portsmouth Family Division, which found that no abuse occurred.
Accordingly, RSA 461-A:5, III did not apply.
The court considered the testimony of the guardian ad litem that the
respondent should have sole decision-making responsibility, the parties’
inability to communicate, the behavior of the parties and the child’s stability
and normalcy. Because there is evidence in the record to support the trial
court’s determination regarding decision-making responsibility, we cannot say
that the court’s exercise of discretion was unsustainable.
III. Grounds for Divorce
Finally, the petitioner argues that the trial court erred by not granting
the divorce on fault grounds. She again argues that the court erred by not
considering the finding of abuse against the respondent. We disagree.
Whether the irremediable breakdown of the marriage was caused by
irreconcilable differences or the respondent’s misconduct was a factual
question for the trial court. See Hampers, 154 N.H. at __, 911 A.2d at 20. We
will affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless the evidence does not
support them or they are legally erroneous. Id.
There is no statutory presumption that relates to fault under RSA 458:7
(2004). To obtain a divorce on fault grounds, the petitioner was required to
show that: (1) the respondent so treated her as “seriously to injure health or
endanger reason” during the marriage, RSA 458:7, V; and (2) the respondent’s
behavior was the primary cause of the breakdown of the marriage. See Ebbert
v. Ebbert, 123 N.H. 252, 254 (1983).
Both parties testified that their marriage began to deteriorate around
2003 and that they entered marriage counseling that same year. The trial
court found that the alleged “incidents of physical and verbal abuse” did not
occur. While the testimony presented by the parties conflicted, the trial judge
was in the best position to evaluate the evidence, measure its persuasiveness
and assess the credibility of witnesses. In the Matter of Gronvaldt &
Gronvaldt, 150 N.H. 551, 554 (2004). The record supports the trial court’s
findings, and we find no error in its decision to grant the divorce on the ground
that irreconcilable differences caused the irremediable breakdown of the
marriage. See RSA 458:7-a (2004).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5