THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Environmental Services
No. 2006-703
APPEAL OF REGENESIS CORPORATION
(New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
Waste Management Council)
Argued: May 10, 2007
Opinion Issued: November 30, 2007
Sheehan Phinney Bass & Green, P.A., of Manchester (Edward A. Haffer
and Robert P. Cheney on the brief, and Mr. Haffer orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jennifer J. Patterson, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Anderson & Kreiger, LLP, of Cambridge, Massachusetts (Douglas H.
Wilkins and Jeffrey L. Roelofs on the brief, and Mr. Wilkins orally), for
intervenor Citizens for a Future New Hampshire.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Ronald J. Lajoie and
Michael J. Tierney on the brief, and Mr. Tierney orally), for intervenor
Resident’s Environmental Action Committee for Health, Inc.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Regenesis Corporation (Regenesis),
appeals from a decision of the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services Waste Management Council upholding a hearing officer’s decision
revoking the petitioner’s solid waste permit. We affirm.
I
In November 2004, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (DES) issued a notice of proposed license action (NPLA) seeking to
revoke the solid waste facility permit held by Regenesis that authorized it to
store and use wood fuel derived from construction and demolition debris at a
facility in Hopkinton. The NPLA alleged that Regenesis officials made false or
misleading statements to DES during the course of permit proceedings, calling
into question whether Regenesis had the reliability and integrity to operate a
solid waste facility. Citizens for a Future New Hampshire (CFNH), Resident’s
Environmental Action Committee for Health, Inc. (REACH) and the Town of
Hopkinton (Town) all intervened in the revocation proceeding. In March 2005,
DES issued an amended notice of proposed license action (ANPLA), which
contained additional allegations regarding false and misleading statements and
omissions on the part of Regenesis.
Following a three-day evidentiary hearing at which seven witnesses
testified and all five parties were represented by counsel, the DES hearing
officer issued a ninety-two-page decision revoking Regenesis’ solid waste
permit. Regenesis appealed to the waste management council (council). See
RSA 21-O:9, V, :14 (2000). CFNH and REACH also filed appeals and the Town
intervened. After a non-evidentiary hearing, the council affirmed the
revocation of the permit. Regenesis, DES, CFNH and REACH all filed for
rehearing or clarification. In a written decision issued in September 2006, the
council denied all parties’ motions.
Regenesis appeals, arguing that: (1) the council erred in affirming the
hearing officer’s revocation decision, which was unreasonable and unlawful; (2)
the sanction imposed is unconstitutionally excessive and disproportionate; and
(3) to the extent that the decision makes findings and rulings that were
unnecessary to the determination of the alleged violations, those findings and
rulings should be vacated. The State cross-appeals, arguing that the council
erred in finding that the certification language in RSA 149-M:9 is limited to
existing officers, directors or partners. CFNH cross-appeals, arguing that: (1)
the permit should have been revoked on the additional ground that Regenesis’
officials lack sufficient reliability and integrity to operate a solid waste facility;
and (2) Bio Energy/Regenesis did not provide proper public notice in
connection with the solid waste permit applications. REACH cross-appeals,
arguing that the council erred: (1) in adopting the hearing officer’s decision
that Regenesis officials did not lack integrity and reliability; and (2) in
2
determining that the certification requirements of RSA 149-M:9 did not require
disclosure of a felony conviction for an officer who left the company less than
100 days prior to the certification.
Since 1983, Bio Energy Corporation and its successor, Bio Energy, LLC,
have operated a wood incinerator facility, burning wood chips to produce
electricity and steam. From 1983 to 2002, Bio Energy Corporation’s sole
shareholders were William Dell’Orfano and Anthony DiNapoli, each owning fifty
percent. Throughout that period, Dell’Orfano served as Bio Energy
Corporation’s president and, at different times, either Dell’Orfano or DiNapoli
served as treasurer and secretary and both served as directors.
On October 9, 2001, Bio Energy Corporation submitted an application to
the Division for a permit to construct and operate a solid waste facility. At that
time, DiNapoli was an officer, director and fifty percent shareholder of Bio
Energy Corporation. The Division requested a background investigation from
the environmental protection bureau (EPB) in connection with the initial
application and, as part of that investigation, on October 15, 2001, DiNapoli
submitted a personal history disclosure form to the attorney general’s office,
including a sworn statement that he had no criminal convictions. Three days
later, on October 18, 2001, DiNapoli was indicted for witness tampering. On
November 5, 2001, the attorney general’s office performed a criminal check of
DiNapoli that did not uncover the recently filed charges. On March 20, 2002,
the attorney general’s office, still unaware of the indictment, forwarded the
results of its Bio Energy Corporation background investigation to DES. On
March 25, 2002, while the initial permit application was still pending with
DES, DiNapoli was convicted in Hillsborough County Superior Court of felony
witness tampering. On May 28, 2002, DES issued a solid waste permit to Bio
Energy Corporation, without knowledge of DiNapoli’s conviction.
Dell’Orfano learned of DiNapoli’s conviction in June 2002. Dell’Orfano
realized that DiNapoli’s conviction was a “problem” for Bio Energy. Bio Energy
Corporation’s principals were preparing to dissolve the company and transfer
its assets to a new company, Bio Energy, LLC, in which DiNapoli was an
officer, director and shareholder of more than ten percent. Transfer of the solid
waste permit required DES approval through a type IV permit modification
application, which required certification on behalf of both the existing and
proposed permit holders that no officers, directors, or owners of more than ten
percent have been convicted of a felony within the prior five years. See N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Sw 303.14; 315.08.
Upon reviewing the type IV application form and the solid waste rules,
Dell’Orfano concluded that he could not truthfully make the required
certification on behalf of Bio Energy Corporation or Bio Energy, LLC. Instead,
Dell’Orfano persuaded DiNapoli to resign from Bio Energy Corporation and
3
decided to transfer the solid waste permit to Regenesis, a company with which
DiNapoli was not involved. DiNapoli resigned as an officer and director of Bio
Energy Corporation on August 29, 2002. Bio Energy Corporation had been
dissolved on August 28, 2002, the day before DiNapoli resigned. Its assets,
including the Bio Energy facility, the buildings, the underlying property, most
of the equipment and machinery and all permits, licenses, authorizations and
approvals issued or granted by a governmental agency, had been transferred to
Bio Energy, LLC on June 12, 2002. DiNapoli remained an officer, director and
shareholder of more than ten percent of Bio Energy, LLC.
In early December 2002, Bio Energy Corporation, Bio Energy, LLC and
Regenesis filed an application with DES to transfer the permit from Bio Energy
Corporation to Regenesis. The corporations gave the same mailing address as
Bio Energy, LLC and the check accompanying the application was drawn on a
Bio Energy, LLC account. Corporate officials represented to DES and the
attorney general’s office that the four individuals who would be required to
complete personal history disclosure forms had already completed the forms in
connection with the previous Bio Energy background investigation. With the
exception of DiNapoli, the officers and directors of Regenesis were the same as
the officers and directors of Bio Energy Corporation.
As part of the transfer application, Dell’Orfano certified on December 2,
2002, on behalf of Bio Energy Corporation and Regenesis, that no individual
holding ten percent or more of either entity’s debt or equity, and none of either
entity’s officers, directors, partners or managers had been convicted of a felony
during the five years before the date of the application. At no point during the
application process did Bio Energy Corporation or Regenesis inform DES of the
transfer of the permit to Bio Energy, LLC, nor was DES informed that other
environmental permits associated with the facility were not held by Regenesis
but by Bio Energy, LLC. On the transfer application Dell’Orfano signed a
statement on behalf of the existing permittee, Bio Energy Corporation, and the
proposed new permittee, Regenesis, that “[t]o the best of my knowledge and
belief, the information and material submitted herewith is correct and
complete. I understand that any approval granted by DES based on false
and/or incomplete information shall be subject to revocation or suspension.”
The permit transfer was approved on March 28, 2003.
On March 4, 2005, DES issued the NPLA against Regenesis. The NPLA
and the ANPLA alleged that Dell’Orfano made a false or misleading statement
when he certified on December 2, 2002, that none of Bio Energy’s officers or
directors had been convicted of a felony in the five years prior to the
application for permit transfer, and that Regenesis officials’ false or misleading
statements and omissions to DES in the course of the permit proceedings
called into question whether Regenesis had the reliability and integrity to
operate a solid waste facility. Regenesis objected to the proposed permit
4
revocation and denied that it had wrongfully withheld information about the
conviction or that it had in any way violated or failed to comply with the solid
waste statutes and rules. Specifically, Regenesis asserted that Dell’Orfano’s
certification was true because DiNapoli sold his interest in Bio Energy
Corporation before the December 2002 transfer application that contained the
certification.
Following a hearing, the hearing officer issued a decision revoking the
permit. The hearing officer’s decision contains numerous findings that
Regenesis’ officials acted in a false or misleading manner by failing to inform
DES of DiNapoli’s felony conviction or of his resignation from Bio Energy
Corporation, or of his continued involvement with the facility through Bio
Energy, LLC, and by failing to inform DES of the dissolution of Bio Energy
Corporation and the transfer of its assets, including its environmental permits,
to a different entity. The hearing officer noted “[t]he importance that the
Legislature ascribed to preventing organizations associated with convicted
felons from obtaining solid waste permits” and the provisions in the statute
and rules to this effect. The hearing officer rejected Regenesis’ contention that
Dell’Orfano’s certification was truthful. He stated:
The “existing permittee” in the 2002 transfer application was
Bio Energy Corporation. The application was submitted to DES on
December 6, 2002. Mr. DiNapoli had been an officer in the
corporation, and he had been convicted of a felony on March 25,
2002. Mr. Dell’Orfano’s certification that no corporate officer or
director had been convicted of a felony within five years of the
application date was not rendered true by the mere device of
having Mr. DiNapoli resign from the corporation. The certification
was not complete, it was less than candid, and it was literally false.
Because it was false, it was also misleading. Lacking
accurate information about Mr. DiNapoli’s criminal background,
DES approved the transfer of the permit to Regenesis on March 28,
2003 without knowledge that Bio Energy Corporation might not be
eligible to hold it or transfer it. The original permit had been
issued to Bio Energy on May 28, 2002, after Mr. DiNapoli’s
conviction (he, too, having failed to amend or withdraw a Personal
History Disclosure Form that was no longer accurate), a
circumstance that made the permit voidable, rather than
transferable.
The hearing officer also addressed the question of whether revocation
was an appropriate sanction for the company’s failure to be candid about the
felony conviction. He concluded that the permit should be revoked. As he
stated:
5
DES proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the Bio
Energy Corporation solid waste permit was transferred to
Regenesis based, in part, on the false and misleading certification
by Mr. Dell’Orfano that no corporate principals had been convicted
of a felony within the relevant five year period. The false
certification by Mr. Dell’Orfano in his role as agent for both Bio
Energy Corporation and Regenesis, misled DES with respect to
whether the existing permittee met an important statutory and
regulatory criterion for holding a solid waste permit. Mr.
Dell’Orfano’s provision of the false and misleading certification that
no corporate principal has been convicted of a felony within five
years of the transfer application is good cause to revoke the permit.
The hearing officer declined to revoke the permit on the alternative ground that
Regenesis lacked the reliability and integrity to operate a solid waste facility.
He also concluded that the company properly notified abutters in the 2002
permit transfer proceedings and 2003 permit modification proceedings.
Regenesis appealed the permit revocation to the council. The council
ruled that the certification language contained in RSA 149-M:9 “is limited to
existing officers, directors or partners not past officers, directors or partners.”
Nevertheless, the council affirmed, stating that it agreed with all other findings
and conclusions reached by the hearing officer and “that these, even absent
the certification language finding, are sufficient to support the decision to
revoke the permit.”
II
To prevail on appeal, Regenesis must show that the hearing officer’s
decision and the council’s order affirming it were “clearly unreasonable or
unlawful.” RSA 541:13 (2007). The hearing officer’s findings of fact “shall be
deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable” and the decision “shall not be
set aside or vacated except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a
clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is unjust or
unreasonable.” Id. The presumption that the hearing officer’s findings of fact
are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable may be overcome only by a
showing that there was no evidence from which he could conclude as he did.
See Appeal of Basani, 149 N.H. 259, 261-62 (2003). As a fact-finder, the
hearing officer was at liberty to accept or reject the testimony before him as he
saw fit and his conclusions are entitled to great weight. See Plymouth Fire
District v. Water Pollution Comm’n, 103 N.H. 169, 173-74 (1961).
6
III
Pursuant to the New Hampshire Solid Waste Management Act, RSA
chapter 149-M (2005 & Supp. 2007) (Act), no person may operate a solid waste
facility, or transfer a solid waste permit to any other person, without prior
approval from DES. RSA 149-M:9, I, XII. Under the Act, the commissioner of
DES has adopted administrative rules to implement the permit system. N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Sw 100 et seq. (solid waste rules).1 Within DES, the waste
management division (Division) regulates the management and disposal of solid
waste.
DES may deny a corporation’s solid waste permit application if “any of its
officers, directors, partners, key employees or persons or business entities
holding 10 percent or more of its equity or debt liability has been convicted of
. . . a felony in any state or federal court during the 5 years before the date of
the permit application.” RSA 149-M:9, IX(c). Under the solid waste rules, an
applicant for a solid waste permit, whether through initial application or permit
transfer, must certify that no individual holding ten percent or more of the
applicant’s debt or equity, and none of the officers, directors, partners or
managers have been convicted of a felony during the five years before the date
of the application. N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Sw 303.14(a), (b)(1). For a permit
transfer, both the proposed permit holder and the existing permit holder must
make this certification. Id. 315.03, 315.08.
The Division is authorized to ask the EPB of the attorney general’s office
to conduct background investigations of individuals and entities affiliated with
a solid waste permit application in order to assist in discovering criminal
convictions. RSA 149-M:9, III. One of the EPB’s forms that applicants must
execute under oath in connection with the background investigation is a
personal history disclosure form. This form requires an affidavit affirming that
it is complete and accurate and instructs the applicant to
ANSWER COMPLETELY AND TRUTHFULLY. . . . Be especially
careful not to leave out information in a way that might create an
impression that you are trying to hide it. For example, a minor
criminal conviction probably would not disqualify the applicant,
but attempting to conceal the conviction may lead to a finding of
untrustworthiness, and result in disqualification. Omitting such
information from this form, even unintentionally, may result in
your trustworthiness being questioned.
1 We note that the solid waste rules have been redesignated from Env-Wm to Env-Sw and we utilize the
current designation.
7
The EPB conducts a criminal record check of the individuals listed as officers
and directors of the prospective permit holder. This background investigation
is separate from the DES permit proceeding. During the background
investigation, the applicant forwards the required forms directly to the EPB,
which issues a report to DES at the conclusion of the investigation. The EPB
does not review the permit application materials filed with DES.
IV
The first issue raised by Regenesis is whether the council erred in
affirming the hearing officer’s revocation of its solid waste permit. Regenesis
argues that the hearing officer designated four issues for hearing: reliability
and integrity, notice to abutters, certification, and dissolution. According to
Regenesis, because the hearing officer resolved the first two issues in favor of
Regenesis and the Council rejected his ruling against Regenesis on the third
issue, “only the dissolution issue remains as the basis for revocation of [its]
solid waste permit . . . [and] the incontrovertible documentary proof is that
Regenesis did disclose that dissolution.” We disagree with this constrained
reading of the hearing officer’s decision and the issues before him.
The central issue before the hearing officer was whether Regenesis’
course of conduct during the permitting process was sufficiently false or
misleading to justify revoking the company’s solid waste permit. Under the
DES solid waste rules, “good cause” for revoking a solid waste permit exists if
the permit was issued based upon false or misleading information; if the permit
holder violated the Act, RSA chapter 149-M, or its underlying rules; or if DES
would have had grounds for denying the permit. N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Sw
306.05. Despite Regenesis’ literal parsing of the hearing officer’s decision, our
review of the record reveals support for his conclusion that the DES permit was
issued based upon false or misleading information. The overall course of
conduct engaged in by Regenesis officials in submitting the relevant
applications was intended to prevent DES from learning of DiNapoli’s felony
conviction while still a half-owner of Bio Energy Corporation.
The record supports the hearing officer’s findings that Regenesis omitted
relevant facts from its permit transfer application, gave the misleading
impression that the officers and key employees for Regenesis were the same as
for Bio Energy Corporation, failed to inform DES that the other facility permits
were held by a different company with which DiNapoli was still involved,and
failed to disclose DiNapoli’s conviction despite a direct inquiry by DES
concerning DiNapoli’s involvement. In addition, the record supports the
hearing officer’s findings that DiNapoli remained an officer, director and
shareholder of Bio Energy, LLC after he resigned from Bio Energy Corporation,
that Bio Energy, LLC held all the environmental permits except the solid waste
8
permit (the only permit whose application required disclosure of felony
convictions), and that operation of the electric generation facility for purposes
of the DES air permit held by Bio Energy, LLC is essentially identical to
operation of the solid waste facility for purposes of the solid waste permit held
by Regenesis. We hold that the hearing officer’s conclusions and the council’s
order affirming his decision, that Regenesis provided DES with false or
misleading information during the permitting process, were supported by the
extensive evidence submitted and were neither unjust nor unreasonable.
The second issue raised by Regenesis is whether the sanction imposed,
revocation of the permit, is unconstitutionally excessive and disproportionate.
Regenesis argues that “[t]o have one’s permit revoked for allegedly failing to
disclose that an existing permittee was in dissolution” is an “unconstitutional
denial of substantive due process, and an unconstitutional taking of a property
right.” On the issue of remedy, we review an agency’s decision regarding the
remedial sanction to impose under the unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard. See Appeal of Verizon New England, 153 N.H. 50, 66 (2005).
As discussed above, we do not read the hearings officer’s decision as
based solely upon the failure of Regenesis to disclose that Bio Energy
Corporation was in dissolution. We have affirmed the hearing officer’s
determination that Regenesis officials acted in a false or misleading manner.
The regulatory scheme provides that a permit “shall be revoked if the
department determines . . . that [g]ood cause . . . exists.” N.H. Admin. Rules,
Env-Sw 306.04(1). “Good cause” to revoke a permit exists where “[i]ssuance of
the permit was based on false or misleading information.” Id. 306.05(b). The
legislature’s decision to authorize revocation in such circumstances does not
result in an unconstitutionally excessive penalty and we cannot say that the
hearing officer’s decision to impose this statutorily authorized sanction was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, Regenesis proposes that any findings and rulings made by the
hearing officer that were “unnecessary to the determination of the ‘violations
alleged’” be vacated and have no precedential or binding effect. Regenesis cites
no authority requiring us to vacate findings and rulings deemed by Regenesis
to be unnecessary and we decline to do so.
V
The State has cross-appealed, arguing that it was unreasonable and
unlawful for the council to rule that the certification language contained in
RSA 149-M:9 applies only to existing officers, directors and partners. We
review an agency’s interpretation of a statute de novo. Appeal of Franklin
Lodge of Elks, 151 N.H. 565, 567 (2004).
9
RSA 149-M:9, IX(c) provides that DES “may deny a permit application
. . . to a person if . . . [i]n the case of a corporation or business entity, . . . any
of its officers, directors, partners, key employees or persons or business
entities holding 10 percent or more of its equity or debt liability has been
convicted of, or pled guilty or no contest to, a felony in any state or federal
court during the 5 years before the date of the permit application.” The solid
waste rule requiring the filing of a compliance certification provides in part:
(a) The applicant shall certify that each of the statements listed
in (b) below are true for each of the following individuals and
entities:
(1) The applicant;
(2) The owner;
(3) The facility operator;
(4) All individuals and entities holding 10% or more of the
applicant’s debt or equity;
(5) All of the applicant’s officers, directors, and partners;
(6) All individuals and entities having managerial or
supervisory or substantial decision-making authority and
responsibility for the management of facility operations or
the activity(s) for which approval is being sought . . . .
(b) The applicant shall certify that each of the following
statements are true:
(1) No individual or entity listed in (a) above has been
convicted of or plead [sic] guilty or no contest to a felony in
any state or federal court during the 5 years before the date
of the application . . . .
N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Sw 303.14.
The hearing officer determined:
The certification language refers to the “existing” permittee,
but it is not limited to “existing” officers, directors or partners of
the existing permittee, as Regenesis now argues. To the contrary,
the scope of the certification is defined as “all” of the existing
permittee’s officers, directors and partners. “All” of an applicant’s
officers, directors and partners necessarily includes present and
former holders of those positions. This requirement derives from
the wording of the certification itself, in contrast to the
interpretation of the wording argued by Regenesis, which is based
on words (“existing” or “current”) that do not appear in the statute,
rules or application forms.
10
On appeal, the council modified this finding, concluding that “RSA 149-M:9 is
limited to existing officers, directors or partners not past officers, directors or
partners.”
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. We look first to the statutory language itself, and where possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used.” Green Meadows
Mobile Homes v. City of Concord, 156 N.H. ___, ___ (decided October 31, 2007)
(citation omitted).
We agree with the council’s interpretation that the statutory provision is
intended to cover those individuals who, at the time of the application, fall
within the enumerated categories. The statute’s use of the word “holding,”
indicates that persons currently involved in the company’s affairs are those
who are intended to fall within the statute’s requirements. The five-year time
limitation applies to the length of time within which a person was convicted of,
or pled guilty or no contest to, a felony in order to mandate disclosure. A
person currently holding ten percent of the company’s debt liability would not,
for example, have to disclose a felony conviction that occurred six years prior to
the application for a solid waste permit. The statutory language does not
plainly cover those persons who “have held” stock in the past and we will not
read such language into the statute.
We hold that the hearing officer’s decision revoking the solid waste
permit was supported by the evidence and was not unreasonable. Because of
our holding, we need not address the issues raised by the intervenors.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11