THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-362
CARLSON'S CHRYSLER
v.
CITY OF CONCORD
Argued: April 3, 2007
Opinion Issued: November 8, 2007
McNeill, Taylor and Gallo, P.A., of Dover (Stephen H. Roberts on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Paul F. Cavanaugh, city solicitor, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the
defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, City of Concord (City), appeals a
ruling by the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) that a portion of the City’s zoning
ordinance regulating electronic changeable copy signs is unconstitutional. We
reverse.
The plaintiff, Carlson’s Chrysler (Carlson’s), owns and operates an
automobile dealership in Concord. In 2005, Carlson’s submitted an
application to the City to erect an electronic changeable copy sign on its
property to replace an existing manual changeable sign. The proposed sign
would electronically display messages advertising Carlson’s vehicle inventory.
The City’s code administrator denied the application based upon a section of
the sign ordinance that prohibits “[s]igns which move or create an illusion of
movement except those parts which solely indicate date, time, or temperature.”
Concord, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art. 28-6-7 (2001). Carlson’s appealed to the
Concord Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA), which, after a public hearing,
upheld the decision of the code administrator. Carlson’s appealed the ZBA’s
decision to the superior court, which held that the City’s ordinance violated the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution as an unlawful
infringement upon commercial speech.
The City appeals, arguing that the trial court erred: (1) in finding that
the zoning ordinance constituted an unconstitutional infringement upon
commercial speech; (2) by applying the wrong standard of review when it found
no evidence that regulating electronic signs will promote public safety or
aesthetics; and (3) in finding that there are less intrusive methods the City
could use to achieve its goals.
Concord’s zoning ordinance contains detailed regulations governing
signs. The purposes of the sign regulations are to:
(a) Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the City of Concord; (b) Maintain and enhance
the appearance and aesthetic environment of the City, particularly
in downtown Concord and Penacook, and along the highway
corridors leading into the City; (c) Retain the City’s ability to attract
and encourage economic development and growth; (d) Improve
pedestrian and traffic safety; (e) Minimize potential adverse effects
of signs on nearby public and private property; and (f) Enable fair
and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
Concord, N.H., Zoning Ordinance art. 28-6-1 (2000). At the time of Carlson’s
application for a sign permit, article 28-6-7 of the ordinance prohibited “(a)
Signs which move or create an illusion of movement except those parts which
solely indicate date, time, or temperature” and “(h) Signs which appear
animated or projected, or which are intermittently illuminated or of a traveling,
tracing, or sequential light type, or signs which contain or are illuminated by
animated or flashing light, except such portions of a sign as consist solely of
indicators of time, date, and temperature.” Id. art. 28-6-7(a), (h).
Following the trial court’s decision, the City amended its zoning
ordinance to prohibit all electronic message centers, including those indicating
time, date and temperature. The constitutionality of the amended statute was
challenged in the United States District Court for the District of New
Hampshire, where the district court held that the amended statute is content-
neutral and constitutes a lawful time, place and manner restriction upon
commercial speech in compliance with the test in Ward v. Rock Against
2
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989). See Naser Jewelers, Inc. v. City of Concord,
2007 WL 1847307, at *3-4 (D.N.H. June 25, 2007). The district court’s
decision is not at issue in this appeal.
The First Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
“Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the
press . . . .” U.S. CONST. amend. I. The Fourteenth Amendment makes this
limitation applicable to the States, see Gitlow v. New York, 268 U.S. 652, 666
(1925), and to their political subdivisions, see Lovell v. Griffin, 303 U.S. 444,
450 (1938).
While signs are a form of expression protected by the Free Speech
Clause, they pose distinctive problems that are subject to
municipalities’ police powers. Unlike oral speech, signs take up
space and may obstruct views, distract motorists, displace
alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that
legitimately call for regulation.
City of Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U.S. 43, 48 (1994). Signs, “like other media of
communication, combine communicative and noncommunicative aspects.”
Metromedia, Inc. v. San Diego, 453 U.S. 490, 502 (1981). “As with other
media, the government has legitimate interests in controlling the
noncommunicative aspects of the medium, but the First and Fourteenth
Amendments foreclose a similar interest in controlling the communicative
aspects.” Id. (citation omitted). “Because regulation of the noncommunicative
aspects of a medium often impinges to some degree on the communicative
aspects, it has been necessary for the courts to reconcile the government’s
regulatory interests with the individuals’ right to expression.” Id.
Commercial speech is defined as “expression related solely to the
economic interests of the speaker and its audience.” Central Hudson Gas &
Elec. v. Public Serv. Comm’n, 447 U.S. 557, 561 (1980). The Constitution
“accords a lesser protection to commercial speech than to other
constitutionally guaranteed expression.” Id. at 563. “The protection available
for particular commercial expression turns on the nature both of the
expression and of the governmental interests served by its regulation.” Id. In
Central Hudson, the Supreme Court adopted a four-part test for determining
the validity of government restrictions on commercial speech. Under this test,
courts consider: (1) whether the advertising is neither unlawful nor misleading
and therefore entitled to First Amendment protection; (2) whether the
ordinance seeks to implement a substantial governmental interest; (3) whether
the ordinance directly advances that interest; and (4) whether the ordinance
reaches no further than necessary to accomplish its stated goals. Id. at 566.
3
The trial court found that the commercial speech proposed to be
displayed by Carlson’s is neither unlawful nor misleading and therefore is
entitled to First Amendment protection. However, the court also found that
although the City’s concerns for public safety and aesthetics are “substantial
governmental goals” that satisfy the second prong of the Central Hudson test,
the City failed to meet its burden of proving that the ordinances advance its
asserted interests and reach no further than necessary because the City
presented no evidence that regulating the content of electronic display signs
will promote aesthetics or public safety.
Regarding aesthetics, the trial court stated that
the ZBA expressed many concerns that numerous signs in a small
area might lead to visual clutter or otherwise be unsightly.
However, the City’s ban on electronic display signs does not take
into account the character of the area in which a sign is proposed
to be placed or the size of the sign or its lettering. For example, the
Court can take judicial notice that the sign proposed in this case
will be situated among many other commercial entities with large,
lit advertising signs of their own. It is difficult to imagine that
electronic display signs in this area will have an aesthetically
negative effect.
Regarding public safety, the trial court stated that “the City contends that the
changing displays of the proposed sign might be distracting to motorists and
lead to increased traffic accidents. While this may have a common sense
appeal, no evidence was presented to support such a concern.”
We disagree with the trial court’s analysis. In Metromedia, the United
States Supreme Court considered the validity of an ordinance in the city of San
Diego which banned offsite commercial billboards while allowing onsite
commercial billboards. Metromedia, 453 U.S. at 495-96. It was asserted that
the record in that case was inadequate to show any connection between
billboards and traffic safety and that the City had therefore failed to prove that
the ordinance directly advanced governmental interests in traffic safety. Id. at
508. The Supreme Court recognized that the California Supreme Court had
held “as a matter of law that an ordinance which eliminates billboards designed
to be viewed from streets and highways reasonably relates to highway safety.”
Id. As the Court stated, “[n]oting that billboards are intended to, and
undoubtedly do, divert a driver’s attention from the roadway . . . the California
Supreme Court agreed with many other courts that a legislative judgment that
billboards are traffic hazards is not manifestly unreasonable and should not be
set aside.” Id. at 508-09 (quotations and citations omitted). The Supreme
Court “likewise hesitate[d] to disagree with the accumulated, commonsense
judgments of local lawmakers and of the many reviewing courts that billboards
4
are real and substantial hazards to traffic safety. There is nothing to suggest
that these judgments are unreasonable.” Id. at 509.
The Court reached a similar conclusion regarding advancement of the
city’s “esthetic interests.” Id. at 510. As the Court stated:
It is not speculative to recognize that billboards by their very
nature, wherever located and however constructed, can be
perceived as an “esthetic harm.” San Diego, like many States and
other municipalities, has chosen to minimize the presence of such
structures. Such esthetic judgments are necessarily subjective,
defying objective evaluation, and for that reason must be carefully
scrutinized to determine if they are only a public rationalization of
an impermissible purpose. But there is no claim in this case that
San Diego has as an ulterior motive the suppression of speech,
and the judgment involved here is not so unusual as to raise
suspicions in itself.
Id.; see also Lorillard Tobacco Co. v. Reilly, 533 U.S. 525, 555 (2001) (speech
restrictions may be justified based solely on history, consensus, and simple
common sense); City Council v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789, 806-07
(1984) (municipalities have a weighty, essentially esthetic interest in
proscribing intrusive and unpleasant formats for expression).
“[Z]oning is a legislative function, and judging the wisdom of the
legislation is not the function of this court.” Taylor v. Town of Plaistow, 152
N.H. 142, 145 (2005). “The State zoning enabling act grants municipalities
broad authority to pass zoning ordinances for the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the community.” Id. “In enacting a zoning regulation, a
town may consider the knowledge of town selectmen and planning board
members concerning such factors as traffic conditions and surrounding uses
resulting from their familiarity with the area involved.” Id. “Furthermore, a
municipality may exercise its zoning power solely to advance aesthetic values
because the preservation or enhancement of the visual environment may
promote the general welfare.” Id.
The City “need not provide detailed proof that the regulation advances its
purported interests of safety and aesthetics,” Center for Bio-Ethical v. City and
County of Hono., 455 F.3d 910, 922 (9th Cir. 2006), and we hold that the trial
court erred in substituting its judgment for that of the City’s that prohibiting
animated, flashing signs containing commercial advertising will “enhance the
appearance and aesthetic environment of the City” and “improve traffic safety.”
Such a determination is not “manifestly unreasonable and should not be set
aside.” Metromedia, 453 U.S. at 509.
5
Finally, with respect to the fourth prong of the Central Hudson test, the
trial court found that “the City has available other, more narrowly tailored
means to meet its desired objectives. To protect its interests, the City could
regulate the number, proximity or placement of electronic display signs or it
could ban all types of electronic signs, including those displaying time, date
and temperature.” We disagree that the City, by prohibiting all electronic signs
displaying commercial speech, has drawn an ordinance broader than necessary
to meet and advance its substantial interests of traffic safety and aesthetics.
The most effective way to eliminate the problems raised by electronic signs
containing commercial advertising is to prohibit them. See Metromedia, 453
U.S. at 508. The City continues to allow other means of commercial
advertising of a non-electronic nature.
We do not consider whether the challenged ordinance unfairly
distinguishes among various types of non-commercial speech as Carlson has
not advanced that argument.
Reversed.
DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DUGGAN, J., concurred specially.
DUGGAN, J., concurring specially. I agree with the court’s opinion but
write separately to make two points.
First, whether the test articulated in Central Hudson Gas v. Public
Service Commission of New York, 447 U.S. 557 (1980), which applies when an
ordinance regulates only commercial speech, applies to this ordinance is
debatable. The ordinance does not restrict only commercial speech, and
instead applies equally to all “[s]igns which move or create an illusion of
movement except those parts which solely indicate date, time, or temperature.”
Concord, N.H. Zoning Ordinance art. 28-6-7 (2001). As such, both commercial
and non-commercial signs are prohibited under the ordinance. See La Tour v.
City of Fayetteville, Ark., 442 F.3d 1094, 1096-97 (8th Cir. 2006) (treating sign
regulation with exception permitting messages displaying time and/or
temperature as applicable to both commercial and non-commercial speech).
For this type of ordinance, which does not on its face distinguish
between commercial and non-commercial speech, a significant number of
courts have found that the Central Hudson test does not apply. See Solantic,
LLC v. City of Neptune Beach, 410 F.3d 1250, 1268-69 n.5 (11th Cir. 2005)
(where city code regulated all signs, including appellant’s electronic message
sign, without distinguishing between signs bearing commercial and
noncommercial messages, “the Central Hudson test has no application”);
Cleveland Area Bd. of Realtors v. City of Euclid, 88 F.3d 382, 386 (6th Cir.
1996) (where City argued that ordinance regulating placement and size of signs
6
in residential neighborhoods should be analyzed under Central Hudson, court
found issue moot, but concluded “that use of the commercial speech test would
be inappropriate”); Moser v. F.C.C., 46 F.3d 970, 973 (9th Cir. 1995) (where
statute regulating automated telemarketing calls did not distinguish between
commercial and non-commercial speech, Central Hudson test not applicable);
XXL of Ohio, Inc. v. City of Broadview Heights, 341 F. Supp. 2d 765, 783 (N.D.
Ohio 2004) (Central Hudson does not apply if ordinance restricts both
commercial and non-commercial signs and, instead, “more stringent ‘time,
place, and manner’ test . . . is used”); cf. Naser Jewelers, Inc. v. City of
Concord, N.H., 2007 WL 1847307, at *2, 4 (D.N.H. June 25, 2007) (applying
time, place, and manner test to amended Concord ordinance prohibiting, inter
alia, all “electronic message center type signs,” and finding ordinance is likely
constitutional).
On appeal, neither party has briefed the applicability of a test other than
Central Hudson. Accordingly, I agree with the majority that, for the purposes
of this appeal, we should analyze the First Amendment issues using the
Central Hudson framework.
Second, the superior court relied in part on the exception for time, date
and temperature in holding that the ordinance is unconstitutional. On appeal,
the parties in their briefs and at oral argument discussed the effect of this
exception on the analysis.
The four-prong Central Hudson test requires courts to consider: (1)
whether the advertising is neither unlawful nor misleading and is therefore
entitled to First Amendment protection; (2) whether the ordinance seeks to
implement a substantial governmental interest; (3) whether the ordinance
directly advances that interest; and (4) whether the ordinance reaches no
further than necessary to accomplish its stated goals. Central Hudson, 447
U.S. at 566. In my view, Central Hudson requires us to account for the
exception for time, date and temperature. See Flying J Travel Plaza v. Com.,
928 S.W.2d 344, 348-49 (Ky. 1996) (analyzing whether sign regulation’s
exception for time, date and temperature directly advances governmental
interest). This exception in the ordinance makes the analysis under Central
Hudson a closer question, but I would nonetheless conclude that the time, date
and temperature exception also directly and materially advances the City’s
interests and reaches no further than necessary to accomplish its stated goals.
Because a message displaying time, date and temperature is short and
rudimentary, the City could have reasonably found that such a message is less
distracting and thus poses less of a traffic hazard than other messages. See
Fayetteville, 442 F.3d at 1097. Such determination by the City is not
“manifestly unreasonable and should not be set aside.” Metromedia, Inc. v.
City of San Diego, 453 U.S. 490, 509 (1981).
7