THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2006-674
IN RE JUVENILE 2006-674
Argued: March 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2007
Jordan, Maynard and Parodi, PLLC, of Nashua (Steven L. Maynard on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jill A. Desrochers, attorney, on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
HICKS, J. The respondent, father of the juvenile, appeals an order of the
Hillsborough County Probate Court (Patten, J.) terminating his parental rights
for failure to correct conditions that had led to a prior finding of neglect under
RSA chapter 169-C (2002 & Supp. 2006). See RSA 170-C:5, III (2002). We
affirm.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or appear in the
record before us. The juvenile was born on May 20, 1998. On September 9,
1998, the New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF)
filed a petition for neglect against the juvenile’s mother alleging that the
juvenile was in imminent danger and “likely to suffer additional serious
impairment” due to the mother’s “continued abuse of alcohol.” As a result, the
juvenile was placed with a foster family with whom he has remained since
October 13, 1998.
The respondent has been involved in the abuse and neglect proceedings
in the district court since their inception. His reported concerns about the
mother were recounted in the supporting affidavit to the abuse and neglect
petition, and he appeared at the adjudicatory hearing on the petition. For
some six years after the finding of neglect against the mother, DCYF, at the
court’s behest at numerous review hearings, made repeated efforts to foster
conditions under which the respondent could assume full custody of the
juvenile. For example, the respondent was provided with various forms of
assistance, including parent aides and home based services. He was ordered
to participate in parenting classes, maintain appropriate housing, remain
sober, and continue counseling “to address . . . his poor interpersonal skills
and his parenting abilities.”
The respondent’s “poor interpersonal skills” were a primary concern
throughout the abuse and neglect proceedings. According to a court-ordered
psychological evaluation, the respondent “has an extensive history of mental
illness with an array of diagnoses assigned over the years: Bipolar Disorder,
Mixed Personality Disorder with paranoid, histrionic, narcissistic, dependant,
and/or borderline traits, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, Depression, and a
provisional diagnosis of Schizo-affective Disorder.” The Nashua District Court
(Howorth, J.) noted that a “feature of [the respondent’s personality] disorder is
a marked inability to avoid hostile and intimidating behavior when confronted
with persons and situations which he regards as being non-supportive.”
On December 19, 2000, the District Court (Howorth, J.) established a
“provisional permanency plan of reunification” of the juvenile with the
respondent. Sometime prior to April 2003, the respondent sought legal and
physical custody through a “Bill F.” proceeding in the Nashua District Court.
See In re Bill F., 145 N.H. 267 (2000); see also RSA 169-C:19-e (2002). The
District Court (Leary, J.) found that the respondent was “not fit to assume full
custody of his son at this time.”
Nevertheless, reunification of the respondent and the juvenile remained
the goal through at least July 16, 2003. The respondent’s behavior, however,
continued to be problematic. Orders from a post-permanency review hearing
before the District Court (Leary, J.) noted that “[r]eports from DCYF, CASA
[(Court Appointed Special Advocates)], and SNHS [(Southern New Hampshire
Services)] document ongoing and repeated incidents of inappropriate and
threatening actions by [the respondent].” These actions apparently included
“telling a worker at SNHS that ‘he [the respondent] could be one of those people
you hear about on top of a roof shooting people.’”
2
On July 9, 2004, the District Court (Leary, J.) entered a permanency
order finding the respondent “unfit to perform the parental duties required to
provide for the financial and emotional support for [the juvenile].” The court
opined that “[b]ased on the history of [the respondent’s] behavior, and the
nature of his diagnosis, it is highly unlikely that this behavior will change in
the future.” On October 4, 2004, the District Court (Leary, J.) ordered that
DCYF was no longer required to make reasonable efforts toward reunification
between the juvenile and either parent and authorized DCYF to initiate the
termination of parental rights.
The probate court terminated the respondent’s parental rights on August
3, 2006, finding beyond a reasonable doubt that, “after a finding of child
neglect under RSA 169-C, [the respondent] has failed to correct the conditions
that lead to the finding of neglect, within 12 months, indeed, within 6 years, of
that finding, despite reasonable efforts under the direction of the district court
to rectify the conditions.”
On appeal, the respondent argues: (1) that the trial court impermissibly
expanded the grounds for terminating parental rights under RSA 170-C:5, III,
thereby violating his state and federal due process and equal protection rights;
and (2) that there was insufficient evidence to establish, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that the respondent had failed to correct conditions of neglect.
“Before a court may order the termination of a parent’s rights, the
petitioning party must prove a statutory ground for termination beyond a
reasonable doubt.” In re Juvenile 2003-195, 150 N.H. 644, 648 (2004). Under
the statutory ground alleged in the petition against the respondent, parental
rights may be terminated when “[t]he parents, subsequent to a finding of child
neglect or abuse under RSA 169-C, have failed to correct the conditions leading
to such a finding within 12 months of the finding despite reasonable efforts
under the direction of the district court to rectify the conditions.” RSA 170-
C:5, III. Once the probate court has found the petitioning party’s burden of
proof to be satisfied, “it must then consider whether termination is in the
child’s best interest.” Juvenile 2003-195, 150 N.H. at 648. “We will not
disturb the probate court’s decree unless it is unsupported by the evidence or
plainly erroneous as a matter of law.” Id.
The respondent argues that “the trial court improperly expanded the
statutory definitions of RSA 170-C:5 to accommodate a theory of termination of
parental rights not authorized by the statute.” He contends that the court
erroneously accepted the State’s theory tying the district court’s prior finding,
at the Bill F. hearing, of the respondent’s unfitness “to allegations of a failure to
correct conditions of neglect, as creating the basis to terminate” his parental
rights. We disagree.
3
The petition for termination of the respondent’s parental rights alleged
that “[p]ursuant to RSA 169-C: 19-e, [the respondent] was found by the
Nashua District Court . . . not fit to assume full custody of [the juvenile].” The
petition clearly stated, however, that the ground for termination was failure to
correct conditions of neglect pursuant to RSA 170-C:5, III. The probate court
also clearly ruled that it did not base the termination of the respondent’s
parental rights upon the outcome of the Bill F. hearing. Rather, the court
stated:
[The respondent’s] actions and inactions found by the district court
in its orders on the fitness question under RSA 169-C:19-e, . . .
and the permanency hearing order leading to the termination of
parental rights proceedings . . . are facts presented as evidence,
among other evidence presented, for a determination that [the
respondent] ultimately failed to correct the conditions of neglect
that [the juvenile] suffered, and would likely continue to suffer
because of those failures.
We agree. The court heard testimony from a number of witnesses over
six days of hearing. It recounted numerous prior orders of the district court
throughout the six-year history of the abuse and neglect proceedings, as well
as the child impact assessment and CASA’s guardian ad litem report. We
conclude that the trial court did not use the district court’s prior finding of
unfitness at the Bill F. hearing as “the basis to terminate” the respondent’s
parental rights.
The respondent also argues that the trial court erroneously “expanded
the statutory definitions of RSA 170-C:5” by concluding that the neglect
suffered by the juvenile was not his mother’s alcoholism, but the actual and
potential impairment of his well being. He offers, as evidence that the court
read the statutory language more broadly “than a literal reading would
indicate,” the following statement by the trial court: “[I]t is not the [mother’s]
alcoholism that is the statutory neglect. Rather, it is the likelihood of or actual
serious impairment of the child’s physical, emotional, and mental well being
that are the conditions of neglect that must be repaired and corrected in the
district court process.”
RSA 169-C:3, XIX (2002) defines “[n]eglected child” to include a child:
(b) Who is without proper parental care or control, subsistence,
education as required by law, or other care or control necessary for
his physical, mental, or emotional health, when it is established
4
that his health has suffered or is very likely to suffer serious
impairment . . . .
The trial court accurately interpreted and applied the statute.
The respondent further contends that his parental rights may not be
terminated under RSA 170-C:5, III, consistently with due process, where he
“had nothing at all to do with the underlying factors that caused his son to be
brought within the protective umbrella of RSA 169–C proceedings” and both
the district and probate courts expressly found that he neither abused nor
neglected his son. The respondent’s argument has long been foreclosed by In
re Tricia H., 126 N.H. 418 (1985), in which we held that subsection III of RSA
170-C:5
does not provide that a parent must have been the named
respondent in an RSA chapter 169-C neglect proceeding before
that parent’s rights can be terminated. It requires rather that the
parent in question have “failed to correct the conditions leading to
such a finding within 18 [now, 12] months of the finding,” despite
the district court’s efforts to rectify conditions.
Id. at 422.
Our decision in Tricia H. is dispositive of the respondent’s second due
process argument. He contends that “[a]t a minimum, due process requires
that a statute give fair notice of conduct that will trigger its application,” and
argues that a parent reading RSA 170-C:5, III would be led to believe that his
parental rights could be terminated only by “his participation in, or refusal to
help alleviate the dangerous situation that caused his child to be placed in
foster custody in the first instance.” He asserts that this case is “distinctly
different” from prior cases in which we have upheld the termination of a “non-
offending” parent’s parental rights because “the constitutional basis for
applying the statute [in those cases] was a knowing participation by the parent
in the underlying neglect and/or a knowing refusal to participate in the
correction of the actual, underlying conditions of neglect.”
As noted above, however, although not the subject of the original neglect
petition, the respondent has been a knowing participant in the abuse and
neglect proceedings from the beginning. As such, he was under continuing
orders to “address his poor interpersonal skills” in therapy. Nevertheless,
problems with his behavior were repeatedly noted throughout the six-year
history of the abuse and neglect proceedings and he was at times found to be
noncompliant with orders on this issue. As noted in the court-ordered
psychological evaluation, the respondent “lost the support of” a number of
agencies and professionals as a result of his poor interpersonal skills and
5
resulting difficult behavior, including the following providers: NH Parents as
Teachers Program of the Parent Information Center; Southern New Hampshire
Services (apparently alienating at different times their parent aide program,
transportation service, and fuel assistance program); the juvenile’s
pediatrician; Familystrength; Child and Family Services; and one or more of the
juvenile’s schools.
We do not see this case as “distinctly different” from Tricia H., in which
the father “actually knew of the neglect proceedings, became a party to them
upon his release from New Hampshire Hospital, rebuffed the efforts of the
welfare division to involve him in ameliorating the conditions of neglect, and
refused treatment offered to help him to become a responsible parent.” Tricia
H., 126 N.H. at 423; see also In re Juvenile 2003-195, 150 N.H. 644, 649-50
(2004) (“Where the parents refused to cooperate with the service providers and
follow through with their recommendations and instructions, we have upheld
termination of parental rights as in the best interest of the child.”). We found
that evidence in Tricia H. “more than sufficient” to meet the requirements of
RSA 170-C:5, III and ruled that it “provide[d] no colorable basis to raise any
issue of due process.” Tricia H., 126 N.H. at 423. We similarly conclude here.
The respondent next argues that the trial court erroneously conflated two
separate and distinct grounds for termination of parental rights: failure to
correct conditions of neglect under RSA 170-C:5, III and an inability to parent
based upon mental illness or mental disorder under RSA 170-C:5, IV (2002).
We disagree. The basis for termination of the respondent’s parental rights, as
stated by the trial court was:
[the respondent’s] failure, over a seven year period, to sufficiently
correct . . . conditions of neglect, by not becoming consistently able
to meet all of [the juvenile’s] needs and avoid the risk of harm or
impairment of the child’s physical, emotional and mental health
and well being, while under the direction of the district court
process.
To be sure, the respondent’s mental illness presumably contributed to his
failure to remedy the conditions of neglect, but the statute makes no
exceptions for failures attributable to mental illness. See RSA 170-C:5, III. To
the extent the respondent is attempting to raise an equal protection challenge,
he fails to develop the argument in his brief and we therefore need not address
it. See Gulf Ins. Co. v. AMSCO, 153 N.H. 28, 40 (2005).
Finally, the respondent contends that the evidence is insufficient to
support termination of his parental rights. He argues that he “has complied
with request[s] to improve parenting skills, to abstain from alcohol, and to have
his own mental health needs addressed.” Nevertheless, the record amply
6
supports the conclusion that the respondent’s parenting abilities remained
incurably deficient.
As the district court stated in a permanency order dated July 9, 2004:
It is unnecessary to again review all of the many situations
when [the respondent] has acted inappropriately, to his son’s peril.
Suffice it to say that due to [the respondent’s] behavior, physicians’
offices have taken the extraordinary step of prohibiting [the
respondent] from coming into the office and have terminated care
for his son. Social service agencies that provide[d] care and
financial resources for [the respondent] and [the juvenile] have
terminated assistance and prohibited him from entering their
premises.
Similarly, the district court noted that when it allowed the respondent to
choose the school at which to enroll his son and “to make all related
arrangements for his education[,] . . . [t]he outcome . . . was disastrous. The
situation ended with his son being expelled from school because of his father’s
behavior and the school requested a restraining order prohibiting [the
respondent] from coming back on campus.” We also note that in addition to
the obvious and immediate detriment to the juvenile of interruption of and lack
of continuity in necessary services, the district court found that the
respondent’s hostile behavior could negatively affect him in that he might
model his father’s unacceptable behavior.
The court-ordered psychological evaluation also “raise[d] serious
concerns” about the respondent’s parenting abilities:
The patterns of parenting observed by others as well as observed
during the evaluation are consistent with a parent who lacks the
capacity to shape his behavior to meet his child’s needs. On
numerous occasions, [the respondent’s] decisions about [his son]
have been driven by his immediate narcissistic needs regardless of
their impact on [the juvenile]
After reviewing the evidence, the probate court concluded that the
respondent’s limitations left the juvenile “in the same conditions of neglect that
he was experiencing at the onset of this case in the district court”; namely,
without a parent “able to provide him with the care, comfort and control
necessary to meet all of his physical, emotional and mental health needs,
without causing a grave risk of impairment to his well being.” The court
therefore found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the respondent had failed to
correct the conditions that led to a finding of neglect under RSA chapter 169-C.
We conclude that the evidence supports that determination. Moreover, the
7
evidence in the record of detriment to the juvenile due to shortcomings in the
respondent’s behavior and parenting abilities supports the conclusion that
termination of the respondent’s parental rights is in the juvenile’s best interest.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, J., concurred; DALIANIS, J.,
concurred specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. While I concur in the majority’s
opinion because under our deferential standard of review the law and the
record support it, the proceedings in this case trouble me. The child has been
living with his foster family since October 13, 1998. Under the Federal
Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997 (ASFA), he was entitled to a
permanency hearing “no later than 12 months” after that date. 42 U.S.C.A.
§ 675(5)(c) (Supp. 2007). The record shows, however, that the court did not
hold a permanency hearing until December 19, 2000, more than two years
later.
Following that hearing, the district court established a “provisional
permanency plan” for reunifying the father and his son. Although, through the
ensuing years, the court found that the father did not comply with this
provisional permanency plan for one reason or another, it permitted the effort
to reunify the father and son to continue. Specifically, the court found that the
father was not in compliance at the May 15, 2001, August 21, 2001, November
13, 2001, January 23, 2002, June 24, 2002 and July 16, 2003 post-
permanency review hearings, but still ordered the State to continue efforts to
reunify the father and son. The court even entered a new permanency order on
July 9, 2004, that found the father “unfit,” but, nonetheless, kept the
permanency plan for reunification in place. The court did not change the
permanency plan until October 2004, nearly four years after the provisional
plan to reunite father and son had been approved.
I believe that leaving the father and son in legal uncertainty for four
years is indefensible. Children need and deserve permanent living
arrangements. This is why the ASFA requires a permanency hearing within
twelve months of the child’s entry into foster care. See State, DYFS v. S.A., 908
A.2d 244, 250 (N.J. Super. Ct. Ch. Div. 2005). “If the parents do not show that
they are able to provide adequate care of their child after that one (1) year time
period, the federal government has mandated that the child deserves
permanency, either through termination of the parents’ rights and subsequent
adoption, or through placement in permanent foster care.” Division of Family
Services v. L.C., No. CS00-04212, 2002 WL 1932501, at *2 (Del. Fam. Ct. Jan.
17, 2002) (unpublished opinion). “The philosophy behind ASFA is that it is
8
unfair for a child to be held in limbo for a period of much longer than one (1)
year.” Id.
In my view, preventing the child, the biological father and the foster
parents from having a resolution of this case for approximately four years is
also unfair. This is particularly so since the father, as the district court found
in January 2002, was an “eager and devoted parent,” who “applied himself to
learn parenting skills so as to better care for his son.” In spite of the father’s
efforts, it was long since apparent that he would not be able to safely care for
his son. He, his son and the foster parents should have been informed of that
conclusion long before now. In keeping with the ASFA, I believe that the needs
of all concerned would have been better served had the district court changed
the permanency plan from reunification either to permanent foster care or
termination of parental rights within a reasonable period of time after it
approved the provisional permanency plan.
9