THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-651
GEORGE NICOLAOU
v.
VERMONT MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: May 23, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 19, 2007
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John G. Cronin on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Aten Clayton & Eaton PLLC, of Littleton (Gregory S. Clayton on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, George Nicolaou, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) granting a motion in limine of the defendant,
Vermont Mutual Insurance Company (Vermont Mutual), which barred him
from recovering the full replacement cost of his fire-damaged home and garage
because he never undertook to repair or replace them. We affirm.
I
The record supports the following. While covered by a homeowners
policy issued by Vermont Mutual, Nicolaou’s home suffered extensive fire
damage. Under “Coverage A,” Nicolaou’s policy has a stated liability limit of
$223,000 for the dwelling. The policy also includes an endorsement titled
“Additional Limits of Liability for Coverages A, B, C, and D” (additional coverage
endorsement), which pertains to replacement cost coverage.
The additional coverage endorsement provides, in pertinent part:
A. If you have:
1. Allowed us to adjust the Coverage A limit of liability
and the premium in accordance with:
a. The property evaluations we make; and
b. Any increases in inflation; and
2. Notified us, within 30 days of completion, of any
improvements, alterations or additions to the dwelling
building which increase the replacement cost of the
dwelling building by 5% or more;
the provisions of this endorsement will apply after a loss,
provided you elect to repair or replace the damaged or
destroyed dwelling building.
B. If there is a loss to the dwelling building that exceeds the
Coverage A limit of liability shown in the Declarations:
1. We will increase the Coverage A limit of liability to
equal the current replacement cost of the dwelling
building.
. . . .
4. For the purpose of settling that loss only, Section I
Condition 3. Loss Settlement paragraph b. is deleted
and replaced by paragraphs b., c., and d. as follows:
b. Buildings under Coverage A or B at replacement
cost without deduction for depreciation. We will
pay no more than the smallest of the following
amounts for like construction and use on the
same premises:
(1) The replacement cost of that part of the
building damaged or destroyed;
2
(2) The necessary amount actually spent to
repair or replace the damaged or destroyed
building; or
(3) The limit of liability under this policy that
applies to the building, increased in
accordance with paragraphs B.1. and B.2.
of this endorsement.
c. We will pay no more than the actual cash value
of the damage until actual repair or replacement
is complete.
d. You may disregard the replacement cost loss
settlement provisions and make claim under this
policy for loss or damage to buildings on an
actual cash value basis. You may then make
claim within 180 days after loss for any
additional liability on a replacement cost basis.
(Emphases added.)
After the fire, Nicolaou made a claim on his policy, and Vermont Mutual
paid him $223,000, the policy’s stated limit of liability on the dwelling.
Nicolaou sought additional payments to cover, among other things, the
replacement cost of his dwelling, notwithstanding that he had not undertaken
to repair or replace it. When Vermont Mutual refused to provide payment
beyond the stated limit of liability, Nicolaou filed suit against both Vermont
Mutual and his insurance agent.
In the trial court, Vermont Mutual moved in limine for a ruling that
under the terms of his homeowners policy, Nicolaou was not entitled to seek
replacement costs unless he: (1) actually repaired or replaced the building and
incurred replacement costs in excess of the settlement he received; and (2)
complied with the relevant policy conditions. The trial court granted Vermont
Mutual’s motion. This appeal followed.
II
The question before us is whether the trial court erred by ruling that
under Nicolaou’s Vermont Mutual policy, he was obligated to repair or replace
his dwelling before he was entitled to replacement costs. Nicolaou makes two
principal arguments: (1) that he is entitled to full replacement costs under RSA
3
407:11 (2006); and (2) the policy contains ambiguities that should be
construed in his favor to provide replacement cost coverage. We disagree.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 472, 479 (2006).
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole. Id.
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a also question of law
for this court to decide. Tech-Built 153 v. Va. Surety Co., 153 N.H. 371, 373
(2006). We construe the language of an insurance policy as would a
reasonable person in the position of the insured based upon a more than
casual reading of the policy as a whole. Merchants Mut. Ins. Co. v. Laighton
Homes, 153 N.H. 485, 487 (2006). Policy terms are construed objectively, and
where the terms of a policy are clear and unambiguous, we accord the
language its natural and ordinary meaning. Banfield v. Allstate Ins. Co., 152
N.H. 491, 494 (2005). However, if more than one reasonable interpretation is
possible, and an interpretation provides coverage, the policy contains an
ambiguity and will be construed against the insurer. Merchants, 153 N.H. at
487.
III
Nicolaou’s first argument relies upon RSA 407:11 (policy value statute),
which contains the following relevant language: “If a building insured for a
specified amount . . . is totally destroyed by fire or lightning without criminal
fault on the part of the insured or his assignee, the sum for which such
building is insured shall be taken to be the value of the insured’s interest
therein . . . .” Moreover, “[e]very provision and stipulation in a contract to
which [RSA] chapter [407] is applicable in conflict with [that] chapter shall be
void and no waiver of any part thereof shall be set up by the insurer.” RSA
407:21 (2006). Presumably in recognition of RSA 407:11, Nicolaou’s policy
contains a “valuation clause” that provides: “If a building insured for a
specified amount . . . is totally destroyed by fire or lightning without criminal
fault on the part of [the policyholder or his or her] assignee, the total amount
for which the building is insured shall be taken to be the value of [the
policyholder’s] interest in the building.”
According to Nicolaou, the “specified amount” for which his dwelling was
insured was its replacement cost and, as a consequence, Vermont Mutual was
obligated to pay that cost, regardless of whether he actually repaired or rebuilt
the house. In other words, the premise of Nicolaou’s argument is that there is
a conflict between the policy value statute and the repair or replacement
requirement of the additional coverage endorsement that voids the repair or
replacement requirement.
4
Initially, we note that it has never been determined as a factual matter
that Nicolaou’s house was totally destroyed by fire, which is a necessary
prerequisite to the applicability of the policy value statute. However, because
Vermont Mutual did, in fact, pay out the stated limit of liability, we assume
without deciding that RSA 407:11 applies. That said, there is no conflict
between RSA 407:11 and the additional coverage endorsement in Nicolaou’s
policy. In a case upon which Nicolaou relies, the Arkansas Supreme Court
explained:
Statutes [such as RSA 407:11] are passed for the purpose of
avoiding the uncertainty of determining the value after the fire.
The manifest policy of the statute is to guard against over-
insurance of the property. The agents of the company have the
opportunity to inspect the property fully before taking the
insurance and fixing the amount of the premiums. It is the
valuation fixed in advance by the parties by way of liquidated
damages in a case of a total loss by fire of the property insured
without the fault of the insurer.
St. Paul Reinsurance Co., Inc. v. Irons, 45 S.W.3d 366, 369 (Ark. 2001)
(quotation omitted). We are persuaded by St. Paul, and the conclusion that
necessarily flows from it, i.e., that the term “specified amount” in RSA 407:11
cannot refer to a covered structure’s replacement cost – which could not be
determined by a pre-insurance inspection – but must refer to the specific
amount of coverage stated, in dollars and cents, in the policy. See also Higgins
v. Insurance Company of North America, 469 P.2d 766, 773 (Or. 1970)
(“Replacement Cost insurance does not provide valued coverage.” (quotation
omitted)). The purpose of the policy value statute is to guarantee a
policyholder payment of the dollar amount stated in the policy without having
to defend against insurance company claims that the property was actually
worth less than the stated limit of liability when the primary evidence, the
property itself, has been destroyed. See St. Paul, 45 S.W.3d at 369; Marchman
v. Grange Mut. Ins. Co., 500 S.E.2d 659, 661 (Ga. Ct. App.) (explaining that
Georgia policy value statute “protects property owners from the overwhelming
burden of proving the value of property after it has been totally destroyed by
fire”), cert. denied (Ga. 1998); 46 C.J.S. Insurance § 1109(a) (1993).
Accordingly, we hold that there is no conflict between the policy value statute
and the policy provision requiring Nicolaou to repair or replace his house
before Vermont Mutual was obligated to pay him the difference, if any, between
the stated limit of liability and the replacement cost of his house. See
Marchman, 500 S.E.2d at 661 (rejecting policyholder’s argument that policy
value statute superseded repair or replacement requirement stated in
replacement cost rider). Moreover, given our construction of RSA 407:11, it is
5
clear that by paying Nicolaou $223,000, the amount stated in the policy,
Vermont Mutual has fully complied with that statute.
Nicolaou makes several subsidiary arguments we briefly discuss. First,
he argues that the repair or replacement requirement is of no import when a
building is totally destroyed. That is simply not the case. See, e.g., Burchett v.
Kansas Mut. Ins. Co., 48 P.3d 1290, 1290, 1291-92 (Kan. Ct. App. 2002)
(holding that repair or replacement was precondition to recovery of replacement
costs in case involving total destruction of insured dwelling); Hilley v. Allstate
Ins. Co., 562 So. 2d 184, 186, 189-90 (Ala. 1990) (same). Moreover, the
additional coverage endorsement itself refers to “[t]he necessary amount
actually spent to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed building”
(emphasis added), thus demonstrating the applicability of the repair or
replacement requirement in the context of a total loss.
Second, relying upon Ferguson v. Lakeland Mutual Insurance Co., 596
A.2d 883 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1991), appeal denied, 611 A.2d 712 (Pa. 1992), and
SR International Business Insurance Co. v. World Trade Center Properties,
LLC, 445 F. Supp. 2d 320 (S.D.N.Y. 2006), Nicolaou argues that the repair or
replacement requirement is unconscionable. Nicolaou’s authorities are not
persuasive. In Ferguson, the insurer denied the policyholders’ claim.
Ferguson, 596 A.2d at 884. What was unconscionable in that case was
requiring the policyholders to repair or replace their property before they knew
whether their insurer would provide any coverage at all. See Burton v.
Republic Ins. Co., 845 A.2d 889, 897-99 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2004) (declining to
extend the unconscionability analysis of Ferguson to case in which insurer did
not deny coverage). Here, Vermont Mutual did not deny coverage, but paid
$223,000 within several weeks after the fire. Thus, Vermont Mutual’s reliance
upon the repair or replacement condition for paying replacement costs was not
unconscionable under the rationale of Ferguson. SR International is similarly
unavailing. In that case, the policyholder’s right to collect replacement costs
was not even before the court. SR International, 445 F. Supp. 2d at 333.
Accordingly, we do not agree with Nicolaou that the repair or replacement
requirement is either inapplicable to total losses or unconscionable. Cf.
Maryland Cas. Co. v. Knight, 96 F.3d 1284, 1292 (9th Cir. 1996) (holding that
insurer that had paid actual cash value of loss was not estopped from
conditioning payment of replacement cost upon repair or replacement of
covered property).
IV
Nicolaou next argues that his policy contains two ambiguous terms that
must be construed against Vermont Mutual and in favor of his claim for
replacement cost coverage. We disagree.
6
According to Nicolaou, the term “specified amount” in the valuation
clause may reasonably be construed either as the limit of liability listed in the
coverage section of the policy or as the replacement cost. In common parlance,
the word “specify” means, among other things, “to mention or name in a
specific or explicit manner : tell or state precisely or in detail . . . to make
specific . . . to speak precisely or in detail : give full particulars.” Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 2187 (unabridged ed. 2002). In turn, the
common definition of the word “specific” includes “characterized by precise
formulation or accurate restriction (as in stating, describing, defining,
reserving) : free from such ambiguity as results from careless lack of precision
or from omission of pertinent matter.” Id. Based upon the natural and
ordinary meanings of the words “specify” and “specific,” it is not reasonable to
construe the policy term “specified amount” as referring to the replacement
cost of a covered building. Unlike a limit of liability stated in dollars, which is
fixed and definite at the time a policy is issued, the replacement cost of a
building is necessarily contingent, inexplicit, imprecise and unamenable to
detailed description of its full particulars until some undetermined point in the
future. Accordingly, we hold that the term “specified amount” may not
reasonably be construed in a way that would provide Nicolaou with
replacement cost coverage. See Catholic Med. Ctr. v. Executive Risk Indem.,
151 N.H. 699, 701 (2005) (“We will not . . . perform amazing feats of linguistic
gymnastics to find a term ambiguous.”).
Nicolaou also argues that the term “actual cash value” in the additional
coverage endorsement is ambiguous. According to Nicolaou, “actual cash
value” may reasonably be construed to mean the stated limit of liability in his
policy or the replacement cost of his home. There are two problems with that
argument. First, the additional coverage endorsement provides that Vermont
Mutual “will pay no more than the actual cash value of the damage until actual
repair or replacement is complete.” Thus, by its own language, the
endorsement provides that after actual repair or replacement is complete,
Vermont Mutual might pay more than the actual cash value of the damage.
But because there is no circumstance under which Vermont Mutual would ever
pay more than the replacement cost, unless the replacement cost was less than
the stated limit of liability, it is not reasonable to construe the term “actual
cash value” to mean “replacement cost.” Second, the additional coverage
endorsement also provides that the policyholder “may disregard the
replacement cost loss settlement provisions and make claim . . . on an actual
cash value basis.” That provision would make no sense if “replacement cost”
and “actual cash value” were synonymous. Finally, we note that at least one
other court has determined, in the context of a similar insurance policy, that
the term “actual cash value” is not ambiguous. See Burton, 845 A.2d at 894.
In sum, we conclude that Nicolaou’s policy clearly and unambiguously
required him to repair or replace his house before Vermont Mutual would incur
7
any obligation to pay him the difference between the stated limit of liability and
the replacement cost. See Marchman, 500 S.E.2d at 660-61 (discerning no
ambiguity in similar policy language).
Finally, at oral argument, Nicolaou contended that under the additional
coverage endorsement, he did not have to actually repair or rebuild, but only
elect to do so. In his view, once he stated an intention to repair or rebuild, he
was entitled to replacement costs but had no obligation to actually repair or
replace his house. Because Nicolaou did not brief that issue, we deem it to
have been waived. See Appeal of Town of Nottingham, 153 N.H. 539, 555
(2006). However, even if the argument were properly before us, the arguments
against it are persuasive. Allowing a policyholder to recover replacement costs
without actually repairing or rebuilding would leave him in a better position as
a result of the fire than the position he was in before the fire, which is the
“moral hazard” that the repair or replacement requirement is intended to avoid.
See Higgins, 469 P.2d at 773; Gilbert v. North Carolina Farm Bureau, 574
S.E.2d 115, 118 (N.C. Ct. App. 2002) (“The reason insurers place this [repair or
replacement] provision in insurance policies is to prevent an insured from
making a profit from a loss.” (quotation omitted)), aff’d, 580 S.E.2d 691 (N.C.
2003). Accordingly, we agree with those courts that have rejected the
argument that a stated intent to repair or replace is sufficient to trigger an
insurer’s obligation to pay the full replacement cost of an insured building. See
Hilley, 562 So. 2d at 190 (“a mere intention to replace does not trigger the
insurer’s replacement cost payment obligations”); National Tea Co. v.
Commerce & Industry Ins., 456 N.E.2d 206, 211 (Ill. App. Ct. 1983).
The Kansas Court of Appeals has noted that the courts of this country
have all but “unanimously held that actual repair or replacement is a
precondition to recovery on a replacement cost policy.” Burchett, 48 P.3d at
1292 (collecting cases). Today we join those jurisdictions so holding.
V
Nicolaou also asks us to hold that the exclusion of the insurance
industry from the Consumer Protection Act, RSA chapter 358-A (1995 & Supp.
2006) is unconstitutional. However, the arguments Nicolaou raises here
regarding the Consumer Protection Act were never raised in the trial court.
Thus, they have not been preserved for our review, and we decline to address
them. See Miller v. Blackden, 154 N.H. 448, 456 (2006) (“It is a long-standing
rule that parties may not have judicial review of matters not raised in the
forum of trial.”).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8