THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-481
SARAH EVERITT
v.
GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY & a.
Argued: April 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: September 21, 2007
Thomas Craig, PA, of Manchester (Thomas Craig and David Woodbury on
the brief, and Mr. Woodbury orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Donald E. Gardner and
Donald L. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Smith orally), for defendant Keith Lee.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (Charles P. Bauer & a. on the
brief, and Mr. Bauer orally), for defendants Town of Hooksett and Owen
Gaskell.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg orally), for defendant Jeremiah
Citro.
BRODERICK, C.J. This interlocutory appeal, see Sup. Ct. R. 8, was
brought by direct defendants, Town of Hooksett (Town), Owen Gaskell and
Keith Lee, and third-party defendant Jeremiah Citro, from two rulings of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.). The first denied the direct defendants’ motion for
summary judgment seeking immunity from the negligence claim brought by
the plaintiff, Sarah Everitt, and the second denied Citro’s motion to dismiss the
third-party claims against him. We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
I
The following facts are taken from the interlocutory appeal statement,
unless otherwise noted. See Guglielmo v. Worldcom, 148 N.H. 309, 311 (2002).
Citro was employed at the General Electric (GE) facility in Hooksett. On
Saturday morning, November 1, 2003, he arrived at work, and his supervisor
reminded him that on the day before, he had been instructed not to return to
work until Monday. When Citro failed to leave, GE security contacted the
Hooksett Police Department. Lee, a Hooksett police officer, arrived at about
10:45 a.m., but Citro had already left. Officer Lee was familiar with Citro from
a prior encounter and went to his home to speak with him. Citro admitted that
he was not supposed to be at the GE facility and agreed not to return there
until the following Monday. Around 12:45 p.m. that day, however, Citro
returned to GE. Hooksett Police were again contacted, and Officer Lee
responded to the call. When he arrived, he noticed Citro sitting in his vehicle
outside of the company gate. Citro told the officer that he was supposed to
meet with the company nurse. During this conversation, Lieutenant Gaskell,
also from the Hooksett Police Department, arrived. He observed that Citro had
difficulty understanding the situation. As a result, the police conducted field
sobriety tests and determined that Citro should be released. At about 3:00
p.m., Citro was involved in a motor vehicle accident with the van in which
Everitt was a passenger, allegedly causing her significant injuries. Everitt and
Citro settled prior to suit for the full amount of Citro’s automobile liability
insurance limits.
Everitt then sued GE, a GE supervisor, the Town of Hooksett, Lieutenant
Gaskell and Officer Lee. She later added as defendants the security company
for GE and one of its employees. Everitt asserts that, because of Citro’s
unusual behavior, each defendant owed her a duty of care to prevent Citro
from operating his motor vehicle on the day of the accident. With respect to
the Town and the police officers, Everitt also alleges that they had knowledge of
or access to information about Citro’s prior motor vehicle accidents. For
example, she asserts that two years before her accident, Citro hit a car in a
parking lot while operating his automobile and that the Hooksett police took
him into protective custody because of his disoriented state.
2
Officer Lee moved for summary judgment, which the Town and
Lieutenant Gaskell joined, arguing, inter alia, that the doctrines of
discretionary function immunity and qualified immunity precluded any liability
for the decision not to detain Citro. The trial court denied the motion. Lee
then brought a contribution action against Citro for his role in the accident,
and defendants Town and Lieutenant Gaskell filed a claim against Citro,
contending that he was an indispensable party who should be joined as a
third-party defendant. Citro moved to dismiss these claims, arguing that
under RSA 507:7-h (1997), no contribution action could be filed against him
because he had entered into a valid settlement agreement with Everitt. He also
contended that common law did not support including him in the litigation as
an indispensable party, and that Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H. 393 (2003), did
not permit the joinder of a settling party. The trial court denied the motion and
subsequently certified five questions for interlocutory appeal. We accepted
three, none of which pertains to defendants GE, the GE supervisor, GE’s
security company or its employee.
II
The first two questions relate to whether the trial court properly denied
Citro’s motion to dismiss him as a participating party in the litigation. They
inquire:
Does 507:7-h, Effect of Release or Covenant Not to Sue,
preclude a settling tortfeasor from being brought into
litigation under a claim of contribution when there is no
allegation that the settlement was not made in good faith?
Does Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H. 393 (2003) allow a
defendant to bring a settling tortfeasor into the litigation as a
party, as opposed to simply allowing them to be named on
the jury verdict form, thereby requiring them to participate
in the litigation itself and incur the costs of litigation despite
obtaining a full release from liability?
Because defendant Lee now concedes that his contribution claim is barred by
RSA 507:7-h, we need not address the first question. Thus, we only consider
whether under Nilsson, a settling tortfeasor can be compelled to join litigation
as a participating party. This inquiry constitutes a question of law, which we
review de novo. See K & B Rock Crushing v. Town of Auburn, 153 N.H. 566,
568 (2006).
The legislature has enacted a “comprehensive statutory framework for
apportionment of liability and contribution” in tort actions, designing several
provisions of RSA chapter 507 to work in concert to create “a unified and
3
comprehensive approach to comparative fault, apportionment of damages, and
contribution.” Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 395 (quotation omitted). In Nilsson, we
were asked to decide whether the trial court properly instructed the jury to
assess the percentage of fault attributable to a joint tortfeasor who settled
before trial and to a non-settling party in accordance with RSA 507:7-e. Id.
That statutory provision states in pertinent part:
In all actions, the court shall:
(a) Instruct the jury to determine, or if there is no jury shall
find, the amount of damages to be awarded to each claimant
and against each defendant in accordance with the
proportionate fault of each of the parties; and
(b) Enter judgment against each party liable on the basis of
the rules of joint and several liability, except that if any party
shall be less than 50 percent at fault, then that party’s
liability shall be several and not joint and he shall be liable
only for the damages attributable to him.
RSA 507:7-e, I(a), (b) (1997). We held that for the purposes of apportionment
under RSA 507:7-e, I(b), the term “party” refers to “parties to an action,
including settling parties,” and affirmed the jury verdict that apportioned
ninety-nine percent of the fault to the settling defendant and one percent to the
non-settling defendant. Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 396 (ellipsis and quotations
omitted).
In DeBenedetto v. CLD Consulting Engineers, 153 N.H. 793 (2006), a
decision issued after this interlocutory appeal was filed, we again reviewed the
scope of the term “party” in the apportionment statute, RSA 507:7-e. We
examined whether the trial court erred by instructing the jury to consider the
apportionment of fault against “non-parties,” a settling tortfeasor and a
tortfeasor who was immune from liability. DeBenedetto, 153 N.H. at 797.
Following Nilsson, we upheld the trial court’s instruction noting that “for
apportionment purposes under RSA 507:7-e, the word ‘party’ refers not only to
parties to an action, including settling parties,” but incorporates “all parties
contributing to the occurrence giving rise to an action, including those immune
from liability or otherwise [never sued.]” Id. at 804 (quotations and ellipsis
omitted).
Permitting juries to allocate fault on the verdict form among current
parties, former parties who have settled, tortfeasors who settled before suit and
immune tortfeasors does not mean that a settling tortfeasor (whether that
tortfeasor settled with the plaintiff before or after suit was filed) may be joined
in the litigation as an active litigant. In Nilsson, the settling tortfeasor was not
4
an active litigant at trial. Nilsson, 150 N.H. at 396. The trial court simply
instructed the jury about apportioning fault and, in its special verdict
questions, asked the jury to assess the percentage of fault, if any, that was
attributable to the defendant and the settling non-litigant tortfeasor. Id. at
394. We note that the jury returned a verdict assessing ninety-nine percent of
fault to the settling tortfeasor who was not an active litigant. Id.
Further, in DeBenedetto, we anticipated that jurors would apportion
fault among joint tortfeasors, including those “otherwise not before the court.”
DeBenedetto, 153 N.H. at 804. Indeed, we noted that a defendant “may not
easily shift fault under RSA 507:7-e; allegations of a non-litigant tortfeasor’s
fault must be supported by adequate evidence before a jury or court may
consider it for fault apportionment purposes.” Id. (emphasis added). Thus, we
anticipated that the jury or the court would need to apportion fault among joint
tortfeasors, even when some tortfeasors were not active litigants at trial, and
we expected that the burden of establishing fault on the part of “non-litigant”
tortfeasors would be borne by the litigant defendants. Id. Requiring a settling
tortfeasor to participate actively in litigation, regardless of whether the defense
cost is borne by an insurer, is not contemplated or permitted by Nilsson or
DeBenedetto. Therefore, we conclude that a defendant is not permitted under
Nilsson or DeBenedetto to bring a settling tortfeasor into the case as an active
litigant, requiring him to participate in and incur the cost of the litigation itself.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred in denying Citro’s motion to
dismiss him as an active litigant in the case.
We decline to address arguments raised by the defendants that were not
preserved for our review because they exceed the scope of the interlocutory
question presented. The defendants Town and Lieutenant Gaskell argue that
the trial court properly exercised its discretion to retain Citro as a third-party
defendant pursuant to RSA 514:10 (2007), Superior Court Rule 27 and our
common law practice regarding necessary and indispensable parties.
Defendant Lee joined in their argument, identifying Citro as a necessary and
indispensable party. The interlocutory appeal question, however, is limited to
inquiring whether Nilsson permits the defendants to join a settling tortfeasor as
a party to the litigation. Thus, we decline to address the defendants’ additional
arguments. Further, we do not address the contention made by defendants
Town and Gaskell that joinder of Citro comports with their rights to equal
protection and due process under our State Constitution. This argument is
also beyond the scope of the interlocutory appeal question, was asserted in a
mere passing manner without further development, see Franklin Lodge of Elks
v. Marcoux, 149 N.H. 581, 592 (2003), and was not raised below.
5
III
We now turn to the third question posed in the defendants’ interlocutory
appeal:
Were Officer Lee, Lt. Gaskell and/or the Town of Hooksett
entitled to summary judgment because the decision not to
detain Mr. Citro was a discretionary decision entitled to
immunity under the doctrines of discretionary function
immunity and/or qualified immunity?
This question incorporates two separate immunity inquiries: (1) whether the
discretionary function immunity exception to municipal liability protects the
individual police officers and/or the Town; and (2) whether qualified immunity
affords similar protection. At the outset, we note that while Everitt asserts a
direct claim against the Town for failing to provide proper training and
discipline for its police officers, this claim was not included in the interlocutory
appeal. Thus, our analysis regarding the defendants’ possible immunity
reaches only Everitt’s claim of negligence premised upon the officers’ decision
not to detain Citro.
In denying the defendants’ motion for summary judgment, the trial court
ruled that it could not “find, under all the circumstances, that the Hooksett
defendants are entitled[,] as a matter of law[,] to municipal immunity.” It
offered no other analysis or reasoning and did not separately address qualified
immunity. When reviewing the denial of a motion for summary judgment, “we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Porter v. City
of Manchester, 155 N.H. __, __, 921 A.2d 393, 398 (2007). If “no genuine issue
of material fact existed, and the moving party was entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, then summary judgment should have been granted.” Id.
(quotation omitted); see RSA 491:8-a, III (1997). We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Belanger v. MMG Ins. Co., 153 N.H.
584, 586 (2006).
A
Various concepts of immunity exist under both common law and
statutory law to protect governmental entities and public officials from liability
for injury allegedly caused by official conduct. Sovereign and municipal
immunity are distinct doctrines, both designed to protect particular
government entities and both rooted in the common law at their inception.
Tilton v. Dougherty, 126 N.H. 294, 298 (1985) (sovereign immunity); Merrill v.
Manchester, 114 N.H. 722, 727 (1974) (municipal immunity). Sovereign
immunity protects the State itself “from suit in its own courts without its
6
consent,” and shields it “from liability for torts committed by its officers and
employees.” Tilton, 126 N.H. at 297. In 1978, the legislature adopted the
doctrine of sovereign immunity by statute, RSA 99-D:1 (2001), and has waived
immunity for certain circumscribed acts, see, e.g., RSA 507-B:2 (1997)
(governmental unit may be held liable for certain damages arising out of
government’s operation, inter alia, of motor vehicles and premises). The
doctrine of municipal immunity has historically protected local governments
from tort liability. Merrill, 114 N.H. at 724. More than three decades ago,
however, this court abrogated the common law doctrine of municipal immunity
with limited exception. Id. at 729. Consequently, municipalities are subject in
most instances to the same rules of liability as private corporations. Id. at 730.
With respect to personal liability for public officials and employees, the
doctrines of qualified immunity and official immunity provide immunity for
wrongful acts committed within the scope of their government employment.
Richardson v. Chevrefils, 131 N.H. 227, 232 (1988); Tilton, 126 N.H. at 299.
The doctrines are distinct, however, in that the former shields against lawsuits
alleging constitutional violations, such as claims brought under 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983 (2000), whereas the latter shields against lawsuits alleging common law
torts, such as negligence. Compare Richardson, 131 N.H. at 232, with Tilton,
126 N.H. at 299; see also Mulligan v. Rioux, 643 A.2d 1226, 1234 (Conn. 1994)
(standard for qualified immunity that protects public officials from
constitutional claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 is distinct from that for official
immunity against common law claims). When it adopted sovereign immunity
as the law of this state in 1978, the legislature also adopted official immunity
for state and state agency officers, trustees, officials and employees. RSA 99-
D:1. This provision states in part that:
The doctrine of sovereign immunity of the state, and by the
extension of that doctrine, the official immunity of officers,
trustees, officials, or employees of the state or any agency
thereof acting within the scope of official duty and not in a
wanton or reckless manner, except as otherwise expressly
provided by statute, is hereby adopted as the law of the
state.
RSA 99-D:1. It further provides that:
The immunity of the state’s officers, trustees, officials, and
employees as set forth herein shall be applicable to all claims
and civil actions, which claims or actions arise against such
officers, trustees, officials, and employees in their personal
capacity or official capacity, or both such capacities, from
acts or omissions within the scope of their official duty while
7
in the course of their employment for the state and not in a
wanton or reckless manner.
Id. While the legislature also has adopted isolated provisions affording
immunity to certain municipal officials, it has not enacted a provision corollary
to RSA 99-D:1 extending official immunity to all municipal officers, trustees,
officials and employees. See, e.g., RSA 31:104 (2000) (certain municipal
officials, such as selectmen, school board members, mayors and city managers,
cannot be held liable for certain acts or decisions made “in good faith and
within the scope of [their] authority”). Thus, other than those instances in
which the legislature has spoken, the scope of official immunity for municipal
employees sued in their individual capacities remains a common law question.
B
We turn now to consider the first part of the immunity inquiry before us,
that is, whether discretionary function immunity identified in Merrill precludes
liability against the Town for the decision of Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee
not to detain Citro. We have recognized that “certain essential, fundamental
activities of government must remain immune from tort liability so that our
government can govern,” Hacking v. Town of Belmont, 143 N.H. 546, 549
(1999) (quotations and brackets omitted), and thus we preserved the
discretionary function immunity exception primarily “to limit judicial
interference with legislative and executive decision-making,” Schoff v. City of
Somersworth, 137 N.H. 583, 590 (1993). “To accept a jury’s verdict as to the
reasonableness and safety of a plan of governmental services and prefer it over
the judgment of the governmental body which originally considered and passed
on the matter would be to obstruct normal governmental operations.” Gardner
v. City of Concord, 137 N.H. 253, 256 (1993). To that end, we defined the
exception to provide immunity protection only for
acts and omissions constituting (a) the exercise of a
legislative or judicial function, and (b) the exercise of an
executive or planning function involving the making of a
basic policy decision which is characterized by the exercise
of a high degree of official judgment or discretion.
Merrill, 114 N.H. at 729 (discretionary function immunity exception).
In assessing whether the discretionary function immunity exception
applies in any given case, we “distinguish between planning or discretionary
functions and functions that are purely ministerial.” Hacking, 143 N.H. at 549
(quotation omitted); see Gardner, 137 N.H. at 257. “We have refused to adopt a
bright line rule to determine whether conduct constitutes discretionary
planning or merely the ministerial implementation of a plan.” Hacking, 143
8
N.H. at 549-50. Rather, recognizing that the distinction is “sometimes
blurred,” Gardner, 137 N.H. at 257, we adopted the following test to
discriminate between the different functions:
When the particular conduct which caused the injury is one
characterized by the high degree of discretion and judgment
involved in weighing alternatives and making choices with
respect to public policy and planning, governmental entities
should remain immune from liability.
Id. It is not simply the exercise of a high degree of discretion and judgment
that distinguishes immune acts or omissions from those that are not; the
discretion or judgment must attach to decisions requiring consideration of
public policy or planning to be protected. See Mahan v. N. H. Dep’t of Admin.
Services, 141 N.H. 747, 750 (1997). In particular, we distinguish between
“policy decisions involving the consideration of competing economic, social, and
political factors” and “operational or ministerial decisions required to
implement the policy decisions.” Id. Immunity extends only to decisions, acts
and omissions for which attaching liability would permit judicial second-
guessing of the governing functions of another branch of government. See id.
at 749-50.
We have had numerous occasions to address the scope of the
discretionary function immunity exception. In so doing, we have held that
immunity exists for: a planning board’s approval of a subdivision plan without
adequate drainage, Hurley v. Hudson, 112 N.H. 365, 369 (1972); a town
selectmen’s decision not to lay out certain roads, Rockhouse Mt. Property
Owners Assoc. v. Town of Conway, 127 N.H. 593, 600 (1986); traffic control
and parking regulations, Sorenson v. City of Manchester, 136 N.H. 692, 694
(1993); setting of road maintenance standards and construction of a sidewalk
when based upon a city’s faulty plan or design, Gardner, 137 N.H. at 258, 259;
traffic control and management of roadway safety, Bergeron v. City of
Manchester, 140 N.H. 417, 422, 424 (1995); a decision whether to enact
maintenance and inspection regulations, Mahan, 141 N.H. at 751; and the
training and supervision of coaches and referees at a school basketball game,
Hacking, 143 N.H. at 550.
Yet, we have denied immunity to municipalities for failing to carry out an
established plan to inspect roadway signage and railings, Schoff, 137 N.H. at
590, as well as for decisions by the referees and coaches during a school
basketball game, Hacking, 143 N.H. at 551-52. We also have analyzed
discretionary function immunity as it applies to the State’s limited waiver of
sovereign immunity. See, e.g., DiFruscia v. N.H. Dept. of Pub. Works &
Highways, 136 N.H. 202, 205 (1992) (although decision whether or where to
place guardrail on a State highway falls within discretionary immunity, State
9
not immune for failure of State worker to install specific guardrail); Bergeron,
140 N.H. at 422 (State immune from liability for decision whether to install
flashing beacon at intersection). After examining “the broad spectrum of
official actions that can be called discretionary, to determine the point at which
the exercise of discretion is no longer characterized by a choice of policy and
becomes simply a choice of a means to implement policy,” Mahan, 141 N.H. at
750 (quotation and brackets omitted), we conclude that the decision of
Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee not to detain Citro does not constitute the
type of discretionary function protected under the Merrill immunity exception.
The Town seeks immunity for discretionary functions involving acts or
omissions constituting “the exercise of an executive or planning function
involving the making of a basic policy decision which is characterized by the
exercise of a high degree of official judgment or discretion.” Merrill, 114 N.H. at
729. According to the Town, the scope of decisions protected by the
discretionary function immunity exception “is not limited to planning decisions
by a municipal governing body,” but extends protection to the exercise of
executive functions. The Town argues that under RSA 135-C:28, III and RSA
172-B:3, police authority to take a person into protective custody requires
officers to evaluate the mental condition of a person, the cause of the condition,
likely future conduct and harm, and alternative approaches to assisting the
person and protecting the public. These decisions, according to the Town,
“require[ ] the deliberation and judgment characteristic of discretionary
conduct, and fundamental judgments about how to deal with members of the
public as a representative of government.”
RSA 135-C:28, III (2005) provides in pertinent part that:
When a peace officer observes a person engaging in
behavior which gives the peace officer reasonable
suspicion to believe that the person may be suffering
from a mental illness and probable cause to believe
that unless the person is placed in protective custody
the person poses an immediate danger of bodily injury
to himself or others, the police officer may place the
person in protective custody.
RSA 172-B:3 (2002), states, in pertinent part, that:
I. When a peace officer encounters a person who, in
the judgment of the officer, is intoxicated as defined in
RSA 172-B:1, X, the officer may take such person into
protective custody and shall take whichever of the
following actions is, in the judgment of the officer, the
10
most appropriate to ensure the safety and welfare of
the public, the individual, or both.
. . . .
II. When a peace officer encounters a person who, in
the judgment of the officer, is incapacitated as defined
in RSA 172-B:1, IX, the officer may take such person
into protective custody and shall take whichever of the
following actions is, in the judgment of the officer, the
most appropriate to ensure the safety and welfare of
the public, the individual, or both.
Certainly, under these statutes, the process of reaching a decision about
whether to detain Citro required Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee to evaluate
carefully Citro’s conduct and attendant circumstances, and to use their trained
judgment, experience and discretion. Their decision was not menial, rote or
automatic. The exercise of discretion, even to a significant degree, however, is
not the sole factor for determining whether government conduct constitutes a
discretionary function. To be protected, the official discretion must constitute
a choice of policy or planning, involving the consideration of competing
economic, social, and political factors. The officers’ discretion in this case did
not involve legislative or executive policy-making or government planning. Cf.
Hacking, 143 N.H. at 552 (decisions of referees and coaches during basketball
game, while perhaps involving some discretionary judgment, were not decisions
concerning municipal planning and public policy); Peavler v. Monroe Cty. Bd.
of Com’rs, 528 N.E.2d 40, 45 (Ind. 1988) (question not simply whether
judgment was exercised, but whether judgment required consideration of
policy). Simply put, their decision did not involve municipal governing.
Therefore, subjecting the Town to liability for the officers’ decision is not
tantamount to judicial interference with legislative or executive decision-
making which would otherwise compromise our system of separation of
powers. See Schoff, 137 N.H. at 590. Accordingly, the Town, as a matter of
law, cannot rely upon discretionary function immunity to protect it from
liability for the alleged negligence of Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee.
We decline the Town’s invitation to expand the scope of discretionary
function immunity. As the last remnant of common law municipal immunity,
the exception was tailored to satisfy the underlying policy of preserving and
respecting our system of separation of powers. We are not convinced that this
case requires an extension or modification of the parameters already
recognized.
11
C
The second component of the immunity question before us requires us to
consider whether the doctrine of qualified immunity shields the individual
police officers from personal liability, as well as vicariously protecting the
Town. In reality, Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee seek official immunity, not
qualified immunity, because Everitt seeks recovery based upon a common law
tort claim and not upon an alleged constitutional violation. Further, in the
pleadings below and the briefs before us, Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee
argue for application of official immunity, as demonstrated by the legal
authority cited for their position, albeit they at times interchange the term
qualified immunity.
Official immunity protects individual government officials or employees
from personal liability for discretionary actions taken by them within the
course of their employment or official duties. See Tilton, 126 N.H. at 298-99;
Sletten v. Ramsey County, 675 N.W.2d 291, 300 (Minn. 2004); Cameron v.
Lang, 549 S.E.2d 341, 344 (Ga. 2001). We previously have applied official
immunity to protect various government employees from personal liability. For
example, any public officer performing judicial duties is immune from suit for
harm caused by a mistake made in the performance of official duties, provided
the officer had jurisdiction over the person and subject matter. See Sargent v.
Little, 72 N.H. 555, 556-57 (1904) (immunity for members of state board of
license commissioners for granting state licenses); Sweeney v. Young, 82 N.H.
159, 165-66 (1925) (immunity for members of school board for quasi-judicial
decision dismissing student). Prosecutors also enjoy immunity when
performing advocacy functions; that is, functions which are intimately related
to initiating and pursuing judicial proceedings against a person. Belcher v.
Paine, 136 N.H. 137, 146 (1992). The legislature has provided official
immunity to certain municipal employees performing particular job functions
on the government’s behalf. See, e.g., RSA 31:104 (certain municipal officials,
such as selectmen, school board members, mayors and city managers, cannot
be held liable for certain acts or decisions made “in good faith and within the
scope of [their] authority”). Further, it adopted official immunity as the law of
the state concerning all state officers, trustees, officials and employees. RSA
99-D:1. Whether municipal police officers are entitled to the protection of
official immunity remains a common law question, a matter of first impression
before us today.
“The goal of official immunity is to protect public officials from the fear of
personal liability, which might deter independent action and impair effective
performance of their duties.” Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 299; see also Dokman v.
County of Hennepin, 637 N.W.2d 286, 296 (Minn. Ct. App. 2001); Hudson v.
Town of East Montpelier, 638 A.2d 561, 564 (Vt. 1993); Restatement (Second)
of Torts § 895D comment b at 412 (1979). A genuine need exists to “preserv[e]
12
independence of action without deterrence or intimidation by the fear of
personal liability and vexatious suits.” Restatement, supra comment b at 412.
Further, those individuals charged with exercising discretion and judgment
when conducting the affairs of government stand in a unique position:
The complex process of the administration of government
requires that officers and employees be charged with the
duty of making decisions, either of law or of fact, and of
acting in accordance with their determinations.
Id. It would be
manifest[ly] unfair[ ] [to] plac[e] any [public official] in a
position in which he is required to exercise his judgment and
at the same time is held responsible according to the
judgment of others, who may have no experience in the area
and may be much less qualified than he to pass judgment in
a discerning fashion or who may now be acting largely on the
basis of hindsight.
Id.; see also Cameron, 549 S.E.2d at 344 (immunity meant to preserve public
employee’s independence of action without fear of lawsuits and to prevent
review of his judgment in hindsight). The United States Supreme Court has
pointed out that the consequences of personal liability
are not limited to liability for money damages; they also
include the general costs of subjecting officials to the risks of
trial -- distraction of officials from their governmental duties,
inhibition of discretionary action, and deterrence of able
people from public service.
Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 526 (1985) (quotation omitted) (discussing
qualified immunity). In sum, official immunity is designed to encourage and
safeguard the ability of public officials to act properly in the exercise of the
discretion required by their official duties to the benefit of the public on whose
behalf the officials act.
Whether, and to what extent, official immunity should be granted to a
particular public official is largely a policy question, see Tilton, 126 N.H. at
299, and depends upon the nature of the claim against the official and the
particular government activity that is alleged to have given rise to the claim,
see Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 304; Restatement, supra comment f at 415-16. It is
necessary to examine “the kind of discretion which is exercised and whether or
not the challenged government activities require something more than the
performance of ministerial duties.” Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 304. Ultimately,
13
numerous factors must be examined and weighed, and we identify but a few:
(1) the nature and importance of the function that the officer is performing; (2)
the importance that the duty be performed to the best judgment of the officer,
unhampered by extraneous matters; (3) whether the function is performed by
private individuals for which they could be held liable in tort or it is one
performed solely by the government; (4) the extent of the responsibility involved
and the extent to which the imposition of liability would impair the free
exercise of discretion by the officer; (5) the likelihood that the official will be
subjected to frequent accusations of wrongful motives; (6) the extent to which
the threat of vexatious lawsuits will impact the exercise of discretion; (7)
whether the official would be indemnified by the government or whether any
damage award would be covered by insurance; (8) the likelihood that damage
will result to members of the public in the absence of immunity; (9) the nature
of the harm borne by the injured party should immunity attach; and (10) the
availability of alternative remedies to the injured party. See generally
Restatement, supra comment f at 416-17. A commentator aptly stated the
nature of the comparison and evaluation of these competing factors:
Some official conduct is more vulnerable to attack than other
conduct. Some official conduct especially needs a free range
of choice that is not hampered by concerns over potential
personal liability. Other official conduct is neither especially
vulnerable to complaint nor in need of especially
unhampered decision-making. One who repairs the street
can do a good job without provoking a citizen suit; the
prosecuting attorney cannot do a good job without provoking
anger and, sooner or later, a citizen suit. Good operation of
the prosecutor’s office does adversely affect people (usually
criminals, but, unavoidably, others as well); good operation
of the street repair department does not harm people, but on
the contrary makes their travel safer. Both kinds of work are
socially desirable, but one kind, since it is intended to
adversely affect others and does so, is more likely to generate
claims than the other. The range of free choice needed in the
two kinds of work is also quite different. The importance of
the officer’s freedom of decision and the likelihood of unjust
suit for honest decision-making are factors to be considered
in deciding whether official conduct is “discretionary” and
immune or “ministerial” and unprotected.
W.P. Keeton, et al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts § 132, at 1065 (5th
ed. 1984). Within this framework, we examine whether public policy demands
the extension of official immunity to municipal police officers.
14
Police officers are trusted with one of the most basic and necessary
functions of civilized society, securing and preserving public safety. This
essential and inherently governmental task is not shared with the private
sector. Police officers are regularly called upon to utilize judgment and
discretion in the performance of their duties. They must make decisions and
take actions which have serious consequences and repercussions to the
individuals immediately involved, to the public at large and to themselves. On
any given day, they are required to employ their training, experience, measured
judgment and prudence in a variety of volatile situations, such as investigatory
stops, investigations of crime, arrests and high speed pursuits, to name a few.
Even routine traffic stops can be unpredictable and can escalate into
dangerous, and sometimes deadly, affairs.
Further, law enforcement by its nature is susceptible to provoking the
hostilities and hindsight second-guessing by those directly interacting with
police as well as by the citizenry at large. Police officers, as frontline agents for
the executive branch, are particularly vulnerable to lawsuits, whether the
underlying police conduct or decision was errant or not. Unbridled exposure to
personal liability and hindsight review of their decisions would undoubtedly
compromise effective law enforcement and unfairly expose officers to personal
liability for performing inherently governmental tasks. The public safety
entrusted to police officers demands that they remain diligent in their duties
and independent in their judgments, without fear of personal liability when
someone is injured and claims an officer’s decision or conduct was to blame.
The public simply cannot afford for those individuals charged with securing
and preserving community safety to have their judgment shaded out of fear of
subsequent lawsuits or to have their energies otherwise deflected by litigation,
at times a lengthy and cumbersome process.
Certainly, it is incontrovertible that immunity can be fundamentally
unfair to our citizens who are injured by erroneous police decisions. When
abrogating municipal immunity in Merrill, we emphasized that compelling a
citizen to bear his loss himself when injured by the negligence of municipal
employees “offends the basic principles of equality of burdens and of
elementary justice.” Merrill, 114 N.H. at 724. We further recognized that
leaving an injured citizen exposed without recourse “is foreign to the spirit of
our constitutional guarantee that every subject is entitled to a legal remedy for
injuries he may receive in his person or property.” Id. at 725; see N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 14. We are, however, at a crossroad of competing policies, and we
must formulate a necessary compromise.
Numerous jurisdictions have adopted some version of official immunity
to protect police officers from personal liability, either by common law or by
legislation. See, e.g., Borders v. City of Huntsville, 875 So. 2d 1168, 1178 (Ala.
2003) (statutory immunity); Samaniego v. City of Kodiak, 2 P.3d 78, 83 (Alaska
15
2000) (common law immunity); Mulligan, 643 A.2d at 1234 (common law
immunity); Cameron, 549 S.E.2d at 344 (common law immunity); Dokman,
637 N.W.2d at 296 (common law immunity); Clea v. City of Baltimore, 541 A.2d
1303, 1308 (Md. 1988) (common law immunity); Brumfield v. Lowe, 744 So. 2d
383, 388 (Miss. Ct. App. 1999) (common law immunity); Prior v. Pruett, 550
S.E.2d 166, 174 (N.C. Ct. App. 2001) (common law immunity); Alston v. City of
Camden, 773 A.2d 693, 697, 703-04 (N.J. 2001) (statutory immunity); Clark v.
University of Houston, 60 S.W.3d 206, 208 (Tex. Ct. App. 2001) (common law
immunity); Long v. L’Esperance, 701 A.2d 1048, 1052 (Vt. 1997) (common law
immunity). When affording official immunity to town selectmen, we
emphasized realities that are equally applicable here:
[I]t is impossible to know whether [a] claim [against an
official] is well founded until the case has been tried, and
[thus] to submit all officials, the innocent as well as the
guilty, to the burden of a trial and to the inevitable danger of
its outcome, would dampen the ardor of all but the most
resolute, or the most irresponsible, in the unflinching
discharge of their duties. Again and again the public interest
calls for action which may turn out to be founded on a
mistake, in the face of which an official may later find himself
hard put to it to satisfy a jury of his good faith. There must
indeed be means of punishing public officers who have been
truant to their duties; but that is quite another matter from
exposing such as have been honestly mistaken to suit by
anyone who has suffered from their errors. As is so often the
case, the answer must be found in a balance between the
evils inevitable in either alternative. In this instance it has
been thought in the end better to leave unredressed the
wrongs done by dishonest officers than to subject those who
try to do their duty to the constant dread of retaliation.
Voelbel v. Town of Bridgewater, 144 N.H. 599, 601 (1999) (quotation omitted).
Today, we decide that encouraging independent police judgment for the
protection and welfare of the citizenry at large must prevail over ensuring
common law civil recourse for individuals who may be injured by errant police
decisions. We adopt parameters for official immunity, as informed by our case
law, the law in foreign jurisdictions as well as the scope of official immunity
identified by the legislature in RSA 99-D:1. Accordingly, we hold that
municipal police officers are immune from personal liability for decisions, acts
or omissions that are: (1) made within the scope of their official duties while in
the course of their employment; (2) discretionary, rather than ministerial; and
(3) not made in a wanton or reckless manner. We caution against a formulaic
approach to discerning discretionary and ministerial decisions, acts or
16
omissions. In the context of immunity, these terms are not subject to a
dictionary definition, nor can they be reduced to a set of specific rules.
Restatement, supra comment d at 413; Hudson, 638 A.2d at 564. The
prescription we provide today for discerning the dividing point between
discretionary and ministerial decisions, acts or omissions is intended not to
provide exacting strictures, but rather to furnish guiding criteria to enable
courts to render legal conclusions that accomplish the policies underlying the
grant of official immunity. Above all, the distinction must serve the purposes
underlying official immunity. See Hudson, 638 A.2d at 564.
A discretionary decision, act or omission involves the exercise of personal
deliberation and individual professional judgment that necessarily reflects the
facts of the situation and the professional goal. Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 306;
Clark, 60 S.W.3d at 208. Such decisions include those for which there are no
hard and fast rules as to the course of conduct that one must or must not take
and those acts requiring the exercise of judgment and choice and involving
what is just and proper under the circumstances. Borders, 875 So. 2d at
1178. An official’s decision, act or omission is ministerial when it is absolute,
certain and imperative, involving merely execution of a specific duty arising
from fixed and designated facts. Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 306; Dokman, 637
N.W.2d at 296; Clark, 60 S.W.3d at 208 (ministerial actions are those which
require obedience to orders or performance of a duty which leave no choice for
the public official). “Ministerial refers to a duty which is to be performed in a
prescribed manner without the exercise of judgment or discretion,” Mulligan,
643 A.2d at 1233 (quotations and brackets omitted), and includes those
decisions, acts or omissions “imposed by law with performance required at a
time and in a manner or upon conditions which are specifically designated, the
duty to perform under the conditions specified not being dependent upon the
officer’s judgment or discretion,” Brumfield, 744 So. 2d at 388 (quotation and
brackets omitted); see also Restatement, supra comment h at 418 (acts are
ministerial when official administers law “with little choice as to when, where,
how or under what circumstances their acts are to be done”).
We note that the criteria adopted today for characterizing a decision, act
or omission as “discretionary” for purposes of official immunity is in accord
with Tilton. In Tilton, we refused to apply official immunity to individual state
employees because the alleged negligent acts and omissions did not “call for
deliberation, discretion, judgment or policy choice,” and otherwise constituted
“mere inaction or inattention” not protected by official immunity. Tilton, 126
N.H. at 300. Yet, we left open the question of “whether the discretionary
character of official action that may support an immunity claim must involve
the exercise of a governmental function.” Id. (citing discretionary function
immunity exception under Merrill). In other words, we did not decide whether
official immunity could extend to discretionary decisions, acts or omissions
that do not involve governmental policy-making or planning.
17
“Discretionary” necessarily has a broader meaning in the context of
official immunity than that in the context of the discretionary function
immunity exception for municipalities under Merrill given the differing policies
underlying the two. See Nusbaum v. Blue Earth County, 422 N.W.2d 713, 718
n.4 (Minn. 1988). The discretionary function immunity exception protects
municipalities from judicial intrusion into the province of the executive or
legislative branch by supervising its policy and planning decisions through tort
law. Thus, the discretionary functions that fall within the protection of the
exception are limited to discretionary decisions involving municipal policy-
making or planning. By contrast, official immunity is premised upon removing
the fear of personal liability for public officials who are required to exercise
discretion in the performance of their official duties so that they are free to
exercise independent judgment and effectively perform the responsibilities of
their government employment. Public officials may be required to exercise
discretion in the operation or implementation of a government policy or plan,
such that subjecting the decision to unbridled tort liability would compromise
the official’s ability to render independent judgment and effectively perform his
job. Accordingly, the scope of the discretionary decisions, acts or omissions
protected by official immunity must be broader than functions of governing,
with official immunity protecting the kind of discretion exercised at the
operational level rather than exclusively at the policy-making or planning level.
See Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 301-02; Hudson, 638 A.2d at 565 n.1.
Because today we have adopted, for the first time, official immunity for
municipal police officers, and identified the standard for determining whether
such immunity protects an officer’s particular decision, act or omission, we
remand this case to the trial court for it to determine whether official immunity
applies in this case. We caution that the purpose of immunity is to operate as
a bar to a lawsuit, rather than as a mere defense against liability, and is
“effectively lost if a case is erroneously permitted to go to trial.” Sletten, 675
N.W.2d at 300 (quotation omitted); see also Richardson, 131 N.H. at 231
(discussing qualified immunity for constitutional claims).
IV
One final matter remains, determining whether the Town may enjoy
vicarious immunity should the trial court determine that official immunity
protects Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee from personal liability for their
allegedly negligent decision not to detain Citro. Official immunity, when
available to individual public officials, generally may be vicariously extended to
the government entity employing the individual, but it “is not an automatic
grant.” Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 300; see also Restatement, supra comment j at
419-20. Vicarious immunity ought to apply when the very policies underlying
the grant of official immunity to an individual public official would otherwise be
18
effectively undermined. See Sletten, 675 N.W.2d at 300. In other words,
vicarious immunity applies when exposing the municipality to liability would
focus “stifling attention” upon the individual official’s job performance and
thereby deter effective performance of the discretionary duties at issue. Id.; cf.
Tilton, 126 N.H. at 299 (indemnification of individual state officials does not
protect independence in judgment and discretion because individuals still
would fear retribution from government that would have to pay the judgment).
We note that the legislature is free to enact legislation that would otherwise
afford relief to citizens harmed by the negligent conduct of municipal police
officers. See Cameron, 549 S.E.2d at 347 (immunity for individual public
employee does not protect government employer to the extent that employer
has secured liability insurance). On remand, should the trial court determine
that Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee are entitled to official immunity, it
must also determine whether the Town is protected by vicarious immunity
under the standard adopted today.
In sum, we conclude that our holdings under Nilsson and DeBenedetto
do not permit joinder of Citro, a tortfeasor who has fully settled Everitt’s
liability claim against him, as an active litigant in the case. Thus, we reverse
the trial court’s denial of Citro’s motion to dismiss him as a necessary and
indispensable party. Should the case go to trial, pursuant to RSA 507:7-e, I,
the jury should apportion fault among all of the alleged tortfeasors, and the
jury verdict form should identify Citro as a party for purposes of apportioning
fault. We affirm the trial court’s denial of the Town’s motion for summary
judgment, but hold as a matter of law that the Town is not entitled to immunity
under discretionary function immunity. We remand for the trial court to
determine whether Lieutenant Gaskell and Officer Lee are entitled to official
immunity for their decision not to detain Citro, and whether the Town is
entitled to vicarious immunity.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
19