THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2006-113
FREDERICK J. MURRAY
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DIVISION OF STATE POLICE, SPECIAL INVESTIGATION
UNIT & a.
Argued: November 14, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2006
Gallant & Ervin, LLC, of Chelmsford, Massachusetts (Timothy J. Ervin
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Daniel J. Mullen, associate attorney
general, on the brief, and Nancy J. Smith, senior assistant attorney general,
orally), for the respondents.
GALWAY, J. The petitioner, Frederick J. Murray, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) denying his request for injunctive and other relief
relative to the decisions of the respondents, the New Hampshire Division of
State Police, Special Investigation Unit and several other law enforcement
agencies and officials, not to disclose records relating to the disappearance of
his daughter, Maura Murray. We vacate and remand.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or appear in the
record and are not disputed by the parties on appeal. On February 9, 2004,
Maura Murray’s vehicle was reported to have been involved in a single-car
accident along Route 112 in Haverhill, New Hampshire. When the North
Haverhill police arrived at the scene, they found no trace of Maura. In the
nearly three years since her disappearance, numerous agencies and individuals
have attempted to locate her without success.
After the accident, and through approximately October 2005, the
petitioner sent requests to numerous agencies, pursuant to New Hampshire’s
Right-to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp. 2006), and the federal
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. §§ 552 (2002) et seq., requesting
records and information pertaining to those agencies’ investigations into
Maura’s disappearance. All of the investigatory material is now under the
control of the attorney general’s office. With a single, minor exception, the
attorney general’s office has denied all of the petitioner’s requests on the
grounds that the records are exempt from disclosure because they are
investigatory and because disclosure would constitute an unwarranted
invasion of privacy.
In December 2005, the petitioner filed a petition in superior court
requesting, among other things, a declaration that the respondents’ denials
violated the Right-to-Know Law and FOIA, and an injunction requiring the
respondents to release the requested documents. In January 2006, the trial
court ruled that the requested records were investigatory in nature and that
disclosure could interfere with law enforcement proceedings. It therefore
denied the petitioner’s requests. Additionally, the trial court did not find either
an in camera review or the compilation of a Vaughn index necessary. See
Union Leader Corp. v. N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. 540, 548-551 (1997)
(explaining the attributes of a Vaughn index). The trial court did not address
the petitioner’s contention that disclosing the documents would not constitute
an invasion of privacy.
On appeal, the petitioner contends that the trial court erred in finding
that the requested records were investigatory in nature and that disclosure
could interfere with law enforcement proceedings. The petitioner also contends
that disclosing the records would not constitute an invasion of privacy. Finally,
the petitioner argues that the trial court erred in denying his request for in
camera review or the compilation of a Vaughn index.
“The interpretation of a statute, including the Right-to-Know Law, is to
be decided ultimately by this court.” N.H. Challenge v. Commissioner, N.H.
Dep’t of Educ., 142 N.H. 246, 249 (1997) (quotation omitted). “The superior
court’s legal conclusions and its application of law to fact are ultimately
questions for this court.” Id. Thus, in the absence of disputed facts, we review
the trial court’s ruling de novo. Union Leader Corp. v. City of Nashua, 141
N.H. 473, 476 (1996).
2
“The purpose of the Right-to-Know Law is to ensure both the greatest
possible public access to the actions, discussions and records of all public
bodies, and their accountability to the people.” N.H. Civil Liberties Union v.
City of Manchester, 149 N.H. 437, 438 (2003) (quotation omitted). Thus, the
Right-to-Know Law helps further our state constitutional requirement that the
public’s right of access to governmental proceedings and records shall not be
unreasonably restricted. Id.; see also N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. While the
statute does not provide for unrestricted access to public records, we resolve
questions regarding the Right-to-Know Law with a view to providing the utmost
information in order to best effectuate the statutory and constitutional
objective of facilitating access to all public documents. Id. Therefore, we
construe provisions favoring disclosure broadly, while construing exemptions
narrowly. Id. “We also look to the decisions of other jurisdictions, since other
similar acts, because they are in pari materia, are interpretatively helpful,
especially in understanding the necessary accommodation of the competing
interests involved.” N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. at 546 (quotation
omitted). Finally, when a public entity seeks to avoid disclosure of material
under the Right-to-Know Law, that entity bears a heavy burden to shift the
balance toward nondisclosure. City of Nashua, 141 N.H. at 476.
Because the respondents make no argument to the contrary, we presume
for purposes of this appeal that all respondents are subject to the disclosure
requirements of the Right-to-Know Law. Our Right-to-Know Law does not
explicitly address requests for police investigative files, such as those at issue
here. Id. at 475. In Lodge v. Knowlton, 118 N.H. 574 (1978), therefore, we
adopted the six-prong test under FOIA for evaluating requests for access to
police investigative files. Under FOIA, an agency may exempt from disclosure:
records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but
only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement
records or information (A) could reasonably be expected to interfere
with enforcement proceedings, (B) would deprive a person of a right
to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication, (C) could reasonably be
expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,
(D) could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a
confidential source, including a State, local, or foreign agency or
authority or any private institution which furnished information on
a confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or information
compiled by criminal law enforcement authority in the course of a
criminal investigation or by an agency conducting a lawful national
security intelligence investigation, information furnished by a
confidential source, (E) would disclose techniques and procedures
for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would disclose
guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions if such
3
disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the
law, or (F) could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or
physical safety of any individual . . . .
5 U.S.C. § 552 (b)(7). Because the trial court based its decision upon
exemption (A) above, regarding interference with enforcement proceedings, we
first consider the application of that exemption.
The entity resisting disclosure under exemption (A) must initially show
that the requested documents are: (1) investigatory; and (2) compiled for law
enforcement purposes. Lodge, 118 N.H. at 576-77. The petitioner does not
challenge the trial court’s findings that the requested documents are
investigatory in nature and that they were complied for law enforcement
purposes. Accordingly, we conclude that the respondents have met their initial
burden.
We next consider whether exemption (A) in fact applies. As noted, we
construe provisions favoring disclosure broadly, while construing exemptions
narrowly. N.H. Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 438. The key question in the
analysis is whether revelation of the documents could reasonably be expected
to interfere with enforcement proceedings. Curran v. Dept. of Justice, 813 F.2d
473, 474 (1st. Cir. 1987). While an agency must show that enforcement
proceedings are pending or reasonably anticipated, see Mapother v. Dept. of
Justice, 3 F.3d 1533, 1540 (D.C. Cir. 1993); see also NLRB v. Robbins Tire &
Rubber Co., 437 U.S. 214, 232 (1978), we need not determine whether the
respondents have made such a showing here. Assuming, without deciding,
that enforcement proceedings are reasonably anticipated, we hold that the
respondents have not met their burden to demonstrate that disclosure of the
requested documents could reasonably be expected to interfere with those
proceedings.
Exemption (A) was designed to eliminate “blanket exemptions” for
government records simply because they were found in investigatory files
compiled for law enforcement purposes. Curran, 813 F.2d at 475. “Put
another way, merely because a piece of paper has wended its way into an
investigative dossier created in anticipation of enforcement action, an agency
. . . cannot automatically disdain to disclose it.” Id. Since an agency may not
rely on a blanket exemption, it must meet a minimum threshold of disclosure
in order to justify its refusal to disclose. Id. The agency is not required,
however, to justify its refusal on a document-by-document basis. Id. While an
in camera review or the preparation of a Vaughn index may be sufficient to
justify an agency’s refusal to disclose, such measures are also not necessarily
required. See id. (noting that use of a Vaughn index is not practicable in cases
involving exemption (A)).
4
In cases such as this one, generic determinations of likely interference
often will suffice. Id.; see also Robbins Tire, 437 U.S. at 236. When generic
determinations are used, the withholding “should be justified category-of-
document by category-of-document not file-by-file.” Curran, 813 F.2d at 475
(quotation and ellipses omitted); see also Crooker v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
& Firearms, 789 F.2d 64, 66-67 (D.C. Cir. 1986). The categorization should be
clear enough to permit a court to ascertain how each category of documents, if
disclosed, could interfere with the investigation. Curran, 813 F.2d at 475. The
categories must be distinct enough to allow meaningful judicial review, yet not
so distinct as to reveal the nature and scope of the investigation. Id.
In order to provide some guidance to trial courts attempting to apply this
standard, we emphasize two points made in the Curran decision. First, the
Curran Court provided some examples of types of categories which, because
coupled with careful explanation to the trial court as to how interference with
enforcement proceedings could occur, satisfied the aforementioned principles.
These categories included: “details regarding initial allegations giving rise to
th[e] investigation; interviews with witnesses and subjects; investigative reports
furnished to the prosecuting attorneys; contacts with prosecutive attorneys
regarding allegations, subsequent progress of investigations, and prosecutive
opinions . . . .” Curran, 813 F.2d at 476. Second, in the case of one-of-a-kind
records, Curran would not preclude application of the exemption if an
enforcement agency made limited use of a “miscellaneous” category to avoid
having to set forth a precise – and potentially compromising – description of the
record(s). See id.
Prior to the hearing on this matter, the respondents disclosed a one-page
document delineating twenty categories of information contained within their
investigative files. The record reveals that the trial court made no findings or
rulings regarding the sufficiency of these categories. Based upon our review,
we hold that the respondents’ categories do not meet the requirements of the
Right-to-Know Law. The respondents’ categories include, for example, the
broad terms “photographs,” “correspondence (letters and e-mails),” “maps and
diagrams” and “tax records,” without any annotations or explanations. While
additional explanation might have allowed the respondents to meet their
burden, see, e.g., Curran, 813 F.2d at 476 (government’s categorization was
sufficient because it was accompanied by a declaration carefully explaining
how the release of documents in the various categories would interfere with
enforcement proceedings), the respondents offered no affidavits, testimony, or
other evidence which, for example: (1) defined these categories more precisely;
(2) explained how disclosure of the information within these categories could
interfere with any investigation or enforcement; or (3) explained why “there was
no reasonably segregable portion of any of the withheld material suitable for
release . . . .” Curran, 813 F.2d at 476 (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we
conclude that the respondents have not met their burden to demonstrate how
5
disclosure of the requested documents could reasonably be expected to
interfere with any investigation or enforcement proceedings.
The respondents point out that during the hearing in the superior court,
it supplied witnesses who could have been, but were not, cross-examined by
the petitioner. The fact that witnesses could have testified to certain things on
cross-examination would not, however, have fulfilled the respondents’
obligation. Under the Right-to-Know Law, the respondents bear the burden of
demonstrating why the requested information should not be disclosed. See
City of Nashua, 141 N.H. at 476; cf. Curran, 813 F.2d at 473-74. It is not the
petitioner’s responsibility to clarify the respondents’ vague categorizations, nor
should the petitioner be penalized for failing to do so.
Accordingly, because the respondents have not met their burden to
justify withholding the requested documents, we remand the matter for a new
hearing. On remand, if the respondents continue to resist disclosure, they
must make a presentation that will allow the superior court to determine how
disclosure of the requested information could interfere with an ongoing
investigation or enforcement proceedings. Crooker, 789 F.2d at 67. Given the
disposition of this appeal, we need not consider the petitioner’s privacy
argument.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6