THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-621
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PHILIP MORRIS USA, INC. & a.
Argued: March 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 22, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Richard W. Head, senior assistant
attorney general, & a. on the brief, and Mr. Head orally), for the State.
Ransmeier & Spellman, of Concord (R. Matthew Cairns and Lisa M. Lee
on the brief), Ford, Weaver & McDonald, of Portsmouth (Marc McDonald on the
brief), Kirkland & Ellis LLP, of New York, New York (Marjorie P. Lindblom & a.
on the brief), Winston & Strawn, LLP, of Chicago, Illinois (Thomas J. Frederick
on the brief), Kirkland & Ellis LLP, of Chicago, Illinois (Stephen R. Patton and
Douglas G. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Patton orally), Weil Gotshal & Manges,
of New York, New York (Penny Reid on the brief), and DLA Piper US LLP, of New
York, New York (Alexander Shaknes & a. on the brief), for defendants Philip
Morris USA, Inc., R.J. Reynolds, Inc. and Lorillard Tobacco Company.
McNeill, Taylor & Gallo, P.A., of Dover (Robert J. Gallo on the brief), and
Howrey LLP, of Washington, D.C. (Robert J. Brookhiser and Elizabeth B.
McCallum on the brief, and Mr. Brookhiser orally), for defendants
Commonwealth Brands, Inc. & a. (the Subsequent Participating
Manufacturers).
DUGGAN, J. The State appeals an order of the Superior Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) granting the defendants’ motion to compel arbitration and
dismissing its petition for declaratory judgment. We affirm.
I. Background
A. The Master Settlement Agreement
Several years ago, New Hampshire, along with other states and
jurisdictions, filed suit against a number of tobacco manufacturers, alleging
that they were engaging in wrongful advertising and marketing of cigarettes
and other tobacco products. See, e.g., Com. v. Philip Morris, Inc., 864 N.E.2d
505, 507 (Mass. 2007); State v. Philip Morris, Inc., 905 A.2d 42, 43 (Conn.
2006). In November 1998, the Attorneys General of forty-six states, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and four United States
Territories (the Settling States) entered into the Tobacco Master Settlement
Agreement (MSA) with four domestic tobacco manufacturers, known as the
Original Participating Manufacturers (OPMs). Because two of the
manufacturers have merged, the OPMs now are defendants Philip Morris USA,
Inc., R.J. Reynolds, Inc., and Lorillard Tobacco Co.
Under the MSA, the Settling States agreed to dismiss their lawsuits and
to release past and future claims against the OPMs in exchange for annual
payments from the OPMs, as well as several other concessions, including
marketing and advertising restrictions. Since the execution of the MSA,
various other tobacco manufacturers, known as Subsequent Participating
Manufacturers (SPMs), have joined the MSA and are subject to the same
payment obligations and other restrictions as the OPMs. Collectively, the
OPMs and the SPMs are known as Participating Manufacturers (PMs). Those
tobacco companies that did not enter into the settlement are known as Non-
Participating Manufacturers (NPMs).
The annual payments that the MSA requires the PMs to make are
intended to help the Settling States achieve “significant funding for the
advancement of public health” and “the implementation of important tobacco-
related public health measures.” Under the MSA, the PMs do not make
2
payments directly to the individual Settling States. Instead, each PM is
required to make a single, nationwide payment into an escrow account on April
15th of each year, and the funds are subsequently allocated among the Settling
States. The PMs’ payment obligations are calculated annually by an
“Independent Auditor.” Currently, the Independent Auditor is the public
accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
The MSA contains a comprehensive formula governing how the
Independent Auditor calculates the PMs’ annual payment obligation. The
starting point is for each of the OPMs to pay into the escrow account its relative
market share of the base amount for the year at issue as specified in section
IX(c)(1) of the MSA. This amount is then subject to several reductions and
adjustments. One adjustment is the “Non-Participating Manufacturer
Adjustment” (NPM Adjustment), which is here at issue.
As noted above, the NPMs are tobacco manufacturers that have not
joined the MSA, and are thus not subject to the MSA’s marketing restrictions
and payment obligations. The drafters of the MSA acknowledged that
marketing restrictions and payment obligations could put the PMs at a
competitive disadvantage and potentially cause PMs to lose market share to the
NPMs. Thus, the NPM Adjustment attempts to level the marketplace by
reducing the annual payment obligations of the PMs if – as a collective group –
it is proven that they lost market share to the NPMs.
In order for the NPM Adjustment to apply and reduce the annual
payment obligations of the PMs, it first must be determined whether the PMs
experienced a collective loss of a certain percentage of domestic market share
to the NPMs. Next, it must be determined by a nationally recognized economic
consulting firm – referred to in the MSA as the “Firm” – whether the MSA
imposed a competitive disadvantage on the PMs and whether that disadvantage
was a “significant factor” in the PMs’ loss of market share. If the PMs
experience the requisite market share loss and the Firm also concludes that
the MSA was a significant factor contributing to that loss, then the NPM
Adjustment applies.
Even if these two factors are proven and the NPM Adjustment is
applicable, the MSA contains a mechanism for a Settling State to avoid a
reduction of payments. The MSA provides that:
A Settling State’s Allocated Payment shall not be subject to an NPM
Adjustment . . . if such Settling State continuously had a
Qualifying Statute . . . in full force and effect during the entire
calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the
payment in question is due, and diligently enforced the provisions
of such statute during such entire calendar year . . . .
3
MSA § IX(d)(2)(B). New Hampshire has a Qualifying Statute, codified as RSA
chapter 541-C (2007). RSA chapter 541-C requires NPMs doing business in
New Hampshire to place into a qualified escrow fund by April 15th a certain
amount of money based upon the number of individual cigarettes sold in New
Hampshire by the NPM during the previous year. See RSA 541-C:3, I(b); see
also RSA 541-C:2, VI, :2, X (defining “qualified escrow fund” and “units sold”).
B. The Present Dispute
The present dispute concerns the Independent Auditor’s decision not to
apply an NPM Adjustment to the PMs’ April 17, 2006 annual payments. In
accordance with the MSA, the Independent Auditor issued detailed preliminary
calculations of the amounts due from the PMs on March 7, 2006. In its
calculations, the Independent Auditor did not apply the NPM Adjustment to the
PMs’ payment obligations. Recognizing that the parties disputed whether the
adjustment should apply, the Auditor stated that:
The Independent Auditor is not charged with the responsibility
under the MSA of making a determination regarding this issue.
More importantly, the Independent Auditor is not qualified to make
the legal determination as to whether any particular Settling State
has “diligently enforced” its Qualifying Statute. . . . Until such time
as the parties resolve this issue or the issue is resolved by a trier of
fact, the Independent Auditor will not modify its current approach
to the calculation.
Although the Independent Auditor did not – in its preliminary
calculations or elsewhere – explicate its current approach to determining
whether an NPM Adjustment applies, apparently its approach was to presume
that the Settling States were diligently enforcing their Qualifying Statutes,
since, in spite of the fact that it acknowledged that all of the conditions for
applying an NPM Adjustment had been met, it refused to apply the NPM
Adjustment to the PMs’ annual payments for 2003. See Com. v. Philip Morris,
Inc., 864 N.E.2d at 510 n.7.
After receiving the Independent Auditor’s preliminary calculations, the
PMs requested that an NPM Adjustment for 2003 be applied to their final 2006
payment calculation. Nonetheless, the Independent Auditor did not apply the
NPM Adjustment in its final calculations issued March 29, 2006. Even though
the Independent Auditor again acknowledged the dispute between the PMs and
the Settling States concerning application of the NPM Adjustment, it did not
attempt to resolve the dispute. Rather, it reiterated its prior statement that
“[u]ntil such time as the parties resolve this issue or the issue is resolved by a
4
trier of fact, the Independent Auditor will not modify its current approach to
the application of the NPM Settlement Adjustment.”
Shortly following the release of the Independent Auditor’s final
calculations, several PMs served notice that they disputed the final calculation.
While most of the PMs paid the full amounts calculated on the due date of April
17, 2006, albeit under protest, see People v. Lorillard Tobacco Co., 865 N.E.2d
546, 551 (Ill. App. Ct. 2007), R.J. Reynolds and Lorillard paid the sums
attributable to the NPM Adjustment into the “Disputed Payments Account,” as
provided in the MSA. Id.
On April 18, 2006, the State filed a petition for an expedited declaratory
order in superior court, seeking a declaration that it had a Qualifying Statute
in effect and that it diligently enforced that statute during 2003. The State also
sought an order requiring the OPMs to release all money due New Hampshire
from the disputed payments account. The PMs countered that the issue of New
Hampshire’s diligent enforcement of its Qualifying Statute was not properly the
subject of an action in superior court, and that the matter ought to be
submitted to arbitration in accordance with section XI(c) of the MSA.
Consequently, the PMs filed a motion to compel arbitration and to dismiss the
State’s petition.
The superior court examined the provisions of the MSA in order to
determine whether the dispute between the parties was arbitrable. It
concluded that the MSA’s arbitration clause, section XI(c), covers disputes
concerning the application of the NPM Adjustment. In addition, the court
found that the matter ought to be submitted to arbitration “because to do so
would more closely conform to the parties’ expectations and intentions.”
Particularly, the court noted that submitting the matter to arbitration would be
consistent with the parties’ intent “to have issues of nationwide concern, such
as the application of nationwide adjustments and reductions, determined on a
nationwide basis.” Consequently, the court found that the matter ought to be
submitted to arbitration in accordance with the terms of the MSA, and
dismissed the State’s petition. The State filed a motion for reconsideration,
which was denied.
II. Discussion
On appeal, the State argues that: (1) the dispute over whether it
diligently enforced its Qualifying Statute in 2003 is not subject to the
arbitration provisions of the MSA; (2) section IX(j) of the MSA does not apply to
the issues raised in its petition; (3) the Settling States did not contract away
from their own judiciaries the review of their executive officers’ diligence; and
(4) the PMs waived their right to contest diligent enforcement in 2003 by virtue
of a series of agreements executed by the parties in June 2003. The State also
5
argues that it never surrendered its sovereignty to provide an accounting firm
with the duties and powers that are traditionally within its province.
In response to the State’s arguments, the OPMs and the SPMs assert
that: (1) the superior court correctly ruled that the plain and unambiguous
language of the MSA requires arbitration of this dispute; (2) the superior court
correctly concluded that the MSA’s nationwide payment structure compels
arbitration; (3) the well-settled presumption in favor of arbitration compels
arbitration; and (4) the State’s assertion that the OPMs “waived” their right to
contest diligent enforcement during 2003 through agreements settling their
NPM Adjustment claims for 1999-2002 is an arbitrable issue. The OPMs and
SPMs also point to the fact that a significant number of other states have
considered these and similar issues and concluded that the MSA requires that
they be submitted to arbitration.
“The scope of an arbitration provision contained in a contract presents a
question of law for this court.” John A. Cookson Co. v. N.H. Ball Bearings, 147
N.H. 352, 355 (2001). “Such a clause is to be interpreted so as to make it
speak the intention of the parties at the time it was made bearing in mind its
purpose and policy.” Id. (quotation omitted). While there is a presumption of
arbitrability if the contract contains an arbitration clause, we may conclude
that a particular grievance is not arbitrable if it is determined with positive
assurance that the contract is not susceptible of an interpretation that covers
the dispute. Id. at 355-56.
The arbitration provision of the MSA states as follows:
Any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of or relating to
calculations performed by, or any determinations made by, the
Independent Auditor (including, without limitation, any dispute
concerning the operation or application of any of the adjustments,
reductions, offsets, carry–forwards and allocations described in
subsection IX(j) or subsection XI(i)) shall be submitted to binding
arbitration before a panel of three neutral arbitrators, each of
whom shall be a former Article III federal judge. Each of the two
sides to the dispute shall select one arbitrator. The two arbitrators
so selected shall select the third arbitrator. The arbitration shall
be governed by the United States Federal Arbitration Act.
MSA § XI(c).
We conclude that the plain language of the arbitration provision evinces
the parties’ intent to arbitrate disputes such as the one at issue in this case.
The language used in section XI(c) is broad, encompassing “[a]ny dispute,
controversy or claim arising out of or relating to calculations performed by or
6
any determinations made by, the Independent Auditor.” See, e.g., Merrimack
School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140 N.H. 9, 13 (1995) (the phrase
“arising out of” is a “very broad, general and comprehensive term” (quotation
omitted)). The provision also explicitly includes disputes related to the
adjustments described in section IX(j), which lists the various adjustments
(including the NPM Adjustment), allocations, offsets and reductions that are to
be applied by the Independent Auditor.
In addition, section VII of the MSA, entitled “Enforcement,” defines the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Merrimack County Superior Court relative to the
MSA, and provides that it has jurisdiction to enforce the MSA and resolve
disputes “except as provided in subsections IX(d) [the NPM Adjustment
provision], [and] XI(c) [the arbitration clause] . . . .” Thus, as the superior court
determined, “it is abundantly clear that [the superior court] does not have
jurisdiction to hear disputes over the applicability of the NPM Adjustment.”
While not binding upon us, we note that courts in other jurisdictions
have almost unanimously concluded that by operation of the MSA’s plain
language, disputes pertaining to the Independent Auditors’ decision not to
apply the NPM Adjustment to the PMs’ 2003 annual payment are arbitrable.
We agree with those courts. See, e.g., Com. v. Philip Morris, Inc., 864 N.E.2d
at 512 (“The language of the [MSA] arbitration clause thus plainly and
unambiguously encompasses the present dispute.”); People v. Lorillard Tobacco
Co., 865 N.E.2d at 552 (“We conclude that the clear language of the Arbitration
Provision shows that the parties intended to arbitrate the present dispute.”);
State v. Philip Morris, Inc., ___ N.E.2d ___, ___, 2007 WL 1624765 (N.Y. June 7,
2007) (“The plain language of the MSA compels arbitration.”); State v. Philip
Morris, ___ N.W.2d ___, ___, 2007 WL 1650423, at *5-*6 (N.D. June 7, 2007)
(“[W]e believe the plain and unambiguous language of the settlement agreement
requires arbitration of the parties’ dispute. Our conclusion comports with the
decisions of every other state court that has decided the issue to date.”); see
also Colorado v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., No. 97CV3432, at 6 (Denver Dist.
Ct. July 19, 2006); Hawaii v. Philip Morris USA, No. 06-1-0695, at 7 (Haw. Cir.
Ct. Aug. 3, 2006); Idaho v. Philip Morris, Inc., No. OC 97 03239D, at 12 (Idaho
Dist. Ct. June 30, 2006); Iowa v. Philip Morris USA, Inc., No. CL 71048, at 5
(Iowa Dist. Ct. Aug. 16, 2006); Nevada v. Philip Morris USA, Inc., No. CV06-
00929, at 3 (Nev. Dist. Ct. Aug. 4, 2006); Vermont v. Philip Morris USA, Inc.,
No. S 0463-06-CnC, at 5 (Vt. Super. Ct. July 14, 2006); Virginia v. Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corp., No. HJ-2241, at 6 (Richmond Cir. Ct. Aug. 9, 2006).
The State argues that the dispute over whether it diligently enforced its
Qualifying Statute is not a dispute that “arises out of or relates to” a
calculation or determination made by the Independent Auditor. It asserts that
since the Independent Auditor does not have the authority to make a diligent
enforcement determination and has not made one, there is nothing to arbitrate.
7
We concur with other appellate courts that have held that the
Independent Auditor did, in fact, make a determination regarding diligent
enforcement of Qualifying Statutes. As explained by the Supreme Judicial
Court of Massachusetts:
[B]ecause [the Firm] had determined that the [MSA] was a
significant factor in the loss of market share by the participating
manufacturers in 2003, the only means by which the auditor could
have denied the NPM adjustment for that year was by affirmatively
finding that there was diligent enforcement by the States. It is
therefore logically necessary that the auditor did make a diligent
enforcement determination. Whether the auditor made this
determination explicitly, or impliedly, or by employing a
presumption makes no difference.
Id; see also People v. Lorillard Tobacco Co., 865 N.E.2d at 553 (Independent
Auditor’s decision not to apply NPM Adjustment was based upon its
presumption that the Settling States were diligently enforcing their Qualifying
Statutes).
Further, we are unconvinced by the State’s contention that because the
Auditor did not make a specific determination as to whether there was diligent
enforcement of the Qualifying Statutes, there were no calculations or
determinations to submit to arbitration. The State overlooks the broad
language in the arbitration clause stating that any dispute, controversy or
claim arising out of or relating to the Auditor’s calculations or determinations
is subject to arbitration. Moreover, “there is nothing in the arbitration clause
limiting arbitration to those questions actually determined.” Com. v. Philip
Morris, Inc., 864 N.E.2d at 513. The arbitration clause specifically includes
“any dispute concerning the operation or application of any of the
adjustments . . . described in subsection IX(j),” which discusses the NPM
Adjustment. This language is broad enough to encompass “disputes over
issues not actually determined, just as well as those over issues which are
actually determined.” Id. at 513.
Finally, we disagree with the State’s contention that the Independent
Auditor lacks authority to make a diligent enforcement determination. To the
contrary, the MSA not only authorizes the Independent Auditor to make the
initial determination of whether to apply the NPM Adjustment to the PMs’
annual payments, but it requires the Auditor to make this determination. See
MSA § XI(a)(1) (Independent Auditor shall calculate and determine the amount
of all payments owed, including adjustments, reductions and offsets thereto).
The Independent Auditor was, therefore, acting within its authority by
presuming diligent enforcement.
8
The State also apparently argues that the superior court erred in
concluding that submitting this dispute to arbitration “would more closely
conform to the parties’ expectations and intentions” under the MSA. The OPMs
and SPMs counter that the superior court’s ruling was correct, and point out
that the MSA’s nationwide payment structure compels arbitration. We agree.
As the superior court noted, the total amount the PMs are required to
pay in a given year is calculated on a nationwide level, and the sums paid are
then allocated to the Settling States. The NPM Adjustment is an adjustment
made to the total amount owed by the PMs, as opposed to an adjustment on a
state-by-state level. Under MSA section IX(d)(2)(C), if the NPM adjustment is
determined not to apply to a given state because it diligently enforced its
Qualifying Statute, the amount by which its allocated share would have been
reduced is reallocated pro rata to the other Settling States to which the NPM
Adjustment does apply. In other words, the application of the NPM Adjustment
to one state’s allocated share affects the payments made to the other settling
states.
[T]he [MSA’s] broad referral to an arbitration panel of any dispute,
controversy or claim arising out of the independent auditor’s
calculations or determinations reflects the necessity of creating a
uniform, nationwide set of rules by which the independent auditor
is to calculate the annual payments. Indeed . . . if the
interpretation of the rules on calculating annual payments were
left up to the courts of each of the settling states, fifty-two different
sets of payment rules might emerge, sowing confusion, depriving
settling states of moneys needed for smoking cessation and other
essential health programs, and causing wave after costly wave of
new litigation.
State v. Philip Morris, Inc., 905 A.2d at 50 (quotations and alterations omitted).
As the Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court aptly stated:
Such a result [would defeat] the whole purpose of having a Master
Settlement Agreement. The mechanism of submitting disputes
involving the decisions of the Independent Auditor to a neutral
panel of competent arbitrators, who are guided by one clearly
articulated set of rules that apply universally in a process where all
parties can fully and effectively participate, obviates this problem
and ensures fairness for all parties to the MSA.
State v. Philip Morris, Inc., 813 N.Y.S.2d 71, 76 (App. Div. 2006), aff'd, ___
N.E.2d ___, 2007 WL 1624765 (N.Y. June 7, 2007). Accordingly, we reiterate
9
our conclusion that the plain and unambiguous language of the MSA requires
arbitration of this dispute.
Next, the State argues that section IX(j) of the MSA does not apply to the
issues raised in its petition. It contends that it filed its petition in superior
court to obtain a determination that it had diligently enforced its Qualifying
Statute, but that the superior court mistakenly concluded that it brought its
petition to dispute the application of the NPM Adjustment. Although the State
acknowledges that section IX(j) lists the various adjustments (including the
NPM Adjustment), allocations, offsets and reductions that are to be applied by
the Auditor, it nonetheless argues:
The arbitration clause specified in § XI(c) refers to the “operation or
application of any of the adjustments, reductions, offsets, carry-
forwards and allocations described in subsection IX(j) . . . not the
allocations enumerated in subsection IX(j). Simply because the
NPM Adjustment is mentioned in this list – as one would expect, as
it would need to be applied before certain adjustments are applied
and after others – is not a reason to conclude that [ ] every issue
related in any way to the NPM Adjustment is arbitrable.
We are not persuaded by this argument. First, the State misconstrues
the arbitration clause by drawing a meaningless distinction between the words
“described,” which is the word used in the arbitration clause, and
“enumerated,” which is the word used to describe the NPM Adjustment in
section IX(j). A close reading of section IX(j), however, reveals that the NPM
Adjustment is described in the same manner as all of the other adjustments
and allocations listed in section IX(j). Second, as the superior court observed:
The State contends that this dispute is not in regard to the NPM
Adjustment. Instead, the only issue is whether it diligently
enforced its Qualifying Statute during 2003. While the State has
attempted to rephrase this issue as unrelated to the NPM
Adjustment, the Court finds the argument unavailing. The parties
do not point to, and the Court is not aware of, any provisions in
the MSA other than those regarding the NPM Adjustment, where
the diligent enforcement of a Qualifying Statute has any relevance.
Thus, a dispute over diligent enforcement arises out of a
determination by the Independent Auditor whether to apply the
NPM Adjustment.
We agree with the superior court and consequently reject the State’s argument.
Next, the State argues that the parties executed a series of agreements in
June 2003, in which the PMs absolutely and unconditionally released and
10
discharged each Settling State from any and all claims under section IX(d) of
the MSA (the provision discussing the NPM Adjustment) with respect to
cigarettes shipped or sold during 1999, 2000, 2001 and 2002, including any
effect such claims may have on future payments under the MSA. Thus, the
State contends that the PMs have waived their right to contest diligent
enforcement in 2003. The State points out that the June 2003 agreements do
not contain an arbitration clause, and thus argues that the superior court –
not the arbitration panel – has the authority to determine the scope and effect
of these agreements.
The PMs question whether the June 2003 agreements apply to the
present dispute, arguing that the PMs’ NPM Adjustment for a particular year is
based upon cigarettes sold in that year, and the agreement does not prohibit
them from asserting claims pertaining to the NPM Adjustment for 2003.
Further, they assert that the issue of whether the PMs “waived” their right to
contest diligent enforcement through execution of the June 2003 settlement
agreements is arbitrable, because disputes concerning the applicability of the
diligent enforcement exemption fall within the plain language of the MSA’s
arbitration clause. They argue that it is irrelevant that the June 2003
agreements do not contain an arbitration clause, because “[w]hat is dispositive
is that the dispute in which those agreements are being asserted as a defense
is arbitrable.” We agree.
We have not yet had the occasion to examine whether a dispute
concerning a subsequent agreement must be arbitrated pursuant to an
arbitration clause in a settlement agreement involving the same parties.
Nonetheless, we begin our analysis by reiterating our conclusion that the
language of the MSA arbitration clause is broad, encompassing any dispute,
controversy or claim arising out of or relating to calculations performed by, or
any determinations made by, the Independent Auditor. Bearing this in mind,
we turn to decisions from other jurisdictions that provide guidance on this
issue. Several circuit courts of appeals have held that “a settlement agreement
is an arbitrable subject when the underlying dispute is arbitrable, except in
circumstances where the parties expressly exclude the settlement from being
arbitrated.” Niro v. Fearn International, Inc., 827 F.2d 173, 175 (7th Cir.
1987); see also Inlandboatmens Union of the Pacific v. Dutra Group, 279 F.3d
1075, 1080 (9th Cir. 2002) (“disputes arising under a side agreement must be
arbitrated if the dispute relates to a subject that is within the scope of the
CBA’s arbitration clause”).
We find these cases persuasive, and conclude that the dispute over
whether the June 2003 agreements prohibit the PMs from contesting diligent
enforcement in 2003 falls within the purview of the Independent Auditor’s
determination concerning applicability of the NPM Adjustment to the PMs’
2003 annual payment, and therefore must be presented as part of the
11
arbitration process. The fact that the June 2003 agreements do not contain
arbitration clauses is significant because there is no language in the
agreements indicative of the parties’ intent to expressly exclude the agreements
from being arbitrated. See L.O. Koven & Bro., Inc. v. Local Union No. 5767,
United Steelworkers of America, 381 F.2d 196, 204-05 (3d Cir. 1967) (dispute
over a side agreement that was silent as to arbitrability was governed by the
Collective Bargaining Agreement arbitration clause because the underlying
subject was one “ordinarily a matter for consideration by an arbitrator” under
the Collective Bargaining Agreement).
As mentioned above, the State asserts that this court “should not lightly
infer that the settling states contracted away from their own judiciaries the
review of their executive officers’ diligence.” It argues:
In the absence of unmistakably clear language in the MSA, it
cannot be inferred that the State agreed to cede to an accounting
firm the task of reviewing regulatory and enforcement activities
under RSA 541-C where judicial review of such decisions must
itself proceed deferentially in order to preserve the constitutional
separation of powers.
This is the identical argument that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
made on appeal in Com. v. Philip Morris Inc., 864 N.E.2d at 513-15, which the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts soundly rejected. We concur with
the Supreme Judicial Court’s analysis. As the court noted, the argument
“draws on the long-standing principle that the government is generally
presumed not to have delegated or by contract alienated its sovereign powers.”
Id. at 514 (citing Home Tel. & Tel. Co. v. Los Angeles, 211 U.S. 265, 273
(1908)). However, as it further observed:
The Commonwealth’s argument misses the mark. Submitting the
diligent enforcement question to an arbitrator cedes neither
sovereign power nor the task of reviewing discretionary
enforcement decisions under [Massachusetts’ Qualifying Statute].
Any determination by the auditor or the arbitrator concerning
diligent enforcement has meaning only in the context of the [MSA],
with no effect on anyone except for the [MSA] parties. It is an
analysis to determine whether a condition in the contract has been
met. There is no reason why the Commonwealth, as opposed to
any other party to a contract, cannot be subject to an analysis of
its having met (or not) contractual conditions within the terms
established by the contract. Determining whether the
Commonwealth has met a condition in a contract does not
constitute a cession or delegation of the sovereign enforcement
power. Indeed, the [MSA] places no limitations on the
12
Commonwealth’s prerogative to enforce [its Qualifying Statute] as it
sees fit.
Id. (quotations omitted). Thus, we find the State’s argument unpersuasive.
Finally, the State argued in its reply brief that it never surrendered its
sovereignty to provide an accounting firm with the duties and powers that are
traditionally the province of the State, citing language in United States
Supreme Court decisions holding that such a waiver of state sovereignty may
only be imputed to the State if the waiver was made in unmistakable language.
See, e.g., United States v. Winstar, 518 U.S. 839, 874-75 (1996) (courts should
not interpret a contract to include a surrender of the powers of state
sovereignty “unless such surrender has been expressed in terms too plain to be
mistaken.”(quotation omitted)). However, at oral argument the State conceded
that it raised this argument for the first time on appeal, and it is well
established that we will not consider issues raised on appeal that were not
presented in the superior court. Sullivan v. Town of Hampton Bd. of
Selectmen, 153 N.H. 690, 695 (2006).
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that this dispute falls squarely
under the arbitration provision of the MSA. Consequently, the superior court’s
order is affirmed.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
13