THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Plymouth Family Division
No. 2006-870
IN THE MATTER OF GEORGE J. NASSAR AND MAUREEN NASSAR
Submitted: November 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: March 7, 2008
Harvey & Mahoney, P.A., of Manchester (J. Campbell Harvey on the
brief), for the petitioner.
McLaughlin Law Office, P.C., of Laconia (Philip T. McLaughlin on the
brief), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, George J. Nassar (husband), appeals the
Plymouth Family Division’s (Carbon, J.) award of permanent monthly alimony
to the respondent, Maureen Nassar (wife), in the amount of $1,100. We vacate
and remand.
I. Facts
The record supports the following facts. The husband and wife are fifty-
six and fifty-three years old, respectively. They were married on April 16, 1983,
after residing together for approximately ten years. They have two children,
both of whom are now emancipated adults.
Throughout the duration of the marriage, the husband’s parents
permitted the couple and their children to live rent free in a house they own on
Squam Lake. Apart from this singular luxury, the parties lived a modest life.
The couple could never afford to buy new furniture, and they consistently drove
old cars that did not have heat. Indeed, the wife testified that one of her
complaints had always been that the couple “did not have money.”
Both parties worked to provide for their family. In addition to acting as
the primary caretaker for the couple’s children, the wife worked as a part-time
substitute teacher early on in the marriage. For the last twenty years, she has
worked as a waitress and a staff trainer at a restaurant. In that capacity, she
is currently working twenty-four hours per week.
The husband held a variety of positions. For an unspecified period of
time, he was a traveling salesman. From the late 1980s through the 1990s, he
was the manager of a deli department at a grocery store. For the past several
years, he has operated his parents’ Squam Lake boat tour from May until
October, and a ski check booth at Loon Mountain from approximately the
middle of December until early April. The remainder of the year, he collects
unemployment benefits. During the summer months, the husband works
roughly seventy-five hours per week.
At some point between 1995 and 2000, the husband began to suspect
that the parties’ marriage would fail, but he did not verbalize his concerns to
his wife. It was not until March 15, 2005, that he informed his wife that he
was unhappy and wanted a divorce. Nevertheless, the record indicates that the
relationship between the parties had been strained for some time. For
example, the parties had been taking separate vacations for several years and
had been filing individual tax returns since 2001. Moreover, they had not been
intimate for quite some time and, since 2004, the husband had slept on a
couch in a separate room. Finally, although the wife requested several times
that the parties seek counseling, the husband consistently rebuffed her
suggestion.
At some point in 2000, the husband pushed the wife, causing her to fall
over a chair. Following this incident, the wife moved out and the parties were
estranged for three weeks. She ultimately decided to return because, as she
testified, “[her] children were still young,” “[t]hey didn’t know why their mother
left,” and the husband “explained to [the children] that he had done something
wrong” and promised to never do so again. There were no other incidences of
physical abuse.
After the parties filed for divorce, the wife was awarded temporary
alimony of $800 per month. She also received temporary use and possession
2
of the home the couple had occupied during the marriage. However, because
they still had legal title to the property, the husband’s parents subsequently
commenced an eviction proceeding against the wife. As a result, she was
forced to vacate the premises. After she left, the husband immediately moved
back in and, for the first time, executed a formal rental agreement with his
parents.
At the final divorce hearing, the parties submitted a partial stipulation
resolving the grounds for divorce, health insurance, retirement, debt and
division of property. The principal issue remaining for the court was alimony.
The wife asked for $1,500 a month and the husband objected to paying any
amount.
In its final order, the court awarded the wife “permanent alimony” of
$1,100 per month, “subject to an annual cost of living increase based upon the
Consumer Price Index published by the Wall Street Journal.” In support of its
ruling, the court acknowledged “that the lifestyle during the marriage was
modest.” However, it held that “each party’s employment prospects could be
enhanced.”
More particularly, the court found that, while the husband “is clearly
working many hours per week for his parents, . . . his actualized hourly rate is
diminimus [sic].” The court determined that the husband could increase his
reported income of $41,000 by “choos[ing] to work another job where his
hourly rate would be substantially higher.” The court believed such an
opportunity was available to the husband because “[h]is previous history with
the deli business supports a finding that he has been successful in other
ventures.”
Moreover, the court ruled that the rental agreement between the
husband and his parents was “specious.” As a result, it held that the
husband’s “effective income is higher than he reports, given that he receives
the benefit of housing from his parents.” The court concluded that the
husband therefore had the ability to pay alimony because “the $900 which [the
husband] claims he is paying as rent c[an] be applied towards alimony for [the
wife].”
In addition, the court found that the wife “clearly has an ability to work
more hours each week to become more self sufficient,” despite her
protestations that her current hourly schedule is “customary in the industry.”
It also held that the wife “had a reasonable expectation that support from [the
husband’s] parents would continue” and, thus, “there was less of a need [for
her] to plan for future expenses than what might otherwise be the case.” The
court determined that the wife was accordingly in need of alimony. Finally, the
3
court held that “the underlying circumstances giving rise to the divorce”
supported an award of alimony.
II. Analysis
On appeal, the husband argues that we must reverse the alimony award
because: (1) the court considered the husband’s fault in the dissolution of the
marriage; (2) the award was made subject to an automatic, annual cost-of-
living increase; (3) the record does not support the court’s decision to award
alimony for life; (4) the court considered the free housing provided by the
husband’s parents in ascertaining the wife’s needs and the husband’s ability to
pay alimony; and (5) the court was motivated by “animus.”
In reviewing the husband’s claims, we will “sustain the findings and
rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidential support or tainted
by error of law.” In the Matter of Fowler & Fowler, 145 N.H. 516, 519 (2000).
“The trial court has broad discretion in determining and ordering . . . the
payment of alimony . . . .” Id. Accordingly, absent an unsustainable exercise
of discretion, we will not overturn its factual findings. In the Matter of Peirano
& Larsen, 155 N.H. 738, 746 (2007). However, we review its interpretation of
the law de novo. See In re Juvenile 2004-789, 153 N.H. 332, 334 (2006).
A trial court is permitted to award alimony if it finds that:
(a) [t]he party in need lacks sufficient income, property, or both . . .
to provide for such party’s reasonable needs, taking into account
the style of living to which the parties have become accustomed
during the marriage; and (b) [t]he party from whom alimony is
sought is able to meet reasonable needs while meeting those of the
party seeking alimony, taking into account the style of living to
which the parties have become accustomed during the marriage;
and (c) [t]he party in need is unable to be self-supporting through
appropriate employment at a standard of living that meets
reasonable needs . . . .
RSA 458:19, I (Supp. 2007). In determining the amount of alimony, the court
may consider the value of economic and non-economic contributions to the
family unit, RSA 458:19, IV(d), and:
shall consider the length of the marriage; the age, health, social or
economic status, occupation, amount and sources of income, the
property awarded. . ., vocational skills, employability, estate,
liabilities, and needs of each of the parties; the opportunity of each
for future acquisition of capital assets and income; the fault of
4
either party as defined in RSA 458:16-a, II(l); and the federal tax
consequences of the order.
RSA 458:19, IV(a). We turn now to the husband’s specific arguments.
A. Consideration of Fault
The husband argues first that the court mischaracterized the parties’
reconciliation following the incident of abuse and impermissibly considered
fault in determining that the wife is entitled to alimony. More particularly, he
argues that there is no basis in the record for the court’s determination that he
“induced [the wife] to return to the marriage following [the] physical assault.”
We agree that there is no evidence to support the court’s finding that the
husband “induced [the wife] to return to the marriage following [the] physical
assault.” At trial, the wife testified that she returned to the home following the
assault because “[her] children were still young,” “[t]hey didn’t know why their
mother left,” and the husband “explained to [the children] that he had done
something wrong.” We have not found, and the wife has failed to provide, any
evidence that supports the court’s deduction from this testimony that there
was “inducement.” Because this finding was clearly erroneous and was central
to the court’s decision regarding alimony, we vacate the award and remand.
The husband also contends that the court should not have considered
his conduct because the parties stipulated to a divorce on irreconcilable
differences grounds and the court adopted their stipulation. Pursuant to RSA
458:7-a (Supp. 2007), parties are entitled to a no-fault divorce if “irreconcilable
differences . . . have caused the irremediable breakdown of the marriage.” The
intent of this statute is to permit parties to dissolve their marriage, while
“minimiz[ing] the acrimony attending divorce proceedings.” Murphy v. Murphy,
116 N.H. 672, 673 (1976). Because this purpose could be defeated should a
party offer evidence of fault in a no-fault divorce, we held in Murphy “that in a
divorce under RSA 458:7-a . . . the trier of fact may properly in [its] discretion
exclude evidence of fault on the issue of alimony.” Id. at 674.
We later broadened our interpretation of RSA 458:7-a in Chabot v.
Chabot, 126 N.H. 793, 795 (1985). There, we stated that, when a “court grants
a divorce on the ground of irreconcilable differences, fault would not be
considered on the questions of property division or alimony.” Id.; see also
Boucher v. Boucher, 131 N.H. 377, 379 (1988) (“[E]vidence of fault may be
considered in an award of alimony or division of property if a fault ground is
proven to be the primary cause of the marital breakdown.” (quotation omitted)).
This rule is in accord with the alimony statute itself, which limits consideration
of fault to cases where fault was the basis of the divorce and caused the
breakdown of the marriage. See RSA 458:19, IV(b) (adopting the definition of
5
fault provided by RSA 458:16-a, II(l) (2004); to wit, “the fault of either party as
specified in RSA 458:7 [the fault-based divorce statute] if said fault caused the
breakdown of the marriage”).
In the instant case, the court stated that it was permitted to consider the
“underlying circumstances giving rise to the divorce” and proceeded to recite
the following:
[The husband] testified that he knew at least five years, and maybe
as much as ten years, prior to the separation that he intended to
divorce [the wife]. This was near to the time that he induced [the
wife] to return to the marriage following a physical assault upon
her. Had he shared this information with [the wife] in a timely
way, she might have been better able to secure other employment
that would give her greater income and a more substantial
retirement in old age. His failure to share this information, and his
inducement for her to return to the marriage, has impeded her
ability to be self sufficient. Even if she were to return to school at
a cost of $13,000 to $15,000 over two to three years, she could not
receive a master’s degree soon enough to have a vested pension.
Additionally, [the wife] had a reasonable expectation that support
from [the husband]’s parents would continue. The Court
concludes that [the wife] is in need of alimony.
The husband’s argument is essentially that consideration of these
“underlying circumstances” was tantamount to consideration of fault. A
similar argument was put forward by the defendant in Boucher, 131 N.H. at
379-80. In that case, a marital master granted divorce on irreconcilable
differences grounds, but nevertheless cited the defendant’s “conduct
throughout the marriage” as support for its decision to award the parties’
primary residence to the plaintiff. Id. at 379. On appeal, the defendant argued
that the master’s consideration of such conduct was indistinguishable from
consideration of fault. Id. The plaintiff, in contrast, asserted that the master’s
reference to “conduct throughout the marriage” referred to the defendant’s
vacating of, and loss of interest in the home. Id. She argued that the master
had not erred because such disinterest could be relevant on the issue of a
party’s contribution and attachment to an asset. Id. at 379-80. We
acknowledged that the defendant’s “conduct” could have been used by the
master for both the impermissible purpose of analyzing fault, and for the
permissible purpose of ascertaining his contribution to the home. Id. at 380.
Because we could not determine from the record what “conduct” the master
had considered, we remanded the case. Id.
Here, as in Boucher, the court’s discussion of the husband’s conduct
could be construed in several ways. The court could have been considering the
6
husband’s conduct as relevant to its ultimate determination that the wife has
an “impeded . . . ability to be self sufficient.” Such use of the husband’s
conduct would be permissible because the court was required to consider “the
party in need[’s] . . . [ability] to be self-supporting” prior to awarding alimony.
RSA 458:19, I(c). But, it is also possible that the court believed that it had the
discretion to consider what it thought to be each party’s fault in the breakdown
of the marriage, as intimated from its statement that it could consider the
“circumstances giving rise to the divorce.” If that is the case, the court was in
error. Because we cannot determine from the record in precisely what fashion
the court considered the husband’s conduct, we must remand. Boucher, 131
N.H. at 380.
B. Annual Cost of Living Increase
The husband contends next that the court erred by subjecting the
alimony award to an annual cost-of-living increase. Specifically, he argues
that, because an alimony award can only be modified “upon a proper showing
of changed circumstances,” In the Matter of Arvenitis & Arvenitis, 152 N.H.
653, 655 (2005), it cannot be made subject to the consumer price index, which
is unrelated to the financial circumstances of the parties. See RSA 458:19. We
agree.
While we have not yet had occasion to consider this precise issue, we
recently held that child support awards cannot be made subject to automatic
cost-of-living escalators in In the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55,
64-65 (2005). There, the parties had agreed to a uniform support order that
required the father to pay child support, “subject to annual adjustment for
inflation using the Consumer Price Index.” Id. at 56. Three years later, the
father filed a petition to modify the support order, arguing, among other things,
that the consumer price index provision must be stricken as contrary to RSA
458-C:3, II(a) (2004), which provides the computations used in calculating a
child support award. Id. at 57. After examining RSA 458-C:3, II(a), we noted
that the child support guidelines generally require a “trial court to set
prospective support based upon [the parents’] current income figures.” Id. at
64. From this, we concluded that the use of the consumer price index as a
mandatory escalator was “inconsistent with the child support guidelines
because it requires adjustments to the [payor]’s support obligation that are
independent of actual changes in the parties’ incomes.” Id. at 65.
The rationale underlying our holding in Donovan is equally applicable in
this case. As noted above, in determining the amount of alimony to be
awarded, the court must consider such factors as the “length of the marriage;
the age, health, social or economic status, occupation, amount and sources of
income, the property awarded . . ., vocational skills, employability, estate,
liabilities, and needs of each of the parties.” RSA 458:19, IV(b). All of these
7
enumerated factors pertain to the financial and personal circumstances of the
actual divorcing parties. In this way, RSA 458-C:3, II(a) and RSA 458:19, IV(a)
are similar. See Donovan, 152 N.H. at 64 (explaining how RSA 458-C:3, II(a)
requires the court to analyze the parties’ actual incomes in making a child
support award).
The consumer price index, in contrast, is intended to provide a general
overview of “the price of goods and services purchased by the average
consumer.” Black’s Law Dictionary 335 (8th ed. 2004). While this information
may be useful in ascertaining the effect of inflation on the macroeconomic
condition of a large geographic area, it does not necessarily shed light on the
realities of individuals. It cannot be presumed that inflation will perforce affect
the financial condition of every divorced couple. Consequently, it cannot be
presumed that inflation will affect the equities of an alimony award. See
Waldman v. Waldman, 520 So. 2d 87, 89 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1988) (explaining
that “there must be a showing that the national problem of inflation impacts
specifically on the individual” requesting modification of an alimony award
before such modification can be granted), receded from on other grounds by
Acker v. Acker, 821 So. 2d 1088 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2002). Because RSA
458:19, IV(b) requires alimony awards to be based upon the condition of the
actual parties, and not solely the economy at large, the trial court erred by
making the alimony award subject to the consumer price index. See Donovan,
152 N.H. at 64-65; see also Barham v. Barham, 487 S.E.2d 774, 781 (N.C. Ct.
App. 1997) (holding that an alimony recipient is not entitled to an automatic
cost-of-living increase based upon the consumer price index); Stoler v. Stoler,
376 So. 2d 253, 254 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1979) (finding error where a trial court
inserted a provision in an alimony award providing for an automatic cost-of-
living increase); cf. Tillman v. Tillman, 791 So. 2d 285, 288-89 (Miss. Ct. App.
2001).
C. Award of Alimony for Life
The husband next challenges the duration of the alimony award. He
contends that the court erred in finding, on this record, that an award of
alimony for life was warranted. Moreover, he argues that we must reverse
because the court failed to state a basis for its decision to make alimony
payments permanent. We agree.
It has long been recognized that the primary “purpose of alimony is
rehabilitative.” E.g., Tishkevich v. Tishkevich, 131 N.H. 404, 407 (1989); see
also RSA 458:19, I(c) (requiring that a trial court find, prior to awarding
alimony, that the recipient is “unable to be self-supporting through appropriate
employment”). This principle is based upon the realization that “modern
spouses are equally able to function in the job market and to provide for their
own financial needs.” Fowler, 145 N.H. at 520. Alimony should, therefore,
8
generally be “designed to encourage the recipient to establish an independent
source of income.” In the Matter of Harvey & Harvey, 153 N.H. 425, 431
(2006), overruled on other grounds by In the Matter of Chamberlin &
Chamberlin, 155 N.H. 425, 430 (2007).
However, the express language of the alimony statute dictates that
alimony awards need not be rehabilitative in all cases. See RSA 458:19, I
(providing for alimony awards that are “either temporary or permanent, for a
definite or indefinite period of time”); RSA 458:19, IV (mandating consideration
of multiple factors when calculating the amount of an alimony award).
Because of this, we have held that the rehabilitative principle is not controlling
where, for instance: (1) the supported spouse suffers from ill health and is not
capable of establishing her own source of income, see Henry v. Henry, 129 N.H.
159, 162 (1987); (2) the supported spouse, in a fault-based divorce, has
minimal job experience, no formal education, a learning disability and suffers
from anxiety and panic attacks caused by the other spouse’s emotional abuse,
see In the Matter of Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 39-40 (2002); and (3)
the court determines that it is necessary for the supported spouse to maintain
a part-time work schedule in order to care for the parties’ child, see In the
Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 284-85 (2006). In such cases,
the court is permitted to provide for more than rehabilitative alimony because
the supported party lacks the wherewithal to enter “the job market and . . .
provide for their own financial needs,” Fowler, 145 N.H. at 520, as those needs
have been shaped by the parties’ lifestyle during the marriage. See RSA
458:19, I(a), (c); Harvey, 153 N.H. at 431.
We disagree with the trial court’s conclusion that the record justifies an
award of alimony for life in this case. Unlike prior cases where we have found
non-rehabilitative alimony to be justified, in this case the wife is in good health,
see Henry, 129 N.H. at 162, has no minor children to support, see Hampers,
154 N.H. at 284, and has marketable job skills, see Fowler, 145 N.H. at 520,
including a bachelor’s degree. Moreover, the standard of living to which she
has become accustomed, and which she will attempt to reproduce through her
own means, is indisputably modest. See id. (finding an alimony award
insufficient where the recipient was unlikely to “obtain a job which will allow
her to maintain independently a standard of living comparable to that enjoyed
during her marriage”). At the same time, the court found that the wife “is
[currently] only working 24 hours per week” and “clearly has an ability to work
more hours . . . to become more self sufficient.” We, therefore, reverse the
court’s award of permanent alimony as such an award is unwarranted by the
record.
9
D. Consideration of Parental Support
The husband argues next that the court impermissibly considered the
prospect that he would continue to receive support, particularly housing, from
his parents in arriving at its alimony award. We agree with the husband that
the court may have presumed that he would receive free housing in the future
when it calculated his ability to pay alimony. Moreover, we agree with the
husband that the court gave at least some weight to its belief that he will “be
cared for financially by his parents.” At issue, therefore, is whether it was
proper for the court to consider the mere potentiality for receipt of such future
support in its analysis.
Resolution of this question requires us to interpret the language and
intent of the alimony statute, RSA 458:19. In so doing, we will ascribe the
plain and ordinary meaning to the words used and discern the legislative intent
from the statute as written. ElderTrust of Fla. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H.
693, 697 (2007). “We will not consider what the legislature might have said, or
add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. However, we are
the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as it is expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole.” State v. Doyle, 156 N.H. ___, ___ (decided
October 17, 2007).
At least facially, neither RSA 458:19, I, nor IV(b) grants a trial court
explicit authority to consider a party’s potential for receiving future gifts in
determining alimony. The wife argues, implicitly, that we should nevertheless
uphold the trial court by reading such considerations into RSA 458:19, IV(b),
which permits a trial court to consider “the opportunity of each [party] for
future acquisition of capital assets and income.” We decline to adopt such a
broad interpretation of RSA 458:19, IV(b).
By factoring in the husband’s mere expectancy of future gifts, the court
“anticipated, indeed counted on, continuation of a state of affairs beyond the
control of the affected spouse, . . . and even impinged on the freedom of his
[parents], who [were] not party to the proceeding, to use and dispose of [their]
property as [they] see[] fit.” Gassaway v. Gassaway, 489 A.2d 1073, 1077 (D.C.
1985) (holding that the potential receipt of future gifts cannot be considered in
dividing marital assets). Such an approach is problematic because, as the
Supreme Court of Connecticut aptly observed:
The expectancy may never be realized because of diminution of
the donor’s wealth or a change in the planned disposition of his
property . . . . Relying upon such an [expectancy], a court may
assume that adequate provision has been made for a needy spouse
and neglect to provide more dependable means of support, such as
a sufficient periodic alimony order or a greater share of assets
10
owned at the time of the decree . . . . Any prediction of what justice
between the parties may require when a future event may occur is
likely to be less well considered than a determination made after
the event, when speculation as to the circumstances involved has
been supplanted by actuality.
Rubin v. Rubin, 527 A.2d 1184, 1189-90 (Conn. 1987). For these reasons, we
concur with those courts that have held that a party’s mere expectation of
receipt of a future gift cannot be considered when making an alimony award.
See id.; Scott v. Scott, 645 S.W.2d 193, 198 (Mo. Ct. App. 1982) (holding that a
trial court is not required to consider “such an uncertain source of funds as
future gifts” in making an alimony award); Mumma v. Mumma, 280 A.2d 73,
76 (D.C. 1971). “Of course, if the legislature disagrees with our construction of
its statutory scheme, it is free to amend the statutes as it sees fit.” Marceau v.
Concord Heritage Life Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 216, 221 (2003). Therefore, to the
extent that the court considered the husband’s potential receipt of future gifts
from his parents, it was in error.
The wife asserts, alternatively, that the court did not consider the
housing as a gift, but rather as a wage supplement. See Thayer v. Thayer, 119
N.H. 871 (1979), superseded by statute on other grounds as stated by In the
Matter of Clark & Clark, 154 N.H. 420, 425 (2006). Admittedly, this is at least
a plausible interpretation of the court’s order, in light of its statement that the
husband’s “effective income is higher than he reports, given that he receives
the benefit of housing from his parents.” However, the court did not make
findings on the value of the housing or explain in what way, or to what extent,
the husband’s reported income was increased. Indeed, the court only stated
that “the $900 which [the husband] claims he is paying as rent c[an] be applied
towards alimony for [the wife].” We are unable to reconcile these two findings,
as one suggests the housing was treated as a credit to the husband’s income
(or a wage supplement), and the other suggests the housing was treated as a
debit to the husband’s reported expenses. Moreover, our confusion is further
exacerbated by the court’s discussion of the reasonableness of the wife’s beliefs
that the husband’s “parents would have continued to provide housing at no
expense for the duration of the parties’ lives” and that the husband “expects to
be cared for financially by his parents.” Because we are unable to determine
from this record precisely in which way the court considered the housing
provided to the couple, we must remand for the trial court to make specific
findings on this issue. See Calderwood v. Calderwood, 114 N.H. 651, 653
(1974) (explaining how “the husband’s ability to pay is a vital factor to be
considered by the court”).
11
E. Remaining Arguments
Finally, the husband argues that the court’s decision evinces a bias and
animus against him. However, his brief fails to demonstrate that he preserved
this argument by raising it in the trial court. Moreover, the record does not
indicate that the husband filed a motion to disqualify or recuse the trial judge.
We generally do not consider issues raised on appeal that were not presented
to the court below. See State v. McAdams, 134 N.H. 445, 447 (1991). This
preservation requirement recognizes that, ordinarily, trial courts should have
an opportunity to rule upon issues and to correct errors before they are
presented to the appellate court. State v. Bain, 145 N.H. 367, 370 (2000).
Because no such opportunity for consideration was given here, we decline to
address this argument. State v. Szczerbiak, 148 N.H. 352, 356 (2002).
The husband offers several additional arguments in his brief, all of which
rely, at least in part, upon the parties’ specific financial information and the
trial court’s computations involving that information. While we agree that
some of the financial figures provided by the husband in his brief appear to cut
against the amount of alimony awarded in this case, we do not have before us
the actual financial affidavits that were filed by the parties in accordance with
Superior Court Rule 197. See Murphy, 116 N.H. at 675; Economides v.
Economides, 116 N.H. 191, 195 (1976); In the Matter of Levreault & Levreault,
147 N.H. 656, 658 (2002). Since we are vacating the alimony award in its
entirety, the husband may present his arguments to the trial court should it
again determine upon remand to award alimony to the wife.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12