THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Laconia District Court
No. 2006-290
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SHAUN M. BROWN
Submitted: May 10, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 22, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
Shaun M. Brown, pro se, filed no brief.
HICKS, J. The State appeals the Laconia District Court’s (Huot, J.)
dismissal of its complaint against the defendant, Shaun M. Brown, for one
misdemeanor count of providing false information to secure a firearm in
violation of RSA 159:11 (2002). We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following. On November 30, 2005, Brown
attempted to purchase a nine millimeter handgun. He filled out the required
Federal Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) Form 4473, a federal
gun purchase application form. Question 11.i. on the form inquires of the
permit applicant: “Have you ever been convicted in any court of a
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence?” Brown responded “no” to the
question despite his previous conviction for violation of an abuse prevention
order.
On December 21, 2005, the State charged Brown with a class A
misdemeanor for giving false information to secure a firearm in violation of RSA
159:11. Brown attempted to plead guilty to the State’s charge. However, the
court rejected his plea, ruling that it lacked jurisdiction because RSA 159:11
only criminalizes conveying false information that is pertinent to the
acquisition of a firearm under New Hampshire law. Because the case was
dismissed for lack of jurisdiction, the trial court did not reach the issue
whether Brown’s conviction for violation of his abuse prevention order qualifies
as a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence as defined in ATF Form 4473.
The sole question before us is whether RSA 159:11 criminalizes
conveying false information in the purchase or acquisition of a pistol, revolver,
or other firearm whether or not the false information pertains to New
Hampshire gun acquisition laws.
Because the trial court engaged in statutory interpretation, a question of
law, we review its ruling de novo. See State v. Boulais, 150 N.H. 216, 218
(2003). When construing a statute, we first examine its language, ascribing the
plain and ordinary meaning to the words used by the legislature. Id. We
consider words and phrases within the context of the statute as a whole, and in
light of the policy or purpose advanced in the statutory scheme. Id. We “can
neither ignore the plain language of the legislation nor add words which the
lawmakers did not see fit to include.” Appeal of Astro Spectacular, 138 N.H.
298, 300 (1994) (quotation omitted).
RSA 159:11 states that “[a]ny person who, in purchasing or otherwise
securing delivery of a pistol, revolver, or other firearm, gives false information
. . . shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the first offense, and be guilty of a
class B felony for any subsequent offense.”
In RSA 159:11, the legislature used plain language to criminalize the
provision of false information in obtaining a firearm. Contrary to the trial
court’s reading, the statute does not limit the type of false information that it
criminalizes when conveyed in the acquisition of a firearm. We hold that the
plain language of RSA 159:11 criminalizes conveying false information,
including information upon a federal form that is false based upon federal
definitions of the form’s terms.
Accordingly, we reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
2