THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Littleton Family Division
No. 2006-785
IN THE MATTER OF AMY ALDRICH AND RYAN GAUTHIER
Argued: June 20, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 22, 2007
Carter Law Office, of Lancaster (George C. Carter on the brief and orally),
for the petitioner.
Gillian Morrison, of Littleton, on the brief and orally, for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Ryan Gauthier, appeals a final domestic
violence restraining order of the Littleton Family Division (Cyr, J.). We reverse.
The following appears in the record: The petitioner, Amy Aldrich, filed a
petition for a domestic violence restraining order against the respondent, with
whom she had been in a relationship for more than five years, and with whom
she had a child. Her petition principally alleged that she was having disputes
with the respondent’s mother, who was not named as a respondent in the
petition.
While nowhere in the petition did the petitioner allege that the
respondent had threatened to kill her, at the hearing she testified that the
respondent had stated: “if I ever tried to take [the child] from him, then he
would kill me.” The respondent’s counsel objected, arguing that such a threat
was not alleged in the petition. The trial court overruled the objection.
In granting the restraining order, the trial court specifically relied upon
the petitioner’s testimony concerning the death threat, as follows: “This Court
finds that there has been abuse within the meaning of RSA 173-B:1, Criminal
Threatening. This Court finds that the defendant has threatened to kill the
plaintiff.” The respondent sought reconsideration, which was denied. This
appeal followed.
The respondent argues that, pursuant to RSA 173-B:3, I (2002), notice
was required of an allegation of a death threat before the petitioner could
testify to such a threat and that the court erred in allowing this testimony. The
petitioner counters that under RSA 173-B:3, VIII (2002), the trial court has
broad discretion to admit evidence it deems relevant and material, and that the
alleged death threat was material and relevant evidence which could be
admitted regardless of whether it was alleged in the petition. RSA 173-B:3, I,
states: “Notice of . . . the facts alleged against the defendant shall be given to
the defendant. . . .” The petition may be supplemented or amended “only if the
defendant is provided an opportunity prior to the hearing to respond to the
supplemental or amended petition.” RSA 173-B:3, I. On the other hand, RSA
173-B:3, VIII states: “In any proceeding under this chapter, the court shall not
be bound by the technical rules of evidence and may admit evidence which it
considers relevant and material.” RSA 173-B:3, VIII.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426, 429 (2006). We are
the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
the words used. Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its
meaning is not subject to modification. Id. We will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. Id.
Under the plain terms of the statute, facts alleged against the defendant
must be supplied in advance of the hearing on the petition. Should the need
arise to supplement or amend the petition to modify the facts alleged, this, too,
must be done prior to the hearing so that the defendant has an opportunity to
respond.
We do not construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to do so in
harmony with the overall statutory scheme. Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski
Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005). When interpreting two or more statutes that
deal with a similar subject matter, we construe them so that they do not
contradict each other, and so that they will lead to reasonable results and
effectuate the legislative purpose of the statutes. Id.
2
RSA 173-B:3, VIII must be read in harmony with RSA 173-B:3, I. The
trial court’s power to admit evidence under RSA 173-B:3, VIII is limited by the
notice requirement of RSA 173-B:3, I. RSA 173-B:3, I, sets the contours of the
hearing contest. The trial court has broad discretion to admit evidence it
deems “relevant and material” pertaining to facts alleged pursuant to RSA 173-
B:3, I, but it should not admit evidence on unnoticed charges.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3