THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Liquor Commission
No. 2006-122
APPEAL OF OMEGA ENTERTAINMENT, LLC
(New Hampshire State Liquor Commission)
Argued: February 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 16, 2007
Jeffco, Starbranch & Soldati, of Portsmouth (Harry N. Starbranch, Jr. on
the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Mary E. Maloney, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Omega Entertainment, LLC (Omega),
appeals a decision of the New Hampshire State Liquor Commission
(commission) denying its application for renewal of its liquor license. We
affirm.
I
The record supports the following. On December 1, 2005, Omega applied
for renewal of its liquor license at 494 Elm Street in Manchester (Club Omega).
At the commission’s meeting on December 7, Eddie Edwards, Chief of the
commission’s Bureau of Enforcement (bureau), recommended denial of the
renewal application. Based upon the bureau’s presentation, which raised
concerns with Omega’s “management, violence on or near the premises, record
of violations and public safety,” the commission denied Omega’s renewal
application on December 9.
Omega appealed the commission’s denial; orders of notice for a full
adjudicatory hearing on the license renewal were issued on December 27, and
the hearing was scheduled for January 18, 2006. Subsequent to both parties
conducting discovery and exchanging witness and exhibit lists, Omega filed an
assented-to motion to continue the hearing in order to accommodate more
witnesses, offers of proof, and cross-examination. The commission
rescheduled and conducted the adjudicatory hearing on January 25-26. Both
parties submitted requests for findings of fact and rulings of law. Omega also
filed a motion to vacate the commission’s December 9 denial of its renewal
application, which the commission denied.
On February 8, 2006, the commission affirmed its denial of Omega’s
renewal application, finding that the bureau had satisfied its burden of proof
by a preponderance of the evidence. Omega moved for rehearing, alleging a
number of errors in the commission’s decision. Based upon a review of the
motion for rehearing, the commission issued an interim order (Interim Order I)
on February 16 to correct two errors in its February 8 decision. Interim Order I
clarified that Omega’s liquor license would expire at 5:00 p.m. on February 17,
2006. The commission issued a second interim order (Interim Order II) on
February 24, and an amended second interim order (Amended Interim Order II)
on February 27, correcting additional errors, and “reinstat[ing] Omega’s license
effective . . . February 17 . . . [and] extend[ing] [the license] until the
Commission has taken final action on the Motion for Rehearing with the
applicable appeal period. If the Commission’s final action is unfavorable, the
license shall not expire until the last day for seeking judicial review.”
On March 13, 2006, Omega filed an amended motion for rehearing,
which incorporated by reference its earlier motion for rehearing. In response,
the commission scheduled a public hearing for April 5. During the public
session, the commission affirmed its decision of February 8, and voted to deny
Omega’s motion and amended motion for rehearing. This appeal followed.
II
Pursuant to RSA chapter 541 (2007), our review of this appeal from an
administrative agency’s decision is governed by RSA 541:13:
Upon the hearing the burden of proof shall be upon the
party seeking to set aside any order or decision of the commission
to show that the same is clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all
findings of the commission upon all questions of fact properly
before it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable;
2
and the order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or
vacated except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a
clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is
unjust or unreasonable.
See Appeal of Baldoumas Enters., 149 N.H. 736, 737 (2003).
On appeal, Omega argues that the commission should be ordered to
renew its liquor license due to the commission’s failure to follow numerous
statutes and procedural rules. In its notice of appeal, Omega presented
twenty-six questions for review. We address, however, only the seventeen
questions it chose to brief. See Colla v. Town of Hanover, 153 N.H. 206, 210
(2006) (issue waived when raised in notice of appeal, but not briefed).
III
Omega alleges several violations of the Right-to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A
(2001 & Supp. 2006). At oral argument, counsel for Omega stated that its
Right-to-Know Law claims had not been raised during the course of the liquor
commission proceedings, that they were first raised in Omega’s notice of
appeal, and that they had not been preserved by “prior counsel.” We agree
that, as such, the claims would not be preserved for our review. See State v.
Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 48 (2003). Omega contended, however, that we should
review them under our plain error rule, which allows us to consider an error
that affects substantial rights even though not raised by either party. See
State v. Taylor, 152 N.H. 719, 720 (2005); Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
Under our plain error rule, we consider the following four elements: (1)
there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect
substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity
or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Taylor, 152 N.H. at 720. We note
that whether our plain error rule applies to proceedings of the liquor
commission is an open question. However, even assuming that the rule does
apply to such agency proceedings, and that “substantial rights” of Omega were
at stake, its use should be limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. See State v. MacInnes, 151 N.H.
732, 736-37 (2005). In this case, whatever procedural errors the liquor
commission may have committed that implicated the Right-to-Know Law were
subsequently corrected. The commission’s Interim Order I, Interim Order II,
and Amended Interim Order II were all designed to correct earlier alleged
errors. The public session and full deliberation on April 5, subsequent to
notice to the public and Omega, addressed the commission’s earlier failure to
deliberate in public both on Omega’s motion to vacate and subsequent to the
January 25-26, 2006 adjudicatory hearing. Given the actions of the
commission to rectify earlier errors, we cannot say that any error under the
3
Right-to-Know Law seriously affected the fairness, integrity, or public
reputation of the proceedings.
IV
Omega alleges several violations of its right to due process. It first
contends that the commission failed to provide proper notice “prior to the
December 7, 2005 and March 10, 2006 hearings.” Because nothing in the
record indicates that a hearing occurred on March 10, 2006, we assume that
Omega meant to refer to the meeting of the commission scheduled for March
20, 2006, at which it intended to consider Omega’s motion for rehearing. In its
brief, the commission concedes that its notice of the March 20 meeting did not
comply with the notice requirements of either the commission’s rules or RSA
91-A:2, II. The commission also notes, however, that upon receipt of Omega’s
objection, it continued the consideration of Omega’s motion for rehearing until
the commission’s regularly-scheduled meeting of April 5, 2006. The record
reflects timely notice of the April 5 meeting, and Omega does not claim error
with regard to the conduct of the April 5 meeting. As we discuss the issue of
notice of the December 7 meeting in our analysis in Section V, below, we need
no further discussion of Omega’s allegation of improper notice here.
Next, Omega alleges that “[t]here was a denial of due process generally by
the Commission as the Commission consistently failed to abide by its
published rules and the appropriate statutes designed to afford to a licensee a
fair hearing.” None of Omega’s allegations, however, are supported by
significant legal argument. Judicial review is not warranted for complaints
regarding adverse rulings without developed legal argument, and neither
passing reference to constitutional claims nor off-hand invocations of
constitutional rights without support by legal argument or authority warrants
extended consideration. See Blackmer, 149 N.H. at 49.
Assuming, arguendo, that Omega adequately developed its legal
argument concerning its due process claims, we note that before we will
evaluate a due process claim, Omega must show actual prejudice. See
McIntire v. Woodall, 140 N.H. 228, 230 (1995). Omega repeatedly claims that
it was prejudiced by the commission’s procedural irregularities. In support of
those claims, however, it points only to its inability to sell alcohol from
February 17 to February 24, 2006. In its decision of February 8, 2006, the
commission termed Omega’s license as “officially expired,” yet it “extend[ed]”
the license for seven business days. In response to Omega’s motion for
rehearing, Interim Order I (dated February 16) clarified that Omega’s liquor
license would expire at 5:00 p.m. on February 17, 2006. Interim Order II
reinstated Omega’s license, effective February 17, and extended the license
until the commission took final action on Omega’s motion for rehearing and the
applicable appeal period expired. Amended Interim Order II (dated February
4
27) noted that, if the commission’s final action on Omega’s motion for
rehearing were unfavorable, the license would not expire until the last day for
seeking judicial review. By the time Interim Order II issued on February 24,
however, Omega had apparently not made alcohol sales for a full week.
Omega may have incurred some economic loss precipitated by a
suspension of alcohol sales from February 17 to February 24. Our focus here,
however, is whether the commission’s procedural irregularities denied Omega’s
due process rights in either the adjudication of its application for license
renewal, its motion for rehearing or appeal. The commission’s actions in
Interim Order II and Amended Interim Order II corrected its earlier error of
ordering Omega’s license to prematurely expire at 5:00 p.m. on February 17,
2006. The commission also made clear that, pursuant to RSA 541-A:30, I
(2007), the license was extended until the commission took final action on
Omega’s motion for rehearing and, if the commission’s final action was
unfavorable, Omega’s license would not expire until the last day for seeking
judicial review. Consequently, we do not believe that Omega has made the
necessary showing of material prejudice for it to prevail on its due process
claim. “We will not set aside an agency’s decision for a procedural irregularity
. . . unless the complaining party shows material prejudice.” Appeal of
Concord Natural Gas Corp., 121 N.H. 685, 691 (1981).
V
Omega alleges specific procedural or substantive errors by the
commission with regard to requested findings of fact submitted subsequent to
the January 25-26, 2006 hearing.
Omega first contends that the commission’s denial of the bureau’s
requested finding of fact #11 in its February 8, 2006 order was tantamount to a
finding that there was no rational basis to deny the application for renewal of
Omega’s liquor license. Consequently, Omega argues that the commission
should renew the license.
Omega’s argument rests upon a faulty premise. The bureau’s requested
finding #11 states:
That, considering the history of violations of statute and rule
committed by the LLC operated under the immediate management
control of Mr. George C. Maroun, the Bureau has substantial
doubt that applicable state laws and commission rules will be
followed if the license to operate the business known as Omega
Entertainment LLC is renewed. Therefore we recommend there is
a rational basis for the Commission to deny the pending license
renewal application of Omega Entertainment LLC.
5
In its order of February 8, 2006, the commission neither granted nor denied
the bureau’s requested finding #11. Second, in Interim Order II, dated
February 24, 2006 (and affirmed in Amended Interim Order II, dated February
27, 2006), the commission explained that:
certain Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law were neither
granted nor denied by the Commission [in its February 8 decision]
because they involved opinions, confusing or conflicting
statements, inapplicable laws or rules, or did not involve a Finding
of Fact or Conclusion of Law, and are therefore denied.
Hence, we will not equate the commission’s denial of the bureau’s stated
opinion, recommendation, or request for relief with a substantive finding of the
converse.
Next, Omega contends that the commission violated RSA 541-A:35 by
“failing to deliberate and make findings of fact and conclusions of law,
separately stated, on Omega’s [requests] 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 63 and 65.”
The commission originally granted Omega’s requested finding #55 in its order
of February 8, 2006, but then denied it in its Interim Order II. The requested
finding read:
The information presented by the Bureau is not only
inaccurate, but is exaggerated and is fueled by the campaign for
Mayor of the City of Manchester which targeted Omega as the
“whipping boy” for Mayor Guinta[’]s campaign.
The commission noted that the initial grant of requested finding #55 was
“clearly inconsistent with its decision” to deny Omega’s application for renewal,
and stated that its correction in Interim Order II was simply the “correcting [of]
a scrivener’s error.” Omega has cited no authority, and we know of none, that
would prohibit the commission from correcting such an error. Cf. Blagbrough
Family Realty Trust v. Town of Wilton, 153 N.H. 234, 238-39 (2006) (“The
statutory scheme [RSA chapter 677] is based upon the principle that the local
board should have the first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its
decisions so that the court may have the benefit of the board’s judgment in
hearing the appeal.”); 74 Cox St. v. City of Manchester, 156 N.H. ___, ___
(decided September 21, 2007) (“[M]unicipal boards, like courts, have the power
to reverse themselves at any time prior to final decision if the interests of
justice so require.”).
In its order of February 8, 2006, the commission neither granted nor
denied Omega’s requested findings #51, 52, 53, 56, 63, and 65. In Interim
Order II, dated February 24, 2006 (and affirmed in Amended Interim Order II,
6
dated February 27, 2006), however, the commission denied these requested
findings, giving the same explanation noted above concerning the bureau’s
requested finding #11.
RSA 541-A:35 (2007) states:
A final decision or order adverse to a party in a contested
case shall be in writing or stated in the record. A final decision
shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law, separately
stated. Findings of fact, if set forth in statutory language, shall be
accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying
facts supporting the findings. If, in accordance with agency rules,
a party submitted proposed findings of fact, the decision shall
include a ruling upon each proposed finding. Parties shall be
notified either personally or by mail of any decision or order. Upon
request, a copy of the decision or order shall be delivered or mailed
promptly to each party and to a party’s recognized representative.
Our review of the record reveals that the commission accomplished the
statute’s mandate in all respects. In its February 8, 2006 decision, the
commission recited detailed “background information,” summarized the course
of the January 25-26, 2006 hearing, including procedures and witnesses,
detailed its decision and the reasoning behind it, and included twelve findings
of fact and five conclusions of law. The commission’s decision also responded
to the requested eleven findings of fact and conclusions of law submitted by the
bureau, and the requested sixty-five findings of fact and conclusions of law
submitted by Omega. We see no evidence, and Omega has offered none, that
the commission failed to deliberate in this case. Moreover, we see nothing to
support Omega’s contention, pursuant to Appeal of City of Nashua, 138 N.H.
261, 263-64 (1994), that the commission’s order should be vacated and
remanded for a new hearing. Instead, “[o]ur review of the [commission’s]
decision . . . reveals a thorough, well-documented analysis that does not
comport with [Omega’s] assertions. The [commission’s] analysis of the
information presented by the parties can in no way be characterized as a
conclusory summary of the evidence . . . . In its decision, the board specifically
identified strengths and weaknesses in the evidence, and it connected the
evidence presented to its findings in every instance.” Id. at 264.
Omega next contends that the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested
finding #51 is evidence that the commission failed to recognize that its
December 9, 2005 order contained no findings of fact, in violation of RSA 541-
A:35’s mandate for such findings. We disagree, as Omega’s argument again
rests upon a faulty premise.
7
The commission’s order of December 9, 2005, contained no findings of
fact. Omega’s requested finding #51 stated:
The Commission’s Order dated December 9, 2005 failed to
contain findings of fact and conclusions of law, separately stated,
to support the basis for its December 9, 2005 Order to deny . . .
Omega’s renewal application contrary to RSA 541-A:35.
As noted above, the commission neither granted nor denied Omega’s requested
finding #51 in its February 8, 2006 decision. The commission later denied
requested finding #51.
The commission’s order of December 9, 2005 was not a “final decision or
order adverse to a party in a contested case,” RSA 541-A:35, that required
findings of fact. As explained in the commission’s decision of February 8,
2006, the December 2005 order provided Omega with the opportunity to
request a full adjudicatory hearing before the commission, which Omega did.
Consequently, RSA 541-A:35 was inapplicable to the commission’s December 9
order, and we find no error in the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested
finding #51.
Omega contends that the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested
finding #52 “shows the Commission’s unwillingness to consider all relevant
evidence offered by Omega.” Omega’s requested finding #52 stated:
The Commission should take notice of its own records which show
that not one restaurant/lounge licensee has been denied a renewal
of its liquor license during the past two years and several other
restaurant/lounge licensees that have had [their] liquor license[s]
suspended have subsequently been granted renewal of [their]
liquor license[s] during the past two years, the same time period as
Omega’s operation.
As noted above, the commission neither granted nor denied Omega’s requested
finding #52 in its February 8, 2006 decision. The commission later denied
requested finding #52.
RSA 541-A:33 (2007) provides, in pertinent part:
II. The rules of evidence shall not apply in adjudicative
proceedings. Any oral or documentary evidence may be received;
but the presiding officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence. . . .
. . . .
8
V. Official notice may be taken of any one or more of the following:
. . . [t]he record of other proceedings before the agency.
We agree with the commission that, while RSA 541-A:33 permits the
commission to take official notice of the record of other proceedings before it,
the statute does not require that such notice be taken. As such, it is within the
discretion of the commission whether or not to take official notice of its own
records. Further, Omega’s requested finding #52 would have the commission
take official notice of two full years of records concerning liquor license renewal
applications and suspensions at other establishments. Even if we assume that
such notice would confirm what Omega contended — that no licensee’s renewal
application had been denied, and that certain licensees had been granted
license renewals subsequent to license suspensions, over the previous two
years — Omega has not shown that such information was necessarily relevant
to the adjudication of its own renewal application. Absent such a showing, we
cannot say that the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested finding #52
either violated RSA 541-A:33 or was an unsustainable exercise of its discretion.
Cf. State v. Cox, 133 N.H. 261, 265-66 (1990) (trial court’s denial of defendant’s
request that it take judicial notice reviewed for unsustainable exercise of
discretion); see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining
“unsustainable exercise of discretion” standard).
Next, Omega alleges that the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested
findings #53 and #65 “shows that there was no rational deliberation process
conducted by the Commission” because the requested findings simply restated
what New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Liq 207.03 and 207.08 provide.
Omega is correct that requested finding #53 quotes Rule 207.03(a) and that
requested finding #65 accurately paraphrases Rule 207.08(a). As noted above,
the commission neither granted nor denied Omega’s requested findings #53
and #65 in its February 8, 2006 decision. The commission later denied both
requested findings.
Omega has failed to recognize, however, that both Rules 207.03(a) and
207.08(a) pertain to petitions brought by the “governing body of any city or
town . . . for the revocation of a liquor license located within that community.”
N.H. Admin. Rules, Liq 207.01. The instant case involves only Omega’s
application for renewal of its liquor license — there is no petition from the City
of Manchester for the revocation of Omega’s liquor license at issue. Pursuant
to the plain meaning of the language of the administrative rules, the
commission did not err in denying Omega’s requested findings #53 and #65, as
both findings involved rules inapplicable to an application for liquor license
renewal. See Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transportation, 152 N.H. 565, 574 (2005)
(“In construing administrative rules, as in construing statutes, where possible,
9
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used.” (brackets
omitted)).
Omega next alleges that the commission’s denial of Omega’s renewal
application “constitute[d] a revocation as set forth under the provisions of
[Rule] 207.08,” and thus the commission erred in failing to fulfill the
requirements of Rules 207.03(a) and 207.08(b). For the reason just given, we
disagree. Rules 207.03(a) and 207.08(a) are inapplicable here as there is no
prerequisite petition from the City of Manchester for the revocation of Omega’s
liquor license at issue.
Omega also alleges that the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested
finding #56 “shows that there was no rational deliberation process conducted
by the Commission” because the record “clearly shows that the Bureau failed
to give Omega proper notice of the December 7, 2005 meeting . . . and that
licensee George Maroun, Sr., Omega’s Manager was told not to attend the . . .
meeting.” Omega has again presented an argument based upon a faulty
premise.
Pursuant to RSA 176:8 (2002) and RSA 541-A:29 (2007), the commission
established procedures by which it processes an application for the renewal of
a liquor license. Paragraph I of RSA 176:8 provides, in part:
The [bureau] chief shall handle all license applications and shall
make recommendations, in writing, to the commission, on whether
to grant the license application. The commission shall then either
grant or deny the request, stating its reasons in writing. An
aggrieved applicant may appeal the commission’s decision to the
commission as a whole.
Paragraph II(a) of RSA 541-A:29 provides:
Within a reasonable time . . . after receipt of the application
. . . the [commission] shall . . . [a]pprove or deny the application,
in whole or in part, on the basis of nonadjudicative processes, if
disposition of the application by the use of these processes is not
precluded by any provision of law.
(Emphasis added.)
Subsequent to the denial of its application for license renewal, Omega
appealed the decision to the commission as a whole, see RSA 176:8, I, by
requesting an adjudicative hearing, see RSA 178:3, X (Supp. 2006); N.H.
Admin. Rules, Liq 208.03(b). The record is clear that Omega received
appropriate notice of the January 25-26, 2006 adjudicative hearing in the form
10
of an order of notice from the commission. Omega has presented no authority,
and we know of none, entitling it to formal notice and an adjudicative hearing
at the initial stage of its license renewal application. Cf. N.H. Admin. Rules, Liq
205.11(a)-(g) & 205.12(a) (notice requirements for adjudicative proceedings).
Consequently, we disagree with Omega to the extent that it argues that the
absence in the record of an order of notice for the December 7, 2005 meeting
shows that the commission “failed to give Omega proper notice” of that
meeting.
Further, we also disagree with Omega to the extent it argues that the
bureau’s response to its manager’s inquiry either directed him not to attend the
meeting or evidenced improper notice. Omega contends that “[p]rior to the
[December 7, 2005 meeting] . . . George Maroun, Sr., contacted the [bureau] to
inquire as to whether his attendance was necessary at the . . . meeting.” First,
it seems clear to us that Omega must have received some form of notice of the
December 7 meeting, prompting it to have then made such an inquiry. More
important, we disagree with Omega’s characterization that the bureau told
Maroun “not to attend the December 7, 2005 meeting.” In response to
Maroun’s inquiry, the bureau’s deputy chief left a telephone message at his
residence, stating:
This message is for George Maroun, Senior. This is Deputy Chief
Avery with Liquor Enforcement. Um, you’ve left a voice mail
message for me inquiring about attending that meeting on
Wednesday. There’s no need for you to attend that meeting. If it
comes to a hearing, if the Commission decides to require a hearing
before that license [is] renewed, then you’ll be notified. Otherwise,
there’s no need for you to attend that meeting. Thank you. Bye.
While we agree that Deputy Chief Avery’s message made clear that Maroun was
not required to attend the December 7 meeting, we do not interpret it as a
directive not to attend. Further, we note that the record shows that Omega
was both present at the December 7 meeting and informed that, subsequent to
the commission’s denial of Omega’s application for renewal of its liquor license,
there would be a full adjudicative hearing on the matter. In sum, we find no
error with regard to the commission’s denial of Omega’s requested finding #56.
VI
Omega contends that the commission erred in its decision because the
bureau failed to submit “a written [p]etition with its recommendations, in
writing, as required by RSA 176:8 and evidence to support a revocation of its
license as set forth under [New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Liq]
207.08(b).” It is unclear from Omega’s brief if it is alleging error within the
context of the December 7, 2005 nonadjudicatory meeting or the January 25-
11
26 adjudicatory hearing. In either case, we find no error in the commission’s
actions.
RSA 176:8, I, provides, in pertinent part: “The [bureau] chief shall
handle all license applications and shall make recommendations, in writing, to
the commission, on whether to grant the license application.” The statute
makes no mention of a “written petition” and Omega cites no other authority in
support of its contention except Rule 207.08(b). We have already explained,
however, that Rule 207.08 pertains to a petition brought by the governing body
of any city or town for the revocation of a liquor license located within that
community. See N.H. Admin. Rules, Liq 207.01. The only “petition” at issue in
this case is Omega’s application for the renewal of its liquor license, see N.H.
Admin. Rules, Liq 205.02(n) (defining “petition”). Rule 207.08 remains
inapplicable to an application for liquor license renewal. Accordingly, there
was no requirement for the bureau to file its own petition, and the
commission’s actions concerned the bureau’s recommendations as to Omega’s
petition.
Further, our review of the record reveals that the bureau made a written
recommendation to the commission regarding whether to grant Omega’s license
renewal application. The agenda for the December 7 meeting of the
commission shows that the bureau made a written recommendation of “denial”
with regard to the renewal application. While we concur with the commission’s
acknowledgment that the bureau’s recommendation could have been more
explanatory, we agree that the agenda’s writing complied with the mandate of
RSA 176:8, I, that it be “in writing.” In the context of the January 25-26, 2006
adjudicatory hearing, the bureau submitted requested conclusions of law and
eleven findings of fact in support of its written recommendation that the
commission deny Omega’s application for renewal of its liquor license.
Omega further contends that the commission violated RSA 541-A:30, II
and III by denying the application for license renewal in the absence of: (1) a
written petition from the bureau; (2) notice of the impending actions; and (3) an
adjudicatory proceeding. We disagree. Prior to this case, we have not been
presented with the need to construe RSA 541-A:30, II or III. In statutory
interpretation, this court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. Baldoumas, 149
N.H. at 737. When construing the meaning of a statute, we first examine the
language found in the statute, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to words used. Id. at 738.
RSA 541-A:30, III (2007) clearly applies only to the “immediate
suspension of a license” and thus is inapplicable to the instant license renewal
case.
12
RSA 541-A:30, II (2007) states:
An agency shall not revoke, suspend, modify, annul,
withdraw, or amend a license unless the agency first gives notice to
the licensee of the facts or conduct upon which the agency intends
to base its action, and gives the licensee an opportunity, through
an adjudicative proceeding, to show compliance with all lawful
requirements for the retention of the license.
(Emphasis added.) While the plain language does not include license
“renewals,” we need not decide whether RSA 541-A:30, II applies to a license
renewal, as we have already addressed Omega’s arguments concerning what
the commission did or did not provide. Specifically, we concluded that there
was no requirement for a petition from the commission in this license renewal
case; that Omega received adequate notice of the December 7 meeting; that
Omega received an adjudicative hearing, in accordance with RSA 176:8, I, RSA
178:3, X, and Rule 208.03(b); and that Omega received appropriate notice of
the adjudicative hearing in the form of an order of notice from the commission.
As previously described, both parties conducted discovery and exchanged
witness and exhibit lists in advance of the adjudicative hearing. Thus, we see
no violation of RSA 541-A:30, II.
VII
Omega alleges that the commission erred because, contrary to RSA 541-
A:31, VIII and RSA 541-A:33, V, its decision was based, not exclusively upon
the evidence and matters officially noticed, but upon “mere allegations and
conclusionary [sic] statements . . . innuendo and matters of opinion and
political considerations.” We note that, pursuant to the plain meaning of the
statutory language, only the commission’s findings of fact, and not its decision
as a whole, are the focus of RSA 541-A:31, VIII (2007) (“Findings of fact shall be
based exclusively on the evidence and on matters officially noticed in
accordance with RSA 541-A:33, V.”). In contrast, when making its overall
decision, the commission is guided by RSA 541-A:33 (2007) and RSA 178:3, XI.
RSA 541-A:33 provides, in part, that the rules of evidence shall not apply in
adjudicative hearings; that any oral or documentary evidence may be received;
and that the presiding officer may “exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.” In addition, RSA 178:3, XI provides:
There shall be no presumption that any liquor license shall
be renewed. The commission shall review all license requests for
renewal, and shall not renew any license unless the licensee meets
all of the current requirements for the issuance of a license. The
commission may consider the licensee’s record of violations, the
manner in which the licensee has operated during the term of the
13
license, the effect of the license on the neighborhood or
community, and any other facts presented at the renewal hearing
in determining whether to renew the license.
(Emphasis added.) As such, we will consider Omega’s argument as one
challenging the sufficiency of the evidence supporting the commission’s
decision.
Mindful that our review is governed by RSA 541:13, we review Omega’s
sufficiency of the evidence claim as a matter of law, and uphold the findings
and rulings of the commission unless they are lacking in evidential support or
tainted by error of law. See ElderTrust of Fla. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H. 693,
704 (2007). We accord considerable weight to the commission’s judgments on
the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. See id.
During the course of the January 25-26, 2006 adjudicatory hearing, the
commission heard live testimony from witnesses for both parties and further
testimony by way of offers of proof. Both parties were afforded the opportunity
to cross-examine all witnesses. The bureau presented the testimony of the
mayor of the City of Manchester, the deputy chief, a captain and a sergeant of
the Manchester Police Department, and a lieutenant of the bureau. Further
offers of proof and letters from community members, exhibits, and statistical
reports concerning police service calls were also introduced.
Mayor Frank C. Guinta testified that he did not feel that the activities at
Club Omega “me[t] the standard or the threshold of a safe and secure
environment . . . based on the number of incidents I see, particularly underage
drinking, stabbings inside the complex, to me, that’s not acceptable.” Further,
the mayor testified concerning the large number of calls to the Manchester
Police Department for service to both Club Omega and the surrounding area.
He detailed his receipt of some two to three dozen telephone calls from the
police department, city employees, and constituents concerning Club Omega,
with only one call in support of the facility. He testified that, prior to his
election as mayor, he had, as alderman for the ward in which Club Omega was
situated, tried to contact Omega with no success. Mayor Guinta denied that
the city was “targeting” Omega or that the renewal of Omega’s license was a
“political issue,” but readily acknowledged that the media had given active
coverage to the events at Club Omega that occurred during the campaign
season.
Deputy Chief Gary Simmons of the Manchester Police Department
testified that Omega had been cooperative with the police department’s efforts
to alleviate problems, yet there had still been “stabbings, fightings, and . . . a
drive-by shooting” at the club, causing concern for public safety and a drain on
police resources from the rest of the city. Deputy Chief Simmons further
14
testified that, while the level of negative activity at Club Omega had dropped,
perhaps because of a drop in the club’s overall patronage, he did not believe
that Omega was successful in curtailing those sorts of problems that were
present prior to the drop in patronage.
Captain David Mara of the Manchester Police Department testified
regarding the number of police calls for service to Club Omega and to the
surrounding area, including the Verizon Wireless Arena and Club Envy.
Captain Mara testified that during the time period from July 2005 to December
14, 2005, Club Envy had twenty-one police service calls for disorderly conduct;
Club Omega had nearly 120 disorderly conduct calls during the same time
period. Captain Mara provided further testimony regarding a stabbing and
shooting right outside the club and reports from surrounding business owners
of vandalism and other property damage.
Sergeant Kevin Kincaid of the Manchester Police Department, and a
member of the mayor’s alcohol, tobacco and other drug task force, testified that
he had worked numerous police details at Club Omega over the previous two
years, and that the level of assaults at the club was greater than that at other
area clubs. Further, he testified as to the club’s security systems, and of the
club’s seeming inability to curb the number of assaults and fights in spite of
that security. Sergeant Kincaid testified that he believed the level of criminal
behavior by club patrons resulted from “a total disregard for the rules of the
club” and that the club’s inability to control its patrons resulted in an unsafe
environment for patrons and police officers.
Lieutenant Kyle Metcalf of the bureau provided testimony via an offer of
proof concerning, among other things, “[h]appy hour violations, disorderly
premise violations, failure to have affidavits on file, advertisement violations,
service to minors, intoxicated individuals . . . [and] failure to maintain an
orderly premise.” Lieutenant Metcalf also testified that club patrons had
assaulted liquor investigators.
Christopher Stawasz, the executive director of Rockingham Ambulance,
the city’s emergency medical services provider and a neighboring business to
Club Omega, testified that Rockingham responded to Club Omega
approximately once a month in 2005 for some type of emergency. In addition,
he testified concerning problems with the club’s patrons using Rockingham’s
parking spaces, increased vandalism and trash, and Rockingham’s installation
of increased security equipment.
Timothy Rourke of the Making It Happen Coalition for Resilient Youth
testified concerning underage access to alcohol at Club Omega during its “18-
plus” nights. Tracey Degges, a representative from the Manchester
15
Neighborhood Housing service testified that “dozens” of underage youth had
told her that they had been served alcohol at Club Omega.
Given this evidence, we cannot say that the commission’s findings and
rulings in this case lacked evidential support, see id., or that the commission’s
decision to deny the renewal of Omega’s license was either unjust or
unreasonable, see Baldoumas, 149 N.H. at 737.
VIII
Finally, Omega alleges a “denial of due process” because of a conflict
between New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Liq 206.04(f) and RSA chapter
541-A, and also alleges that Rule 206.04(a) is “unlawful” because it conflicts
with RSA 541:3. As Omega has briefed only the issue concerning Rule
206.04(a), we limit our discussion to that question. See Colla, 153 N.H. at 210
(issue waived when raised in notice of appeal, but not briefed). At the outset,
we agree with Omega’s argument.
The version of Rule 206.04(a) in effect at the time of the January 25-26,
2006 adjudicative hearing provided:
(a) Any party to an adjudicatory hearing may petition the
commission for a rehearing within 5 calendar days of being notified
of the commission’s decision.
RSA 541:3 provides:
Within 30 days after any order or decision has been made by
the commission, any party to the action or proceeding before the
commission, or any person directly affected thereby, may apply for
a rehearing in respect to any matter determined in the action or
proceeding, or covered or included in the order, specifying in the
motion all grounds for rehearing, and the commission may grant
such rehearing if in its opinion good reason for the rehearing is
stated in the motion.
We note that, effective July 1, 2006, Rule 206.04(a) was amended to provide for
a petition for a rehearing “within 30 calendar days of being notified of the
commission’s decision.”
The conflict between previous Rule 206.04(a) and RSA 541:3 is readily
apparent, and Omega should not have been required to file its motion for
rehearing within five calendar days of being notified of the commission’s
decision of February 8, 2006. The commission does not dispute that previous
Rule 206.04(a) was in conflict with RSA 541:3. It notes, however, that the error
16
of holding Omega to the five-day requirement was corrected by Interim Order I,
which granted Omega an additional twenty-five days from the February 16 date
of the interim order
in order to allow additional time, pursuant to RSA 541:3, to review
a full transcript or develop further arguments for its Motion for
Rehearing. The Commission grants the additional twenty-five (25)
days to supplement the five (5) days permitted in Liquor Rules to
equal the thirty (30) days as recited in RSA 541:3.
While we agree that previous Rule 206.04(a) was in direct conflict with
RSA 541:3, Omega has failed to show that it was materially prejudiced by that
conflict, given the corrective actions of the commission. We also agree with the
commission that the existence of the conflict, without more, does not violate
the due process rights of a party. Given the conflict between the rule and the
statute, the language of the statute supersedes that of the rule. See Woodman
v. Perrin, 124 N.H. 545, 549 (1984). The commission agreed with that portion
of Omega’s motion for rehearing that recognized this conflict, and issued
Interim Order I to correct it.
IX
Omega requests this court to reverse the commission’s decision of
February 8, 2006, and order the commission to renew Omega’s license “based
upon the multiple procedural and statutory errors of law committed by the
Commission, which materially prejudiced [Omega] and its right to a fair and
just hearing.” We agree that the commission made procedural errors in the
conduct of the proceedings against Omega, and the commission has conceded
the same. While we find those procedural errors to be troubling, and admonish
the commission that it must take pains to avoid such errors in the first
instance, we note all of the commission’s efforts to correct those same errors.
Given the commission’s corrective measures, we cannot say that the
commission’s decision to deny Omega’s application for renewal of its liquor
license was either unjust or unreasonable.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
17