THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-859
NEW HAMPSHIRE ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES & a.
v.
COMMISSIONER, NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES
Argued: May 23, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2007
Devine, Millimet & Branch, PA, of Concord (Robert E. Dunn, Jr. on the
brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Andrew B. Livernois, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The respondent, Commissioner of the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services (commissioner), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) denying his motion for summary judgment
and granting summary judgment to the petitioners, the New Hampshire
Association of Counties, five individual counties and four county
commissioners. In an action for declaratory and injunctive relief, the
petitioners claimed that the commissioner violated Part I, Article 28-a of the
State Constitution by: (1) requiring the counties to pay a share of the cost of
providing Medicaid-funded long-term care to recipients of old age assistance
(OAA) and assistance for the permanently and totally disabled (APTD) who
received services in facilities not licensed by the State as residential care
facilities; and (2) billing the counties, in fiscal year 2004, in excess of the
amount allowed by statute. We affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
I
The record supports the following. Since 1999, pursuant to RSA 167:18-
b (Supp. 2006), the department of health and human services (DHHS) has
billed each county for a share of the cost of providing OAA and APTD recipients
with two kinds of Medicaid-funded long-term care: (1) nursing facility services,
see RSA 167:18-b, I; 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 1396d(a)(4)(A), 1396d(f), 1396r (West 2003
& Supp. 2007); and (2) home and community-based nursing services provided
under a Medicaid waiver program, see RSA 167:18-b, II; 42 U.S.C.A.
§ 1396n(b)-(d) (West 2003 & Supp. 2007); 42 C.F.R. §§ 441.350 et seq. (2006).
In May, November and December 2002, DHHS sent the counties a series of
supplemental bills, which are at the heart of this dispute. With those bills,
DHHS sought to recover half of the non-federal share of the cost of providing
Medicaid-funded long-term “skilled care,” in facilities that DHHS does not
categorize as “nursing homes,” to OAA and APTD recipients who had not
previously received either nursing facility services or home and community-
based nursing services.
According to the commissioner, all of the disputed billings were for
patients who received “nursing facility services,” regardless of the State
licensure classification of the facilities in which they received those services.
The counties describe the subjects of the disputed billings as “over 100
Medicaid recipients who apparently were receiving certain types of skilled care
services but who had not been in a nursing home or in [home or community-
based care].” For its part, the trial court referred to the “disputed category of
recipients,” but recited no facts concerning the nature of the services the
disputed category of recipients had received. However, in a section heading,
the trial court characterized the disputed billings as being for “[l]ong-term
Medicaid costs,” which at least suggests a finding that the disputed billings
were for what the Medicaid statute refers to as “nursing facility services.” See
42 U.S.C.A. § 1396d(a)(4)(A), (f).
DHHS has continued to bill the counties for the services provided to the
disputed category of recipients on a monthly basis. Six counties initially paid
the bills, but eventually stopped doing so. One county paid for a longer time,
but has since stopped. The remaining three counties received none of the
disputed billings until recently.
More than half of the OAA and APTD recipients for whose care DHHS
sought reimbursement received services at Crotched Mountain Rehabilitation
Center (Crotched Mountain). The remaining recipients received services either
2
in hospitals in New Hampshire or in out-of-state facilities. Both sides treat
Crotched Mountain as an exemplar for all the disputed facilities. In a
document titled “HEALTH FACILITY CATEGORY CODES,” the DHHS bureau of
health facilities administration (bureau) placed Crotched Mountain in the
“special hospital - rehabilitation” category rather than the category labeled
“nursing.” Both sides appear to assume, although the record does not
demonstrate, that the bureau’s health facility categories are based upon the
statutory licensure classifications. A “bed need report” prepared in 2005 by the
DHHS division of public health services shows that there are no nursing home
beds in Greenfield, the town where Crotched Mountain is located. In addition,
Crotched Mountain does not pay the nursing facility quality assessment, a fee
imposed by statute upon “all nursing facilities.” See RSA 84-C:2 (Supp. 2006).
On the other hand, DHHS asserts, without direct evidence in the summary
judgment record, that Crotched Mountain is certified by the federal government
to provide nursing facility services for Medicaid recipients. However, as both
sides agree that their dispute concerns responsibility for the non-federal share
of the cost of providing care to OAA and APTD recipients receiving Medicaid-
funded services in Crotched Mountain and other facilities, it seems beyond
reasonable dispute that Medicaid has agreed to pay the federal share, and
would not have done so for recipients in facilities that it had not certified in
some manner.
In 2004, the amount DHHS was allowed to bill the counties for nursing
facility services and home and community-based nursing services for OAA and
APTD recipients was capped, by statute, at $60 million. See RSA 167:18-b,
IV(a). DHHS submitted bills to the counties in the amount of $62,109,886.56
for 2004, but provided them a credit of $2,109,886.56, thus lowering the
amount it sought to collect to exactly $60 million. The “counties have [all]
refused to pay bills for the excess amount over the cap of $2,109,8[8]6.56.”
Asserting that billings for OAA and APTD recipients who were not in
“nursing homes” or receiving home and community-based nursing services and
billings in excess of $60 million for fiscal year 2004 were both unfunded
mandates within the meaning of Part I, Article 28-a of the State Constitution,
and therefore unconstitutional, the New Hampshire Association of Counties
and several individual counties filed an equitable action against the
commissioner. As a remedy for their first claim, the petitioners sought an
order that would: (1) prohibit DHHS from billing the counties for services
provided in the disputed facilities; and (2) require DHHS to give the counties
that actually reimbursed DHHS for those services a credit against future
payments.
The petitioners moved for summary judgment. In an objection to the
petitioners’ summary judgment motion, the commissioner argued that “even
assuming arguendo that the Counties are correct in their contention that they
3
have been improperly billed for the amount of the disputed funds pursuant to
RSA 167:18-b, those bills are permissible under the broader provisions of RSA
167:18-a.” The commissioner also moved for summary judgment, arguing that
the petitioners’ entire action was barred by the doctrine of sovereign immunity
and that the credit they sought was barred by sovereign immunity. In the
order from which the commissioner appeals, the trial court ruled that: (1) as a
constitutional claim, the petitioners’ action was not barred by sovereign
immunity; (2) because the credit the petitioners sought constituted equitable
relief rather than money damages, it was not barred by sovereign immunity; (3)
the counties were not obligated to pay for the disputed services pursuant to
RSA 167:18-a; (4) the commissioner violated Part I, Article 28-a of the State
Constitution by billing the counties for services falling outside the scope of RSA
167:18-b, I; and (5) the commissioner violated Part I, Article 28-a of the State
Constitution by billing the counties more than the amount allowed by RSA
167:18-b, IV(a). With regard to RSA 167:18-b, I, the trial court ruled:
Because the Department does not dispute that the institutions at
issue in this case are not and have never been licensed as nursing
homes or nursing facilities in the State of New Hampshire, and
because the Department does not dispute that the institutions at
issue have not paid a nursing facility quality assessment as
required of all nursing facilities under RSA 84-C:2, the Court finds
these institutions are not nursing homes or facilities under the
language of RSA 167:18-b.
This appeal followed.
II
In reviewing the trial court’s summary judgment rulings, we consider the
evidence in the light most favorable to each party in its capacity as the non-
moving party and, if no genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine
whether the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. N.H. Ins.
Guaranty Assoc. v. Elliot Hosp., 154 N.H. 571, 574 (2006).
The commissioner raises four issues on appeal, three related to the
merits, one related to sovereign immunity. Regarding the merits, the
commissioner contends that the trial court erred by ruling that: (1) RSA
167:18-b, I, bars DHHS from billing the counties for services provided to OAA
and APTD recipients in facilities other than nursing homes licensed by the
State; (2) RSA 167:18-a applies only to cash payments to OAA and APTD
recipients; and (3) the cap on billings in RSA 167:18-b, IV(a) refers to the gross
amount DHHS bills the counties rather than the net amount it seeks to recover
from them. In addition, the commissioner contends that the trial court erred
by ruling that sovereign immunity does not preclude the relief it granted in this
4
case, a credit against future DHHS billings. The commissioner does not
challenge, and we do not consider, the trial court’s determination that because
this action is a constitutional claim, it is not barred by the doctrine of sovereign
immunity.
III
In their motion for summary judgment, the petitioners argued that the
commissioner imposed an unconstitutional unfunded mandate upon the
counties when DHHS billed them for a share of the cost of services provided to
OAA and APTD recipients in facilities such as Crotched Mountain because RSA
167:18-b, I, only authorizes the State to seek reimbursement for services
provided to OAA and APTD recipients in State-licensed nursing facilities. The
trial court agreed. In doing so, it construed the term “nursing homes” in RSA
167:18-b, I, to mean facilities that are licensed by the State as nursing facilities
and that pay the nursing facility quality assessment, see RSA 84-C:2. More
specifically, the trial court found “it logical that the terms ‘nursing home’ and
‘nursing facility’ were used within RSA 167:18-b to denote those facilities
licensed as ‘nursing home[s] or facility[ies]’ by the State under RSA 151-C:4.”
The commissioner argues that the trial court construed RSA 167:18-b, I, too
narrowly, and that the term “nursing home” should be construed to mean any
facility that is certified as a nursing facility by the federal Medicaid program.
The commissioner further contends that if the trial court had construed the
term “nursing home” correctly, it would have determined that the federal
certification status of Crotched Mountain and the other disputed facilities
presented a genuine issue of material fact that precluded summary judgment.
We begin by noting that the commissioner does not challenge the trial
court’s determination that the DHHS billing decisions at issue were “mandates”
within the meaning of Part I, Article 28-a of the State Constitution, and so we
express no opinion on that aspect of the trial court’s ruling. Rather, the
commissioner argues that: (1) the trial court misconstrued the term “nursing
home” in RSA 167:18-b, I; (2) under a proper construction of that term, DHHS
did not violate the statute; and (3) absent a statutory violation, there was,
necessarily, no constitutional violation.
We limit ourselves to construing the relevant statutory language, which
provides, in pertinent part:
All expenditures in carrying out the purposes of this chapter
. . . relative to old age assistance or aid to the permanently and
totally disabled recipients who are in nursing homes shall be made
in the first instance from the public assistance fund hereby
created, but each county shall make monthly payments to the
state for the amounts due under this section within 45 days from
5
notice thereof and shall reimburse said fund for all assistance
granted to persons for which such county is liable, to the extent of
50 percent of the non-federal share . . . .
RSA 167:18-b, I (emphasis added).
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 472, 479 (2006).
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent, as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the
words used. Id. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we
need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. However, if a statute is ambiguous, we
consider the legislative history to aid our analysis. Cloutier v. City of Berlin,
154 N.H. 13, 17 (2006). Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Id. Moreover, we consider all
statutes concerning the same subject matter in interpreting any one of them
and, where reasonably possible, we construe statutes as consistent with each
other. In the Matter of Barrett & Coyne, 150 N.H. 520, 523 (2004).
The question of statutory construction we face is what did the legislature
intend by using the phrase “recipients who are in nursing homes” in RSA
167:18-b, I. The commissioner contends that RSA 167:18-b, I, was adopted
with the federal Medicaid program in mind and that, as a consequence, the
legislature intended the phrase “recipients who are in nursing homes” to
denote OAA and APTD recipients who are in facilities certified by the federal
Medicaid program as nursing facilities. The petitioners, on the other hand, ask
us to limit the phrase to recipients who are in State-licensed nursing homes,
see RSA 151:2, I(e) (2005), that pay the nursing facility quality assessment, see
RSA ch. 84-C (Supp. 2006). Because both interpretations are reasonable, RSA
167:18-b, I, contains an ambiguity that requires us to look beyond the statute
itself to determine its meaning. In the Matter of Baker & Winkler, 154 N.H.
186, 187 (2006).
As a preliminary matter, we note that, notwithstanding the petitioners’
suggestion to the contrary, DHHS has not licensed any facilities as nursing
homes, because there is no statutory licensure classification for nursing homes
per se. RSA 151:2, I, requires licensing for six classifications of health
facilities: (1) hospitals and infirmaries or health services maintained by
educational institutions; (2) home health care providers; (3) certain laboratories
or collection stations operated by laboratories; (4) “[f]acilities . . . operating as
an outpatient rehabilitation clinic, ambulatory surgical center, hospice,
6
emergency medical care center, drop-in or walk-in care center, dialysis center,
birthing center, or other entity where health care associated with illness, injury
deformity, infirmity, or other physical disability is provided”; (5) residential care
facilities; and (6) adult day care facilities. With regard to “residential care
facilities,” the statute provides that “[s]uch homes or facilities shall include, but
not be limited to, nursing homes, sheltered care facilities, rest homes,
residential care facilities, board and care homes, or any other location, however
named, whether owned publicly or privately or operated for profit or not.” RSA
151:2, I(e). But while “nursing home” is listed as a kind of facility that qualifies
as a “residential care facility,” it is not accurate to say that any particular
facility is licensed as a nursing home; under the statute, nursing homes, along
with a variety of other kinds of facilities, are licensed as residential care
facilities. We understand that a bureau of health facilities administration
listing of “health facility category codes” includes a separate code labeled
“nursing,” but that administrative categorization is insufficient to make
“nursing home” a separate statutory licensure classification. Accordingly, we
decline the petitioners’ request to define the term “nursing homes” to include
only facilities licensed by the State as nursing homes, because there simply is
no such statutory classification of licensure.
As the petitioners acknowledge, RSA 167:18-b does not define the term
“nursing home.” That is not to say, however, that the legislature has never
done so. To the contrary, in 1969, the legislature adopted two different
definitions of “nursing home.” In “An Act Relative to Hospital Licensing,” the
legislature defined “‘[n]ursing [h]ome’ [to] mean[ ] any facility subject to license
hereunder which is maintained and operated for the express purpose of
providing continuing nursing care for more than ten persons.” Laws 1969,
379:2 (emphasis added), repealed by Laws 1979, 399:3. Because chapter 379
did nothing other than amend RSA chapter 151 (1964), the term “hereunder”
must, necessarily, refer to a facility subject to license under RSA chapter 151.
Also during the 1969 legislative session, in “An Act Relative to the Licensing
and Registration of Nursing Home Administrators,” the legislature defined
“‘[n]ursing home’ [to] mean[ ] any institution or facility, whether proprietary or
non-proprietary, defined as a nursing home for licensing purposes pursuant to
RSA 151, or the equivalent facility or facilities as defined by the secretary of the
United States Department of Heath, Education and Welfare.” Laws 1969,
459:1 (emphasis added). While the former definition was eventually repealed,
both were in effect in 1973 when the provision now denominated as RSA
167:18-b, I, was first adopted, and both support the commissioner’s position.
For its part, the trial court pointed to a definition of “nursing home or
facility” from the statute establishing the certificate of need process, see RSA
151-C:2, XXVI (2005), and found it logical to interpret RSA 167:18-b, I, in light
of the requirements set out in RSA 151-C:4. However, unlike either of the two
definitions from 1969, the definition of “nursing home or facility” in RSA 151-
7
C:2, XXVI – which was first adopted in 1985 and subsequently amended in
1995 – is silent with regard to licensing. Consequently, it is of little assistance
in answering the question before us. Similarly unavailing is the petitioners’
reliance upon the fact that Crotched Mountain does not pay the nursing facility
quality assessment; RSA chapter 84:C, which imposes that fee, was enacted in
2003, which demonstrates that payment of the assessment established by that
statute could not have played any part in the legislature’s understanding of the
term “nursing home” in 1973. Accordingly, we turn to the two statutory
definitions of “nursing home” that were in effect in 1973, when the legislature
first used the phrase “recipients who are in nursing homes” in RSA 167:18-b, I.
The definition from chapter 379 provided that a nursing home was,
among other things, a facility subject to license under RSA chapter 151.
Chapter 379 did not require a nursing home to be subject to license as a
residential care facility, only that it be subject to license under the general
hospital licensing statute. That is because, unlike today, when RSA 151:2, I,
specifically identifies six classifications of facilities that require licensure and
establishes licensing fees based upon those classifications, see RSA 151:5
(2005), the version of RSA chapter 151 in force in 1973 had only a single
licensure classification. It required licensing of any “hospital or other
institution, building, residence, private home, or other place or part thereof,
however named” that provided certain services. RSA 151:2 (1977). It also did
not include a classification-specific schedule of licensing fees. In other words,
when RSA 167:18-b, I, was first adopted, there was no licensure classification
for residential care facilities, much less a classification for nursing homes.
Thus, there is no evidence supporting an inference that the legislature intended
to limit the term “nursing homes” in RSA 167:18-b, I, to those facilities licensed
by the State as residential care facilities or nursing homes. Because there was
no separate statutory licensure classification for nursing homes in 1973, when
RSA 167:18-b, I, was first adopted, the definition of “nursing home” in chapter
379 does not support the limitation the petitioners ask us to impose upon that
term.
The definition from chapter 459 favors the commissioner’s position even
more strongly. That definition of “nursing home” includes both facilities
defined as nursing homes for the purposes of State licensing and “the
equivalent . . . facilities as defined by the secretary of the United States
Department of Health, Education and Welfare.” Laws 1969, 459:1. As early as
1969, four years before the initial adoption of RSA 167:18-b, I, the legislature
recognized that the federal government had an interest in and procedures for
evaluating nursing facilities.
Finally, we turn to the context in which the legislature used the term
“nursing home” in RSA 167:18-b, I. See Home Insurance, 154 N.H. at 479.
The legislature must be presumed to have been aware of the statutory licensing
8
regime for health care facilities, yet it did not use the phrase “State licensed
nursing homes.” To be sure, it also did not use the phrase “federally certified
nursing homes,” but within RSA 167:18-b, I, itself, the legislature plainly
recognized federal participation in funding the services at issue. On balance,
the wording of RSA 167:18-b, I, as a whole favors a construction of the term
“nursing home” based upon federal certification standards rather than State
licensure.
In light of the two statutory definitions of “nursing home” in force when
the legislature used the term “nursing home” in RSA 167:18-b, I, our obligation
to construe statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme, see N.H.
Ins. Guaranty Assoc., 154 N.H. at 574, and our obligation to construe statutory
language in the context of the statute as a whole, see Home Insurance, 154
N.H. at 479, we conclude that the legislature did not intend, by using the term
“nursing home,” to limit the applicability of RSA 167:18-b, I, to OAA and APTD
recipients in institutions licensed by DHHS as residential care facilities.
Our conclusion is further supported by subsequent legislative
enactments that continue the pattern of State recognition of, and reliance
upon, federal certification of nursing homes. For example, the statute
pertaining to the obligation of residential care facilities to evaluate the needs of
their residents defers to federal standards when facilities are certified under
Titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act. See RSA 151:5-a, I (Supp.
2006). And under RSA 151:5-b (2005), facilities certified under Titles XVIII and
XIX are “deemed licensed” and are exempt from annual inspections.
Based upon the foregoing, we hold that the term “nursing home” in RSA
167:18-b, I, means any institution certified by the federal Medicaid program to
provide nursing facility services. But that is not the end of the matter. Under
Title XIX, it is possible for facilities providing inpatient hospital services also to
provide nursing facility services, see 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 1396l, 1396r(a) (West
2003), which raises the specter of the counties being billed, under RSA 167:18-
b, I, for services other than nursing facility services, such as inpatient hospital
services. However, when nursing facility services are provided in hospitals, the
costs for such services must be in line with the rates paid for similar services
at nursing facilities. See 42 U.S.C.A. § 1396l. Thus, defining the term
“nursing home” to include facilities such as Crotched Mountain does not mean
that the counties will be obligated to pay half the non-federal share of inpatient
hospital services, see 42 U.S.C.A. § 1396d(a)(1) (West 2003 & Supp. 2007), but
only half the non-federal share of nursing facility services provided in Crotched
Mountain and the other facilities housing OAA and APTD recipients for whom
the counties were billed. To make that point perfectly clear, we construe the
phrase “recipients who are in nursing homes” to mean OAA and APTD
recipients receiving Medicaid-funded nursing facility services in institutions
9
certified by the Medicaid program to provide such services. To the extent the
trial court construed that phrase differently, its order is vacated.
Based upon our construction of “recipients who are in nursing homes,”
the petitioners are not entitled to judgment as a matter of law that DHHS
exceeded its statutory authority by issuing the disputed billings. Accordingly,
the trial court’s grant of summary judgment to the petitioners on their claim
that the DHHS billings violated the State Constitution by violating RSA 167:18-
b, I, is vacated. Necessarily, the remedy awarded the counties is also vacated.
Because, at this point, the counties are not entitled to any remedy on the
claim that they were billed unlawfully, we decline to determine whether the
remedy imposed by the trial court – a credit against future billings – violates
the doctrine of sovereign immunity.
IV
In his supplemental objection to the petitioners’ motion for summary
judgment, the commissioner argued that even if the counties were not liable for
half the non-federal share of the cost of the disputed services under RSA
167:18-b, I, they were liable for half the costs of those services under RSA
167:18-a. Notwithstanding the untimely presentation of that argument, the
trial court considered but rejected it, ruling, among other things, that RSA
167:18-a pertains not to reimbursement for medical services but to
reimbursement for cash payments to OAA and APTD recipients.
Based upon our construction of the phrase “recipients who are in
nursing homes,” the only services that would fall outside the coverage of RSA
167:18-b, thus falling within the commissioner’s “even if,” would be medical
services that do not qualify as nursing facility services and/or services provided
in facilities not certified by the federal government to provide nursing facility
services. Because the summary judgment record does not indicate that the
counties have been billed for any such services, we decline to address the
commissioner’s argument regarding RSA 167:18-a.
V
In their motion for summary judgment, the petitioners argued that the
commissioner imposed an unconstitutional unfunded mandate upon the
counties when DHHS billed them $62,109,886.56 for fiscal year 2004, which
was $2,109,886.56 more than the $60 million cap established by RSA 167:18-
b, IV(a). The trial court agreed, and further ruled that the counties were within
their rights when they declined to pay any of the disputed $2,109,886.56. The
commissioner argues that to the extent the trial court construed the term
“billings” to mean the gross amount billed, before the application of any offsets,
10
credits or adjustments, it erred. According to the commissioner, such a
reading of the statute would lead to an absurd result because it would allow
erroneous bills to be counted toward the cap, and would allow for double
counting when a corrected bill was sent out to replace an erroneous one. In
addition, while the commissioner now concedes that the $2 million credit
established by RSA 167:18-b, III reduced the cap on the counties’ actual 2004
payment obligation to $58 million, he contends that the trial court’s ruling was
erroneous because the petitioners never presented any evidence, and the trial
court never made any findings, regarding how much the counties were actually
obligated to pay in 2004.
The statutory provisions limiting county liability for reimbursing DHHS
for nursing services provide, in pertinent part:
III. The counties shall have an aggregate credit of
$2,000,000 against amounts due under this section for each fiscal
year beginning July 1, 1998. . . . The credit under this paragraph
shall reduce the obligation of the counties under paragraph IV.
IV. The total billings by all counties made pursuant to this
section for persons who have been determined eligible to receive
nursing facility services shall not exceed 50 percent of the non-
federal share of the combined long-term care medicaid spending
for which the counties are obligated and in no instance shall the
billings for the 12-month period of the state fiscal year, dated
between July 1, 2004 and June 30, 2007 exceed:
(a) State fiscal year 2004–$60,000,000.
RSA 167:18-b.
As with his challenge to the trial court’s ruling regarding RSA 167:18-b,
I, the commissioner does not contest the trial court’s determination that a
billing in excess of the amount allowed by RSA 167:18-b, IV(a) would be an
unconstitutional unfunded mandate. Therefore, we again express no opinion
regarding that aspect of the trial court’s ruling but, instead, confine ourselves
to the statutory arguments raised by the parties.
Regarding the interplay between RSA 167:18-b, III and RSA 167:18-b,
IV(a), there appears to be no disagreement; both sides agree that RSA 167:18-
b, III reduced the counties’ aggregate 2004 reimbursement obligation from $60
million to $58 million. We affirm the trial court’s ruling to that effect.
We reach a different result with regard to the trial court’s determination
that the counties were within their rights not to pay any of the disputed
11
$2,109,886.56. It is undisputed that DHHS submitted bills to the counties
totaling $62,109,886.56 for 2004 and that the counties refused to pay
$2,109,886.56. However, the record does not indicate how much the counties
actually did reimburse DHHS for 2004, and there still remains a legal issue:
whether the term “billings” applies only to gross billings, before any credits,
offsets, or adjustments are made. The commissioner concedes that it is
unclear whether the trial court reached such a legal conclusion, but asks us to
determine that if it did so, it erred. We will not pass upon a legal ruling that
may or may not have been made by the trial court, but we encourage the trial
court, upon remand, to address this issue to the extent necessary.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12