THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–southern judicial district
No. 2006-258
LONDONDERRY SCHOOL DISTRICT SAU #12 & a.
v.
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Argued: June 22, 2006
Opinion Issued: September 8, 2006
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (William L. Chapman & a. on the brief, and
Mr. Chapman orally), for the plaintiffs.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Anne M. Edwards, associate attorney
general, and N. William Delker, senior assistant attorney general, on the brief, and
Ms. Edwards orally), for the State.
Patrick E. Donovan and Kenneth D. Murphy, of Concord (Mr. Donovan and
Mr. Murphy on the brief, and Mr. Murphy orally), for the Speaker of the New
Hampshire House of Representatives and the President of the New Hampshire
Senate, as amici curiae.
Bernstein, Shur, Sawyer & Nelson, P.A., of Manchester (Andru H. Volinsky
on the brief), and John E. Tobin, Jr., of Concord, and Scott Johnson, of Concord,
on the brief, for the Claremont Petitioners, as amici curiae.
Theodore E. Comstock, of Concord, executive director and general counsel,
and Barrett M. Christina, of Concord, staff attorney, on the brief, for New
Hampshire School Boards Association, as amicus curiae.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, staff attorney, on the brief, for NEA-New
Hampshire, as amicus curiae.
Eugene M. Van Loan III, of Manchester, by brief, pro se, as amicus curiae.
Soltani/Mosca P.L.L.C., of Epsom (Edward C. Mosca on the brief), for
Granite State Taxpayers, as amicus curiae.
HICKS, J. Once again, we are called upon to address the basic educational
needs of the children of New Hampshire and the State’s obligation to ensure and
to fund each educable child’s opportunity to obtain a constitutionally adequate
education as required by Part II, Article 83 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
The State appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Groff, J.) finding that the
State has failed to fulfill its duty to define a constitutionally adequate education,
failed to determine the cost of an adequate education, and failed to satisfy the
requirement of accountability, and that House Bill 616 (the current education
funding law) creates a non-uniform tax rate in violation of Part II, Article 5 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. We affirm the trial court’s finding that the State
has failed to define a constitutionally adequate education and stay consideration
of its remaining findings.
I
The plaintiffs, Londonderry School District School Administrative Unit (SAU)
#12, Merrimack School District SAU #26 and New Hampshire Communities for
Adequate Funding of Education, a non-profit organization consisting of nineteen
school administrative units and towns, filed a petition for declaratory relief in this
court in 2005 seeking a determination that House Bill 616 is unconstitutional.
After considering the parties’ briefs regarding whether we should exercise our
original jurisdiction, we concluded that “while substantial questions of
constitutional law are presented by this case, we believe further factual
development is necessary in the superior court before those questions are
decided.” Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ action was dismissed without prejudice.
2
The plaintiffs then filed a petition for declaratory relief and a motion for
summary judgment in the superior court challenging the constitutionality of
House Bill 616 on grounds that the statute: (1) fails to define, determine the cost
of, and ensure delivery of a constitutionally adequate education; (2) requires a
number of municipalities to fund a constitutionally adequate education through
local taxes; (3) all but eliminates so-called “donor communities” and imposes an
unreasonable and disproportionate tax burden on property-poor municipalities
with respect to the funding of education; and (4) creates a class of former donor
communities that retain all the revenue they raise through the statewide
enhanced education tax, resulting in a violation of equal protection. The trial
court found House Bill 616 unconstitutional on its face and granted the motion
for summary judgment.
II
In Claremont School District v. Governor (Accountability), 147 N.H. 499,
505 (2002), we acknowledged the State’s assertion that Claremont School District
v. Governor, 142 N.H. 462 (1997) (Claremont II) issued “four mandates: define an
adequate education, determine the cost, fund it with constitutional taxes, and
ensure its delivery through accountability,” and that these four mandates
comprise the State’s duty to provide an adequate education. We focus here upon
the first mandate: defining a constitutionally adequate education.
Since the inception of the education cases in 1993, we have consistently
deferred to the legislature’s prerogative to define a constitutionally adequate
education. In Claremont School District v. Governor, 138 N.H. 183 (1993)
(Claremont I), we stated that “[w]e do not define the parameters of the education
mandated by the constitution as that task is, in the first instance, for the
legislature and the Governor.” Id. at 192. We expressed our confidence that the
legislature and the Governor would “fulfill their responsibility with respect to
defining the specifics of, and the appropriate means to provide through public
education, the knowledge and learning essential to the preservation of a free
government.” Id. at 193.
In Claremont II, we looked to “the seven criteria articulated by the Supreme
Court of Kentucky as establishing general, aspirational guidelines for defining
educational adequacy.” Claremont II, 142 N.H. at 474 (emphasis added). We
expressly viewed these guidelines as “benchmarks of a constitutionally adequate
public education” and “anticipate[d] that [the other branches of government
would] promptly develop and adopt specific criteria implementing these
guidelines.” Id. at 475. As we explained, “[w]hile the judiciary has the duty to
construe and interpret the word ‘education’ by providing broad constitutional
guidelines, the Legislature is obligated to give specific substantive content to the
word and to the program it deems necessary to provide that ‘education’ within the
3
broad guidelines,” id. (quotation omitted; emphasis added), all consistent with the
duties imposed by Part II, Article 83.
In Claremont School District v. Governor (Motion for Extension of
Deadlines), 143 N.H. 154 (1998), the State acknowledged that the legislature had
yet to achieve “a system to ensure delivery of a constitutionally adequate
education.” Id. at 160 (quotation omitted). We, therefore, “declined the . . .
invitation to determine whether the definition adopted is facially unconstitutional.”
Id. In Claremont School District v. Governor (Statewide Property Tax Phase-In),
144 N.H. 210 (1999), we denied as premature the plaintiffs’ request to assign a
master for purposes of fact-finding to determine the definition of a constitutionally
adequate education. Id. at 212; cf. Pauley v. Bailey, 324 S.E.2d 128 (W. Va. 1984)
(on remand, trial court appointed special master to oversee development of master
plan for constitutional adequacy). In Opinion of the Justices (Reformed Public
School Financing System), 145 N.H. 474 (2000), we noted that constitutional
adequacy had yet to be defined and that “[t]he content of a constitutionally
adequate education must be defined, in the first instance, by the legislature.” Id.
at 478.
III
Today, the State argues that it has defined a constitutionally adequate
education in RSA 193-E:2 (Supp. 2005). That statute, titled “Criteria for an
Equitable Education,” provides:
An equitable education shall provide all students with the
opportunity to acquire:
I. Skill in reading, writing, and speaking English to enable
them to communicate effectively and think creatively and
critically.
II. Skill in mathematics and familiarity with methods of
science to enable them to analyze information, solve problems,
and make rational decisions.
III. Knowledge of the biological, physical, and earth sciences to
enable them to understand and appreciate the world around
them.
IV. Knowledge of civics and government, economics,
geography, and history to enable them to participate in the
democratic process and to make informed choices as
responsible citizens.
4
V. Grounding in the arts, languages, and literature to enable
them to appreciate our cultural heritage and develop lifelong
interest and involvement in these areas.
VI. Sound wellness and environmental practices to enable
them to enhance their own well-being, as well as that of others.
VII. Skills for lifelong learning, including interpersonal and
technological skills, to enable them to learn, work, and
participate effectively in a changing society.
RSA 193-E:2.
The State argues that this definition of adequacy “accords with the
definitions upheld by the judiciaries of other states around the nation,” citing
West Virginia, Kentucky, Montana and Washington. An examination of the cases
and statutes in those states, however, reveals otherwise. In West Virginia, for
example, an action was brought by parents of school children contending that the
system for financing public schools violated that state’s constitutional guarantee
of a “thorough and efficient” education. Pauley v. Kelly, 255 S.E.2d 859, 861 (W.
Va. 1979) (quotation omitted). Although the state supreme court of appeals
remanded the case “for further evidentiary development,” because the case
involved “significant and far-reaching public issues,” id. at 863, the court
proposed certain guidelines to the trial court, including identifying the parameters
of a “[t]horough and [e]fficient” educational system, ultimately holding that the
legislature has the constitutional duty “to develop a high quality Statewide
education system.” Id. at 861. On remand the trial court found that the State
had failed “to perform its constitutional and statutory duties with respect to
formulating high quality standards for education” because the standards
promulgated by the board of education were “far too general and minimal to define
the elements of a thorough and efficient system of education.” Pauley v. Bailey,
324 S.E.2d at 132 (quotation omitted). The trial court appointed a special master
to oversee the development of an educational master plan that contained “an
extensive compilation of detailed concepts and standards that defines the
educational role of the various state and local agencies, sets forth specific
elements of educational programs, enunciates consideration for educational
facilities and proposes changes in the educational financing system.” Id.
Similarly, in Kentucky, a group of school districts and public school
students brought an action challenging whether the Kentucky General Assembly
had complied with its constitutional mandate to “provide an efficient system of
common schools throughout the state.” Rose v. Council for Better Educ., Inc.,
790 S.W.2d 186, 189-90 (Ky. 1989) (quotation omitted). The state supreme court
declared the system of common schools to be constitutionally deficient and
directed the legislature to “re-create . . . and re-establish a system of common
5
schools within this state which will be in compliance with the Constitution.” Id. at
214. In doing so, the court set out standards for a new system, including
identifying seven “capacities” with which each and every child was to be provided
through an efficient system of education. Id. at 212. The court indicated that the
seven characteristics “should be considered as minimum goals in providing an
adequate education.” Id. at 214 n.22. The Kentucky legislature subsequently
enacted the Kentucky Education Reform Act of 1990, “which radically changed the
system of public education” in that state. Chapman v. Gorman, 839 S.W.2d 232,
234 (Ky. 1992).
In Montana and Washington, although the applicable statutes contain
general definitions of an adequate education, in each state the legislation defines
the substantive content of the educational program implementing the general
definitions. In Montana, the legislature established five “goals” for public
elementary and secondary schools. Mont. Code. Ann. § 20-1-102 (2005). The
statutory scheme also identifies “the minimum standards upon which a basic
system of free quality public elementary and secondary schools is built,” and the
“educationally relevant” factors the legislature must consider. Mont. Code Ann.
§§ 20-9-309(2)(a), (3); see Mont. Code Ann. § 20-9-309(4)(b)(i) (2005).
In Washington, the state supreme court interpreted the constitutional
provision that “[i]t is the paramount duty of the state to make ample provision for
the education of all children residing within its borders,” as creating a judicially
enforceable, affirmative duty. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1 of King City v. State, 585
P.2d 71, 83, 85 (Wa. 1978) (quotation and emphasis omitted). The court held that
pursuant to that duty, the legislature has the responsibility to define and give
content to a basic education and a basic program of education. Id. at 95. The
“Basic Education Act,” codified in the Washington statutes, requires each school
district “to provide opportunities for all students to develop” essential knowledge
and skills in four broad categories. Wash. Rev. Code § 28A.150.210 (2004). The
state board of education is required to establish a program that includes “the
essential academic learning requirements . . . and such other subjects and such
activities as the school district shall determine to be appropriate for the education
of the school district’s children,” Wash. Rev. Code § 28A.150.220(1)(a), (b), and to
“adopt rules to implement and ensure compliance with the program requirements,”
Wash. Rev. Code § 28A.150.220(4). See also Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 69, § 1
(West 1996) (intent of statute is to provide “public education system of sufficient
quality to extend to all children the opportunity to reach their full potential and to
lead lives as participants in the political and social life of the commonwealth and
as contributors to its economy”), § 1B (duties of the board of education), § 1D
(statewide educational goals and academic standards), § 1E (curriculum
frameworks), § 1I (performance reports, evaluation system and assessments);
Hancock v. Commissioner of Educ., 822 N.E.2d 1134, 1137-38 (Mass. 2005)
(Massachusetts Education Reform Act of 1993 established uniform, objective
performance and accountability measures for every public school student, teacher,
6
administrator, school and district in the state). Therefore, although each state
noted above provides, as part of a comprehensive statutory scheme, a general
definition of an adequate education, each state also establishes a mechanism
through which educational content is identified in fulfillment of constitutional
duties.
In the case before us, the State asserts that the system of education in New
Hampshire goes well beyond constitutional adequacy. In its brief, the State
argues that “statutes and regulations . . . implement [the definition of adequacy]
with a specificity that far exceeds constitutional requirements”; that by complying
with the federal No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 and “establishing a
comprehensive system for holding its schools accountable, the State has exceeded
the constitutional requirements of accountability”; that “the annual testing and
statewide performance targets. . . . far exceed the constitutional standard of
adequacy as defined by the legislature in RSA 193-E:2”; and that the “school
approval standards go well beyond the constitutional floor of adequacy” and “far
surpass the constitutional minimum of adequacy.” For purposes of this appeal,
we will accept these assertions. These assertions themselves, however, expose the
core issue before us. If the statutory scheme that is in place provides for more
than constitutional adequacy, then the State has yet to isolate what parts of the
scheme comprise constitutional adequacy. More specifically, under the statutory
scheme there is no way a citizen or a school district in this State can determine
the distinct substantive content of a constitutionally adequate education.
Consequently, its cost cannot be isolated. Such a system is also impervious to
meaningful judicial review.
IV
The task of developing specific criteria of an adequate education is for the
legislature. Claremont II, 142 N.H. at 475. By failing to do so, the legislature
creates the potential for a situation in which a superior court judge, or a special
master appointed by this court, will be required to decide what is to be taught in
the public schools in order to provide the opportunity to acquire “[s]kill in reading,
writing and speaking English,” “[s]kill in mathematics and familiarity with
methods of science,” “[k]nowledge of the biological, physical, and earth sciences,”
“[k]nowledge of civics and government, economics, geography, and history,”
“[g]rounding in the arts, languages, and literature,” “[s]ound wellness and
environmental practices,” and “[s]kills for lifelong learning.” RSA 193-E:2.
Similarly, to assess whether a constitutionally adequate education is being
provided, a trial judge would likely have to determine the levels of “skill,”
“knowledge,” “grounding” and “sound wellness” to which an educable child is
entitled. Moreover, RSA 193-E:2 mandates that students be provided the
“opportunity to acquire” such skills and knowledge. Without more, a trial judge or
a special master would have to determine the adequacy of the “opportunity” to be
afforded. Determining the substantive educational program that delivers a
7
constitutionally adequate education is a task replete with policy decisions, best
suited for the legislative or executive branches, not the judicial branch.
RSA 193-E:2 largely mirrors the seven criteria that we cited with approval in
Claremont II, 142 N.H. at 474-75. We characterized those criteria as establishing
“general” and “aspirational” guidelines for defining educational adequacy and
made clear that the legislature was expected to develop and adopt specific criteria
for implementing the guidelines. In the years since RSA 193-E:2 was adopted,
this court and the State have acknowledged that constitutional adequacy has yet
to be defined. Standing alone, RSA 193-E:2 does not fulfill the State’s duty to
define the substantive content of a constitutionally adequate education in such a
manner that the citizens of this state can know what the parameters of that
educational program are. The right to a constitutionally adequate education is
meaningless without standards that are enforceable and reviewable. See
Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Accountability), 147 N.H. at 508 (definition of
constitutionally adequate education must have standards subject to meaningful
application). Furthermore, without a substantive definition of constitutional
adequacy, it will remain impossible for school districts, parents, and courts, not to
mention the legislative and executive branches themselves, to know where the
State’s obligations to fund the cost of a constitutionally adequate education begin
and end.
The State further argues that, aside from the constitutionally sufficient
definition of adequacy in RSA 193-E:2,
[t]he Legislature has delegated to the State Board the authority and
the duty to prescribe uniform standards for all public schools in
New Hampshire. RSA 194:23; RSA 186:8; RSA 21-N:9. The State
Board has responded by enacting comprehensive and detailed
minimum standards for public school approval. See [N.H. Admin.
Rules] Ed 306.01 et seq. Local school boards are required by
statute to “comply with the rules and regulations of the state
board.” RSA 186:5; RSA 186:8. The school approval standards
are very detailed and demanding; they govern nearly every facet of
a school’s operation. The standards prescribe how schools must
be organized and staffed as well as the particular educational
content of each subject taught. See e.g., [N.H. Admin. Rules] Ed
306.17 (setting forth maximum class sizes); [N.H. Admin. Rules] Ed
306.37 (detailing requirements for English program). These
standards are monitored by DOE, which grades individual schools
on their compliance with the standards. [N.H. Admin. Rules] Ed
306.40(b)(1)-(4).
(Emphasis added.)
8
If it is the State’s position that RSA 193-E:2 together with the education
rules and regulations, curriculum frameworks and other statutes define a
constitutionally adequate education, we defer to the legislature’s judgment. We
note, however, that if the current system of delivery in combination with the
statutory definition establishes a constitutionally adequate education, there would
be no need for any local education taxes as the State would be required to pay for
implementing the entire statutory scheme. Indeed, if that is the case, we question
whether $837 million, the amount currently allotted for public education under
House Bill 616, is facially sufficient to fund the school system as required by that
statutory scheme. Alternatively, if, as the State asserts, the education rules and
regulations, curriculum frameworks and other statutes provide some level of
education beyond that of a constitutionally adequate education, the point of
demarcation cannot currently be determined.
Any definition of constitutional adequacy crafted by the political branches
must be sufficiently clear to permit common understanding and allow for an
objective determination of costs. Whatever the State identifies as comprising
constitutional adequacy it must pay for. None of that financial obligation can be
shifted to local school districts, regardless of their relative wealth or need.
V
The trial court found House Bill 616 facially unconstitutional in part
because it does not contain a definition of constitutional adequacy. House Bill
616 simply modifies the adequacy aid formula. Although the State must define
constitutional adequacy in accord with this opinion, House Bill 616 standing
alone need not necessarily contain such a definition for the bill itself to pass
constitutional muster. Viewed together, however, the current education funding
and “definitional” statutory framework falls well short of the constitutional
requirements established in this court’s Claremont decisions.
Because the definition of a constitutionally adequate education is essential
to all other issues, including the cost of a constitutionally adequate education and
the method by which to raise the necessary funds, we stay that portion of the case
containing the trial court’s findings that the legislature has failed to determine the
cost, failed to satisfy the requirement of accountability and established a non-
uniform tax rate. As to the core definitional issues, we will retain jurisdiction with
the expectation that the political branches will define with specificity the
components of a constitutionally adequate education before the end of fiscal year
2007. Should they fail to do so, we will then be required to take further action to
enforce the mandates of Part II, Article 83 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
Such appropriate remedies may include: (1) invalidating the funding mechanism
established in House Bill 616 as set forth in the concurring opinion of Justice
Galway; (2) appointing a special master to aid in the determination of the
definition of a constitutionally adequate education, see Below v. Secretary of State,
9
148 N.H. 1, 2-3 (2002) (“the supreme court has been called upon to establish a
new district plan for the New Hampshire Senate . . . because the New Hampshire
Legislature failed to [do so] following the 2000 census”); or (3) implementing the
remedy outlined in the concurring opinion of Justice Duggan and remanding the
case to the trial court “for further factual development and a determination of
whether the State is providing sufficient funding to pay for a constitutionally
adequate education.”
Respectful of the roles of the legislative and executive branches, each time
this court has been requested to define the substantive content of a
constitutionally adequate public education, we have properly demurred.
Deference, however, has its limits. We agree with Justice Galway’s concern that
this court or any court not take over the legislature’s role in shaping educational
and fiscal policy. For almost thirteen years we have refrained from doing so and
continue to refrain today. However, the judiciary has a responsibility to ensure
that constitutional rights not be hollowed out and, in the absence of action by
other branches, a judicial remedy is not only appropriate but essential. Petition of
Below, 151 N.H. 135 (2004).
We urge the legislature to act.
Affirmed in part; and stayed in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred; DUGGAN, J., concurred
specially in part and dissented in part; GALWAY, J., concurred specially in part
and dissented in part.
DUGGAN, J., concurring specially in part and dissenting in part. Rather
than focus on whether the State has defined a constitutionally adequate education
with sufficient specificity, I believe we should focus on whether House Bill 616
provides municipalities with sufficient funding to pay for a constitutionally
adequate education. A specific definition of adequacy is meaningless without a
determination of its cost, and, unlike the task of defining a constitutionally
adequate education, there exist concrete methodologies for determining the cost.
The sufficiency of funding in light of the cost of a constitutionally adequate
education, however, is a factually-driven question appropriate for resolution
through a trial. Accordingly, I would remand this case to the superior court now
for a trial on that and the other related issues in this case.
I
A brief examination of the history of House Bill 616 and some of its current
provisions suggests that there may be some validity to the plaintiffs’ argument
10
that the State has sidestepped its constitutional obligation to provide an adequate
education.
House Bill 616 was based in large part on funding legislation that was
debated during the 2003 and 2004 legislative sessions. See N.H.S. Jour. ___
(June 9, 2005). During those debates, one senator acknowledged that the
legislature was “only going to spend so much money, regardless of what [an]
adequate education costs.” N.H.S. Jour. 1242 (2004). Another senator admitted
that the legislature “arbitrarily set $428 million as the amount . . . [it was] willing
to spend on an adequate education” and then “backed into figuring out how to pay
for an adequate education based on the numbers[,] not based on the needs of the
children of this state.” Id. at 1262.
In a letter written to the Governor, the senate president and the speaker of
the house in 2004, the attorney general raised significant and specific concerns
regarding the constitutionality of that legislation. See Letter from Attorney
General Peter Heed to Governor Benson, President Eaton, and Speaker Chandler
(April 27, 2004) (reprint on file with court). Although House Bill 616 is not
identical to that earlier legislation, it includes two of the features about which the
attorney general was concerned: (1) House Bill 616 repeals the statutory provision
calculating the cost of an adequate education, replacing it with provisions that
distribute State educational aid based upon property value, see Laws 2005, 257:6,
:22, II; and (2) the word “adequate” has been stricken throughout the statute, see,
e.g., Laws 2005, 257:15. See also Letter from Attorney General Peter Heed, supra.
Although criticism from legislators and the attorney general regarding previous
legislation certainly does not render House Bill 616 unconstitutional, it provides
important context for the issues now before us.
Furthermore, various provisions of House Bill 616 appear to support the
plaintiffs’ claim that it does not pass constitutional muster. First, it is unclear
from the statutory scheme whether the distribution of education aid is linked to
providing each community with the funds necessary to provide an adequate
education. Second, the substitution of “equitable” for “adequate” in RSA 193-E:2
and other statutory provisions, see, e.g., Laws 2005, 257:15, calls into question
whether House Bill 616 is actually designed to fund a constitutionally adequate
education. Third, given that the office of the legislative budget assistant projected
the statewide cost of an adequate education to be over $909 million for fiscal year
2001, see Opinion of the Justices (Reformed Public School Financing System), 145
N.H. 474, 476 (2000), and if, as the plaintiffs allege, the legislature appropriated
only $837 million for fiscal year 2006, then there may be considerable strength to
the plaintiffs’ argument that the funding provided in House Bill 616 is insufficient
to fund a constitutionally adequate education. That argument, however, is heavily
fact-driven and requires further factual development.
11
II
As explained by the majority, the plaintiffs argue that House Bill 616 is
unconstitutional on a variety of grounds. The majority chooses to focus at this
juncture only on what it views as the legislature’s failure to define the components
of a constitutionally adequate education.
The State argues that it has defined a constitutionally adequate education
in RSA 193-E:2 (Supp. 2005). I acknowledge that the definition contained therein
merely reflects the seven “general, aspirational guidelines for defining educational
adequacy” that we articulated in Claremont School District v. Governor, 142 N.H.
462, 474 (1997) (hereinafter Claremont II). Although I agree that a further
statutory articulation of the specific components of a constitutionally adequate
education would certainly be more conducive to judicial review in any challenge
made under any of the Claremont II mandates, I do not think that the statutory
schemes of Montana and Washington, for example, are illustrative of any ideal to
which we should instruct the legislature to aspire. Although the majority cites
these two statutory schemes, among others, as demonstrating how a State might
“define[] the substantive content of [an] educational program implementing [a]
general definition[]” of adequacy, each statutory scheme offers a different level of
specificity and neither provides meaningful guidance to the legislature as to how it
should define that “substantive content.” It is thus unclear to me what level of
statutory specificity as to the definition of a constitutionally adequate education is
compelled by the Constitution. I do not think that further legislative action
regarding the definition is a prerequisite for consideration of the other issues
raised in this case. Rather, I believe that RSA 193-E:2 provides a sufficient
starting point.
Moreover, although Claremont II requires the State to define a
constitutionally adequate education, determine the cost of that education, fund
that education with constitutional taxes, and ensure provision of that education
through accountability, see Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Accountability),
147 N.H. 499, 505 (2002), it does not create a scheme under which any single
piece of education funding legislation failing to satisfy any one of the Claremont II
mandates will automatically be unconstitutional. I therefore respectfully disagree
with Justice Galway’s conclusion that House Bill 616 is rendered unconstitutional
merely because it does not explicitly define the components of a constitutionally
adequate education. While the obligation to articulate this definition remains,
Claremont II does not require us to declare funding legislation unconstitutional for
this reason alone.
III
Regardless of whether the components of an adequate education have been
defined with specificity, I think it is important to identify the real issue presented
12
in this case. The central issue is not whether the State has defined a
constitutionally adequate education. Rather, the plaintiffs’ fundamental
complaint is that, by virtue of House Bill 616, the plaintiff school districts are
receiving less education funding from the State than they have received in the
past. They seek to invalidate House Bill 616 so as to restore the funding that the
State previously provided. The core of this appeal is the basic question of whether
the State has, in House Bill 616, fulfilled its constitutional obligation to fund an
adequate education. Accordingly, I disagree with the majority’s decision to focus
on the question of whether the State has satisfied its obligation to define a
constitutionally adequate education.
Determining whether the State has fulfilled its constitutional obligation to
fund a constitutionally adequate education cannot be done solely by examining
the provisions of House Bill 616 and the limited factual record before us on
appeal. Further factual development is necessary to determine whether there are
municipalities that are not receiving sufficient funding from the State to pay for an
adequate education. Thus, I would remand this case to the trial court for further
factual development regarding whether the funding provided in House Bill 616 is
sufficient to fund a constitutionally adequate education.
On remand, in order to determine whether any municipalities are receiving
insufficient funding, the trial court would have to consider the cost of a
constitutionally adequate education. Because neither House Bill 616 nor any
other statute purports to calculate the cost of an adequate education, in the
absence of any further action on the part of the legislature, it would be up to the
trial court to consider that cost.
Determining the cost of a constitutionally adequate education may not be
an easy task. With RSA 193-E:2 already established as the starting point for what
a constitutionally adequate education must provide, it would likely fall into the
hands of educational experts to inform the trial court as to whether the funding
provided by the State in House Bill 616 is sufficient to fund a constitutionally
adequate education. Making this determination would be an arduous process –
one far better suited for elected decision-makers rather than a single member of
the judiciary.
However, courts are “well suited to interpret and safeguard constitutional
rights and review challenged acts of our co-equal branches of government – not in
order to make policy but in order to assure the protection of constitutional rights.”
Campaign for Fiscal Equity, Inc. v. State, 801 N.E.2d 326, 349 (N.Y. 2003)
(affirming trial court’s determination that state funding system failed to provide
the constitutionally-required level of education in New York City and ordering the
State to determine the actual cost of providing that education). We should not shy
away from the need to determine the cost of a constitutionally adequate education
in order to ensure that it is being funded by the State. “It is our duty to uphold
13
and implement the New Hampshire Constitution.” Claremont II, 142 N.H. at 475.
We must act to ensure that constitutional rights are protected, and we cannot
ignore the possibility that the State may not be meeting its constitutional
obligation to provide an adequate education to the children of this State.
If we were to remand this case, as I suggest, the trial court would not be the
first ever to consider how to determine the cost of an adequate education.
Although the facts necessary to make a determination would come from experts
and other witnesses’ testimony, general guidance regarding computational
methods exists in opinions from courts in other jurisdictions, see, e.g., Hancock v.
Driscoll, No. 02-2978, 2004 WL 877984, at *118-29 (Mass. Super. Ct. Apr. 26,
2004) (hereinafter Hancock I), report and recommendation rejected by Hancock v.
Commissioner of Educ., 822 N.E.2d 1134, 1136-37 (Mass. 2005), and also in one
legislatively-authorized study that is specific to New Hampshire, see J. Augenblick
et al., Alternative Approaches for Determining a Base Figure and Pupil-Weighted
Adjustments for Use in a School Financing System in New Hampshire (Nov. 30,
1998), in Final Report of the Adequate Education Costs and Municipal Grant
Distribution Commission, SB 462 (Dec. 17, 1998) (attachment B).
In Hancock I, a Massachusetts Superior Court judge conducted a trial for
the purpose of finding facts and making recommendations to the Supreme
Judicial Court of Massachusetts on the issue of whether the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts was failing to provide its students “with the level and quality of
education required by the Massachusetts Constitution.” Hancock I, 2004 WL
877984, at *1. One of the many issues addressed in the report was the adequacy
of state funding for education. Id. at *118-29. At trial, the parties presented a
number of expert witnesses who testified to the various methods for determining
the cost of an adequate education. Id. at *118.
The report describes four basic analytical models for determining the cost of
adequacy. Id. at *118-29. The “successful schools” model identifies school
districts that perform at a predetermined level according to state performance
standards and, by examining the amount that those school districts spend on
their core educational programs, distills a base per pupil spending figure that
represents the cost of adequacy. Id. at *119. Another model also identifies school
districts that perform at a predetermined level according to state performance
standards, but rather than determine a base per pupil cost, it compares the net
spending of those schools with their legislatively-defined budgets to determine
whether they are spending, on average, above their legislatively-defined budgets,
which would suggest that funding of only the foundation budget amount is
insufficient. Id. at *122-24. The “professional judgment” model utilizes panels of
educational experts who determine, based upon the state constitution’s
minimally-required skills or levels of achievement, what the necessary
components are for providing such an education and, in turn, what the provision
of those components will cost. Id. at *120-21. Finally, the “value added” analysis
14
identifies the average statewide standardized test scores for certain demographic
subgroups of students and then compares each district’s expected student
performance, based upon its demographic make-up, to its actual student
performance to determine whether increased spending results in students
performing above their expected levels. Id. at *124-25.
Our own legislature, in previous legislation, utilized one of the above
methodologies – the “successful schools” model – in arriving at a formula to
determine the cost of an adequate education in New Hampshire. See, e.g., RSA
198:40 (1999) (amended 2003, 2004; repealed 2005). That statutory formulation
was apparently derived from the 1998 study report prepared by John Augenblick
and his colleagues. See Final Report of the Adequate Education Costs and
Municipal Grant Distribution Commission, supra at 4-5.
The study report proposed four possible formulas for calculating the cost of
an adequate education in New Hampshire. J. Augenblick et al., Alternative
Approaches for Determining a Base Figure and Pupil-Weighted Adjustments for
Use in a School Financing System in New Hampshire, supra at 7-10. All four
formulas were based upon the “successful schools” method described above. See
id. at 1. Each of the four formulas differed in its method of identifying “successful
schools.” See id. at 1-2. Three of the formulas identified the “successful schools”
by considering a variety of input measures (e.g., student-teacher ratios and
starting teacher salaries) and output measures (e.g., drop-out rate and
performance on standardized tests). Id. at 7-10 & tables 1-A, 1-B. The fourth
formula identified “successful schools” based solely upon one output factor –
performance on standardized tests at forty to sixty percent. Id. at 10.
The legislature appears to have adopted the final formula proposed in the
study report. In 1999, the legislature enacted RSA 198:40 (1999), entitled
“Determination of Per Pupil Adequate Education Cost and Adequate Education
Grant.” See Laws 1999, 17:41. The statute provided, in pertinent part:
I. [T]he cost per pupil shall be established using the following
formula:
(a) The department of education shall calculate the base
expenditure per pupil for each school district that operates an
elementary school . . . . For each school district, this amount shall be
divided by the average daily membership in attendance at the
elementary school level to attain the base expenditure per pupil.
(b) The adequate education grant amount shall be calculated as
follows:
(1) The department of education shall identify those school
districts where 40 to 60 percent of the elementary pupils enrolled in
the grades tested on the day testing began, achieved a scaled score
15
[on the statewide standardized educational test], in all areas tested,
equivalent to performance at the basic level or above.
(2) From the school districts identified in subparagraph
I(b)(1) of this section, the department of education shall then identify
those school districts that have the lowest base expenditure per pupil
. . . .
(3) The department of education shall calculate the average
base cost per pupil of an adequate education at the elementary school
level by multiplying the base expenditure per pupil of each school
district identified in subparagraph I(b)(2) of this section by the average
daily membership in attendance at each of the selected school
districts, and add the results across all districts selected. This sum
shall then be divided by the total average daily membership in
attendance at the elementary school level in all of the selected school
districts and the result shall be multiplied by .9025.
II. [Defining the “weighted average daily membership in residence”
for a municipality as taking into consideration various factors.]
III. For each fiscal year, the statewide cost of an adequate
education for all pupils shall be calculated by multiplying the average
base per pupil cost of an adequate education by the statewide
weighted average daily membership in residence of pupils and then
adding 70 percent of total statewide transportation costs.
RSA 198:40 (1999). House Bill 616 repealed this calculation of the cost of an
adequate education in its entirety. See Laws 2005, 257:22, II.
While I do not necessarily endorse this particular formula for determining
the cost of an adequate education, cf. Hancock I, 2004 WL 877984, at *119-20 &
n.148 (criticizing a similar formulation as yielding illogical results, and noting that
the test scores relied upon to identify “successful schools” under that formulation
may not have reflected the students’ level of competence as required by the
constitution), I note its prior existence in order to illustrate that a legislative
calculation of the cost of an adequate education is far from impossible.
In light of the foregoing, I would remand this case to the trial court for
further factual development and a determination of whether the State is providing
sufficient funding to pay for a constitutionally adequate education. I note that I
would not expect the trial court to craft its own definition of an adequate
education, or to determine with any precision the cost of providing that education
to every child in the State. Rather, I would expect the trial court to begin with the
seven factors articulated in Claremont II, and codified in RSA 193-E:2, as
guidelines for the provision of an adequate education, and from there consider
whether the funding provided under the current statutory scheme is sufficient to
pay the cost of that education.
16
IV
The majority concludes that the legislature must define a constitutionally
adequate education before this case is given any further consideration. In my
view, however, because a number of methodologies already exist to determine the
cost of a constitutionally adequate education, it would be less problematic for the
legislature to determine the cost of that education than it would be for it to look to
the Washington and Montana statutes for guidance to further define the
components of that education. More fundamentally, even if the legislature
provides a more specific definition of an adequate education, that definition is
meaningless unless the legislature also determines what that specifically-defined
education will cost. A legislative determination of the cost of a constitutionally
adequate education would more quickly advance the process of establishing a
constitutionally sound statutory scheme for the future education of New
Hampshire’s children. Indeed, in my view, a legislative determination of the cost
of a constitutionally adequate education using an acceptable method for
determining that cost could also satisfy the need to define a constitutionally
adequate education.
Hopefully, a trial will not be necessary in this case. Hopefully, in the
interim, the Governor and legislature will, using an acceptable method, determine
the cost of a constitutionally adequate education at a level that satisfies
constitutional concerns and addresses the issues raised by the plaintiffs.
GALWAY, J., concurring specially in part and dissenting in part. I agree
with the majority that the New Hampshire Legislature has not defined a
constitutionally adequate education. The majority and I part ways over the
remedy for this failure. The majority would retain jurisdiction of this appeal and
would consider remand to the trial court, or appointment of a special master, if
the legislature, by the end of fiscal year 2007, continues not to define a
constitutionally adequate education. I fear that by so doing we risk taking over
the legislature’s role in shaping educational and fiscal policy. The judiciary
should be unwilling to assume that risk. Rather than retain jurisdiction and later
remand to the superior court, I believe that the court should today declare House
Bill 616 unconstitutional on its face. Consistent with the plaintiffs’ request, we
should stay this ruling until the end of fiscal year 2007 so that school districts will
receive the state funding they anticipated.
Part II, Article 83 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides: “[I]t shall be
the duty of the legislators . . . to cherish the interest of literature and the sciences,
and . . . public schools, to encourage . . . public institutions . . . for the promotion
of agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades, manufactures, and natural
history of the country . . . .” Under Part II, Article 83, it is the legislature’s duty to
provide every educable child with a constitutionally adequate public education.
17
Claremont School Dist. v. Governor, 138 N.H. 183, 184 (1993). A constitutionally
adequate public education gives our children a safety net – a guarantee that, at a
minimum, they will receive a state-funded constitutionally adequate education,
regardless of where they live and how much money their parents earn.
Providing a constitutionally adequate education to the children of this State
entails: “defin[ing] a[ ] [constitutionally] adequate education, determin[ing] the
cost, fund[ing] it with constitutional taxes, and ensur[ing] its delivery through
accountability.” Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Accountability), 147 N.H.
499, 505 (2002) (quotation omitted). This court did not impose these duties upon
the legislature; they derive from our State Constitution.
As the majority finds, the legislature has yet to define a constitutionally
adequate education. In 1998, it enacted RSA 193-E:2 (Supp. 2005). That year,
the State admitted that it had not “completed its efforts to define and implement a
constitutionally adequate education.” Claremont School Dist. v. Governor (Motion
for Extension of Deadlines), 143 N.H. 154, 160 (1998). In this case, the State
contends that RSA 193-E:2 is the definition of a constitutionally adequate
education. As the majority aptly observes, the seven criteria set forth in that
statute are no more than a restatement of the “general, aspirational guidelines” we
quoted with approval in Claremont School District v. Governor, 142 N.H. 462,
474-75 (1997) (Claremont II). Aspirational guidelines do not provide a safety net
for our children. Aspirational guidelines do not “give specific substantive content”
to a constitutionally adequate education and “to the program [the legislature]
deems necessary to provide that education.” Claremont II, 142 N.H. at 475
(quotations omitted).
Without such a definition, the legislature cannot fulfill its mandate to
determine the cost of providing a constitutionally adequate education to our
children. As we stated in Opinion of the Justices (Reformed School Financing
Systems), 145 N.H. 474, 478 (2000): “It is not possible to determine the level of
funding required to provide the children of this State with a constitutionally
adequate education until its essential elements have been identified and defined.”
Thus, as the trial court observed, “While great latitude must be granted to the
Legislature to develop a formula or methodology to compute [the cost of a
constitutionally adequate education], it must fulfill its duty by, in fact,
determining the cost in accordance with its definition of an adequate education.”
As the trial court aptly found, the current education funding law, House Bill
616, is constitutionally infirm for just this reason -- it is not tethered to a
definition of a constitutionally adequate education. In the trial court’s words,
House Bill 616 does not “provide[ ] for a calculation of the cost of a[ ]
[constitutionally] adequate education, per pupil or otherwise.” Rather, it
“arbitrarily establishes an amount to be dedicated to providing [such] an . . .
education.” Because House Bill 616 is not linked to a definition of a
18
constitutionally adequate education, I believe that the court should declare it
facially unconstitutional.
It is the legislature’s job, not ours, to define a constitutionally adequate
education, and to determine the mechanism by which to fund it. Claremont II,
142 N.H. at 476-77. It is our job to determine whether the legislature has
complied with its constitutional obligation. “[W]e were not appointed to establish
educational policy . . . . That is why we leave such matters, consistent with the
Constitution, to the two co-equal branches of government.” Id. at 475. Our sole
duty is to “uphold and implement the New Hampshire Constitution.” Id.
“While it is appropriate to give due deference to a co-equal branch of
government as long as it is functioning within constitutional constraints, it would
be a serious dereliction on our part to deliberately ignore a clear constitutional
violation.” Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H. 124, 129 (2005) (quotation
omitted). I believe that, by remanding to the superior court, or by appointing a
special master, we risk usurping the legislature’s prerogative to set educational
and fiscal policy. Accordingly, I believe that we should declare House Bill 616
unconstitutional for the reasons the superior court sets forth in its decision. Once
the legislature provides the children of this State with what it determines to be a
constitutionally adequate education, the mandate of the constitution will be
satisfied, and our role will be concluded.
I believe strongly that it is not our role to “sit in continuous judgment over
educational policy decisions made by the legislature and the Governor.” Claremont
School Dist., 147 N.H. at 524 (Nadeau and Dalianis, JJ., dissenting). Nor is it our
role to judge the legislature’s fiscal policy. See id. By retaining jurisdiction of this
appeal, I believe that the majority moves us dangerously close to taking these
policy-making roles for ourselves and deciding questions that are not ours to
answer. See Hughes v. Speaker, N.H. House of Representatives, 152 N.H. 276,
283-88 (2005) (discussing political question doctrine).
For these reasons, respectfully, I concur in the majority’s determination that
the legislature has not defined a constitutionally adequate education and dissent
from its decision to retain jurisdiction of this appeal indefinitely.
19