THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2006-155
WALTER W. FISCHER, TRUSTEE OF WALTER W. FISCHER 1993 TRUST
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE STATE BUILDING CODE REVIEW BOARD
Argued: September 12, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2006
Gottesman & Hollis, P.A., of Nashua (Anna Barbara Hantz on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Mary E. Maloney, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, Walter W. Fischer, Trustee of Walter W.
Fischer 1993 Trust, appeals an order of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.)
affirming a determination by the New Hampshire State Building Code Review
Board (board) that the buildings on nine Durham properties owned by the
petitioner do not qualify as two-family dwellings under the State Fire Code
(code). We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The buildings at issue were
constructed as two-family dwellings in 1968. Each unit has three bedrooms,
two and one half baths, a kitchen, living room and dining room. The petitioner
leases these units to groups of four to six University of New Hampshire
students.
Local fire officials have periodically inspected the buildings and, through
at least May 2002, have classified them as two-family dwellings. In 2002, a fire
occurred in one of the buildings which, according to the respondent board,
caused the Durham Fire Department to review the building’s classification and
fire safety standing. The Durham Fire Marshal notified the petitioner on July
1, 2003, that his buildings were improperly classified under the code. The
Durham Fire Marshal then reclassified the buildings as “lodging or rooming
houses” and required modifications to the buildings to bring them into
compliance with the code.
The petitioner appealed the reclassification to the state fire marshal, who
affirmed. That decision was appealed to, and affirmed by, the board. The
petitioner then appealed to the superior court, claiming that “the Board
improperly determined that subsequently-enacted fire regulations apply to the
petitioner’s use of the buildings, even though the petitioner’s use has not
changed for over 30 years.” The trial court affirmed, except as to a waiver
request, which was remanded for evaluation by the fire marshal.
On appeal, the petitioner argues that: (1) reclassification of his buildings
“improperly interferes with [his] vested right to use the structures as duplexes”;
(2) the code exempts existing uses from new requirements unless there is a
change in use; (3) the code “arbitrarily discriminates between related and
unrelated individuals”; and (4) the petitioner was denied due process with
respect to the regulatory change imposed upon his property.
On appeal of the board’s decision to the superior court, “[t]he burden of
proof [is] on the appellant to show that the decision of the board was clearly
unreasonable or unlawful.” RSA 155-A:12, II (Supp. 2006). We, in turn, will
not disturb the decision of the trial court unless it is unsupported by the
evidence or legally erroneous. Cf. Conservation Law Found. v. N.H. Wetlands
Council, 150 N.H. 1, 4 (2003).
The plaintiff first argues that his property is “grandfathered” from
reclassification to a new occupancy category under the code. He grounds his
argument in two provisions of the New Hampshire Constitution: Part I, Article
23, prohibiting retrospective laws, and Part I, Article 12, prohibiting takings of
property without just compensation. Specifically, he contends that the
reclassification of his property “imposes an incompatible later enacted code
requirement on a pre-existing use” and “results in an unconstitutional
retrospective application and improperly denies [him] his vested right to
continue to use the property as originally classified.”
We first address whether the reclassification at issue is a “retrospective
application” of a “later enacted code requirement.” The State asserts that “[t]he
2
Fire Marshal prospectively applied the correct classification under the State
Fire Code to the [plaintiff’s] property” and did not impose a penalty “for
noncompliance with the Code before that date.” As such, the application of the
code in this case is not retrospective. As the Supreme Court of Colorado has
noted:
The constitutional ban of retrospective operation does not prevent
a city from enacting and enforcing ordinances to protect the health
and safety of the community.
The purpose of the constitutional ban of retrospective
legislation, like the ban on ex post facto laws, is to prevent the
unfairness that results from changing the legal consequences of an
act after the act has occurred. In this case, [the plaintiff] was not
penalized for violation of the Safety Code for remodeling that was
completed prior to enactment of the Safety Code. Application of a
safety code to buildings that were constructed in a different period
under different code requirements does not constitute
unconstitutional retrospective legislation.
Van Sickle v. Boyes, 797 P.2d 1267, 1271 (Colo. 1990) (citations
omitted).
The plaintiff next argues, relying upon Part I, Article 12, that the
reclassification of his property deprives him of a vested right to a
nonconforming use. He cites Dugas v. Town of Conway, 125 N.H. 175, 182
(1984) (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted), for the proposition that “a
past use creates vested rights to a similar future use, so that a town may not
unreasonably require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use.” Although
Dugas was a dispute over attorney’s fees and costs, it arose out of a takings
claim, and the above-quoted language appeared in that context. Id. at 181-82.
Dugas also recognized, however, that “[r]easonable regulations, aimed at
promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community, may not
require compensation.” Id. at 182; see also Loundsbury v. City of Keene, 122
N.H. 1006, 1009 (1982) (“Certainly, a town may proscribe harmful property-
related activity without providing compensation.”). As the Washington
Supreme Court aptly stated:
There is no such thing as an inherent or vested right to imperil the
health or impair the safety of the community. . . . It would be a sad
commentary on the law, if municipalities were powerless to compel
the adoption of the best methods for protecting life in such cases
simply because the confessedly faulty method in use was the
method provided by law at the time of its construction.
3
City of Seattle v. Hinckley, 82 P. 747, 748-49 (Wash. 1905). We concur with
this analysis. Accordingly, we conclude that the plaintiff does not have a
vested right to a continued classification as a two-family dwelling for purposes
of fire code application.
Our decision in Durham v. White Enterprises, Inc., 115 N.H. 645 (1975),
does not alter our conclusion. White Enterprises involved the same duplex
properties at issue here. The petitioner and others challenged a 1971
amendment to the Town’s zoning ordinance that limited lawful density of
occupancy to no more than four unrelated persons. Id. at 647-48. We
observed that the leasing of these units to groups of up to six unrelated
individuals was a lawful use under the pre-1971 ordinance and held that the
“Fischers have acquired the right to continue this nonconforming use under
the ordinance as amended in 1971.” Id. at 651.
Our decision in White Enterprises was not based upon constitutional
limitations and vested rights, but upon the terms of the amended zoning
ordinance itself, which contained a grandfather clause exempting, under
certain conditions, “existing lawful use[s]” from the requirements of the
amended ordinance. Id. at 650. Thus, White Enterprises has no application to
the instant case.
The plaintiff next argues that the code has its own grandfather provision,
section 1-9.2, that prohibits the reclassification of his property. That section
provides:
Existing buildings that are occupied at the time of adoption of
this Code shall remain in use provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The occupancy classification remains the same.
(2) There exists no condition deemed hazardous to life or property
that would constitute an imminent danger.
The petitioner argues that this provision “specifically exempts occupied
preexisting buildings from code compliance so long as the use is not changed
and there is no imminent danger to life or property.” The State counters that
this is not a grandfather provision at all, but merely serves to “permit the
continued occupancy or use, of the building under certain specific criteria
during the time it takes to bring the building[] in[to] compliance with the
[code].”
The provisions of the code at issue were adopted by agency rule. See
e.g., N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C 6008.01 (2003) (adopting, with modification, the
4
2000 edition of the NFPA Fire Prevention Code); N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C
6008.03 (2003) (adopting the 2000 edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code).
When construing agency rules, we ascribe to the words used their plain and
ordinary meanings, where possible. Appeal of Flynn, 145 N.H. 422, 423
(2000). In addition, we do not look at the rule in segments, but rather as a
whole. Appeal of Alley, 137 N.H. 40, 42 (1993). While we accord some
deference to an agency’s interpretation of its regulations, “[w]e still must
examine the agency’s interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the
language of the regulation and with the purpose which the regulation is
intended to serve.” Id. (quotation omitted). Furthermore, “[a]dministrative
officials do not possess the power to contravene a statute and we will not
construe an administrative rule as an attempt to do so.” Woodman v. Perrin,
124 N.H. 545, 549 (1984) (citation omitted).
The state fire marshal’s apparent interpretation of the code is that it “has
no provisions for ‘grandfathering’ any property. [Rather,] [t]he code has specific
requirements for ‘existing’ and ‘new’ construction.” The petitioner
acknowledges that, in some instances, the code imposes different requirements
on new and existing buildings and that “[r]equirements for ‘existing buildings’
will apply if more restrictive than those imposed at the time of [construction
plan] approval.” See NFPA 101 Life Safety Code A.1.4, A.3.3.25.3. He does not
appear to contend, however, that he is being required to comply with code
provisions for new, as opposed to existing, lodging or rooming houses; rather,
his apparent argument is that section 1-9.2 prohibits a reclassification of his
property that would require him to comply with any code provisions for lodging
or rooming houses.
The interpretation of code section 1-9.2 advanced by the State, and
employed by the fire marshal, is “consistent with the language of the regulation
and with the purpose which the regulation is intended to serve.” Appeal of
Alley, 137 N.H. at 42. The enabling legislation for the code states that “[t]he
rules [adopted thereunder] shall apply to existing buildings, structures or
equipment” and provides that “[a] reasonable time, as determined by the state
fire marshal, shall be allowed to make necessary alterations.” RSA 153:5
(2002). The code, in turn, states that it “shall apply to both new and existing
conditions.” NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, 1-5.1 (2000). Section 1-5.5
provides:
Buildings in existence or permitted for construction prior to the
adoption of this Code shall comply with the provisions stated
herein or referenced for existing buildings.
. . .
5
Exception: A limited but reasonable time shall be allowed for
compliance with any part of this Code for existing buildings,
commensurate with the magnitude of expenditure, disruption of
services, and degree of hazard. Occupied existing buildings shall
comply with 1-9.2
Finally, the NFPA Fire Prevention Code Handbook (2000) explains:
In the case of existing occupancies, the Code, in many
instances, provides specific exemptions from the requirements for
new occupancies. In other instances, however, there may be no
difference in the requirements between new and existing
occupancies. It is the Code’s intent that existing buildings be
brought into compliance with the provisions in this edition for
existing buildings.
We conclude that section 1-9.2 does not exempt preexisting, occupied
buildings from compliance with code provisions applicable to existing
buildings. Rather, as argued by the State, it permits, under certain conditions,
“the continued occupancy or use, of the building . . . during the time it takes to
bring the building[] in[to] compliance with the [code].”
The petitioner next argues that the code impermissibly discriminates
between related and unrelated individuals. The code defines one- and two-
family dwellings to “include buildings containing not more than two dwelling
units in which each dwelling unit is occupied by members of a single family
with not more than three outsiders, if any, accommodated in rented rooms.”
NFPA 1 Fire Prevention Code, 2-1.112. The petitioner argues that “[r]estricting
unrelated individuals from sharing a duplex or single family home is . . . an
arbitrary classification” in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution.
The restriction does not involve a fundamental right. See Village of Belle
Terre v. Boraas, 416 U.S. 1, 7 (1974); see also White Enterprises, 115 N.H. at
648. Instead it is an “economic and social” regulation that will withstand an
equal protection challenge if the classification is “reasonable, not arbitrary . . .
and bears a rational relationship to a permissible state objective.” Village of
Belle Terre, 416 U.S. at 8 (quotations and brackets omitted).
As previously noted, the purpose of the code is the “protection from fire
and fire hazards for people in the state and for the general welfare of property
and people within the state.” RSA 153:5. We readily conclude that these are
permissible state objectives. The State argues that the “family” classification is
not arbitrary, but is “rationally related to how individuals will respond in case
6
of fire.” In testimony before the board, the Durham Fire Marshal explained the
rationale behind the classification:
Well, because the people are not related, they have no vested
interest in one another, other than they’re . . . they may be friends,
the Code has made some additional requirements to make sure
each individual is safe as opposed to a single family where they are
probably going to be looking out for one another, making . . . being
aware . . . [of their] comings and goings and whatnot.
We cannot say that the classification is not rationally related to a permissible
state objective.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the procedures used by the fire marshal
and the board did not afford him due process. He appears to contend that he
should have been afforded a hearing under New Hampshire Administrative
Rule, Saf-C 6006.02(f)(1), which entitled any person aggrieved by a
determination of the state fire marshal to an adjudicative hearing before the
state fire marshal. N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C 6006.02 (repealed September 23,
2004).
As the trial court correctly ruled, however, Rule Saf-C 6006.02 was
preempted in 2002 by the adoption of RSA 155-A:11, which provides that
appeals from the state fire marshal’s decisions shall be heard by the board.
See RSA 155-A:11, I (Supp. 2006). Since an administrative rule cannot
contravene a statute, Woodman, 124 N.H. at 549, the rule must yield. Thus,
the plaintiff was not entitled to a hearing by the fire marshal.
The plaintiff acknowledges that a hearing was held before the board, but
argues that while the board heard “testimony concerning the interpretation of
the code, . . . [it] did not review the reasonableness of the specific fire safety
measures imposed.” He also notes that no “public hearing” was held. Thus,
the plaintiff appears to contend that he was entitled to the same procedures
used in the rulemaking process. See RSA 541-A:11 (Supp. 2006). As the State
points out, the state fire marshal did not adopt a new rule, but merely enforced
the existing rule. Thus, no public hearing on the rule’s reasonableness was
required.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7