THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-945
STEVEN WEBSTER & a.
v.
ACADIA INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: September 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 17, 2007
D’Amante Couser Steiner Pellerin, P.A., of Concord (R. James Steiner on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiffs
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Naomi L. Mooney
and Jill A. DeMello on the brief, and Ms. Mooney orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiffs, Steven Webster and Dutton & Garfield, Inc.,
appeal the decision of the Trial Court (Fitzgerald, J.) granting summary
judgment to the defendant, Acadia Insurance Company, in the plaintiffs’
breach of contract action. We reverse and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are not in dispute. In
1991, the Winnisquam Regional School District (WRSD) hired the plaintiffs to
perform work on the roof of its middle school. Specifically, the plaintiffs were
to remove the existing outermost roof membrane, replace any damaged
insulation, and install a new standing, seamless metal roof membrane. This
type of roof membrane is fastened to the building using metal clips, and is not
bolted to the ceiling beams, called purlins.
In March 2001, the school discovered structural deficiencies with the
roof after a parent observed buckling in the gymnasium’s purlins.
Consequently, WRSD closed the gymnasium for an unspecified period of time
to assess the damage. Because of the damage to the roof, on October 19, 2001,
WRSD filed suit against the plaintiffs claiming negligence, negligent
misrepresentation, breach of express warranty, professional negligence, and
respondeat superior.
From November 1, 2000, through November 1, 2001, the plaintiffs held a
general liability insurance policy with the defendant. The plaintiffs timely
notified the defendant of the WRSD suit, and requested a defense and coverage
for any liability. By letter dated August 5, 2002, the defendant denied the
plaintiffs’ requests, finding WRSD’s writ did not contain allegations of property
damage as required by the policy, and that several exclusions to coverage
would apply. The WRSD suit came to final judgment following a jury trial and
appeal to this court. See Winnisquam Reg. Sch. Dist. v. Levine, 152 N.H. 537
(2005). The plaintiffs subsequently filed the instant action to recover their
defense costs in the WRSD suit, asserting WRSD’s writ contained allegations of
property damage by virtue of physical injury to the purlins and loss of use of
the school gymnasium. Both parties moved for summary judgment. The trial
court granted the defendant’s motion and denied the plaintiffs’ motion, ruling
that WRSD’s writ did not allege property damage, and, in the alternative, that
coverage would be barred by the policy’s “impaired property” exclusion. This
appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiffs assert: (1) the allegations in the writ regarding
damage to the purlins constitute property damage under the policy; (2) the
closure of the school gymnasium constitutes a loss of use, and, thus, is also an
allegation of property damage under the policy; and (3) the “impaired property”
exclusion does not apply. The defendant argues the trial court correctly
granted summary judgment because: (1) there has been no “occurrence” under
the terms of the policy; (2) WRSD’s writ does not allege property damage to the
purlins, or, in the alternative, the purlins were incorporated into the plaintiffs’
work product, and thus are not covered under the policy; (3) the writ does not
allege a loss of use under the terms of the policy; and (4) the “impaired
property” exclusion would preclude coverage.
When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. St. Onge v. MacDonald,
154 N.H. 768, 770 (2007). If no genuine issue of material fact exists, and if the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary
2
judgment is proper. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
It is well-settled in New Hampshire that an insurer’s obligation to defend
its insured is determined by whether the cause of action against the insured
alleges sufficient facts in the pleadings to bring it within the express terms of
the policy. Broom v. Continental Cas. Co., 152 N.H. 749, 753 (2005). In
considering whether a duty to defend exists based upon the sufficiency of the
pleadings, we consider the reasonable expectations of the insured as to its
rights under the policy. Id.
We have said, “An insurer’s obligation is not merely to defend in cases of
perfect declarations, but also in cases where by any reasonable intendment of
the pleadings liability of the insured can be inferred, and neither ambiguity nor
inconsistency in the underlying plaintiff’s complaint can justify escape of the
insurer from its obligation to defend.” Id. at 754 (quotations, brackets and
ellipses omitted). In case of doubt as to whether the complaint against the
insured alleges a liability of the insurer under the policy, the doubt must be
resolved in the insured’s favor. Id.
In the underlying writ, WRSD specifically alleged that the purlins in the
gymnasium had buckled and “some separation between the purlin webs and
support clips at the building frame” was present. The writ indicated that the
purlins were missing bolts and were not properly aligned. In addition, the writ
alleged that “many roof purlins showed bowing, the early stages of rolling or
lateral buckling . . . .”
The plaintiffs argue these allegations sufficiently raise a claim of physical
injury to the gymnasium’s purlins to fall within the scope of “property damage”
under the terms of the policy. By contrast, the defendant asserts that they
merely support a claim of faulty workmanship, and do not allege property
damage independent of the deficient roof work. Our analysis necessarily
begins with an examination of the policy language. See Broom, 152 N.H. at
753. The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Hartley v. Elec. Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 687, 688 (2007).
We construe the language as would a reasonable person in the position of the
insured based upon a more than casual reading of the policy as a whole. Id.
Policy terms are construed objectively; where the terms are clear and
unambiguous, we accord the language its natural and ordinary meaning. Id.
The plaintiffs’ policy provides, “[Acadia] will pay those sums that the
insured becomes legally obligated to pay as damages because of ‘bodily injury’
or ‘property damage’ to which this insurance applies. [Acadia] will have the
right and duty to defend the insured against any ‘suit’ seeking those damages.”
The policy defines “property damage” as:
3
a. Physical injury to tangible property, including all
resulting loss of use of that property. All such loss of
use shall be deemed to occur at the time of the physical
injury that caused it; or
b. Loss of use of tangible property that is not physically
injured. All such loss of use shall be deemed to occur at
the time of the “occurrence” that caused it.
“[P]roperty suffers physical, tangible injury when the property is altered in
appearance, shape, color or in some other material dimension.” 9A S. Plitt, D.
Maldonado & J. Rogers, Couch on Insurance 3d § 129:6, at 129-16 to 129-17
(Thomson/West 2005).
We have previously held that a writ alleged property damage for purposes
of an indemnity insurance policy when it “alleged actual damage” to property
other than the work product of the insured. High Country Assocs. v. N.H. Ins.
Co., 139 N.H. 39, 43 (1994). In High Country, the underlying action involved
claims for negligence and breach of an implied warranty of workmanlike
quality, specifically alleging that the insured’s faulty design, selection of
materials, and construction of the damaged condominium units resulted in
“substantial moisture seepage into the buildings, causing mildew and rotting of
the walls, and loss of structural integrity.” Id. at 41. Reviewing the underlying
writ, we held that these allegations were claims for the “water-damaged walls,
not the diminution in value or cost of repairing work of inferior quality.” Id. at
43. We specifically distinguished between negligent construction that resulted
in property damage and merely seeking damages for the negligent construction.
Id. By alleging actual damage in the form of mildew, rot, and loss of structural
integrity, the underlying writ was “not simply a claim for the contractor’s
defective work,” but also a claim for the damage to other property suffered as a
result. Id.
Similarly, WRSD’s writ raises claims beyond the defective roof
replacement, as it contains allegations of actual damage to the purlins. WRSD
explicitly alleges alteration of the purlins’ appearance and shape, including
buckling, bowing, lateral movement, and separation of the purlins from the
building frame. The writ also summarizes several engineering reports that
detail this damage to the purlins. WRSD asserts that these alterations were a
direct result of the plaintiffs’ negligent roof design and replacement. Like the
mildew and rot in High Country, the buckling, separation, and other
alterations of the purlins represent actual damage to property separate and
distinct from the plaintiffs’ work product – the metal roof membrane. As such,
we conclude that WRSD’s writ alleges physical injury to tangible property and
thus satisfies the policy’s definition of property damage. Consequently, the
4
writ alleges “damages because of . . . ‘property damage’ to which this insurance
applies,” thereby triggering the defendant’s “right and duty to defend.”
The defendant asserts that the purlins did not sustain physical injury
because the buckling was only temporary and the purlins did not require
repair or replacement. We are not persuaded by this argument. Significantly,
the defendant does not suggest that the buckling, separation from the building
frame, or the other alterations alleged in the writ could not constitute physical
injury. Rather, it essentially argues that, despite the bracing, bolts and other
supports affixed to the purlins to remedy the bowing, any alteration of the
purlins is so minimal that it should not be considered property damage.
However, as the plaintiffs correctly noted, the policy does not prescribe a
minimum level of property damage necessary to initiate coverage. The policy
simply defines property damage, in pertinent part, as “physical injury to
tangible property,” without limitation or restriction. We read this definition as
would a reasonable person in the position of the insured, and conclude that it
does not require a minimum measure of damage to fall within the scope of
coverage.
The defendant also argues that because the purlins were “incorporated”
into the plaintiffs’ work product, this is not property damage to work other
than the insureds’ under the policy. The concept of incorporation is not
defined within the policy. However, the common understanding of the term
“incorporate” is “to unite with or introduce into something already existent . . .
so as to form an indistinguishable whole that cannot be restored to the
previously separate elements without damage.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1145 (unabridged ed. 2002). Here, it is undisputed
that the purlins were part of the original school structure, constructed in 1973,
and were not part of the work done by the plaintiffs. In fact, the record reflects
that the plaintiffs’ replacement work was limited to the metal roof membrane
and insulation. Indeed, the record demonstrates that the roof installed by the
plaintiffs was not bolted to the purlins. There is no evidence to suggest that
the plaintiffs’ installation was somehow contingent upon the purlins so as to
unite the two and create an “indistinguishable whole,” or two parts that could
not be separated without damage. Therefore, we conclude the purlins were not
incorporated into the plaintiffs’ roof replacement.
The defendant further contends that any property damage is not covered
by the policy because there has been no “occurrence.” The plaintiffs’ policy
provides, “This insurance applies to . . . ‘property damage’ only if: (1) The . . .
‘property damage’ is caused by an ‘occurrence’ that takes place in the ‘coverage
territory’; and (2) The . . . ‘property damage’ occurs during the policy period.”
“Occurrence” is defined as “an accident, including continuous or repeated
exposure to substantially the same general harmful conditions.”
5
The defendant does not challenge whether the events leading up to the
initial observation of buckling may be considered an occurrence. Rather,
relying upon McAllister v. Peerless Insurance Co., 124 N.H. 676 (1984), the
defendant argues that the writ does not allege an “occurrence” under the policy
because it only claims “faulty workmanship” without damage to other property.
However, the defendant’s reliance on McAllister is misplaced. In that case, we
held that the underlying declarations, seeking damages solely for defective
work, did not allege an occurrence, noting “[t]he fortuity implied by reference to
accident or exposure is not what is commonly meant by a failure of
workmanship.” Id. at 680. Applying our holding in Hull v. Berkshire Mutual
Insurance Co., 121 N.H. 230 (1981), we observed that “defective work, standing
alone, did not result from an occurrence.” Id. at 681. Unlike in McAllister,
here, the plaintiffs’ alleged defective work does not stand alone. As stated
above, the writ alleges actual damage to the purlins, property other than the
work of the insured, and does not merely seek damages for the defective roof.
Therefore, McAllister is not controlling.
Further, the writ asserts that the first observation of buckling occurred
following a heavy snowstorm, causing an accumulation of approximately two
feet of snow on the building’s roof. At least some of the damage to the purlins
is attributed to this accumulation. We have defined the term “accident” in the
context of an “occurrence” to mean “circumstances, not necessarily a sudden
and identifiable event, that were unexpected or unintended from the standpoint
of the insured.” High Country Assoc., 139 N.H. at 44. In High Country, we
found that the mildew and rot damage alleged in the underlying writ amounted
to an occurrence as the damage was “unexpected from the standpoint of High
Country Associates and was caused by continuing exposure to moisture
seeping through the walls of the units.” Id. In this case, the writ alleged that
some purlins had separated from the building frame and were missing bolts, in
addition to the bowing and buckling. Like in High Country, the damage first
caused or aggravated by the snowstorm, as alleged in WRSD’s writ, was
unexpected from the standpoint of the plaintiffs, especially given that its work
did not include the purlins. Consistent with High Country, the unexpected
physical injury to the purlins in this case gave rise to an occurrence under the
terms of the policy.
At oral argument, the defendant agreed that a finding of physical injury
to the purlins would preclude application of the impaired property exclusion.
Having drawn such a conclusion, we do not address that exclusion here. See
9A Couch on Insurance, supra § 129:21 at 129-44 (“The purpose of this
exclusion is in essence to preclude coverage for loss of use claims arising from
faulty work . . . when there is no physical injury to the property.”).
6
Reading this policy as would a reasonable person in the position of the
insured, we conclude that the writ alleges property damage caused by an
occurrence, creating a duty to defend under the terms of the policy. Having
ruled there is property damage for purposes of providing a defense, we need not
address the plaintiffs’ loss of use claim. Accordingly, we hold that the trial
court’s grant of summary judgment to the defendant was in error.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7