THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-879
LEAH BARBUTO
v.
PEERLESS INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: September 6, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 18, 2007
Law Office of David C. Dunn, P.A., of Manchester (David C. Dunn on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and
Danielle L. Pacik on the brief, and Mr. Dunn orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The respondent, Peerless Insurance Company (Peerless),
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Mangones, J.) granting summary
judgment in favor of the petitioner, Leah Barbuto, in a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether Peerless was entitled to reduce the petitioner’s
underinsured motorist benefits by the amount she recovered in a settlement
with an underinsured tortfeasor. We reverse.
The record supports the following. The petitioner was injured in an
automobile accident caused by the driver of another vehicle. At the time of the
accident, the petitioner was an insured under a motor vehicle insurance policy
issued by Peerless, with a liability limit of $100,000. After obtaining
permission from Peerless, the petitioner settled with the tortfeasor for the
$50,000 liability limit of the tortfeasor’s policy. Because this amount failed to
fully compensate the petitioner for all of her injuries, she sought an additional
$100,000 from Peerless under the policy’s underinsured motorist coverage.
Peerless denied the claim for $100,000, and instead paid the petitioner
$50,000, claiming it was entitled to reduce the amount of recoverable
underinsured benefits by the $50,000 settlement.
The petitioner brought a declaratory judgment action alleging that
Peerless was not entitled to offset her award by the tortfeasor’s settlement until
she was fully compensated for her damages. The trial court ruled that Part C
of the “Uninsured Motorists Coverage” section of the policy unambiguously
allowed Peerless to offset the petitioner’s recovery from the settlement, but that
language in Part F of the “General Provisions” section conflicted with this
provision. These conflicting provisions, the trial court held, rendered the policy
ambiguous and compelled a finding that Peerless was not entitled to the offset.
On appeal, Peerless asserts that the petitioner’s settlement with the
tortfeasor should be credited against the policy’s limit of coverage, rather than
against the actual damages sustained by the policy holder. It argues that the
trial court erred in concluding that the policy is ambiguous. Specifically,
Peerless contends that Part F of the “General Provisions” section and Part C of
the “Uninsured Motorists Coverage” section do not conflict because Part F
deals exclusively with reimbursement and subrogation rights, which are
distinguishable from the setoff rights governed by Part C. Peerless also
maintains that the trial court’s interpretation would render meaningless the
provision in Part C which requires the limit of liability to be reduced by all
sums paid by a tortfeasor. Finally, Peerless argues that the court improperly
concluded that the policy is ambiguous because Peerless’ interpretation “would
potentially lead to a confusing conclusion.”
Interpretation of the language in an insurance policy is a question of law.
Peerless Ins. v. Vt. Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 71, 72 (2004). We construe the
language of an insurance policy as would a reasonable person in the position of
the insured based upon a more than casual reading of the policy as a whole.
Wilson v. Progressive N. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 782, 788 (2005). Where the terms
of the policy are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its natural
and ordinary meaning. Id. However, if the policy is reasonably susceptible to
more than one interpretation and one interpretation favors coverage, the policy
will be construed in favor of the insured and against the insurer. Id. For
exclusionary language to be considered clear and unambiguous, two parties
cannot reasonably disagree about its meaning. Trombley v. Liberty Mut. Ins.
Co., 148 N.H. 748, 751 (2002). Pursuant to RSA 491:22-a (1997), “the burden
of proving lack of insurance coverage is on the insurer.” Maville v. Peerless Ins.
Co., 141 N.H. 317, 320 (1996).
2
Part C of the “Uninsured Motorists Coverage” section of the petitioner’s
policy provides, in relevant part:
With respect to damages caused by an accident with an “underinsured
motor vehicle”:
1. The limit of liability shall be reduced by all sums paid
because of the “bodily injury” by or on behalf of persons or
organizations who may be legally responsible. This includes
all sums paid under Part A of this policy.
We interpreted this exact policy language in Deyette v. Liberty Mutual
Insurance Co., 142 N.H. 560, 561-62 (1997), as clearly and unambiguously
allowing the insurance company to limit its liability. We explained that
because “[t]he plaintiffs purchased uninsured motorist coverage . . . with a
limit of $100,000 . . . the plaintiffs should reasonably expect to recover only up
to that amount . . . .” Deyette, 142 N.H. at 563. Here, the trial court found,
under Deyette, that absent other considerations, Part C of the “Uninsured
Motorists Coverage” would allow Peerless to reduce the petitioner’s award by
the tortfeasor’s settlement.
The trial court, however, went on to consider the effect of Part F of the
policy’s “General Provisions” section, which, under a subsection entitled “Our
right to recover payment,” states, in relevant part: “If we make a payment
under: 1. Part C[.] of this policy [the underinsured motorist provision], we shall
be entitled to recovery under paragraph A. or B. only after the person has been
fully compensated for damages.” Paragraph A provides, in pertinent part: “If
we make a payment under this policy and the person to or for whom payment
was made has a right to recover damages from another we shall be subrogated
to that right.” Paragraph B provides: “If we make a payment under this policy
and the person to or for whom payment is made recovers damages from
another, that person shall: 1. Hold in trust for us the proceeds of the recovery;
and 2. Reimburse us to the extent of our payment.”
The trial court found that a reasonable insured could interpret Part F of
the “General Provisions” section to mean that “payments the insured receives
from other parties will not be used to offset the limit of the insured’s policy
unless the insured has been fully compensated for [her] damages.” Although
Peerless argued that Part F of the “General Provisions” section dealt with
reimbursement, rather than setoff, the trial court found that Kelly v. Prudential
Property & Casualty Insurance Co., 147 N.H. 642 (2002), compelled a finding
that this provision could reasonably be construed as addressing setoff. Relying
upon our interpretation of similar policy language in Kelly, which we stated
“clearly and unambiguously permit[ted the insurer] to offset the plaintiffs’
3
recovery from the tortfeasor,” Kelly, 147 N.H. at 644 (emphasis added), the trial
court found that Part F was also an offset clause. Therefore, the trial court
concluded that this offset provision, requiring the insured to be fully
compensated before Peerless is entitled to recovery, conflicts with Part C of the
“Uninsured Motorists Coverage” section, the offset provision allowing Peerless
to reduce its limit of liability by any settlement regardless of whether the
insured is fully compensated. Accordingly, the trial court found the policy to
be ambiguous. Because there was no dispute that the petitioner’s damages
exceeded $100,000, it determined that Peerless could not reduce the $100,000
limit of the policy by the $50,000 settlement until the petitioner was fully
compensated for her damages.
In Kelly, the insured was injured in an automobile accident, sustaining
damages of $225,000. Id. at 642. At the time of the accident, the insured
carried uninsured motorist insurance with a $100,000 limit. Id. at 642-43.
The insured settled with the tortfeasor for $50,000, and subsequently sought
to recover under the uninsured motorists policy. Id. The insurer offset the
insured’s coverage by the $50,000 settlement, making $50,000 in coverage
available to the insured. Id. at 643. The insured sought a declaration that the
insurance company could not reduce uninsured motorists benefits by the
insured’s settlement with the tortfeasor. Id.
In determining whether the insurance company could reduce the
uninsured motorists benefits by the $50,000 settlement, we interpreted two
provisions in the policy. The “Trust Agreement” provision of the general policy
provided, in pertinent part: “When we pay for a loss under this policy, we are
entitled to the amount we paid from the proceeds of any settlement or
judgment you recover from the responsible party.” Kelly, 147 N.H. at 643
(quotations omitted). We determined that this language “clearly and
unambiguously permits [the insurer] to offset the plaintiffs’ recovery from the
tortfeasor.” Id. at 644. In essence, this provision meant that the insurer was
“always entitled to offset a plaintiff’s recovery by any amounts recoverable from
a tortfeasor.” Id.
A second provision, however, also addressed the possibility of reducing
the insurance company’s payment by a settlement with the tortfeasor. The
“Payments Reduced” provision, located in the Uninsured Motorists booklet of
the policy, stated in relevant part: “Payments will be reduced by any amount
. . . so that the total amount due does not exceed the amount of damage.” Id.
We held that this provision could be reasonably read to mean that the
insurance company “may reduce its payment to a plaintiff only when a
plaintiff’s recovery exceeds the amount of the plaintiff’s damages.” Id.
Accordingly, because both offset provisions could not apply, and because they
conflicted, a reasonable insured “could conclude that the Payments Reduced
provision . . . supersede[d] the general Trust Agreement provision.” Id. The
4
insurer therefore could not offset the insured’s uninsured motorists benefits by
the amount paid by the tortfeasor. Id.
Unlike Kelly, the two policy provisions at issue here can apply without
conflict. Part C of the “Uninsured Motorists Coverage” section, as we held in
Deyette, clearly and unambiguously allows Peerless to reduce the policy’s
$100,000 liability limit by the $50,000 settlement. This setoff provision is the
type typically used by an insurer to reduce or eliminate payments made to the
insured in the first instance. See, e.g., 3 I. E. Schermer & W. J. Schermer,
Automobile Liability Insurance §§ 40:1, 40:2 (4th ed. 2004). Moreover, by
specifically referencing “limit of liability” in the “Uninsured Motorists Coverage”
section of the policy, the insured is put on notice that any payments made by
the tortfeasor will be used as a setoff against the underinsured motorists
coverage limit of $100,000. Cf. Deyette, 142 N.H. at 563.
Conversely, Part F of the “General Provisions” section clearly concerns
reimbursement and applies after Peerless has made the initial payment, here
the $50,000 payment as calculated under Part C of the “Uninsured Motorists”
section. This right of reimbursement is conceptually distinct from the right of
setoff. See, e.g., Deyette, 142 N.H. at 563 (acknowledging that an insurer may
reduce payments under uninsured motorists coverage even though the injured
insured has not been fully compensated, but may not exercise subrogation
rights against non-motorist tortfeasors until the insured is fully compensated);
3 A. L. Widiss & J. E. Thomas, Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist
Insurance §§ 41.7, 44.4 (3d ed. rev. 2005). Under Part F, Peerless would not be
entitled to any reimbursement for the $50,000 it already paid until the
petitioner is fully compensated. Under facts not present here, where the
insured collects funds from other sources after Peerless has made a payment,
Part F may entitle Peerless to be reimbursed to the extent of its payment so
long as the insured is fully compensated. Thus, under this policy, both
Peerless’ right of setoff and reimbursement can apply without conflict.
By referring to the “Trust Agreement” and “Payments Reduced”
provisions in Kelly as “offset” provisions, we did not intend to imply that there
is no distinction between setoff and reimbursement provisions. Such a holding
would effectively prohibit insurance policies from both limiting liability on
underinsured motorists claims and permitting subrogation or reimbursement.
Our holding in Kelly was only that the specific language of the “Payments
Reduced” and “Trust Agreement” provisions in that policy conflicted. These
provisions conflicted because applying both provisions would have rendered
the “Payments Reduced” provision meaningless. If the insurance company was
always entitled to recover payments by any amount recoverable from a
tortfeasor, as provided under the “Trust Agreement,” the provision allowing the
insurance company to reduce its payment only when the plaintiff’s recovery
exceeded damages would have no effect. Thus, regardless of the terminology
5
we used to refer to each provision in Kelly, unlike the two provisions in the
Peerless policy, the provisions there did conflict.
Because we find that the policy language is unambiguous, we do not
reach Peerless’ remaining arguments. Accordingly, we hold that Peerless is
entitled to reduce its $100,000 payment to the petitioner by $50,000, the
amount the tortfeasor paid in the settlement with the petitioner.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6