THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-549
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MARSHALL ZIDEL
Argued: June 20, 2007
Opinion Issued: January 18, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Marshall Zidel, appeals his conviction on
nine counts of possession of child pornography, see RSA 649-A:3 (2007),
arguing that the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) erred in denying his motions to
dismiss. We reverse.
The following facts were found by the trial court for purposes of ruling
upon the defendant’s pretrial motion to dismiss or were stipulated to by the
parties. At the time he was arrested, the defendant worked as a photographer
at a camp in Amherst for children fifteen years old and younger. In that
capacity, the defendant took pictures that were to be used to make an end-of-
summer video yearbook or scrapbook for the children attending the camp.
On July 4, 2005, the defendant gave three CD-ROM discs to the camp
director. On one of the discs, the director discovered images depicting heads
and necks of minor females superimposed upon naked adult female bodies,
with the naked bodies engaging in various sexual acts. One image shows an
act of sexual intercourse; two images depict a person engaging in or about to
engage in cunnilingus; two images depict a person digitally penetrating or
touching a female’s genitalia; and four images show comparably explicit sexual
activity. The defendant and at least one of his family members appear in some
of the images. The parties stipulated that, “[o]ther than necks and heads, there
is no specific evidence that the images in question contain the body parts of
actual children.” In addition to these images, the CD-ROMs contained the
original non-pornographic camp photographs of the minor females.
The camp director identified two of the faces in the images as those of
campers from the summer of 2004, who would have been fifteen years old at
the time the photographs were taken. He gave the discs to the Amherst Police
Department. The parents of all the females involved were able to identify the
individuals as girls under sixteen at the time the images were created. When
questioned, the defendant told the police that the sexually explicit
“photographs were only his ‘personal fantasy’ and that they were not real.” The
defendant was indicted for possession of child pornography.
Before trial, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that the
prosecution pursuant to RSA 649-A:3, I(e) violated his rights under Part I,
Article 22 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution. Following the denial of his motion, the defendant
was convicted based upon stipulated facts.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
constitutional challenges to RSA 649-A:3. That statute provides, in relevant
part, that “[a] person is guilty of a felony if such person . . . (e) Knowingly buys,
procures, possesses, or controls any visual representation of a child engaging
in sexual activity.” RSA 649-A:3, I (2007). The defendant contends that, under
both the Federal and State Constitutions, RSA 649-A:3 is facially overbroad,
and as applied to his conduct, violates his right to free speech.
For purposes of this appeal, although we acknowledge that the images at
issue may more properly be characterized as “composite images,” see United
States v. Rearden, 349 F.3d 608, 613 (9th Cir. 2003) (noting distinction
between “composite” and “morphed” images), we adopt the terminology used by
the United States Supreme Court in Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535
U.S. 234, 242 (2002), and refer to the images in question as “morphed images.”
Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 242. As the Supreme Court explained, in contrast to
wholly computer-generated images, there is a “more common and lower tech
2
means of creating virtual images, known as computer morphing. Rather than
creating original images, pornographers can alter innocent pictures of real
children so that the children appear to be engaged in sexual activity.”
Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 242.
We first address the defendant’s as-applied challenge. We review
questions of constitutional law de novo. State v. Decato, 156 N.H. ___, ___
(decided December 18, 2007). As noted above, the defendant raises his claims
under both the State and Federal Constitutions. Our settled rule is to first
address the defendant’s claims under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v.
MacElman, 154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006). Here, however, because United States
Supreme Court precedents compel us to hold that criminalizing the defendant’s
mere possession of the images in question violates his First Amendment rights,
and because we are required to follow federal constitutional law, an analysis
under the State Constitution is unnecessary. We therefore decide this case
under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution.
“The First Amendment commands, ‘Congress shall make no law . . .
abridging the freedom of speech.’” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 244. “As a general
principle, the First Amendment bars the government from dictating what we
see or read or speak or hear.” Id. at 245. “[A] law imposing criminal penalties
on protected speech is a stark example of speech suppression.” Id. at 244. If a
statute regulates speech based upon its content, application of the statute is
subject to strict scrutiny. United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, Inc.,
529 U.S. 803, 813 (2000); see Sable Communications of Cal., Inc. v. FCC, 492
U.S. 115, 126 (1989). This places the burden upon the State to prove that the
statute is “narrowly tailored to promote a compelling [state] interest. If a less
restrictive alternative would serve the [state]’s purpose, the legislature must
use that alternative.” Playboy Entertainment Group, 529 U.S. at 813 (citation
omitted).
The United States Supreme Court has determined that content-based
restrictions on certain categories of speech satisfy strict scrutiny, and, thus,
are not entitled to absolute constitutional protection. Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at
245-46; see People v. Alexander, 791 N.E.2d 506, 509 (Ill. 2003). This
unprotected speech “includ[es] defamation, incitement, obscenity, and
pornography produced with real children.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 246.
Obscenity and child pornography are the two categories relevant here.
“The regulation of child pornography was initially rooted in the Supreme
Court’s obscenity doctrine.” United States v. Williams, 444 F.3d 1286, 1290
(11th Cir. 2006). In Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973), the Supreme Court
reaffirmed that distribution of “obscene material is not protected by the First
Amendment,” id. at 36, and set forth a standard for determining what
3
materials may be regulated as obscenity, id. at 24. Under this standard, “the
Government must prove that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest, is patently offensive in light of community standards, and
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S.
at 246 (citing Miller, 413 U.S. at 24).
While the government has “broad power to regulate obscenity,” the
Supreme Court held in Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969), that this
“power . . . does not extend to mere possession by the individual in the privacy
of his own home.” Stanley, 394 U.S. at 568. In so holding, the Court rejected
all of Georgia’s justifications for banning the mere possession of obscene
materials. Id. at 565-68. First, the Court explained that the asserted “right to
protect the individual’s mind from the effects of obscenity” is “wholly
inconsistent with the philosophy of the First Amendment.” Id. at 565-66.
Second, it rejected Georgia’s assertion that “exposure to obscene materials may
lead to deviant sexual behavior or crimes of sexual violence,” because there was
“little empirical basis for that assertion” and “the deterrents ordinarily to be
applied to prevent crime are education and punishment for violations of the
law.” Id. at 566-67 (quotation omitted). Third, the Court found that, in a
possession case, there is no “danger that obscene material might fall into the
hands of children, or that it might intrude upon the sensibilities or privacy of
the general public.” Id. at 567 (citations omitted). Finally, the Court flatly
rejected the argument that “prohibition of possession of obscene materials is a
necessary incident to statutory schemes prohibiting distribution” as a result of
“difficulties of proving an intent to distribute or in producing evidence of actual
distribution.” Id. It found that such difficulties, if they existed, did not “justify
infringement of the individual’s right to read or observe what he pleases.” Id.
at 568. Accordingly, the Supreme Court held that “the First and Fourteenth
Amendments prohibit making mere private possession of obscene material a
crime.” Id.
With respect to child pornography, New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747,
764-66 (1982), and Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103, 111 (1990), together hold
that a state may proscribe the distribution and mere possession of child
pornography. Both cases recognized that states have a compelling interest “in
safeguarding the physical and psychological well-being of a minor.” Ferber,
458 U.S. at 756-57 (quotation omitted); see Osborne, 495 U.S. at 109.
In Ferber, the Court relied upon three justifications for a proscription on
the distribution of child pornography. First, the Court reasoned, “The
distribution of photographs and films depicting sexual activity by juveniles is
intrinsically related to the sexual abuse of children in at least two ways”: (1)
“the materials produced are a permanent record of the children’s participation
and the harm to the child is exacerbated by their circulation”; and (2) “the
distribution network for child pornography must be closed if the production of
4
material which requires the sexual exploitation of children is to be effectively
controlled.” Ferber, 458 U.S. at 759. Second, the Court determined that “[t]he
advertising and selling of child pornography provide an economic motive for
and are thus an integral part of the production of such materials, an activity
illegal throughout the Nation.” Id. at 761. Finally, the Court found that “[t]he
value of permitting live performances and photographic reproductions of
children engaged in lewd sexual conduct is exceedingly modest, if not de
minimus.” Id. at 762. It noted that if “visual depictions of children performing
sexual acts . . . were necessary for literary or artistic value, a person over the
statutory age who perhaps looked younger could be utilized. Simulation
outside of the prohibition of the statute could provide another alternative.” Id.
at 762-63.
Accordingly, because “[r]ecognizing and classifying child pornography as
a category of material outside the protection of the First Amendment [wa]s not
incompatible with [its] earlier decisions,” id. at 763, the Court concluded that,
generally, “[c]ontent-based restrictions on child pornography satisfy strict
scrutiny,” Alexander, 791 N.E.2d at 510 (citing Ferber, 458 U.S. at 756-59).
The Court noted, however, that there are “limits on the category of child
pornography which, like obscenity, is unprotected by the First Amendment.”
Ferber, 458 U.S. at 763. Thus, “distribution of descriptions or other depictions
of sexual conduct, not otherwise obscene, which do not involve live
performance or photographic or other visual reproduction of live performances,
retains First Amendment protection.” Id. at 764-65.
In Osborne, the Court extended Ferber’s holding to allow states to
proscribe the mere possession of child pornography. Osborne, 495 U.S. at 111.
The Court noted that, in contrast to Stanley, where Georgia “was concerned
that obscenity would poison the minds of its viewers,” id. at 109 (citation
omitted), Ohio did “not rely on a paternalistic interest in regulating Osborne’s
mind,” id. Rather, Ohio proscribed possession of child pornography “to protect
the victims of child pornography” by “destroy[ing] a market for the exploitative
use of children.” Id. Thus, the Court found that “the interests underlying child
pornography prohibitions far exceed[ed] the interests justifying the Georgia law
at issue in Stanley.” Id. at 108.
Osborne additionally found that several interests justified Ohio’s ban
upon the possession of child pornography. First, “the use of children as
subjects of pornographic materials is harmful to the physiological, emotional,
and mental health of the child.” Id. at 109. Second, it explained that
“penaliz[ing] those who possess and view” child pornography will decrease its
production, “thereby decreasing demand.” Id. at 109-10. Third, relying upon
Ferber, the Court reasoned: “[M]aterials produced by child pornographers
permanently record the victim’s abuse. The pornography’s continued existence
causes the child victims continuing harm by haunting the children in years to
5
come. The State’s ban on possession and viewing encourages the possessors of
these materials to destroy them.” Id. at 111 (citation omitted). Finally, the
Court found that “encouraging the destruction of these materials is . . .
desirable because evidence suggests that pedophiles use child pornography to
seduce other children into sexual activity.” Id. Accordingly, “[g]iven the gravity
of the State’s interests in this context,” the Court held that Ohio could
“constitutionally proscribe the possession and viewing of child pornography.”
Id.
In Ashcroft, the Supreme Court declared unconstitutional as overbroad
section 2256(8)(B) of the Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA), see
18 U.S.C. §§ 2251 et seq., which prohibited “any visual depiction, including
any photograph, film, video, picture, or computer or computer-generated image
or picture, that is, or appears to be, of a minor engaging in sexually explicit
conduct.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 241 (quotations omitted; emphasis added).
This “section capture[d] a range of depictions, sometimes called ‘virtual child
pornography,’ which include computer-generated images, as well as images
produced by more traditional means.” Id. It also encompassed pornography
“created by using adults who look like minors.” Id. at 239-40.
In finding section 2256(8)(B) overbroad, the Supreme Court, although not
explicitly, applied the strict scrutiny standard described above. See Alexander,
791 N.E.2d at 511 (concluding that, in Ashcroft, “section[] 2256(8)(B) . . . did
not pass strict scrutiny because . . . [it was] not narrowly tailored to advance
the government’s compelling interest in protecting actual children from sexual
abuse”); Note, Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition: How can Virtual Child
Pornography be Banned Under the First Amendment, 31 Pepp. L. Rev. 825,
855 (2004) (“the Justices implicitly applied strict scrutiny”). The Court noted,
“[T]he [Government’s] speech ban is not narrowly drawn. The objective is to
prohibit illegal conduct, but this restriction goes well beyond that interest by
restricting the speech available to law-abiding adults.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at
252-53.
The Government first argued that virtual child pornography fell within
the category of child pornography unprotected by Ferber because it is “virtually
indistinguishable from child pornography.” Id. at 249. The Court rejected this
contention for two reasons. First, in Ferber, “[t]he production of the work, not
its content, was the target of the statute.” Id. Thus, “[w]here the images are
themselves the product of child sexual abuse, Ferber recognized that the State
had an interest in stamping it out without regard to any judgment about its
content.” Id. (citation omitted). The Court clarified that Osborne “anchored its
holding [that possession of child pornography is unprotected] in the concern for
the participants, those whom it called the ‘victims of child pornography.’ It did
not suggest that, absent this concern, other governmental interests would
suffice.” Id. at 250 (citation omitted).
6
Second, the Court rejected the Government’s assertion that virtual child
pornography “can lead to actual instances of child abuse.” Id. It explained
that, for virtual child pornography, “the causal link is contingent and indirect”
because “[t]he harm does not necessarily follow from the speech, but depends
upon some unquantified potential for subsequent criminal acts.” Id. The
Court found such indirect harms insufficient because, although “child
pornography rarely can be valuable speech,” id., “Ferber’s judgment about
child pornography was based upon how it was made, not on what it
communicated,” and “Ferber did not hold that child pornography is by
definition without value,” id. at 250-51. The Court concluded, “In contrast to
the speech in Ferber, speech that itself is the record of sexual abuse, the CPPA
prohibits speech that records no crime and creates no victims by its
production. Virtual child pornography is not ‘intrinsically related’ to the sexual
abuse of children, as were the materials in Ferber.” Id. at 250. Accordingly,
the Court rejected the government’s assertion that virtual child pornography is
unprotected speech under Ferber. Id. at 251.
Given its holding that virtual child pornography is protected speech, the
Court went on to apply strict scrutiny to determine whether the Government
could constitutionally proscribe this speech. Applying this demanding test, the
Court flatly rejected the Government’s justifications for banning virtual child
pornography. First, the Government asserted that “the CPPA [wa]s necessary
because pedophiles may use virtual child pornography to seduce children.” Id.
The Court disagreed and found that the CPPA was not “narrowly drawn” to
achieve this objective. Id. at 252. It explained, “The Government cannot ban
speech fit for adults simply because it may fall into the hands of children. The
evil in question depends upon the actor’s unlawful conduct, conduct defined as
criminal quite apart from any link to the speech in question.” Id. Thus, the
restriction upon virtual child pornography went “well beyond” the interest in
“prohibit[ing] illegal conduct” by “restricting the speech available to law-abiding
adults.” Id. at 252-53.
Second, the Government submitted that “virtual child pornography
whets the appetites of pedophiles and encourages them to engage in illegal
conduct.” Id. at 253. This rationale could not sustain the ban on virtual child
pornography because “[t]he mere tendency of speech to encourage unlawful
acts is not a sufficient reason for banning it.” Id. Quoting Stanley, 394 U.S. at
566, the Court explained that “[t]he government ‘cannot constitutionally
premise legislation on the desirability of controlling a person’s private
thoughts.’” Id. It also “may not prohibit speech because it increases the
chance an unlawful act will be committed at some indefinite future time.” Id.
(quotation omitted). Accordingly, because “[t]he Government ha[d] shown no
more than a remote connection between speech that might encourage thoughts
or impulses and any resulting child abuse,” id., the Court concluded that “the
7
Government [could] not prohibit speech on the ground that it may encourage
pedophiles to engage in illegal conduct,” id. at 253-54.
Third, the Government “argue[d] that its objective of eliminating the
market for pornography produced using real children necessitates a prohibition
on virtual images as well.” Id. at 254. The Government submitted that since
they are often indistinguishable and exchanged in the same market, the
“virtual images promote the trafficking in works produced through the
exploitation of real children.” Id. Rejecting this market deterrence theory, the
Court noted that “[i]n the case of the material covered by Ferber, the creation of
the speech is itself the crime of child abuse; the prohibition deters the crime by
removing the profit motive.” Id. Because “there is no underlying crime at all”
with virtual child pornography, the Government’s market deterrence theory did
not justify the statute. Id.
Finally, the Government maintained that virtual child pornography
needed to be banned because advanced technology makes it difficult to
determine whether “pictures were made by using real children or by using
computer imaging,” thus making it difficult “to prosecute those who produce
pornography by using real children.” Id. at 254-55. The Supreme Court found
that this argument “turn[ed] the First Amendment upside down.” Id. at 255. It
explained: “Protected speech does not become unprotected merely because it
resembles the latter. The Constitution requires the reverse.” Id. Thus, the
Government could not ban “unprotected speech if a substantial amount of
protected speech [wa]s prohibited or chilled in the process.” Id. Accordingly,
because section 2256(8)(B) left “unprotected a substantial amount of speech
not tied to the Government’s interest in distinguishing images produced using
real children from virtual ones,” and “cover[ed] materials beyond the categories
recognized in Ferber and Miller,” the Court held that the provision was
“overbroad and unconstitutional.” Id. at 256.
Relying upon the foregoing cases, the defendant argues that applying
RSA 649-A:3 to his private possession of morphed images, namely “images
created by combining the head and shoulders of a real, existing child, with
images of adult bodies, real or virtual, engaging in sexually explicit conduct,”
violates his right to free speech under both the Federal and State
Constitutions. The defendant “does not claim that the state or federal
constitutions preclude the government from criminalizing the distribution of
such material.” Rather, he contends that “Ashcroft, Ferber and Osborne, read
together, mandate the conclusion that morphed images, that depict actual
children but depict no children actually engaging in sexually [sic] activity, do
not constitute child pornography.” According to the defendant:
[T]he overall set of rationales and principles relied
upon by Ferber, and reinforced by Ashcroft’s
8
discussion of Ferber, support the narrow view that
materials cannot be classified as child pornography
unless children are involved in the production process
– not the “post-production” process where images can
be cut, pasted, and morphed – but the production
process, the actual, sordid, filming or photography of
child sexual abuse.
The State counters that because the defendant’s images “incorporate
identifiable pictures of real children,” they “create harm to those children, even
if the original pictures did not involve sexual activity, [since] those children are
depicted as participating in such activity through manipulation of their
likeness.” The State argues that “harm is caused even when only one person
views such an image,” and, thus, “the State has a legitimate interest in
preventing that harm, and no right of free speech is violated by prohibiting the
possession of such images.”
RSA 649-A:1 (2007) declares the legislature’s purpose in criminalizing
child pornography. It provides, in pertinent part:
The legislature finds that there has been a
proliferation of exploitation of children through their
use as subjects in sexual performances. The care of
children is a sacred trust and should not be abused by
those who seek to profit through a commercial
network based upon the exploitation of children. The
public policy of the statute demands the protection of
children from exploitation through sexual
performances. . . . In accordance with the United
States Supreme Court’s decision in New York v.
Ferber, this chapter makes the dissemination of visual
representations of children under the age of 16
engaged in sexual activity illegal irrespective of
whether the visual representations are legally obscene.
(Emphasis added.) Interpreting the identical legislative declaration in New
York’s statute, Ferber found that a state has a compelling interest “in
safeguarding the physical and psychological health of a minor.” Ferber, 458
U.S. at 756-57 (quotation omitted). As with our legislature’s declaration, the
focus in New York’s statute was to combat the harm resulting to children from
the distribution of depictions of sexual conduct involving live performance or
visual reproduction of live performances by children. Id. at 764-65. Thus, the
purpose of RSA 649-A:3 is to prevent harm to children resulting from their “use
as subjects in sexual performances.” RSA 649-A:1.
9
While this interest is undoubtedly compelling, Ferber, 458 U.S. at 756-
57, criminalizing the possession of materials depicting heads and necks of
identifiable minor females superimposed upon naked female bodies, where the
naked bodies do not depict body parts of actual children engaging in sexual
activity, does not promote this interest. Contrary to the State’s assertion, when
no part of the image is “the product of sexual abuse,” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at
249, and a person merely possesses the image, no demonstrable harm results
to the child whose face is depicted in the image.
In Ashcroft, the Court emphasized that “Ferber’s judgment about child
pornography was based upon how it was made, not on what it communicated.”
Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 250-51. Unlike the images in Ferber and Osborne, the
images in this case do not “permanently record the [child]’s abuse.” Osborne,
495 U.S. at 111. Although they may constitute a “permanent record” that if
distributed may be harmful to the depicted child, such harm does not
necessarily follow from the mere possession of these morphed images. Instead,
the harm is contingent upon the occurrence of another arguably unlawful act;
to wit, distribution. See Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 250. The State “may not
prohibit speech because it increases the chance an unlawful act will be
committed at some indefinite future time.” Id. at 253 (quotation omitted).
Further, while Osborne proscribes the mere possession of pornography
produced with real children, see Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 245-46; Osborne, 495
U.S. at 111, its holding is anchored in “the concern for the participants, those
whom it called the ‘victims of child pornography,’” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 250
(quoting Osborne, 495 U.S. at 110). These participants are the children who
have been sexually abused or exploited in the production of the materials.
Ferber, 458 U.S. at 759. The mere possession of morphed images depicting no
victims of child pornography cannot “haunt[] the children in years to come,”
Osborne, 495 U.S. at 111, since the children do not know of their existence
and did not participate in their production. Therefore, the foundation for
Osborne’s proscription on possession of child pornography is not present here.
Moreover, while a ban upon the possession of these morphed images may
encourage possessors to destroy them, besides the indirect harm that may
result from the potential distribution of these materials, the State has not
advanced any additional narrow justification supporting this interest. As
explained above, the possible circulation of these materials is insufficient
justification for banning protected speech. Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 250, 253. To
the extent the State asserts that these morphed images require destruction
because pedophiles use them to “seduce other children into sexual activity,”
Osborne, 495 U.S. at 111, the Supreme Court explicitly rejected this rationale
in Ashcroft. Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 253-54. Additionally, because they are not
the product of the crime of child abuse, criminalizing the possession of these
morphed images created from “innocent pictures” of actual children would not
10
eliminate the market for pornography produced through the abuse of real
children. Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 254. Therefore, their possession is “not
‘intrinsically related’ to the sexual abuse of children, as were the materials in
Ferber.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 250.
Finally, however distasteful, reprehensible, and valueless this conduct
might seem, cf. Ferber, 458 U.S. at 762, the First Amendment protects “the
individual’s right to . . . observe what he pleases,” Stanley, 394 U.S. at 567-68.
This protection is central to our long and sacred tradition of prohibiting the
government from intruding into the privacy of our thoughts and the contents of
our homes. We cannot displace this guarantee simply because the materials at
issue may express ideas that are unconventional and not shared by a majority.
See id. at 566.
Although Ashcroft stated, in dicta, that morphed images “implicate the
interests of real children and are in that sense closer to the images in Ferber,”
Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 242, Ferber involved the distribution of child
pornography, not its possession, Ferber, 458 U.S. at 751-52. Unlike a
distribution case, in the private possession realm, neither the real child nor the
general public observes the images; only the possessor views them. See
Stanley, 394 U.S. at 567. Thus, while distribution of these morphed images
might implicate the interests of real children, mere possession does not cause
harm to the child. Accordingly, applying the standard articulated in Ashcroft,
Ferber, and Stanley to the defendant, the statute is not narrowly tailored to
achieve the State’s asserted objectives.
The State cites United States v. Bach, 400 F.3d 622 (8th Cir. 2005), cert.
denied, 546 U.S. 901 (2005), in support of its position that these morphed
images may be criminalized. In Bach, “a photograph of the head of a well
known juvenile, AC, was skillfully inserted onto the body of [a young] nude boy
so that the resulting depiction appear[ed] to be a picture of AC engaging in
sexually explicit conduct with a knowing grin.” Bach, 400 F.3d at 632
(emphasis added). The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals found:
Although there is no contention that the nude body
actually is that of AC or that he was involved in the
production of the image, a lasting record has been
created of AC, an identifiable minor child, seemingly
engaged in sexually explicit activity. He is thus
victimized every time the picture is displayed. Unlike
. . . virtual child pornography or . . . pornography
using youthful looking adults . . . , this image created
an identifiable child victim of sexual exploitation.
11
Id. The Court noted, however, that “[t]his is not the typical morphing case in
which an innocent picture of a child has been altered to appear that the child
is engaging in sexually explicit conduct,” and that “there may well be instances
in which the [statute] violates the First Amendment.” Id. at 632 (emphasis
added).
Bach is distinguishable for two reasons. First, in Bach, the defendant
challenged his conviction “for receipt of child pornography under [18 U.S.C.]
§ 2252A(a)(2),” id. at 629 (emphasis added), not possession of child
pornography, see 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(a)(5). A conviction under 18 U.S.C.
§ 2252A(a)(2) requires that a person “knowingly receive[] or distribute[] . . .
child pornography [or material that contains child pornography] that has been
mailed, or shipped or transported in interstate or foreign commerce by any
means, including by computer.” 18 U.S.C. § 2252A(a)(2) (emphases added); see
Bach, 400 F.3d at 630. Since these pictures do not remain within the privacy
of a person’s home, but instead disseminate into commerce, the interests of
real children arguably may be implicated in such cases. Here, the defendant
was not charged with receiving or distributing the images. See RSA 649-A:3(c)-
(f). Therefore, we do not address whether we might reach the same result as
Bach if presented with a case involving the receipt or distribution of morphed
images.
Second, unlike these morphed images, the Bach picture depicted a young
nude boy engaged in sexually explicit activity. Bach, 400 F.3d at 632. Thus,
in Bach, the creation of the photograph involved the use and sexual
exploitation of a real child. In contrast, the record here contains no evidence
indicating that any of these morphed images depict similar conduct by a real
child. Accordingly, while we might reach a different result if presented with the
facts in Bach, this case constitutes one of those instances where application of
a statute proscribing the possession of child pornography violates the First
Amendment. Id.
Our finding that application of RSA 649-A:3(e) to the defendant’s conduct
violates his First Amendment right to free speech is limited to the facts of this
particular case, where the defendant is charged with mere possession of
morphed images that depict heads and necks of identifiable minor females
superimposed upon naked female bodies, and the naked bodies do not depict
body parts of actual children engaging in sexual activity. Given this finding, we
do not reach the defendant’s overbreadth challenge. Accordingly, the
defendant’s convictions are reversed.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurred; HICKS, J., dissented.
12
HICKS, J., dissenting. Because I believe that United States Supreme
Court precedents do not compel the result the majority reaches and I believe
that the State may constitutionally criminalize the defendant’s mere possession
of the images in question, I respectfully dissent. I would hold that the images
possessed and controlled by the defendant are “visual representation[s] of a
child engaging in sexual activity” as proscribed by RSA 649-A:3 (2007); that the
statute is not fatally overbroad; and that its applicability to the defendant’s
conduct violates no free speech rights.
First, I cannot conclude that Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S.
234 (2002), compels a finding that the defendant’s morphed images are
protected speech under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution
in part because the Court explicitly left that question open. The respondents in
Ashcroft did not challenge the provision of the Child Pornography Prevention
Act of 1996 (CPPA), 18 U.S.C. §§ 2251 et seq., that prohibits morphed images.
Id. at 242.
Writing for the majority in Ashcroft, Justice Kennedy explained:
Section 2256(8)(C) [of the CPPA] prohibits a more common
and lower tech means of creating virtual images, known as
computer morphing. Rather than creating original images,
pornographers can alter innocent pictures of real children so that
the children appear to be engaged in sexual activity. Although
morphed images may fall within the definition of virtual child
pornography, they implicate the interests of real children and are
in that sense closer to the images in [New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S.
747 (1982)]. Respondents do not challenge this provision, and we
do not consider it.
Id. I believe that this is precisely the case left undecided by Ashcroft.
Moreover, in my view, much of Ashcroft and Ferber is dicta, and, as such, does
not compel any particular result in this case.
Although I believe that the majority correctly analyzes the Ferber factors,
I would simply draw the opposite conclusion. For instance, the Ferber Court
recognized that States have a compelling interest “in safeguarding the physical
and psychological well-being of a minor.” Ferber, 458 U.S at 756-57 (quotation
omitted). I believe that this interest is implicated when pictures of identifiable
real children are altered to make it appear as though the children are engaging
in sexual activity. The Ferber Court noted the legislative and professional
opinion that “the use of children as subjects of pornographic materials is
harmful to the physiological, emotional, and mental health of the child.” Id. at
758 (emphasis added). I believe that a child need not actually engage in the
sexual activity depicted in morphed child pornography to be a victim of sexual
13
exploitation. See United States v. Bach, 400 F.3d 622, 632 (8th Cir.), cert.
denied, 546 U.S. 901 (2005) (concluding that image depicting the head of “AC,
an identifiable minor child” on the nude body of an unidentified boy in a
sexually explicit pose, “created an identifiable child victim [i.e., AC] of sexual
exploitation”). I also believe that the State has a compelling interest in
protecting children from such exploitation.
The Ferber Court noted that “[t]he distribution of photographs and films
depicting sexual activity by juveniles is intrinsically related to the sexual abuse
of children in at least two ways:” (1) “the materials produced are a permanent
record of the children’s participation and the harm to the child is exacerbated
by their circulation;” and (2) “the distribution network for child pornography
must be closed if the production of material which requires the sexual
exploitation of children is to be effectively controlled.” Ferber, 458 U.S. at 759.
I acknowledge that the morphed images here do not implicate these concerns
as directly as the images at issue in Ferber – images that the Ashcroft Court
described as “speech that itself is the record of sexual abuse,” Ashcroft, 535
U.S. at 250. Because they can be produced from “innocent pictures of real
children,” id. at 242, morphed images do not require the sexual abuse of a
child for their production. Nevertheless, such images do produce a permanent
record of the children’s apparent participation in sexual activity. Cf. Ferber,
458 U.S. at 759. As discussed above, I believe that such images sexually
exploit the real child whose image is used and I find the conclusion inescapable
that “the harm to the child is exacerbated by their circulation.” Id.
Additionally, if one accepts the premise that morphed pornographic images of
real children exploit those children, it logically follows that the production of
such morphed images “requires the sexual exploitation of [those] children,” id.
Thus, I believe that morphed pornographic images of actual children
sufficiently implicate the second Ferber rationale.
Another factor in the Ferber Court’s reasoning was that “[t]he value of
permitting live performances and photographic reproductions of children
engaged in lewd sexual conduct is exceedingly modest, if not de minimis.” Id.
at 762. I believe that the value of permitting the exploitation of children by
using their images to create virtual depictions of them engaged in sexual
activity is de minimis at best.
Admittedly, not all of the Ferber factors obtain here; in my view, however,
the absence of one or more of the Ferber factors is not fatal to this prosecution.
The presence of those listed above is sufficient to warrant classifying the
images possessed by the defendant as child pornography within the meaning of
Ferber. Having reached that conclusion, I would hold that the images in
question fall squarely within Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103 (1990), in which
the Supreme Court held that States may constitutionally criminalize the mere
possession and viewing of child pornography, id. at 111. In addition, using the
14
above-cited federal opinions for guidance only, see State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
233 (1983), in the absence of controlling state precedent, I would hold that
criminalizing the defendant’s mere possession of the images at issue does not
violate the State Constitution. Accordingly, I would reject the defendant’s as-
applied challenge and reach his facial challenge.
The defendant argues that this court’s construction of RSA 649-A:3 in
State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638 (1999), renders that statute substantially
overbroad under the reasoning of Ashcroft. Although Ashcroft declared two
provisions of the CPPA unconstitutional, only the first of those provisions,
section 2256(8)(B), is relevant to this case. That section prohibited “any visual
depiction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or computer or
computer-generated image or picture, that is, or appears to be, of a minor
engaging in sexually explicit conduct.” Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 241 (quotations
omitted). In concluding that section 2256(8)(B) was unconstitutionally
overbroad, the Court declared that “[b]y prohibiting child pornography that
does not depict an actual child, the statute goes beyond New York v. Ferber.”
Id. at 240.
The defendant contends that in Cobb, this court “construed [RSA 649-
A:3] to extend to visual representations that did not involve any actual child
engaging in sexual activity.” The defendant cites the following language:
There is no statutory requirement that the visual representation
involve the use of an actual child. Furthermore, we see little
meaningful distinction between sexually explicit material produced
through the use of an actual child and such material that gives the
appearance of having been produced through the use of an actual
child.
Cobb, 143 N.H. at 644 (citations omitted).
As the trial court similarly concluded, however, the defendant takes the
statement out of context. The defendant in Cobb argued that the statute did
not apply to his “photographs because no children were used in sexual
performances in order to create them.” Id. This court’s response, therefore,
was focused upon the “use” of a child in a sexual performance. Thus, in saying
that the statute did not require “the use of an actual child,” id., the court held
that the statute did not require that a child actually engage in the sexual
activity depicted. In my view, that statement was not intended to decide
whether or not the child depicted must be an actual child, as that question was
not before the court.
Because I agree with the State that RSA 649-A:3 can be construed to
apply only to images of real children, I would hold that the statute is not
15
unconstitutionally overbroad. RSA 649-A:3, I, provides, in relevant part, that
“[a] person is guilty of a felony if such person . . . (e) Knowingly buys, procures,
possesses, or controls any visual representation of a child engaging in sexual
activity.” “Child” is defined to mean “any person under the age of 16 years.”
RSA 649-A:2, I (2007) (emphasis added). I conclude that construing the word
“person” in RSA 649-A:2, I, to mean a real person, and the word “child” in RSA
649-A:3 to mean a real child, is a permissible interpretation of the statute.
Cf. Commonwealth v. Simone, No. 03-0986, 2003 WL 22994238, at *15, *14
(Va. Cir. Ct. Nov. 12, 2003) (concluding that plain language of statute “confines
its application to images utilizing actual children” where “[t]he statute
specifically requires that the material at issue utilize or have as its subject a
‘person’”).
When RSA 649-A:2, I, is construed to refer to an actual child, RSA 649-
A:3 does not reach the “virtual” pornography at issue in Ashcroft: images that
look like real children but that are in fact wholly computer-generated. See
Ashcroft, 535 U.S. at 241. In addition, because “[c]hild” is specifically defined
to mean a “person under the age of 16 years,” RSA 649-A:2, I, RSA 649-A:3
covers only images of actual persons who are, in fact, under sixteen years of
age and does not reach images that appear to be of children but that are, in
reality, of young-looking adults. Cf. State v. Fingal, 666 N.W.2d 420, 424
(Minn. Ct. App. 2003) (“‘Minor’ is defined [in the statute] as ‘any person under
the age of 18.’ If the sexual performance depicted does not, in fact, involve a
person under the age of 18, possession of the depiction is not prohibited.”).
Accordingly, under this construction, RSA 649-A:3 would not suffer the
infirmities that rendered section 2256(8)(B) of the CPPA substantially, and
therefore unconstitutionally, overbroad. Other courts have reached similar
conclusions. See id. at 425 (concluding that where a statute prohibiting child
pornography requires that “[t]he visual depiction must be of an identifiable
minor, not a virtual child,” the statute complies with Ashcroft); State v. Tooley,
872 N.E.2d 894, 907 (Ohio 2007) (“[M]orphed child pornography that uses
images of real children . . . is not covered by the Ashcroft definition of protected
virtual child pornography.”), cert. denied, ___ S. Ct. ___, 2008 WL 59614 (U.S.
Oct. 23, 2007) (No. 07-7366). I would also hold, using the above-cited federal
opinions for guidance only, see Ball, 124 N.H. 233 (1983), in the absence of
controlling state precedent, that RSA 649-A:3 is not fatally overbroad under the
State Constitution.
The defendant’s final challenge to his conviction alleges insufficiency of
the evidence. That challenge is expressly conditioned, however, upon this
court having “resolve[d] the constitutional issues by construing RSA 649-A:3
narrowly so that it does not reach [the defendant’s] conduct.” As I would not
so construe the statute, I would not reach the defendant’s final argument.
Accordingly, I would uphold the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motions
and affirm the result below.
16