THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-640
IN RE GRAND JURY SUBPOENA
(ISSUED JULY 10, 2006)
Argued: April 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 13, 2007
Cook & Molan, P.A., of Concord (Glenn R. Milner and John S. Krupski on
the brief, and Mr. Milner orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Brian R. Graf, senior assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, a member of and steward for the Service
Employees International Union, appeals the denial by the Superior Court
(McHugh, J.) of his motion to quash the State’s subpoena requiring him to
testify before a grand jury. We affirm.
The trial court’s order recites the following facts: The petitioner is
employed as a State Correctional Officer. On or about September 15, 2005, a
psychiatric social worker employed by the New Hampshire Department of
Corrections (DOC) sought union representation with respect to allegations that
he had carried contraband into the prison. The petitioner investigated the
allegations in his capacity as the social worker’s union representative,
interviewing the social worker and several other individuals.
The State subpoenaed the petitioner to testify before the grand jury as to
what the social worker and others told him during his investigation. The
petitioner moved to quash the subpoena on the ground that his
communications with the social worker and others were protected by a
privilege between a union representative and a grievant. The trial court
declined to recognize such a privilege and denied the petitioner’s motion to
quash. The trial court did not address the petitioner’s alternative argument
that the subpoena violated the Contract Clauses of the New Hampshire and
Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 23; U.S. CONST. art. I, § 10.
This appeal followed.
Before addressing the merits of the petitioner’s appeal, we begin with
new assertions he made at oral argument. At oral argument, for the first time,
the petitioner argued that the subpoena violated the social worker’s rights
under Garrity v. New Jersey, 385 U.S. 493, 500 (1967). In Garrity, “the United
States Supreme Court held that statements given under threat of discharge
from public employment are compelled and may not be used in subsequent
criminal proceedings.” State v. Litvin, 147 N.H. 606, 608 (2002); see Garrity,
385 U.S. at 500. The record shows that, on September 16, 2005, the social
worker was advised, consistent with Garrity, that: he had a right not to be
compelled to incriminate himself; if he refused to answer the DOC’s questions,
he would be dismissed; and if he answered, none of his statements or any
information or evidence gained because of them could be used against him in
any criminal proceeding. The petitioner contended that compelling him to
testify before the grand jury violated this warning. The petitioner did not brief
this argument, although a footnote in his brief alluded to it.
Assuming, without deciding, that the petitioner has standing to raise an
argument based upon the social worker’s Garrity rights, we decline to address
it because: (1) he did not brief it, see State v. Scovill, 144 N.H. 409, 414
(1999); (2) he did not raise it before the trial court and, thus, did not preserve it
for our review, see Miller v. Blackden, 154 N.H. 448, 457 (2006); and (3) it was
the subject of a trial court order that is not part of this appeal. This issue was
raised before the trial court by the social worker in his motion to intervene, not
by the petitioner. The social worker’s attempt to raise the issue did not
preserve it for our review as he was not a party to this proceeding, and thus
any arguments he attempted to make were not before the trial court. Id.
We also do not address the petitioner’s contention, made for the first
time at oral argument, that we should expand the attorney-client privilege to
include communications between union stewards and union employees. See
Walker v. Huie, 142 F.R.D. 497, 501-02 (D. Utah 1992) (refusing to find
attorney-client privilege applicable to conversations between police officer and
his union representative). The petitioner has not briefed this contention. In
his brief, he argues only that we should create a new evidentiary privilege, not
2
that we should expand an existing one. Accordingly, we limit our analysis to
the arguments the petitioner has actually briefed. See Scovill, 144 N.H. at 414.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court’s ruling violates the
privilege for confidential communications between a union representative and
union employee as recognized by the New Hampshire Public Employee Labor
Relations Board (PELRB) under RSA chapter 273-A (1999 & Supp. 2006). See
New Hampshire Troopers Association v. New Hampshire Department of Safety,
Division of State Police, PELRB Decision No. 94-74 (August 31, 1994). While
he concedes that the PELRB has not recognized this privilege outside of the
context of an unfair labor practice charge, he asserts that the PELRB’s rulings
in this area “serve as sufficient grounds to overrule the trial court.”
The PELRB has ruled only that an employer engages in an unfair labor
practice when it compels a union representative to disclose confidential
communications with a union employee. In New Hampshire Troopers
Association, a police trooper contacted his union representative and told him of
an incident in which he had been involved and that he believed would lead to
discipline. Id. at 2. The trooper asked his union representative for assistance
in contacting the union attorney and president. Id. Thereafter, the union
representative’s superior questioned him about what the trooper had told him;
the union representative answered the questions asked of him. Id. The
purpose of the questioning was to aid the employer in the anticipated
disciplinary procedure involving the trooper. Id. at 3.
The PELRB ruled that the employer committed an unfair labor practice
by questioning the union representative about what the trooper told him. Id. at
5. As the PELRB explained, “In pursuing its disciplinary investigation, the
Division of State Police has all of the options it might exercise under its
managerial prerogative. This does not extend to allowing the employer to
interfere with the Union in its role as representative of the individual member
accused of misconduct.” Id.
The PELRB’s ruling in New Hampshire Troopers Association comports
with rulings by the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and Federal Labor
Relations Agency (FLRA). See Cook Paint and Varnish Company, 258 N.L.R.B.
1230 (1981); U.S. Department of Treasury, 38 F.L.R.A. 1300 (1991). In Cook
Paint and Varnish Company, the NLRB ruled that the employer engaged in an
unfair labor practice when it threatened a union representative with discipline
for refusing to submit to interrogation about conversations with a union
employee. Cook Paint and Varnish Company, 258 N.L.R.B. at 1231-32. The
union representative had been involved in the employee’s grievance of his
discharge. Id. at 1231. Shortly before the grievance was to be arbitrated, the
employer asked the union representative for information about the incident for
which the employee had been terminated and for his notes of his conversations
3
with the employee about that incident. Id. The NLRB ruled that this
constituted an unfair labor practice. Id. at 1231-32. The NLRB cautioned,
however, that its ruling was limited – not all discussions between employees
and their stewards are confidential and protected by the Federal National Labor
Relations Act. Id. at 1232.
The FLRA reached a similar conclusion in U.S. Department of Treasury,
38 F.L.R.A. at 1308-09. In that case, the employer required the union
representative to disclose, under threat of disciplinary action, statements that
the employee had made to the representative while the representative was
representing him in a disciplinary proceeding. U.S. Department of Treasury,
38 F.L.R.A. at 1302. The FLRA concluded that the conversations between the
union representative and employee constituted protected union activity and
that interfering with that activity violated the Federal Service Labor-
Management Relations Statute. Id. at 1308-09.
We disagree that the PELRB’s rulings in the context of unfair labor
practice charges provide a basis for recognizing the existence of a privilege in
the context of a grand jury proceeding. As another court has noted with
respect to the privilege recognized by its state public employment relations
board, the kind of privilege established by the PELRB “is strictly limited to
communications between a union member and an officer of the union, and
operates only as against the public employer, on a matter where the member
has a right to be represented by a union representative, and then only where
the observations and communications are made in the performance of a union
duty.” City of Newburgh v. Newman, 421 N.Y.S.2d 673, 676 (App. Div. 1979).
Such a privilege “may be good as against management[,] [b]ut it is not good as
against the world.” U.S. Dept. of Justice v. Fed. Labor Rel. Authority, 39 F.3d
361, 369 (D.C. Cir. 1994).
The petitioner has cited “no case in which a federal or state court has
ruled that some form of union privilege bars a prosecutor or grand jury from
inquiring into conversations between a union member and his union
representative.” In re Grand Jury Subpoenas Dated January 20, 1998, 995 F.
Supp. 332, 334 (E.D.N.Y. 1998). He thus urges the court to recognize a new
common law evidentiary privilege for confidential communications between a
public employee and a union steward.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 501 recognizes that the court has the
inherent power to “develop new rules of privilege on common-law principles in
cases coming before it.” N.H. R. Ev. 501 Reporter’s Notes. “Consideration of
the creation of a new privilege must begin with the premise that all privileges
are exceptional, and are therefor[e] to be discouraged. The investigation of
truth and the enforcement of testimonial duty demand the restriction, not the
expansion, of these privileges.” Dixon v. Rutgers, 521 A.2d 1315, 1317 (N.J.
4
Super. Ct. 1987) (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted). “For more than
three centuries it has now been recognized as a fundamental maxim that the
public has a right to every man’s evidence. . . . [W]e [thus] start with the . . .
assumption that there is a general duty to give what testimony one is capable
of giving, and that any exemptions which may exist are distinctly exceptional.”
Jaffee v. Redmond, 518 U.S. 1, 9 (1996) (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
“Nowhere is the public’s claim to each person’s evidence stronger than in the
context of a valid grand jury subpoena.” In re Sealed Case, 676 F.2d 793, 806
(D.C. Cir. 1982); see Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665, 688 (1972). Indeed,
“[o]nly a very limited number of recognized privileges provide legitimate
grounds for refusing to comply with a grand jury subpoena, and each of these
is firmly anchored in a specific source – the Constitution, a statute, or the
common law.” In re Sealed Case, 676 F.2d at 806.
We must be particularly “circumspect about creating new privileges
based upon perceived public policy considerations.” In re Grand Jury, 103
F.3d 1140, 1154 (3d Cir.), cert. denied, 520 U.S. 1253 (1997). It is only when
“the need for the privilege is so clear” and “the desirable contours of [it] are so
evident” that it is proper “for [the] court to craft [the privilege] in common law
fashion under Rule 501.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted). Otherwise, it
is for the legislature to create the privilege because it “is institutionally better
equipped” to decide whether adopting a new privilege is in society’s best
interests. Id.; see Branzburg, 408 U.S. at 706 (suggesting that legislature
should create new privileges, not judiciary).
For the above reasons, “with very limited exceptions, federal courts have
generally declined to grant requests for new privileges.” Pearson v. Miller, 211
F.3d 57, 67 (3d Cir. 2000) (citing cases in which courts have declined to adopt
academic peer-review privilege, “protective function” privilege for Secret Service,
corporate ombudsman privilege, insured-insurer privilege, privilege for records
of unemployment hearings, and probation officer privilege).
Professor Wigmore has described four criteria that may be useful when
analyzing whether to create a new evidentiary privilege:
(1) The communications must originate in a confidence that they
will not be disclosed.
(2) This element of confidentiality must be essential to the full and
satisfactory maintenance of the relation between the parties.
(3) The relation must be one which in the opinion of the
community ought to be sedulously fostered.
5
(4) The injury that would inure to the relation by the disclosure of
the communications must be greater than the benefit thereby
gained for the correct disposal of litigation.
8 J. Wigmore, Evidence § 2285 (McNaughton rev. 1961). Only if all four of
these conditions are satisfied should a privilege be recognized. Id.
Applying these principles to the instant case, we decline to recognize a
common law privilege that shields communications between union
representatives and union employees from a grand jury subpoena. Even if we
were to assume that the first two prongs of the Wigmore test were met, the
petitioner “has still failed to show that the union relationship is so highly
valued by an ordered society that its confidences warrant protection even at the
cost of losing evidence important to the administration of justice.” In re Grand
Jury Subpoenas Dated January 20, 1998, 995 F. Supp. at 335. The petitioner
cannot claim that the confidential relationship between union representative
and union member “has the same strong historic roots as those generally
afforded the protection of a common law privilege.” Id. “This is not the type of
relationship such as an attorney-client, husband-wife, or clergy-communicant
that over time the common law has considered important enough to sustain as
privileged.” Walker, 142 F.R.D. at 500-01. “Neither does the union
relationship appear more deserving of protection than other important
confidential relationships [that] courts have refused to recognize as privileged.”
In re Grand Jury Subpoenas Dated January 20, 1998, 995 F. Supp. at 335; see
also Walker, 142 F.R.D. at 501.
Moreover, whatever state interest there may be in encouraging
confidential communications between union members and their
representatives is not so strong that, in our view, it outweighs the State’s
interest in the grand jury context in having all relevant evidence of criminal
conduct explored. In re Grand Jury Subpoenas Dated January 20, 1998, 995
F. Supp. at 337. The State’s interest in having every relevant fact developed is
particularly compelling in the grand jury context, for “its task is to inquire into
the existence of possible criminal conduct and to return only well-founded
indictments”; therefore, “its investigative powers are necessarily broad.”
Branzburg, 408 U.S. at 688.
Under these circumstances, we cannot say that the need for the privilege
is “so clear” and the desirable contours of it “so evident” that we feel compelled
to create it. In re Grand Jury, 103 F.3d at 1154 (quotations omitted).
Therefore, we decline the petitioner’s invitation to create a new common law
privilege to protect communications between a union representative and a
union employee from disclosure to a grand jury pursuant to a valid subpoena.
6
Finally, the petitioner contends that the trial court’s decision violates the
State and Federal Contract Clauses. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 23; U.S.
CONST. art. I, § 10. Part I, Article 23 of the New Hampshire Constitution
prohibits the making of retrospective laws. A retrospective law is one that
“takes away or impairs vested rights, acquired under existing laws, or creates a
new obligation, imposes a new duty, or attaches a new disability, in respect to
transactions or considerations already past.” Opinion of the Justices
(Furlough), 135 N.H. 625, 630 (1992) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). Article I,
Section 10 of the Federal Constitution declares that “[n]o state shall . . . pass
any . . . law impairing the obligation of contracts.” “Although the New
Hampshire provision affords more protection than its federal counterpart, this
court has relied on federal contract clause cases to resolve issues raised under
part I, article 23 where contract impairment, and not simply retroactive
application of a law, was alleged.” Id. (citations omitted). Article I, Section 10
of the Federal Constitution and Part I, Article 23 of the State Constitution thus
“offer equivalent protections where a law impairs a contract, or where a law
abrogates an earlier statute that is itself a contract.” Id.
The petitioner’s reliance upon the State and Federal Contract Clauses is
misplaced as they pertain to legislation that impairs contractual rights. See
id.; see also Allied Structural Steel Co. v. Spannaus, 438 U.S. 234, 244 (1978).
Generally, the State and Federal Contract Clauses “prohibit . . . [the] adopt[ion]
[of] laws that would interfere with the contractual arrangements between
private citizens.” R. Rotunda & J. Nowak, Treatise on Constitutional Law:
Substance and Procedure § 15.8, at 637 (3d ed. 1999). As there is no
legislation at issue in this appeal, neither clause applies.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7