THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-025
MICHAEL PORTER
v.
CITY OF MANCHESTER & a.
Argued: January 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 5, 2007
Backus, Meyer, Solomon & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (Jon Meyer on
the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
McDonough & O’Shaughnessy, P.A., of Manchester (Robert J. Meagher
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, the City of Manchester (City), appeals the
Superior Court’s (Lewis, J.) denial of its motions for summary judgment and
directed verdict in a jury trial where it was held liable on a theory of respondeat
superior for the tortious acts of Susan Lafond, a former welfare commissioner,
against the plaintiff, Michael Porter. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts: The plaintiff was employed
as a caseworker in the City Welfare Department (the department). Lafond hired
him in 1997, and for the first few years they enjoyed a positive working
relationship to the point that he campaigned for her reelection. Eventually, the
plaintiff developed concerns about certain department practices and was told,
“[I]t’s a monarchy. If you don’t like it, there’s the door.” After the suicide of a
client, the plaintiff took a medical leave during which he contacted the City
Human Resources Department to raise concerns about the department under
Lafond’s supervision. Lafond was informed of his complaints.
Upon his return from leave, Lafond began to retaliate. At their first
meeting, she stated, “[W]e’ll see how long you last.” Thereafter, Lafond
frequently scrutinized and criticized the plaintiff, limited his movement within
the office, humiliated him in front of clients, and ignored his presence at staff
meetings. For a period of time, in an attempt to control the situation, the City
did not allow Lafond to work in her office. Ultimately, the City allowed her to
return. Lafond then suspended the plaintiff. The suspension resulted from a
dispute about a case the plaintiff had reported to the New Hampshire Division
for Children, Youth and Families. The City worked with Lafond to make sure
the suspension met its standards, requiring her to redraft the letter of
suspension and increase the penalty from one day to one week.
The welfare commissioner, despite being elected, is a City employee and
head of the department. As such, Lafond had “exclusive personnel authority”
over her department. Her job description stated that “extensive leeway is
granted for the exercise of independent judgment and initiative.” Lafond was
“very protective” of her authority as commissioner during her long tenure at the
department from 1988-2001. She had asserted her authority through prior
controversies and could be punitive to staff with dissenting views. Human
resources personnel testified that Lafond viewed their intervention as a threat
to her authority as commissioner.
At the close of evidence, the jury was instructed on the law of respondeat
superior and asked to determine whether Lafond “commit[ted] retaliatory acts
which were within the scope of her employment” and whether “those retaliatory
acts which were within the scope of her employment [were] sufficient to cause
the constructive discharge of [the plaintiff].” The jury answered in the
affirmative.
This case comes before us a second time. See Porter v. City of
Manchester, 151 N.H. 30 (2004). In the first case, the plaintiff brought an
action against the City, alleging wrongful termination, and against Lafond
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2000), alleging violations of his constitutional rights.
Id. at 32. The jury ruled in favor of the plaintiff. Id. On appeal, we upheld the
judgment against Lafond but vacated the verdict against the City after
clarifying that wrongful termination sounds in tort and, therefore, the trial
court erred when it failed to instruct the jury on respondeat superior. Id. at
40. We remanded the case for a new trial on the plaintiff’s wrongful
termination claim against the City on the premise that if the City were to be
held liable for the actions of Lafond, it would have to be on the basis of
respondeat superior. See id. at 39-40. In the trial court, both sides filed
motions for summary judgment. These were denied and after a second trial the
2
plaintiff again prevailed against the City. The trial court denied the City’s
motion for directed verdict. This appeal followed.
I. Motion for Summary Judgment
The City’s liability, if any, depends upon whether Lafond was acting
within the scope of her employment when she wrongfully terminated the
plaintiff. Id. at 39. Under respondeat superior, “an employer may be held
vicariously responsible for the tortious acts of its employee if the employee was
acting within the scope of his or her employment when his or her tortious act
injured the plaintiff.” Id. at 39-40. “Lafond's conduct falls within the scope of
her employment if: (1) it is of the kind she is employed to perform; (2) it occurs
substantially within the authorized time and space limits; and (3) it is
actuated, at least in part, by a purpose to serve the employer.” Id.
The City argues that the trial court erred by denying its motion for
summary judgment because neither party alleged any material disputed facts
that required resolution by a jury.
In acting upon a motion for summary judgment, the trial court is
required to construe the pleadings, discovery and affidavits in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party to determine whether the proponent has
established the absence of a dispute over any material fact and the right to
judgment as a matter of law. Porter v. Coco, 154 N.H. ___, ____, 910 A.2d
1187, 1190 (2006). An issue of fact is material if it affects the outcome of the
litigation. Id. at __, 910 A.2d at 1190. In reviewing a denial of summary
judgment, we consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.
Van Der Stok v. Van Voorhees, 151 N.H. 679, 681 (2005). “If no genuine issue
of material fact existed, and the moving party was entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, then summary judgment should have been granted.” Id.
We hold that there were disputed material facts on the record before the
trial court sufficient to defeat the City’s motion for summary judgment. We
address each of the City’s arguments in turn.
A. Lack of Control Due to Elected Status
The City first argues that the undisputed facts establish that it lacked
the requisite control over Lafond because of her elected status, and that her
elected status moved her beyond the limits of a traditional master and servant
relationship, thus eliminating any liability of the City for her actions. It argues,
“Simply saying Mrs. Lafond was an employee does not establish the master-
servant relationship and the necessary factors to establish liability through
3
respondeat superior.” At oral argument, the City conceded that it is not
arguing for a blanket rule that a municipality can never be liable for the
actions of an elected employee, but that such a lack of control exists in this
case.
To determine whether an employee-employer relationship exists we
examine the totality of the circumstances, which requires consideration of
many factors, including those set forth in the Restatement (Second) of Agency
§ 220 (1958). See Boissonnault v. Bristol Federated Church, 138 N.H. 476,
478 (1994). The Restatement criteria include:
(a) the extent of control which, by the agreement, the master may
exercise over the details of the work;
(b) whether or not the one employed is engaged in a distinct
occupation or business;
(c) the kind of occupation, with reference to whether, in the
locality, the work is usually done under the direction of the
employer or by a specialist without supervision;
(d) the skill required in the particular occupation;
(e) whether the employer or the workman supplies the
instrumentalities, tools, and the place of work for the person
doing the work;
(f) the length of time for which the person is employed;
(g) the method of payment, whether by the time or by the job;
(h) whether or not the work is a part of the regular business of the
employer;
(i) whether or not the parties believe they are creating the relation
of master and servant; and
(j) whether the principal is or is not in business.
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220. Considering these factors, there was
sufficient dispute on the issue of control to allow it to go to the jury. On factor
(a), “the extent of control which, by the agreement, the master may exercise
over the details of the work,” there was testimony at the first trial by a City
witness that “the Mayor as the chief executive officer had the ability to tell a
department head what to do; regardless if that department head was elected or
appointed, the Mayor was the CEO, that’s what the charter says and it still
4
does.” There was also testimony that the City could not discipline or fire
Lafond. Factor (e), “whether the employer or the workman supplies the
instrumentalities, tools, and the place of work for the person doing the work,”
is also relevant, as there was evidence that Lafond worked out of an office
which the City owned. Similarly, factors (f), “the length of time for which the
person is employed” and (g) “the method of payment, whether by the time or by
the job,” are relevant. Lafond was drawing a regular paycheck from the City for
her work, and she had been in the job for more than a “short” time,
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 220 comment j at 490. Finally, factor (h),
“whether or not the work is a part of the regular business of the employer,” is
relevant because Lafond’s services consisted of running a City department.
Based upon at least these factors, the trial court did not err by denying
the City’s motion for summary judgment because there were sufficient disputed
material facts, which prevented the control issue from being settled as a matter
of law in the City’s favor.
B. Serving the City
The third element of the respondeat superior test asks whether the
conduct “is actuated, at least in part, by a purpose to serve the employer.”
Porter, 151 N.H. at 40. Conduct not actuated at least in part by a purpose to
serve the employer will be outside the scope of employment. The City argues
that Lafond was not actuated to serve it, the employer, but was rather serving
herself by protecting the position of welfare commissioner. See Ennis v.
Crenca, 587 A.2d 485, 490-91 (Md. 1991) (elected official not acting within
scope of employment when acting to protect political career in making allegedly
defamatory statements).
It is possible for liability to exist in cases where there may be mixed
motivation; i.e., the servant is actuated with a purpose to serve both the master
as well as other interests, see Restatement (Second) of Agency § 236 (1958)
(“Conduct may be within the scope of employment although done in part to
serve the purposes of the servant or third person.”). In this case, Lafond could
have been serving the master as well as her own interests, and the law of
agency would not automatically preclude liability under respondeat superior.
There was conflicting evidence from the first trial with regard to Lafond’s
motivation. The City points to testimony that Lafond bumped Porter in the
hallway and threatened that her son would like to “take out” employees as
indicating her motive to serve herself. The plaintiff argues that Lafond’s
motivation in suspending him was, among other things, to maintain the
effective operation of the City’s welfare office; therefore, such actions were in
the service of the City. In light of this conflicting evidence from the first trial
concerning Lafond’s motivation, summary judgment was properly denied.
5
C. Prohibition on Retaliation
The first element of the respondeat superior test is used to determine
whether conduct is within the scope of employment. It requires that the
conduct be “of the kind she is employed to perform.” Porter, 151 N.H. at 40.
The City argues that, because Lafond was told not to retaliate, her conduct
could, therefore, not be “of the kind [Lafond] is employed to perform” for
respondeat superior liability purposes.
Merely forbidding Lafond to take a certain action does not shelter the
City from liability as a matter of law, however. “An act, although forbidden, or
done in a forbidden manner, may be within the scope of employment.”
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 230 (1958); McIntyre v. U.S., 447 F. Supp.
2d 54, 109-10 n.93 (D. Mass. 2006) (collecting cases). This can include
“specifically forbidden acts and forbidden means of accomplishing results.”
Restatement (Second) of Agency § 230 comment b at 511. “A master cannot
direct a servant to accomplish a result and anticipate that he will always use
the means which he directs or will refrain from acts which it is natural to
expect that servants may do.” Id.
As a matter of law, then, the City’s admonitions against retaliation are
not sufficient to eliminate its possible liability. Summary judgment was,
therefore, properly denied.
D. Ratification of Intentional Torts
The City next argues that, to the extent Lafond’s acts were intentional
torts, the City would have to ratify them for liability to attach, and such
ratification did not occur. In support of this proposition the City cites only an
unpublished intermediate Ohio appellate court case interpreting Ohio law. See
Amato v. Heinika, Ltd., DBA, No. 84479, 2005 WL 110441 (Ohio Ct. App. Jan.
20, 2005) (not reported).
The City misapprehends the relevant law. Ratification is an alternative
theory of holding an employer liable for torts of an employee. “[A]n employer
may be vicariously liable for the intentional tort of its employee under the
doctrine of respondeat superior or directly liable under the theory of
ratification.” Skidmore v. Precision Printing and Pkg., Inc., 188 F.3d 606, 614
(5th Cir. 1999) (applying Texas law); see Norton v. Bank, 61 N.H. 589, 592-93
(1882). Summary judgment was properly denied, therefore, because, as a
matter of law, ratification is not necessary for an employer to be held liable for
an intentional tort under respondeat superior; it is an alternative theory.
6
E. Estoppel for Plaintiff’s Retaliation and Scope of Employment
Arguments
The City argues that the plaintiff was estopped as a matter of law from
making arguments about Lafond’s motivation and whether she was acting
within the scope of employment.
The City advances a judicial estoppel argument and hints at a collateral
estoppel argument. The former is that the plaintiff is estopped from now
arguing a contrary position with regard to Lafond’s retaliation; the latter
suggests a “conclusion” at the first trial that Lafond acted outside the scope of
employment. The doctrine of judicial estoppel is as follows: “[W]here a party
assumes a certain position in a legal proceeding, and succeeds in maintaining
that position, it may not thereafter, simply because its interests have changed,
assume a contrary position.” Kelleher v. Marvin Lumber & Cedar Co., 152 N.H.
813, 848 (2005) (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). “While the
circumstances under which judicial estoppel may be invoked vary with each
situation, the court considers the following three factors: (1) whether the
party's later position is clearly inconsistent with its earlier position; (2) whether
the party has succeeded in persuading a court to accept that party’s earlier
position; and (3) whether the party seeking to assert an inconsistent position
would derive an unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment on the
opposing party if not estopped.” Id. at 750-51.
Here, the plaintiff’s position was not inconsistent as a matter of law. At
both trials he contended that Lafond used her supervisory authority in a
tortious way to advance the City’s interests. As noted above, acts that are even
expressly forbidden may still be carried out within the scope of authority if
Lafond’s intent was to serve the master.
Because we find no contradiction in the position taken on this issue, we
do not consider the remainder of the judicial estoppel inquiry. Judicial
estoppel was not a reason for a grant of summary judgment to the City.
Inasmuch as the City has failed to undertake a collateral estoppel
analysis, or to develop its legal argument, we decline to review it. See Gulf Ins.
Co. v. AMSCO, 153 N.H. 28, 40 (2005). For this same reason we also decline to
review the City’s assertion that the trial court should have followed “the general
rule, which is that a municipality is not liable for the intentional torts of its
officers.”
II. Motion for Directed Verdict
The City argues that a directed verdict should have been granted by the
trial court because no rational juror could conclude that the plaintiff was
7
entitled to relief, and, therefore, the trial court committed an unsustainable
exercise of discretion by not granting the motion.
A trial court may grant a motion for a directed verdict only if it
determines, after considering the evidence and construing all inferences
therefrom most favorably to the non-moving party, that no rational juror could
conclude that the non-moving party is entitled to any relief. Kelleher, 152 N.H.
at 840. We uphold a trial court’s ruling on a motion for directed verdict when
the record supports the conclusion that the trial court did not commit an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
The City repeats its arguments that respondeat superior is inapplicable
to Lafond’s actions; namely, that the acts were not the kind Lafond was
employed to perform and that Lafond was not motivated by a purpose to serve
the City.
We hold that on the record before us the jury could have reasonably
reached its conclusion on respondeat superior and the trial judge did not err by
denying the motion for a directed verdict. We address each of the City’s
arguments in turn.
A. Retaliatory Actions Not of the Kind Lafond Employed to Perform
The City argues that Lafond “conceded” that the retaliatory actions were
not of the kind she was employed to perform and, given this concession, no
reasonable juror could have found to the contrary. As a preliminary matter, it
is not clear that Lafond conceded anything; but, even if we were to take this as
a concession, Lafond’s subjective opinion that certain acts would have been
outside of her job description is not determinative. “The question whether or
not the act done is so different from the act authorized that it is not within the
scope of employment is decided by the court if the answer is clearly indicated;
otherwise, it is decided by the jury.” Restatement (Second) of Agency § 228
comment d at 505. It is for the finder of fact, then, to evaluate what is and is
not within the scope of employment in terms of the retaliatory acts at issue
that touch on subjective intent. Id.
Concerning whether Lafond’s actions were of the kind the employee is
employed to perform, the jury was instructed that:
[A]n employee’s act may be within the scope of employment even
though the act is willful or malicious, forbidden by the employer, or
indeed consciously criminal or tortious, if the act is carried out, at
least in part, with a purpose, or subjective intent, to serve the
employer, and it was so similar or incidental to the conduct
authorized as to be within the scope of employment.
8
The trial court also instructed the jury that Lafond “was a City Department
Head and a City employee; and . . . in these capacities, possessed the authority
to supervise and discipline employees in the Welfare department.”
Given these instructions, the jury reasonably could have found that the
actions Lafond took against the plaintiff were of a kind she was employed to
perform. There was evidence that she had “exclusive personnel authority” over
her department. Her job description stated that “extensive leeway is granted
for the exercise of independent judgment and initiative.” Her duties included
employee supervision, among other functions. Therefore, the jury could have
found that conflicts over case handling, criticism of employees, management of
employees and suspension of employees were actions of a kind she was
employed to perform. The jury also could have reasonably found that when
she took these actions, she was acting within the scope of her employment.
B. Serving the City
The City argues that Lafond’s testimony indicated that she was
protecting the position of welfare commissioner. It asserts that in so acting,
Lafond was not “actuated, at least in part, by a purpose to serve the employer.”
Porter, 151 N.H. at 40.
On this specific point, the jury was instructed that an “employer . . . may
be responsible for his or her employee’s actions if the employee was trying to
some extent to serve the employer’s business even though the primary motive
of the employee was to benefit himself/herself or a third person.”
Based upon these instructions, a reasonable juror could have found that
Lafond was, at least in part, serving the City, and not the position of the
welfare commissioner. The jury could have reasonably relied upon the City
charter, Lafond’s job description, and testimony that Lafond served the City in
making this finding.
C. No Master-Servant Relationship
The City argues alternatively that either: (a) Lafond was acting as a
servant who engaged in conduct, which she was specifically not authorized to
do; or (b) she had the power to ignore the City’s directions because it had no
right to control her. The City argues that, in either case, there was no basis for
respondeat superior liability because Lafond was not in a master-servant
relationship.
Based upon the exhibits and testimony, the jury could reasonably have
found that Lafond was authorized to supervise and that her retaliation was an
abuse of that legitimate supervisory power. Supervision was a kind of work
she was expected to perform. Again, the City charter, Lafond’s job description,
9
and testimony relative to her supervisory power are evidence from which the
jury could have drawn such reasonable conclusions.
The jury could also reasonably have found that the City did and could
control Lafond. There was evidence that the City removed Lafond from her
office in an attempt to ameliorate the situation. There was also evidence that
the City ensured that Lafond suspended the plaintiff according to its
standards, requiring her to redraft the letter of suspension and increase the
penalty from one day to one week. The jury could reasonably have found that
this was exercise of control over Lafond by the City.
In summary, a rational jury could have found that Lafond's conduct fell
within the scope of her employment because: (1) it was of the kind she was
employed to perform; (2) it occurred substantially within the authorized time
and space limits; and (3) it was actuated, at least in part, by a purpose to serve
the employer. Porter, 151 N.H. at 40. Based upon this record, we hold,
therefore, that the trial court did not err by denying the motion for a directed
verdict.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10