THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord District Court
No. 2006-324
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SCOTT BUCHANAN
Submitted: March 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 30, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Elizabeth J. Baker, attorney, on the
brief), for the State.
Law Offices of Penny S. Dean, of Concord (Penny S. Dean on the brief),
for the defendant.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Scott Buchanan, appeals the order of the
Concord District Court (Sullivan, J.) denying the return of two firearms to him
after he was found incompetent to stand trial. We vacate and remand.
Following a competency evaluation performed by James J. Adams, M.D.,
Chief Forensic Examiner for the New Hampshire Department of Corrections,
the defendant was found incompetent to stand trial. After charges were
dismissed, he filed a motion for the return of two firearms that had been seized
pursuant to his bail order. The State argued that under federal firearms law,
the defendant was a “mental defective” as a result of the incompetency finding
and, therefore, was prohibited from possessing firearms. The trial court denied
the return of the firearms and this appeal followed.
I. “Mental Defective” under Federal Firearms Law
The defendant argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law in
equating a finding of incompetence to stand trial with an adjudication as a
mental defective under federal law. The State counters that because the
defendant was found incompetent to stand trial, he has been “adjudicated as a
mental defective” and is, therefore, prohibited by 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(4) (2000), a
part of the Federal Gun Control Act of 1968, from owning firearms. See 27
C.F.R. § 478.32(a) (2006).
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 472, 479 (2006).
The meaning of the phrase “adjudicated as a mental defective” under 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(g)(4) is a question of federal law. Cf. Dickerson v. New Banner Institute,
Inc., 460 U.S. 103, 111-12 (1983). In construing the statute, we first examine
its language and structure, Huddleston v. United States, 415 U.S. 814, 819
(1974), and interpret it in accordance with federal policy taking into account
whatever guidance, if any, state law may offer. United States v. Chamberlain,
159 F.3d 656, 658 (1st Cir. 1998).
Subsection 922(g) lists nine categories of people who may not possess a
firearm. “The principal purpose of the federal gun control legislation . . . was to
curb crime by keeping firearms out of the hands of those not legally entitled to
possess them because of age, criminal background, or incompetency.”
Huddleston, 415 U.S. at 824 (quotation omitted). In enacting these categories,
Congress was “reaching far and was doing so intentionally.” Dickerson, 460
U.S. at 116.
Subsection 922(g)(4) -- the provision at issue in this case -- prohibits
possession of a firearm by anyone who “has been adjudicated as a mental
defective.” The term “adjudicated as a mental defective” is defined as:
A determination by a court, board, commission, or other lawful
authority that a person, as a result of marked subnormal
intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition, or disease:
2
(1) Is a danger to himself or to others; or
(2) Lacks the mental capacity to contract or manage his own
affairs.
27 C.F.R. § 478.11(a) (2006).
Because it appears that the trial court ruled as a matter of law that
“adjudicated as a mental defective” means the same thing as incompetent to
stand trial, we hold that it erred. In a criminal case, a competency
determination is a limited inquiry to determine “competen[ce] to stand trial”
that focuses upon “[w]hether the defendant has a rational and factual
understanding of the proceedings against him or her, and sufficient present
ability to consult with and assist his or her lawyer on the case with a
reasonable degree of rational understanding.” RSA 135:17, II(b), III (2005).
Under the terms of this statute, competency is not directly related to
dangerousness or the ability to contract or manage one’s own affairs --
requirements of the federal definition of “adjudicated as a mental defective.”
Therefore, because the trial court impermissibly equated incompetency to
stand trial with “adjudicated as a mental defective,” we vacate the trial court’s
order and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
On remand, the trial court shall determine whether the defendant meets
the definition of “adjudicated as a mental defective” either because “as a result
of marked subnormal intelligence, or mental illness, incompetency, condition
or disease” he is “a danger to himself or others” or he “lacks the mental
capacity to contract or manage his own affairs.” 27 C.F.R. § 478.11(a).
II. Disposition of Property Under RSA 595-A:6
The defendant also argues that the trial court erred in refusing to return
his firearms because there was no evidence before the court that he was
statutorily barred from possessing a handgun under federal law. The State
argues that the defendant’s firearms are contraband because they are “goods
that are unlawful to possess” under federal law. State v. Cohen, 154 N.H. 89,
91 (2006) (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). Therefore, the State
contends the firearms should be forfeited under RSA 595-A:6 (2001). We do
not resolve this issue, as the matter of whether the defendant’s firearms
constitute contraband should be addressed on remand.
Vacated and remanded.
DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3