THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-458
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ERNEST P. PEPIN
Argued: March 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 1, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Benjamin A. Agati, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
James T. Brooks, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. Following a trial on stipulated facts in the Superior Court
(Barry, J.), the defendant, Ernest P. Pepin, appeals his conviction for operating
a motor vehicle after having been certified as a habitual offender. See RSA
262:23 (2004) (amended 2006). The sole issue on appeal is whether the trial
court erred in denying the defendant’s motion to suppress. We reverse and
remand.
The trial court found the following: The defendant was stopped shortly
after midnight on October 6, 2005, by Officer Eric Desmarais of the Manchester
Police Department who heard the tires of the defendant’s vehicle “squeal.”
Desmarais’ police cruiser was positioned immediately behind the defendant at
a red light in a left turn lane. When the light changed, Desmarais heard the
defendant’s tires squeal, a squeal that was more than a “chirp” which caught
Desmarais’ attention. Desmarais testified that it was a “club” night in
Manchester and the road conditions were dry. He activated his blue lights and
pulled the defendant over. The defendant did not appear intoxicated, but in
doing a license check, Desmarais learned that the defendant was a habitual
offender.
The defendant filed a motion to suppress, contending that the stop of his
vehicle violated Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. The
trial court denied the motion, finding that Desmarais was justified in stopping
the defendant’s vehicle because he had a reasonable suspicion that the
defendant had committed a crime.
On appeal, the defendant argues that he was subject to an unlawful
seizure because Desmarais lacked reasonable suspicion when he ordered him
to stop. Accordingly, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying
his motion to suppress.
Our review of the trial court’s motion to suppress is de novo, except as to
any controlling facts determined by the trial court in the first instance. State v.
Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 676 (2005). We first address the issues under the
State Constitution and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball,
124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
For a police officer to undertake an investigatory stop, the officer must
have a reasonable suspicion—based upon specific, articulable facts taken
together with rational inferences from those facts—that the person stopped has
been, is, or is about to be, engaged in criminal activity. State v. Beauchesne,
151 N.H. 803, 809 (2005). In deciding whether the officer conducted a lawful
investigatory stop, we conduct a two-step inquiry: first, we determine when the
defendant was seized; second, we determine whether, at that time, the officer
possessed a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was, had been or was
about to be engaged in criminal activity. Id.
Neither party disputes that the defendant was seized when Desmarais
pulled the vehicle over. Therefore, we turn to the second inquiry: whether
Desmarais possessed a reasonable suspicion that the defendant was, had been
or was about to be engaged in criminal activity. Id. To determine the
sufficiency of an officer’s suspicion, we consider the articulable facts in light of
all surrounding circumstances, keeping in mind that a trained officer may
make inferences and draw conclusions from conduct that may seem
unremarkable to an untrained observer. State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H.
2
19, 26 (2004). A reasonable suspicion must be more than a hunch. Id. The
articulated facts must lead somewhere specific, not just to a general sense that
this is probably a bad person who may have committed some kind of crime. Id.
The officer’s suspicion must have a particularized and objective basis in order
to warrant that intrusion into protected privacy rights. Id.
The State argues that Desmarais had reasonable suspicion of a violation
of the road racing statute, RSA 265:75, I (2004), which provides:
No person shall drive any vehicle on a highway in any race,
speed competition or contest, drag race or acceleration
contest, test of physical endurance, exhibition of speed or
acceleration, or for the purpose of making a speed record;
and no person shall in any manner participate in any such
race, competition, contest, test or exhibition.
The State argues that Desmarais suspected the defendant of engaging in an
“exhibition of speed or acceleration.” RSA 265:75. Courts construing similar
statutory language have found that “[m]oving from a stopped position with the
tires spinning suggests a vehicle is accelerating” and thus provides reasonable
suspicion of an “exhibition of acceleration.” Singleton v. State, 91 S.W.3d 342,
346 (Tex. App. 2002) (citing cases). However, such suspicion is generally
supported by other facts in addition to squealing tires, such as an observation
that the engine revved and the car traveled “at a high rate of speed,” Jones v.
State, 579 So. 2d 66, 68-69 (Ala. Crim. App. 1991); the car went forward fifty
yards, stopped, backed up, then accelerated forward, causing tires to squeal,
spin and throw gravel, State v. Whitehurst, 772 P.2d 1251, 1253 (Kan. Ct. App.
1989); or the car squealed and rapidly accelerated in reverse, creating “an
unusual amount of dust,” State v. Ova, 539 N.W.2d 857, 860 (N.D. 1995).
In Singleton, a driver squealed his tires while making a right turn.
Singleton, 91 S.W.3d at 346. The officer was behind him and pulled him over
for squealing his tires. Id. The court ruled that he lacked reasonable suspicion
to stop the vehicle for excessive acceleration. Id. at 347. As the Singleton
court put it, “Squealing of tires alone suggests a sound and does not always
indicate acceleration.” Id. at 346. It further concluded that “[a]t no point did
[the officer] testify that it appeared [the defendant] was accelerating through
the turn or that acceleration was the cause of the tires squealing . . . . There
were no other facts articulated by the officer to suggest that the reason for the
squealing of the tires was acceleration.” Id.
In this case, too, the trial court did not find any fact to establish that the
squeal of the tires was an exhibition of speed or acceleration. The trial court’s
characterization of the car as “lurch[ing] forward” has no support in the record.
Also, as in Singleton, the officer in this case did not testify that the defendant’s
3
speed increased after the squeal; in fact, he stated: “[The driver] wouldn’t have
had time to even get up to speed.” The defendant complied almost instantly
and pulled over “about a hundred feet” from the intersection. Further,
Desmarais did not observe any erratic driving before he heard the squeal.
Thus, we hold that a brief squeal of tires, without more, does not support
a reasonable suspicion that the road racing statute had been, was or was
about to be violated. Singleton v. State, 91 S.W.3d at 346; State v. Giger, 130
P.3d 149 (Kan. Ct. App. 2006) (table).
The State also argues that Desmarais had reasonable suspicion that the
defendant was driving while intoxicated in violation of RSA 265:82, I (2004),
which provides in pertinent part:
No person shall drive or attempt to drive a vehicle upon any
way:
(a) While such person is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor . . . .
Beyond the brief tire squeal, there was no erratic operation or traffic violation
to support reasonable suspicion of driving while intoxicated. See State v.
Smith, 154 N.H. 113, 116 (2006) (reasonable suspicion and/or probable cause
existed when officers witnessed the defendant cross the yellow line, drive
completely off the road, run a stop sign, and nearly collide with an oncoming
vehicle). The only other facts upon which the State relies are that it was a
“club night” in Manchester and that the police are “always looking for possible
drunk drivers.” The State argues, “[G]iven the place and time of the
defendant’s behavior, [the officer’s] suspicions were reasonable that the
defendant may have been driving under the influence.”
We have observed that: “Although a person’s mere presence in a high-
crime area, even at a late hour, is not a sufficient basis, standing alone, to
justify a brief investigatory detention, the hour and the character of the area
may cast an individual’s own conduct in a more suspicious light.” State v.
Vadnais, 141 N.H. 68, 70-71 (1996). However, in analyzing facts that would
support reasonable articulable suspicion, it is the particular and not the
general that counts. Here, there was no evidence that the defendant had
pulled out of a club parking lot or that there were any clubs in the immediate
vicinity of the stop. Therefore, there is little reason why the character of the
area in this case should “cast [the defendant’s conduct] in a more suspicious
light.” Id. In the absence of any additional specific facts, we hold that the brief
squeal of tires, even on “club night,” did not give rise to reasonable suspicion of
driving while intoxicated.
4
Because we conclude that the stop violated the State Constitution, we
need not decide whether it also violated the Federal Constitution.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5