THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2006-224
ACAS ACQUISITIONS (PRECITECH) INC.
v.
STEPHEN C. HOBERT
Argued: February 27, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 3, 2007
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Martha Van Oot on the brief and orally),
for the plaintiff.
Sheehan Phinney Bass & Green, P.A., of Manchester (Edward A. Haffer
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Stephen C. Hobert, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Sullivan, J.) in favor of the plaintiff, ACAS Acquisitions
(Precitech) Inc. (ACAS). We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. In 1962, P. Donald Brehm
founded Pneumo Precision (Pneumo) in Keene. The defendant joined Pneumo
in 1982. In 1984, Brehm sold Pneumo to Allied Signal and started Toolroom
Craftsmen. The defendant remained employed by Pneumo. Eventually,
Toolroom Craftsmen became Precitech. In 1994, Brehm hired the defendant as
sales manager for Precitech, which, by that time, was competing directly with
Pneumo. Each of these companies manufactured and sold ultra-precision
single-point and multi-axis diamond turning, grinding, grooving and milling
machine systems.
In 1997, Brehm sold Precitech to Schroeder Ventures, which, by that
time, had acquired Pneumo. As part of this sale, Brehm executed an
agreement whereby he remained employed by Precitech until October 14, 1999,
and was subject to a three-year, non-competition agreement thereafter. That
non-competition agreement prevented Brehm from competing with Precitech
and from soliciting Precitech employees to engage in activities competitive with
Precitech.
In 1998, the defendant left Precitech to be the director of sales at Optical
Filter Corporation. He returned to Precitech in late 1999 as the Vice-President
of Sales and Marketing. In November 1999, as a condition of his re-
employment, the defendant executed an employment agreement with Precitech.
That agreement contained provisions requiring the defendant to maintain
Precitech’s trade secrets and to refrain from competing with Precitech.
Additionally, Precitech had a written confidentiality policy of which the
defendant was aware.
In 2001, Patrick Hurst, who at one time was an engineer with Precitech,
formed Novus Technologies, L.L.C. (Novus) to design and manufacture ultra-
precision tools and equipment. In June 2001, Hurst partnered with Brehm to
form Accura Technics, L.L.C. (Accura). Brehm was involved in the founding of
Accura more than one year prior to the expiration of his non-competition
agreement with Precitech. Sometime after the founding of Accura, Novus
ceased operations. Hurst and Brehm testified that, had Novus remained
operational, it could have produced products that would have been competitive
with those of Precitech.
During the summer and fall of 2001, the defendant, along with others at
Precitech, prepared a Confidential Information Memorandum (the Memo) which
identified Precitech’s key customers, marketing strategies and future business
plans, as well as important product and financial information to be used by
investment bankers in connection with a possible sale of Precitech. In early
2002, the defendant presented the Memo and other information to American
Capital Strategies, a potential buyer of Precitech and the parent to ACAS.
In April or May 2002, the defendant met with Brehm and was told that
Brehm and Hurst were developing a company and that if the defendant had
any interest in joining them, he should call Hurst. A short time later, the
defendant met with Hurst and Brehm to discuss marketing strategies for
Accura. Following this conversation, the defendant delivered a letter, dated
May 30, 2002, to the office shared by Hurst and Brehm, which outlined
2
potential marketing strategies for Accura. The trial court found that this letter
clearly stated that the defendant intended to join Accura and that Accura
would be in the business of manufacturing ultra-precision grinding machines
competitive with those made by Precitech and would market those machines to
Precitech customers. Moreover, the trial court noted that the defendant was
aware of Precitech’s interest in expanding into markets that he identified as
potential markets for Accura and that the customers he identified to Accura
were in such markets. Thus, the trial court found that the defendant, by
aiding Accura, violated his 1999 employment agreement with Precitech.
In June 2002, ACAS purchased Precitech. In conjunction with that
purchase, the defendant signed new employment, non-competition and non-
disclosure agreements with ACAS. The new non-competition agreement states,
in relevant part:
3. Non-Competition; Non-Solicitation
(a) While I am employed by [ACAS] and for a period of twenty-four
(24) months after termination of my employment for any reason
. . ., I will not, whether alone or as a partner, officer, director,
consultant, agent, employee or stockholder of any company or
other commercial enterprise, directly or indirectly, engage in any
line of business that represents at least 5% of the gross revenues
of [ACAS] or any line of business which, to my knowledge was to be
entered into and was planned by [ACAS] at any time during the
period of my employment with [ACAS] . . . .
. . . .
(c) While I am employed by [ACAS] and for a period of twenty-four
(24) months after termination of my employment for any reason
. . ., I will not, directly or indirectly, solicit, entice or induce (i) any
Customer . . . of [ACAS] to become a Customer of any other person
or entity engaged in a Competitive Line or (ii) any Customer or
Supplier . . . to cease doing business with [ACAS] in a Competitive
Line, and I will not assist any person or entity in taking any action
described in the forgoing clauses (i) and (ii).
The non-disclosure agreement provides, in pertinent part:
1. Nondisclosure and Use of Proprietary Information
(a) I will not at any time, whether during or after the termination of
my employment, reveal to any person or entity any of the trade
secrets or proprietary or confidential information of [ACAS] or of
3
any third party which [ACAS] is under an obligation to keep
confidential . . . or other materials of any nature relating to any
matter within the scope of the business of [ACAS] or concerning
any of the dealings or affairs of [ACAS] . . ., except as may be
required in the ordinary course of performing my duties as an
employee of [ACAS].
Additionally, under the terms of the defendant’s employment agreement, ACAS
could terminate him at any time with or without cause, or he could terminate
his employment upon sixty days’ notice. Further, the defendant negotiated a
unique severance package, which provided that if he were terminated without
cause within the first year he would be entitled to severance payments equal to
twelve months’ pay and a portion of his incentive bonus. If, however, he had
been terminated for cause as defined in his employment agreement, he forfeited
any right to severance pay. In addition to negotiating this severance package,
the defendant was permitted to “cash out” the stock he owned in Precitech at
the closing. Neither this severance package nor the “cash out” benefit was
made available to any other officer or employee of Precitech.
In late 2002, ACAS and Brehm began corresponding because ACAS was
concerned that Brehm might be violating his non-competition agreement. The
trial court found that when responding to ACAS’ correspondence, Brehm
misled ACAS regarding his involvement in Novus and Accura, his intent to
develop high-precision grinding and turning machines and his belief that
Accura would not compete with ACAS. The trial court found that although
Brehm testified that Accura would not compete with ACAS because Accura
would not develop machines capable of the degree of precision attainable by
ACAS machines, “all the documentary evidence establishes clearly that prior to
this litigation commencing, Accura intended to compete in the ultra-precision
field.”
In August 2002, Accura began production of its 1210G machine. That
same month, the defendant met with two different attorneys to obtain
information about the enforceability of his non-competition agreement and his
severance package. On October 14, 2002, Brehm’s non-competition agreement
expired, and within two months Accura had nearly completed its 1210G
machine. Accura’s website described the machine as capable of, among other
things, super-precision grinding.
In December 2002, the defendant again wrote to Hurst about joining
Accura. According to the trial court, this letter, among other things, implied
that the defendant understood that being employed by Accura within two years
of leaving ACAS would violate his non-competition agreement, but after
consulting with an attorney he believed the non-competition agreement might
be negotiable. Thus, the defendant proposed that if he and Accura could reach
4
an agreement on employment, he would attempt to negotiate being released
from his agreements with ACAS.
Later in December 2002, officers of ACAS met to discuss terminating the
defendant for performance reasons. On January 7, 2003, the defendant was
terminated without cause. Two days later, he met with Hurst, and on January
12, he wrote a letter to Hurst outlining various marketing strategies for
Accura’s products. The trial court found that this letter made it clear that the
defendant “intended to use his knowledge learned at Precitech to help Accura
compete in the ultra-precision area.” Further, the trial court found that “[t]he
letter is a blatant indication that [the defendant] intended to violate his
fiduciary obligations and obligations under his Employment Agreement and
Non-Competition Agreement to Precitech.”
On January 13, 2003, the defendant again met with an attorney to
discuss his obligations under his agreements with ACAS. The trial court found
that the defendant was not forthcoming with his attorney and did not provide
his attorney with numerous documents indicating that Accura intended to
compete with ACAS prior to the commencement of this suit.
On January 17, 2003, Accura hired the defendant as its director of sales.
During the ensuing week, the defendant sent e-mails to numerous companies
that included technical information and a company profile of Accura. Nearly
all of the companies contacted had been identified in the Memo as customers
or potential customers of ACAS. The trial court did not credit the defendant’s
testimony that the e-mails were sent in response to e-mails or telephone calls
he had received. According to the trial court, the evidence “clearly indicates”
that the initial communications came from the defendant.
Regarding the companies’ machines, the trial court found that although
Accura’s basic 1210G machine did not compete with ACAS’ machines, a
customer could add components touted by Accura to the 1210G that would
enable it to directly compete with ACAS’ machines. Further, prior to this
litigation, Accura promoted its 1210G machine as having capabilities
comparable to those of ACAS’ machines. In sum, the trial court found that
Accura manufactured and promoted a machine capable of directly competing
with machines made by ACAS. Additionally, the trial court found that the
defendant, through the use of knowledge and information gained from ACAS,
attempted to aid Accura in selling and distributing its competing machines.
As a result of the above findings, the trial court ruled that the defendant:
(1) violated his non-competition and non-disclosure agreements with ACAS; (2)
violated his fiduciary duties to ACAS; (3) violated the Uniform Trade Secrets
Act, RSA chapter 350-B (1995); (4) was not liable for a civil conspiracy; (5)
forfeited his right to severance benefits and had to return severance payments
5
he had received; and (6) was liable for ACAS’ attorney’s fees. The trial court
ruled against the defendant on his counterclaims for breach of contract,
severance payments, and violation of the Consumer Protection Act (CPA), RSA
chapter 358-A (1995 & Supp. 2006). The defendant appeals.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in ruling that:
(1) he violated his non-competition agreement; (2) he violated his non-
disclosure agreement; (3) he violated his fiduciary duties, misappropriated
trade secrets and otherwise acted wrongfully toward ACAS; (4) he was not
entitled to severance pay and related attorney’s fees under the parties’
agreement, RSA chapter 275 (1999 & Supp. 2006) and the CPA; (5) ACAS was
entitled to terminate severance benefits for post-termination violations; (6)
ACAS was entitled to its attorney’s fees pursuant to the “prevailing party”
provision of the non-competition agreement; and (7) the “prevailing party”
provision was neither contrary to public policy nor an unreasonable restraint
on trade. We address his arguments in turn.
We note first, however, that while the defendant mentions, in passing,
the 1999 agreement he had with Precitech, he does not raise any arguments
relative to it, nor does he challenge the trial court’s determination that he
violated it. Thus, we deem any arguments relative to this agreement waived.
See Colla v. Town of Hanover, 153 N.H. 206, 210 (2006).
I. Non-Competition Agreement
The defendant’s primary argument on appeal is that the trial court erred
in ruling that he violated his non-competition agreement because it found that
ACAS and Accura were competitors. According to the defendant, the two
companies were not competitors because they did not make competing
products and did not avail themselves of the same markets; thus, any dealings
he had with Accura did not violate his non-competition agreement.
We have stated that the law does not look with favor upon contracts in
restraint of trade or competition. Merrimack Valley Wood Prods. v. Near, 152
N.H. 192, 197 (2005). Such contracts are to be narrowly construed. Id.
Restrictive covenants are, however, valid and enforceable if the restraint is
reasonable, given the particular circumstances of the case. Id. A covenant’s
reasonableness is a matter of law for this court to decide. Concord
Orthopaedics Prof. Assoc. v. Forbes, 142 N.H. 440, 443 (1997). We review the
trial court’s factual findings, however, for clear error. Id.
To determine whether a restrictive covenant ancillary to an employment
contract is reasonable, we engage in a three-part inquiry: first, whether the
restriction is greater than necessary to protect the legitimate interests of the
6
employer; second, whether the restriction imposes an undue hardship upon
the employee; and third, whether the restriction is injurious to the public
interest. Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 197. If any one of these questions is
answered in the affirmative, the restriction in question is unreasonable and
unenforceable. Id. In determining whether a restrictive covenant is
reasonable, we will look to the time when the contract was made. Technical
Aid Corp. v. Allen, 134 N.H. 1, 8 (1991).
The first step in determining the reasonableness of a given restraint is to
determine whether the restraint was narrowly tailored to protect the employer’s
legitimate interests. Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 197. Legitimate interests
of an employer that may be protected from competition include: the employer’s
trade secrets that have been communicated to the employee during the course
of employment; confidential information other than trade secrets
communicated by the employer to the employee, such as information regarding
a unique business method; an employee’s special influence over the employer’s
customers, obtained during the course of employment; contacts developed
during the employment; and the employer’s development of goodwill and a
positive image. Nat’l Employment Serv. Corp. v. Olsten Staffing Serv., 145 N.H.
158, 160 (2000). Moreover, when an employee holds a position involving client
contact, it is natural that some of the goodwill emanating from the client is
directed to the employee rather than to the employer, and the employer has a
legitimate interest in preventing its employees from appropriating this goodwill
to its detriment. Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 198.
The defendant argues that the restriction in his non-competition
agreement was broader than necessary to protect ACAS’ interests because it
covered his activities with a company that made products that do not, and
cannot, compete with ACAS’ products. ACAS counters that Accura’s 1210G
machine, as designed, competed with its machines and, therefore, the
companies were in competition.
The trial court found that prior to the commencement of this case,
Accura, with the defendant’s help, distributed promotional material informing
potential customers that the 1210G had capabilities substantially similar to
those of machines manufactured by ACAS. According to the trial court,
however, after this case was filed, Accura and the defendant “tried to argue
that they were not intending to do what their letters and materials created prior
to litigation clearly indicate they intended to do” – that is, to create a competing
machine. Also, the trial court found that the potential customers solicited by
Accura were customers or potential customers of ACAS. The trial court found,
based upon the evidence and testimony presented, that Accura and the
defendant were attempting to compete in a market occupied by ACAS and that
only the institution of this suit prevented such competition.
7
Not only did the trial court determine that Accura intended to develop a
machine capable of competing with ACAS’ machines and that it sought to
retain ACAS’ customers, but also that Accura’s 1210G machine was, in fact,
competitive. The trial court found:
[T]he basic 1210G has applications that do not compete with
Precitech machines, but . . . at the time Precitech hired [the
defendant in June 2002], Accura and [the defendant] both
intended to also sell the 1210G for uses and in market[s] directly
competitive with Precitech’s machines. Also, by simply adding
components touted by Accura, a customer can buy an Accura
machine that is directly competitive with a Precitech machine.
The trial court further found that the 1210G was capable of tasks that would
directly compete with ACAS’ machines.
The defendant contends that the trial court’s findings were contrary to
the weight of the evidence and thus clearly erroneous. Specifically, he argues
that the 1210G machine was not capable of the levels of precision of ACAS’
machines and that its lower precision machines were geared to the
“conventional tool room” market, a market distinct from any that ACAS
occupied or planned to occupy. We disagree.
The trial court heard the testimony of David Davis, president and CEO of
Precitech and ACAS from 1998 until 2004. Davis testified that the promotional
materials distributed by Accura described a machine capable of the levels of
precision attained by ACAS’ machines. According to Davis, while some
advertised aspects of the 1210G posed no problem, other attributes of the
machine were “unusual” for a machine intended for the “conventional tool
room” market and indicated that the machine was intended to compete with at
least some of ACAS’ machines. Furthermore, Davis testified that Accura and
the defendant were soliciting customers who were not in the “conventional tool
room” market. Instead, Accura was soliciting customers in the glass grinding
and optics market, a market which required machines of greater precision than
those in the “conventional tool room” market, and a market which ACAS
occupied and in which it sought to expand its market share. In response, the
defendant offered his own testimony, as well as that of Hurst and Brehm, that
Accura’s machines could not compete with ACAS’ machines and that Accura
was not pursuing the same markets as those occupied by ACAS.
Following this testimony, Michael Janish, the current president of ACAS,
testified similarly to Davis regarding Accura’s and ACAS’ machines. He
testified that the comparisons made by the defendant were misleading because
they compared ACAS’ most accurate machines with the 1210G and did not
take into account that ACAS sold less accurate machines with which the
8
1210G competed. Finally, Janish testified that some of the customers solicited
by Accura and the defendant had no use for “conventional tool room”
machines.
We defer to the trial court’s determinations of credibility unless no
reasonable person could have come to the same conclusion after weighing the
testimony. State v. Livingston, 153 N.H. 399, 402 (2006). Here, the trial court
chose to credit the testimony of Davis and Janish and not that of the
defendant, Hurst and Brehm. After reviewing the record, we cannot say that
no reasonable person would have come to the same conclusion.
According to the defendant, “Not once in the Court’s 50-page Decree did
it say a single word about the most critical evidence in the case” – that ACAS’
machines were substantially more precise than Accura’s and that they
therefore served a different need in a different market. According to the
defendant, “Not only was this evidence fully consistent with the testimony of
Hobert and Accura’s Brehm and Hurst – it demolished Precitech’s core
contention.” Also, the defendant contends that even though the trial court did
not mention this “critical evidence,” it granted his related request for a finding
on that issue, but did so with a mistaken qualification. He argues that this
qualification revealed that “the Court evidently believed that the Accura
product had a higher (and competitive) level of precision when Precitech
brought suit, but had been changed to a lower level thereafter – a point that is
absolutely contrary to uncontroverted evidence.” Contrary to the defendant’s
contentions, however, the trial court specifically addressed the alleged
differences in precision between the machines of each company and credited
the testimony of Davis and Janish that the machines were competitive. Thus,
we reject the defendant’s contentions that the trial court did not properly weigh
the evidence and uphold the trial court’s finding that ACAS and Accura were
competitors.
Having determined that ACAS and Accura were competitors, we next
consider whether ACAS had legitimate interests that could be protected
through its non-competition agreement with the defendant. As noted above,
legitimate interests of an employer that may be protected include trade secrets
and other confidential information and an employee’s contacts with, and
special influence over, customers. Here, the defendant had served as the Vice-
President of Sales for ACAS and in a similar capacity for Precitech. In those
roles, he had nearly unfettered access to all of ACAS’ trade secrets and
confidential company information, and substantial contacts with and influence
over customers and potential customers. Moreover, he had participated in the
production of the Memo, a document outlining much of ACAS’ company
information, strategies and customers. Preventing the defendant from using
this information and influence to the detriment of ACAS was certainly within
its legitimate interests.
9
Next, we consider whether the defendant’s non-competition agreement
was narrowly tailored to protect ACAS’ legitimate interests. Merrimack Valley,
152 N.H. at 197. As quoted above, the defendant’s non-competition agreement
prevented him from engaging in any line of business representing at least five
percent of the gross revenues of ACAS or any line of business which, to his
knowledge, was to be entered into and was planned by ACAS at any time
during his employment with ACAS. Also, section 3(c) of the non-competition
agreement prevented the defendant from soliciting ACAS’ customers to become
customers of a competitor and from aiding anyone else in actions that would
violate the non-competition agreement.
In Merrimack Valley, we held that a restrictive covenant preventing an
employee from doing business with any client who had transacted business
with his employer in the previous year was too broad to protect the employer’s
interests because it covered numerous customers that the employee did not
know and could not have known. Id. at 199. We noted that as to many of the
employer’s customers, the defendant was in no better position than a stranger.
Id. We also noted that we had previously invalidated other non-competition
agreements as too broad because they extended beyond the sphere of the
employee’s influence geographically, or beyond the scope of the employee’s
customer contacts. Id.
Here, unlike the situations discussed in Merrimack Valley, the defendant
was in charge of marketing and sales for Precitech and later ACAS – companies
that had or have, on a world-wide level, a large share of a relatively small
market: the ultra-precision machine tool market. In this world-wide market,
the defendant had contacts with many of the consumers and potential
consumers of goods within the market. Also, the defendant had unfettered
access to ACAS’ technical, financial and customer information. Therefore, the
defendant was in a position to know the customers and lines of business that
produced at least five percent of the gross revenues of ACAS. Additionally, he
was in a position to know which markets and lines of business ACAS would
enter and had planned to enter. This knowledge is demonstrated by the
defendant’s participation in the creation of the Memo, a document created only
about a year prior to the defendant beginning negotiations with Accura which
outlined the status of Precitech and the lines of business it planned to pursue
with and through ACAS. Lastly, because of his position, the defendant was
better able than any other person to solicit customers and to use customer
information in aiding another entity in violating the agreement. We agree with
the conclusion of the trial court:
By reason of [the defendant’s] intimate knowledge of Precitech’s
customer base, market trends and opportunities and pricing
structure, [the defendant’s] use and disclosure of this information
10
to or for the benefit of Accura has caused, and will continue to
cause Precitech irreparable injury through the loss of its good will
and the usurpation of corporate opportunities identified to [the
defendant] during his employment, an interest Precitech has the
right to protect under New Hampshire law.
Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant’s non-competition agreement,
unlike the agreements discussed in Merrimack Valley, was not overly broad in
its scope.
Secondly, the defendant’s agreement prevented him from engaging in
competitive lines of business for two years. In this case, no argument is made
in the brief that the duration is unreasonable. “A covenant not to compete
should last no longer than necessary for the employees’ replacements to have a
reasonable opportunity to demonstrate their effectiveness to customers.”
Concord Orthopaedics, 142 N.H. at 444 (quotation omitted). When evaluating
duration, the court must consider the time necessary to obliterate in the minds
of the public the association between the identity of the employee with his
employer’s business. Id. Here, the defendant had been involved in the sales of
ultra-precision machine tools for many years and had served Precitech and
ACAS in that position since 1994, except for the year he spent with Optical
Filter Corporation. We conclude that allowing two years for the public to
disassociate him from ACAS after his many years there, and for his
replacements to demonstrate their effectiveness, was reasonable. Therefore,
because we conclude that the defendant’s non-competition agreement was
reasonable in both scope and duration, we also conclude that it was narrowly
tailored to protect ACAS’ legitimate interests.
The second factor in determining if the defendant’s restrictive covenant is
enforceable is whether its restrictions imposed an undue hardship upon him.
Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 197. The defendant argues, citing Dunfey
Realty Co. v. Enwright, 101 N.H. 195 (1957), that the restriction imposed an
undue hardship because it unnecessarily interfered with his following a trade
or calling for which he was fitted and from which he may earn his livelihood,
and because it precluded him from exercising the skill and general knowledge
he had acquired. We disagree.
At the time the contract was made, the defendant understood that the
covenant would force him to relocate. For this reason, the defendant
negotiated a substantial severance package, both in value and duration, in
exchange for signing the covenant. Restrictive covenants “not only inure to the
benefit of the employer but to the employee as well, in that the latter may, by
giving a restrictive covenant, be able to place himself in a more advantageous
position economically.” Id. at 198. Under these circumstances, where the
defendant negotiated a substantial severance package in exchange for
11
decreasing the sting of the restrictive covenant and with the full understanding
that he might need to relocate, we cannot say that the covenant unnecessarily
interfered with his ability to follow a particular trade or from using the skills
and knowledge he had obtained. Therefore, we conclude that the agreement
did not impose an undue hardship upon him.
Finally, in determining whether the restrictive covenant was reasonable,
we look to whether the restriction was injurious to the public interest.
Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 197. The defendant contends that because free
and fair competition is protected by Part I, Article 83 of the New Hampshire
Constitution, he had a right to work for Accura and to bring to that work the
skill and general knowledge he obtained while with Precitech and ACAS. The
trial court found that “[n]either Accura nor [the defendant] can reasonably
argue that enjoining [the defendant] from competing in the limited competitive
lines or from usurping corporate opportunities identified to him by Precitech
for a period of two years, unreasonably limits the public’s right to choose.” We
agree. Nothing in the record leads to the conclusion that preventing the
defendant from engaging in competitive business lines in any way injured the
public interest. Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant’s non-competition
covenant was reasonable and enforceable.
Because we have concluded that the trial court’s factual findings that
Accura and ACAS made competing products and operated in competitive
markets are supported by the evidence, and because we have held that the
defendant’s agreement is valid and enforceable, we uphold the trial court’s
determination that by aiding Accura, the defendant violated his non-
competition agreement with ACAS.
The defendant raises what he describes as “secondary points” regarding
his non-competition agreement, which we address briefly. He contends that
because Accura had not, as of the institution of this litigation, sold a single
product, Accura did not compete with ACAS. ACAS was not, however, required
to stand idly by while Accura and the defendant worked to compete with its
products. Moreover, under section 3(c) of the agreement, the defendant was
prevented from assisting another entity to engage in activities forbidden by the
non-competition agreement. Thus, the defendant could violate the agreement
by aiding Accura, regardless of whether Accura sold a single product.
Next, the defendant argues that Precitech and ACAS never planned to
enter the “conventional tool room” market and, therefore, he did not violate the
portion of the agreement requiring him to abstain from entering any line of
business that was planned to be entered into by ACAS during his employment
there. As discussed above, however, Accura’s promotional materials and the
contacts delivered to Accura by the defendant indicated that Accura was
12
entering a line of business that was directly competitive with ACAS. We
therefore reject the defendant’s argument.
Finally, the defendant contends that ACAS’ grinding system did not
produce five percent of its gross revenues, and, therefore, he did not violate his
agreement not to engage in any line of business representing at least five
percent of ACAS’ gross revenues. Davis testified, however, that in the years
preceding the institution of this suit, grinding systems had accounted for
nearly fifteen percent of ACAS’ gross revenues. The trial court was within its
discretion to credit this testimony.
Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s rulings that the non-competition
agreement is valid and that the defendant violated its terms.
II. Non-Disclosure Agreement
The defendant next contends that he did not violate his non-disclosure
agreement because: (1) the three-part test applied to non-competition
agreements also applies to non-disclosure agreements and this agreement fails
that test; (2) ACAS and Accura were not competitors; and (3) the information he
provided to Accura was readily ascertainable from public sources.
While we have never expressly stated that the three-part test applicable
to non-competition agreements applies to non-disclosure agreements, for
purposes of this opinion we will assume that it does. As stated above, this test
requires us to determine whether the restriction is greater than necessary to
protect the legitimate interests of the employer, whether the restriction imposes
an undue hardship upon the employee, and whether the restriction is injurious
to the public interest. Merrimack Valley, 152 N.H. at 197.
The defendant’s non-disclosure agreement provides that he may not
reveal any of the trade secrets or proprietary or confidential information of
ACAS or of any third party to which ACAS has an obligation to keep
confidential, “except as may be required in the ordinary course of performing
[his] duties as an employee of [ACAS].”
The first step is to determine whether this agreement was narrowly
tailored to protect ACAS’ legitimate interests. As noted previously, we conclude
that ACAS had a legitimate interest in preventing its chief sales person from
aiding in the marketing and sales of competitive products for a competitive
business. “The employer has a legitimate interest in preventing its employees
from appropriating [its] good will to its detriment.” Technical Aid, 134 N.H. at
9.
13
Moreover, we conclude that this agreement was narrowly tailored to
protect ACAS’ legitimate interests. It specifically defined the information that
the defendant could not disclose. By its terms, the defendant was prevented
from revealing any information that ACAS had defined as “proprietary
information.” While “proprietary information” has a comprehensive definition
under the agreement, it expressly does not include information in the public
domain, information from third parties that can be disclosed without a breach
of confidentiality obligations, information ACAS permits to be released, and any
information that is required by a court or agency to be disclosed.
The definition of “proprietary information” and its exemptions make clear
that the agreement covered only information that belonged to ACAS and that
concerns the conduct of its business. Therefore, the agreement was narrowly
tailored to protect ACAS’ legitimate interests.
Second, the agreement did not impose an undue hardship upon the
defendant. Under the agreement, the defendant was not permitted to reveal or
use ACAS’ proprietary information to aid another company, but he could use
information in the public domain, information ACAS had released and other
information from third parties that was not subject to confidentiality
obligations. Because the defendant had spent a great deal of time in this
industry, he was aware of the public sources of information on companies and
individuals with interest in the products he was attempting to sell, and he did
not need to rely upon the confidential information of ACAS to earn a living.
Therefore, the agreement did not impose an undue hardship upon him.
Third, the agreement is not injurious to the public interest. The
defendant’s agreement merely prevented him from using ACAS’ proprietary
information for his own gain or for the benefit of another person or entity.
Permitting ACAS to protect its proprietary information did not in any way
burden the public. Therefore, we conclude that the defendant’s non-disclosure
agreement was reasonable, valid and enforceable.
The defendant contends that ACAS and Accura were not competitors,
and, therefore, ACAS suffered no detriment if any information was disclosed.
As we have already concluded, however, ACAS and Accura developed and
promoted competing products and functioned in competing markets.
Finally, the defendant argues that any information he disclosed to
Accura was information available from public sources and, therefore, he did
not violate the agreement. The trial court found:
Some of the information [the defendant] disclosed to Accura and
used on Accura’s behalf was “readily ascertainable” from other
sources. While the mere identity of customers for precision
14
machinery systems may be readily ascertainable from other
sources, the compiled customer information to which [the
defendant] had constant and ready access included the ranking of
customers by volume; the identification of customers by particular
markets and/or particular Precitech products; the identification of
customers who were likely prospects for products Precitech
manufactured or developed; and the identification of customers
who had purchased or would likely purchase “special” machines or
who might partner with Precitech in the development of future
products or markets. This information was set forth in the
Confidential Information Memorandum and the SCH Contact.xls
spreadsheet and the Business Overview [the defendant] provided to
[his attorney], Brehm and Hurst.
The trial court recognized that while certain information the defendant
disclosed to Accura was publicly available, some of the information he shared
with Hurst and Brehm was not. Therefore, at least some of the information he
divulged to Accura’s principals was not in the public domain. Accordingly, for
the above reasons, we conclude that the defendant’s agreement was
enforceable, that ACAS and Accura were competitors, and that the defendant
disclosed ACAS’ confidential information to Accura. Thus, we uphold the trial
court’s ruling that the defendant violated his non-disclosure agreement.
III. Fiduciary Duties, Misappropriating Trade Secrets and Other Wrongful Acts
The defendant’s argument as to the trial court’s rulings relative to his
breach of fiduciary duties, misappropriation of trade secrets under RSA
chapter 350-B, and other wrongful acts states, in its entirety:
The facts on which Precitech claims that [the defendant] violated
his restrictive covenants are also the facts on which it claims that
he breached his fiduciary duty, misappropriated trade secrets, and
otherwise acted wrongfully vis-à-vis Precitech. All of these latter
claims also fail, for the reasons stated in Arguments I and II.
Because we agree with the trial court that the defendant violated his restrictive
covenants and because the only basis upon which the defendant challenges the
trial court’s rulings is that he did not violate his covenants, we conclude that
the trial court did not err.
15
IV. Severance Pay and Related Attorney’s Fees
Because the next two issues deal with the trial court’s rulings on the
defendant’s entitlement to severance benefits and related attorney’s fees, we
address them together. The defendant contends that, contrary to the trial
court’s ruling, he is entitled to his full severance benefits under the parties’
agreement, RSA chapter 275 and RSA chapter 358-A. He also argues that
because ACAS willfully refused to pay his severance benefits, he is entitled to
double or treble damages and attorney’s fees. We address each argument in
turn.
A. The Parties’ Agreement
Section 6(c) of the defendant’s employment agreement provides, in
relevant part:
Upon termination of the [defendant’s] employment hereunder (i) by
the Company without Cause pursuant to Section 5(iv), or (ii) by the
[defendant] for Good Reason pursuant to Section 5(v), the
[defendant] shall be entitled to (i) his Base Salary for the Severance
Period, payable in accordance with the usual payroll practices in
effect at the Company, and (ii) a pro rata portion of [the
defendant’s] Incentive Bonus, if any, for the applicable period
during any calendar year [the defendant] was employed by the
Company . . . .
Under section 6(d) of the agreement, the defendant is not entitled to severance
if he is terminated for cause. “Cause” is defined in the parties’ agreement, in
part, as “a material breach of the [defendant’s] obligations in connection with
his or her Service or of a confidentiality, non-competition or other similar
agreement, if any, with the Company.” Also, the agreement provides that its
provisions governing severance and the non-competition and non-disclosure
agreements survive the defendant’s termination.
ACAS acknowledges that on January 7, 2003, it dismissed the defendant
without cause and, because it terminated him without cause, it began paying
his severance benefits. Also, ACAS admits that on January 31, 2003, it
suspended the defendant’s severance payments. ACAS argues that it was
entitled to do so because it discovered the defendant’s dealings with Accura,
Hurst and Brehm, which violated his non-competition and non-disclosure
agreements. ACAS contends that had it known of those violations prior to the
defendant’s termination without cause, it would have terminated him for
cause. Essentially, ACAS argues that its evidence of the defendant’s pre-
termination violations is a defense to its obligation to pay severance benefits,
though this evidence was not obtained until after his termination. We agree.
16
“The interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we review de
novo.” Barclay Square Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Grenier, 153 N.H. 514, 517
(2006). Also, “[w]hether after-acquired evidence may limit damages or
completely bar liability is a question of law reviewable de novo by this court.”
McDill v. Environamics Corp., 144 N.H. 635, 640 (2000).
“[I]n a breach of contract action after-acquired evidence of employee
misconduct is a defense to a breach of contract action for wages and benefits
lost as a result of discharge if the employer can demonstrate that it would have
fired that employee had it known of the misconduct.” Id. at 641 (quotation
omitted). Under the terms of the parties’ agreements, the defendant forfeited
his right to severance payments if he violated his non-competition or non-
disclosure agreements. Here, ACAS contends, and the trial court found, that
had ACAS known of the defendant’s violations prior to his termination without
cause, it would have terminated him for cause. Therefore, although ACAS did
not learn of the defendant’s violations until after his termination, we conclude
that under the terms of the parties’ agreements, ACAS was justified in
terminating the defendant’s severance payments for his pre-termination
violations.
The defendant acknowledges this understanding of the parties’
agreement when, in his brief, he states: “[I]f [the defendant] had violated his
Non-Competition Agreement while he was employed by the Company, he could
have been terminated ‘for cause’ on that basis. Similarly, [he] could have had a
‘without cause’ termination changed to a ‘for cause’ termination after the fact –
but only if he had violated his covenant pre-termination.” The defendant
contends that he did not work for Accura until after his termination by ACAS.
The trial court found, however, that the defendant “engaged in a
calculated series of moves to help Brehm and Hurst set up a competitive
business through identification of corporate opportunities, disclosure of
confidential information, advice regarding marketing and solicitation of
Precitech customers so that Accura would be poised to enter the market upon
expiration of Brehm’s non-competition agreement and [the defendant’s]
‘extracation’ [sic] from his own contractual and fiduciary obligations . . . .”
Because there is evidence in the record to support these findings, we conclude
that the defendant was not entitled to severance under the terms of the parties’
contract.
Finally, we note that the trial court ruled that ACAS was entitled to
recover the $6,132.29 in severance payments it made before suspending them.
The defendant makes no separate challenge to that ruling, and it is, therefore,
affirmed.
17
B. RSA chapter 275
The defendant contends that his severance benefits are wages as defined
in RSA chapter 275 and that ACAS’ failure to pay them is a violation of the
statute. Also, the defendant contends that because ACAS’ refusal to pay is
willful and without good cause he is entitled to recover increased damages,
costs and attorney’s fees.
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Appeal of Tennis, 149 N.H. 91, 93 (2003). Also, while we defer to the trial
court’s factual findings, provided there is evidence in the record to support
them, we review its application of the law to the facts de novo. Saviano v.
Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 151 N.H. 315, 318 (2004).
RSA 275:44, I, requires that “Whenever an employer discharges an
employee, the employer shall pay the employee’s wages in full within 72 hours.”
If, however, “an employer willfully and without good cause fails to pay an
employee’s wages . . . , such employer shall be additionally liable to the
employee for liquidated damages in the amount of 10 percent of the unpaid
wages for each day . . . such failure continues . . . .” RSA 275:44, IV. RSA
275: 42, III defines “wages” as:
compensation, including hourly health and welfare, and pension
fund contributions required pursuant to a health and welfare trust
agreement, pension fund trust agreement, collective bargaining
agreement, or other agreement adopted for the benefit of an
employee and agreed to by his employer, for labor or services
rendered by an employee, whether the amount is determined on a
time, task, piece, commission, or other basis of calculation.
Under RSA 275:43, III, “Vacation pay, severance pay, personal days, holiday
pay, sick pay and payment of employee expenses, when such benefits are a
matter of employment practice or policy, or both, shall be considered wages
pursuant to RSA 275:42, III, when due.”
The trial court found that, “Severance benefits were not a ‘matter of
practice or policy’ at Precitech, and are therefore not ‘wages’ as defined by RSA
275:42, III or RSA 275:43.” According to the trial court, “Only a few key
management employees were offered employment contracts by ACAS in
connection with its acquisition of Precitech, and the severance benefits were
negotiated individually with each management employee.” We agree with the
trial court that because severance benefits were offered only in connection with
the sale of Precitech and only then to a few employees on terms negotiated
individually with those employees, granting severance benefits was not a
matter of practice or policy at ACAS. Therefore, we conclude that the
18
defendant’s severance benefits do not meet the definition of wages in RSA
275:42, III and RSA 275:43, III.
Additionally, the trial court found that the defendant’s severance benefits
were not wages because they “were not ‘compensation . . . for labor or services
rendered,’ but rather, consideration for his agreement not to compete with
Precitech if he was terminated without cause or voluntarily resigned.” Such a
finding, although not necessary to the determination of the issue, serves to
reinforce the conclusion that not only are the defendant’s severance benefits
not wages, they were not intended by the parties to be treated as wages.
Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s conclusion that the defendant’s
severance benefits are not wages under RSA chapter 275. Because we hold
that the defendant’s severance benefits are not wages, ACAS did not violate
RSA chapter 275 in refusing to pay them.
C. RSA chapter 358-A
The defendant contends that ACAS’ refusal to pay his severance benefits
qualifies as an unfair act or practice under RSA 358-A:2. Also, the defendant
contends that because ACAS’ refusal was willful and knowing, he is entitled to
double or treble damages as well as costs and attorney’s fees.
RSA 358-A:2 states that it is “unlawful for any person to use any unfair
method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice in the conduct
of any trade or commerce within this state.” “Trade” and “commerce,” in turn,
are defined as “the advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any
services and any property . . ., and shall include any trade or commerce
directly or indirectly affecting the people of this state.” RSA 358-A:1, II. RSA
358-A:2 provides a non-exhaustive list of acts and practices that are unlawful.
Finally, RSA 358-A:10 permits any person injured by an unfair act or practice
to bring a private action for damages and to recover enhanced damages for that
injury.
The defendant does not argue that ACAS violated any of the enumerated
provisions of the CPA. Therefore, we must determine whether ACAS’ actions fit
within the statute’s general prohibition on unfair and deceptive acts. In
making our determination, the trial court’s findings of fact and rulings of law
will be upheld unless they lack evidentiary support or constitute clear error of
law. Milford Lumber Co. v. RCB Realty, 147 N.H. 15, 19 (2001).
We have recognized that the general provision of the CPA is broadly
worded, and not all conduct in the course of trade or commerce falls within its
scope. State v. Moran, 151 N.H. 450, 452 (2004). In determining which
commercial actions, not specifically delineated, are covered by the act, we have
employed the “rascality” test. See Barrows v. Boles, 141 N.H. 382, 390 (1996).
19
Under the rascality test, the objectionable conduct must attain a level of
rascality that would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to the rough and
tumble of the world of commerce. Moran, 151 N.H. at 452.
Here, the trial court found that RSA 358-A:2 did not apply to the conduct
of ACAS in this case. We agree. ACAS suspended the defendant’s severance
payments based upon its reasonable belief that he had violated his restrictive
covenants. This conduct is not of the same type as that proscribed by the CPA.
Moreover, suspending benefits until its obligation to pay them is established
does not raise an eyebrow of one inured to the rough and tumble of the world
of commerce. Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendant is not entitled to recovery under the CPA. For the above reasons we
conclude that the defendant was not entitled to severance benefits under the
parties’ agreement, RSA chapter 275 or the CPA.
V. “Prevailing Party” Provision
Because the final two arguments raised by the defendant concern the
enforceability and operation of the “prevailing party” provision of his non-
competition agreement, we address them together. The defendant contends
that the “prevailing party” provision of his non-competition agreement, which
allows the party prevailing at trial to collect its attorney’s fees, is contrary to
public policy because it is a contract of adhesion and a chilling and
unreasonable restraint on alternative employment. Moreover, the defendant
contends that the trial court erred in awarding ACAS its attorney’s fees under
this provision. We address each argument in turn.
A. Enforceability of the Provision
Section 5 of the defendant’s non-competition agreement states, in
relevant part, “The prevailing party in any litigation arising under this
Agreement shall be entitled to recover his or its attorneys’ fees and expenses in
addition to all other available remedies.” As noted, the defendant contends
that this provision is not enforceable because it is a contract of adhesion and
because it is an unreasonable restraint on alternative employment.
As to his argument regarding adhesion, although the defendant raised
the issue in his notice of appeal, he failed to brief it. Therefore, the issue is
deemed waived. In the Matter of Jasper-O’Neil & O’Neil, 149 N.H. 87, 91
(2003).
Regarding his second argument, the defendant contends that this
provision is contrary to New Hampshire public policy “as a chilling and
unreasonable restraint on alternative employment.” According to the
defendant, the disparity in bargaining power between the employer and the
20
employee requires that an employer only be permitted to recover attorney’s fees
in a “flagrant case.” The defendant argues that this is a “close case,” and that
the provision should not be enforced because “[o]therwise, no one in such an
employee’s position would run the risk of losing at trial, even if he firmly and
reasonably believed that his new job would not be competitive with his old
one.”
While the defendant contends that enforcing such a provision in a close
case would be unreasonable because it would impose a hardship on employees,
that logic does not apply here. The defendant’s non-competition agreement
provides that:
I [the defendant] will have the right, at any time during the non-
competition period, to provide written notice to [ACAS] containing
all the details of any proposed business activity on my part and
[ACAS] shall respond within 15 days of such notice with its opinion
as to whether such proposed business activity violates any
obligation in this Section 3(a).
Thus, the defendant had the right under his contract to obtain ACAS’ opinion
as to whether he was violating his non-competition agreement. Had he done
so, and had ACAS stated that it believed his interactions with Accura would
not violate the agreement, he might have been able to claim that he had a
“firmly and reasonably” held belief that he was not competing. Because the
defendant had the contractual right to ACAS’ opinion and because he did not
avail himself of that right, we do not agree that enforcing the “prevailing party”
provision is unreasonable because he believed he was not competing.
B. Award of Fees
The defendant contends that the trial court erred in awarding ACAS its
attorney’s fees because: (1) he did not violate his non-competition and non-
disclosure agreements; and (2) the trial ought to have been confined to his
counterclaims and ACAS should not have been seeking its fees. As to the first
argument, for the reasons stated above, we agree with the trial court that the
defendant violated his non-competition and non-disclosure agreements.
Regarding the defendant’s second contention, he argues that, because
the trial court granted ACAS’ request for a preliminary injunction, because
after that ruling he amended his answer to state that he would not violate his
non-competition and non-disclosure agreements by working for Accura, and
because he stated that he would agree to an order stating that he would not
work for Accura, there was no need for a trial to enforce his obligations under
his agreements. In essence, he argues that the granting of the injunction and
21
his agreement not to work for Accura rendered ACAS’ claims moot. We
disagree.
The defendant had, by aiding Accura prior to his termination, violated
his non-competition and non-disclosure agreements prior to accepting the
position at Accura. Thus, regardless of his agreement not to work for Accura,
ACAS was justified in pursuing its claim that he had violated his agreements.
Also, even if he did not continue to work for Accura, ACAS still sought a ruling
that it was justified in suspending his severance payments due to his violation
of his agreements. Thus, ACAS’ claims were not moot and it was justified in
pursuing them. Because ACAS was justified in pursuing its claims, and
because it prevailed on those claims, the trial court did not err by awarding
ACAS its attorney’s fees under the terms of the parties’ contract.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
22