THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rochester District Court
No. 2006-430
DAN CUI
v.
CHIEF, BARRINGTON POLICE DEPARTMENT
Submitted: April 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: May 15, 2007
Dan C. Cui, by brief, pro se.
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, PA, of Portsmouth
(Christine Woodman Casa on the brief), for the defendant.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, the Chief of the Barrington Police
Department, appeals an order of the Rochester District Court (DiMeo, J.)
finding the Town of Barrington (Town) liable to the plaintiff, Dan Cui, pursuant
to the Dog Control Law, RSA 466:30-a (Supp. 2006). Because the statute
neither expressly nor impliedly imposes liability upon the Town, and no
common law duty is otherwise implicated under these particular
circumstances, we hold that the district court’s order was erroneous as a
matter of law and reverse.
The plaintiff filed a small claims action seeking $1,452.00 for damage to
his porch caused by a stray dog. He alleged that despite numerous complaints
to the Town over the course of one and one-half years, a potentially rabid dog
was living on, and causing damage to, his property. He claimed that the Town
failed to take any action to capture or remove the dog, although it did advise
him as to how he could do so himself. The plaintiff ultimately succeeded in
capturing the dog after it had killed his neighbor’s pigs. Without identifying
any particular provision of the statute as authority, the district court ruled that
because the Town had adopted the Dog Control Law, RSA 466:30-a, it could
not avoid liability by claiming that it lacked sufficient personnel to enforce the
law.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo and begin by
examining the words of the relevant statutes, ascribing to them their plain and
ordinary meaning, where possible. See Lower Bartlett Water Precinct v.
Murnik, 150 N.H. 690, 692 (2004). In doing so, we focus upon the overall
statutory scheme, rather than upon isolated words or phrases. Id. However,
we may not consider what the legislature might have said or add words that it
did not include. Id.
Generally, RSA chapter 466 (2004 & Supp. 2006) addresses dog owner
responsibilities, including licensing and vaccinating. While it expressly
imposes liability upon municipalities for damage caused by a dog to other
animals where adequate recovery is unavailable from either the owner or
through insurance, see RSA 466:21, :22 (2004), it does not extend this liability
to property damage resulting from alleged violations of the Dog Control Law.
Nor can we divine any implied intent to do so, particularly in the face of the
plain language of the Dog Control Law, which permits, but does not compel,
law enforcement officers to impound dogs and issue notices of violation to their
owners. See RSA 466:30-a, III, IV. The trial court, therefore, erred as a matter
of law by imposing liability upon the Town under the statute.
Nor can liability otherwise be predicated upon common law municipal
negligence. See, e.g., Doucette v. Town of Bristol, 138 N.H. 205, 210 (1993).
To prevail upon such a claim, the plaintiff must allege and prove a breach of a
duty of care by the defendant that proximately caused the plaintiff’s injury. Id.
In the context of municipal liability, the concepts of duty and legal causation
are closely related and must be considered together. See Island Shore Estates
Condo. Assoc. v. City of Concord, 136 N.H. 300, 304 (1992). The determination
of legal duty focuses upon the policy issues that define the scope of the
relationship between the parties. The relevant inquiry, therefore, is “whether
the plaintiff’s interests are entitled to legal protection [from the defendant’s
conduct, or] at the defendant’s hands, against the invasion which has in fact
occurred.” Id. (quotation omitted). The existence of a duty depends upon what
risks, if any, are reasonably foreseeable under the particular circumstances.
2
See Doucette, 138 N.H. at 210. The resolution of the question of duty and legal
causality ultimately depends upon consideration of the competing policy
reasons for and against the recognition of a duty. Island Shores Condo. Assoc.,
136 N.H. at 304. Based upon the circumstances in this case, we decline to
impose a legal duty upon the Town to prevent a stray dog from wandering onto
the plaintiff’s property and chewing on his dwelling. To hold otherwise would
impermissibly make the Town a guarantor of public peace, safety and welfare.
See Doucette, 138 N.H. at 210. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s order.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3