THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
U.S. District Court
No. 2006-751
CHRISTINE C. ENG KHABBAZ, BY AND THROUGH
HER MOTHER AND NEXT FRIEND, DONNA M. ENG
v.
COMMISSIONER, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
Argued: May 9, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 9, 2007
Hamblett & Kerrigan, P.A., of Nashua (Timothy G. Kerrigan and Jennifer
R. Schick on the brief, and Mr. Kerrigan orally), for the plaintiff.
United States Department of Justice, of Washington, D.C., (Nicholas J.
Patterson and Richard G. Lepley on the brief, and Mr. Patterson orally), Peter
D. Keisler, assistant attorney general, on the brief, Thomas P. Colantuono,
United States Attorney (David L. Broderick, Assistant United States Attorney,
on the brief), United States Social Security Administration (Karen J. Aviles and
Nancy B. Salafia, attorneys, Office of General Counsel and Office of Program
Law, on the brief), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 34, the United States
District Court for the District of New Hampshire (Barbadoro, J.) certified the
following question for our consideration:
Is a child conceived after her father’s death via
artificial insemination eligible to inherit from her
father as his surviving issue under New Hampshire
intestacy law?
We respond in the negative.
The district court’s order provides the following facts. Donna M. Eng and
Rumzi Brian Khabbaz were married in September 1989 and, six years later,
had a son together. In April 1997, Mr. Khabbaz was diagnosed with a terminal
illness. Subsequently, he began to bank his sperm so that his wife could
conceive a child through artificial insemination. He also executed a consent
form indicating that the sperm could be used by his wife “to achieve a
pregnancy” and that it was his “desire and intent to be legally recognized as the
father of the child to the fullest extent allowable by law.” Mr. Khabbaz died on
May 23, 1998.
Christine C. Eng Khabbaz was conceived by artificial insemination after
Mr. Khabbaz’s death, using his banked sperm, and was born in the summer of
2000. At some point thereafter, she sought social security survivor’s benefits.
Under federal law, her eligibility for the benefits depends upon whether she can
inherit from her father under state intestacy law. As the federal district court
explained:
[U]nder the Social Security Act (the “Act”), an
individual who is the “child” of an insured wage earner
and is dependent on the insured at the time of his
death is entitled to child’s insurance benefits. 42
U.S.C. § 402(d)(1). In determining “child” status, the
Act instructs the Commissioner [to] . . . apply such
law as would be applied in determining the devolution
of intestate personal property by the courts of the
State in which such insured individual was domiciled
at the time of his death. Applicants who according to
such law would have the same status relative to taking
intestate personal property as a child of parent shall
be deemed such. Thus, if Christine may inherit from
Mr. Khabbaz as his surviving issue under New
Hampshire intestacy law, she is considered to be the
“child” of Mr. Khabbaz under the Act and is therefore
entitled to child’s insurance benefits.
(Quotation, citation, brackets and ellipses omitted.)
2
The Commissioner of the Social Security Administration (commissioner)
denied Christine’s application for survivor’s benefits based upon an
interpretation of RSA 561:1, our state’s intestacy distribution statute. After a
hearing, an administrative law judge upheld the commissioner’s decision, and
the Appeals Council of the Social Security Administration subsequently
affirmed. Christine then appealed the commissioner’s decision to the federal
district court. Recognizing that this case raises an unresolved question of New
Hampshire law, the district court certified the question to us.
Responding to the certified question requires us to interpret our state
intestacy statutes. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final
arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Chase v. Ameriquest Mortgage Co., 155 N.H. ___, ___,
921 A.2d 369, 372 (2007). When examining the language of the statute, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. at ___, 921 A.2d
at 372. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. at ___, 921 A.2d at 373.
RSA chapter 561 (2007) sets forth a comprehensive scheme for estate
distribution. RSA 561:1, in particular, governs the devolution of the real and
personal estate upon intestacy. RSA 561:1, I, prescribes the circumstances
under which a surviving spouse may take from the estate. RSA 561:1, II, in
turn, describes the procedure for distributing that portion of the intestate
estate not passing to the surviving spouse. It provides:
The part of the intestate estate not passing to the
surviving spouse under paragraph I, or the entire
intestate estate if there is no surviving spouse, passes
as follows:
(a) To the issue of the decedent equally if they are
all of the same degree of kinship to the decedent, but if
of unequal degree, then those of more remote degree
take by representation.
(b) If there are no surviving issue, to the
decedent’s parent or parents equally.
(c) If there are no surviving issue or parent, to the
brothers and sisters and the issue of each deceased
brother or sister by representation; if there is no
surviving brother or sister, the issue of brothers and
sisters take equally if they are all of the same degree of
3
kinship to the decedent, but if of unequal degree then
those of more remote degree take by representation.
(d) If there are no surviving issue, parent or issue
of a parent but the decedent is survived by one or
more grandparents, one half of the estate passes to the
paternal grandparents if both survive or to the
surviving paternal grandparent if one paternal
grandparent is deceased and the other half passes to
the maternal grandparents in the same manner; or if
only one grandparent survives, such grandparent shall
receive the entire estate.
(e) If there are no surviving issue, parent, issue of
a parent, or grandparent but there are issue of the
decedent’s grandparent who survive, one half of the
estate passes to the issue of the paternal grandparent
who are not beyond the fourth degree of kinship to the
decedent and said issue shall take equally if they are
all of the same degree of kinship to the decedent, but if
of unequal degree those of more remote degree take by
representation, and the other half passes to the issue
of the maternal grandparent who are not beyond the
fourth degree of kinship and said issue shall take
equally if they are all of the same degree of kinship to
the decedent, but if of unequal degree those of more
remote degree take by representation; provided,
however, that if there are no issue of the decedent’s
grandparent within the fourth degree of kinship to the
decedent on either the paternal or maternal side, the
entire estate passes to the issue on the other side who
are not beyond the fourth degree of kinship to the
decedent and said issue shall take equally if they are
all of the same degree of kinship to the decedent, but if
of unequal degree those of more remote degree take by
representation.
(f) No portion of a decedent’s intestate estate shall
pass to any person who is of the fifth or greater degree
of kinship to the decedent.
(g) If there is no taker under the provisions of this
section, the intestate estate passes to the state of New
Hampshire.
4
Eng argues that her daughter is a “surviving issue” within the meaning
of the statute. However, the plain meaning of the word “surviving” is
“remaining alive or in existence.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
2303 (unabridged ed. 2002). In order to remain alive or in existence after her
father passed away, Eng would necessarily have to have been “alive” or “in
existence” at the time of his death. She was not. She was conceived more than
a year after his death. It follows, therefore, that neither she nor any
posthumously conceived child is a “surviving issue” within the plain meaning
of the statute.
Alternatively, Eng contends that even if her daughter is not a “surviving
issue,” RSA 561:1, II(a) does not include the word “surviving,” and therefore it
applies to any “issue” – including posthumously conceived children. She
argues that her position is buttressed by RSA 21:20 (2000), which defines
“issue” as “includ[ing] all the lawful lineal descendants of the ancestor.”
In isolation, the provisions cited by Eng might support her position.
However, we do not construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to do so
in harmony with the overall statutory scheme. Chase, 155 N.H. at ___, 921
A.2d at 373. Parts (b) through (e) of RSA 561:1, II all expressly reference
“surviving issue” in describing the order of distribution. Thus, when viewed as
a whole, RSA 561:1, II evinces a clear legislative intent to create an overall
statutory scheme under which those who “survive” a decedent – that is, those
who remain alive at the time of the decedent’s death – may inherit in a timely
and orderly fashion contingent upon who is alive. To hold that part (a) does
not require the decedent’s issue to “survive” would undermine the orderly
distribution process clearly contemplated by the legislature. See id. at ___, 921
A.2d at 373 (when interpreting two or more statutes that deal with a similar
subject matter, we construe them so that they do not contradict each other,
and so that they will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative
purpose of the statutes). Accordingly, when part (a) is interpreted in light of
parts (b) through (e) and viewed within its larger statutory context, the absence
of the word “surviving” in part (a) makes no difference in determining how the
decedent’s property is distributed.
RSA 21:20 does not compel a contrary result. RSA chapter 21 (2000 &
Supp. 2006) sets forth general rules of statutory construction, including the
definition of “issue” found at RSA 21:20. RSA 21:1 provides, however, that the
definitions in RSA chapter 21 shall be observed in construing statutes “unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
legislature or repugnant to the context of the same statute.” To conclude that
RSA 21:20 broadens RSA 561:1, II(a) to include all issue – whether surviving or
not – would undermine the finality and orderly distribution that the legislature
clearly contemplated. After all, on a practical level, children may be conceived
posthumously several years after an individual’s death, and waiting for the
5
potential birth of a posthumously conceived child could tie up estate
distributions indefinitely. Moreover, in terms of how the statutory scheme
operates, requiring estates to wait for the potential birth of a posthumously
conceived child would render meaningless the contingency scheme created by
RSA 561:1, II(b) – II(e) because application of those parts is dependent upon a
determination of the existence of “surviving issue,” a determination that cannot
be made if using a male’s banked sperm any time after his death could create
“issue” entitled to inherit under the statute. Accordingly, because application
of the definition of “issue” in RSA 21:20 would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the legislature and repugnant to the context of RSA 561:1, II,
we do not apply it. RSA 21:1.
We also reject Eng’s further argument that another statute, RSA 561:4,
renders her daughter eligible to inherit under New Hampshire intestacy law.
RSA 561:4 describes the inheritance rights of children born to unwed parents.
It provides:
I. A child born of unwed parents shall inherit from
or through his mother as if born in lawful wedlock.
The estate of a person born of unwed parents dying
intestate and leaving no issue, nor husband, nor wife
shall descend to the mother, and, if the mother is
dead, through the line of the mother as if the person
so dying were born in lawful wedlock.
II. A child born of unwed parents shall inherit from
or through his father as if born in lawful wedlock,
under any of the following conditions:
(a) Intermarriage of the parents after the birth of
the child.
(b) Acknowledgment of paternity or legitimation by
the father.
(c) A court decree adjudges the decedent to be the
father before his death.
(d) Paternity is established after the death of the
father by clear and convincing evidence.
(e) The decedent had adopted the child.
RSA 561:4.
6
Eng contends that Mr. Khabbaz’s death ended the marriage, leaving
Christine born to unwed parents and eligible to inherit from her father as long
as she satisfied any of the conditions listed in RSA 561:4, II (a) – (e). We
disagree. Viewed as a whole, RSA 561:4 evinces a clear legislative intent to
establish a scheme of inheritance rights, upon intestacy, for illegitimate
children. See N.H.S. Jour. 899 (1983) (“This [bill] would provide for an
illegitimate child whose mother and father dies intestate, to be able to inherit
from both the mother and the father.”). If a man who was both a husband and
a father died during the last few months of his wife’s pregnancy, the parents
would no longer be married; however, he and his wife would not be deemed
“unwed” and no one would question the legitimacy of the child. The same
must be true in the instant case. Although Christine’s father died, her parents
are not “unwed” for purposes of the statute, and she does not argue that she is
illegitimate. To the contrary, she refers to herself as her father’s “legitimate
child.” See RSA 168-B:7 (2002) (child created through artificial insemination is
deemed legitimate). Accordingly, we reject Eng’s contentions based upon RSA
561:4.
Eng also argues that RSA chapter 168-B (2002), a framework governing
artificial insemination, in vitro fertilization, preembryo transfer and surrogacy,
renders her daughter eligible to inherit from Mr. Khabbaz if he died intestate.
RSA 168-B:9, entitled “Intestate and Testate Succession,” provides:
I. Subject to the provisions of paragraph II, a child
shall be considered a child only of his or her parent or
parents, and the parent or parents shall be considered
the parent or parents of the child, as determined
under RSA 168-B:2-5, for purposes of:
(a) Intestate succession.
(b) Taking against the will of any person.
(c) Taking under the will of any person, unless
such will otherwise provides.
(d) Being entitled to any support or similar
allowance during the administration of a parent's
estate.
II. For purposes of paragraph I, a child born of a
surrogate is:
(a) The child of the intended parents from the
moment of the child’s birth unless the surrogate gives
7
notice of her intent to keep the child pursuant to RSA
168-B:25, IV.
(b) The child of the surrogate and her husband, if
any, or if none, the person presumed to be the father
under RSA 168-B:3, I(d), from the moment of the
child’s birth, if the surrogate gives notice of her intent
to keep the child pursuant to RSA 168-B:25, IV.
These provisions establish certain rights for children born by alternative
means. However, nothing in the plain language of RSA 168-B:9 either
affirmatively or implicitly modifies the requirement of RSA 561:1 that the issue
who inherit upon intestacy must be “surviving.” Moreover, to hold that RSA
168-B:9 creates a distribution scheme different from that created by RSA 561:1
would be inconsistent with our practice of construing statutes that deal with a
similar subject matter so that they do not contradict each other, and so that
they will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose.
Chase, 155 N.H. at ___, 921 A.2d at 373.
Eng also argues that the Uniform Simultaneous Death Act (USDA), RSA
chapter 563 (2007), supports her position because “[t]here is no requirement
under the USDA that the surviving individual be in existence, in gestation or in
utero at the time of the death of the individual upon whose death the
survivorship is based, only that they survive the decedent more than one
hundred and twenty hours.” In light of our discussion of “surviving issue”
above, we reject this argument.
Finally, based essentially upon public policy considerations, Eng argues
that we should adopt the reasoning of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court in Woodward v. Commissioner of Social Security, 760 N.E.2d 257 (Mass.
2002). Woodward, however, is distinguishable because it is based upon
Massachusetts statutes that differ from our own. Furthermore, to the extent
Eng argues that public policy requires us to read RSA 561:1, II as allowing
children who are posthumously conceived within a reasonable time after a
parent’s death to inherit, we agree with the special concurrence that “the
intestacy statute . . . essentially leaves an entire class of posthumous[ly
conceived] children unprotected.” However, the present statute requires that
result. To reach the opposite result and adopt the reasoning of Woodward
would require us to add words to a statute, Chase, 155 N.H. at ___, 921 A.2d at
373. We reserve such matters of public policy for the legislature. State v.
Kidder, 150 N.H. 600, 604 (2004). Other state legislatures have grappled with
these issues, and we leave it to ours, if it chooses, to do the same. See, e.g.,
FLA. STAT. § 742.17(4) (2006); LA. ANN. STAT. § 9:391.1(A) (LexisNexis 2004);
N.D. CENT. CODE §§ 14-18-04(2), 14-18-07 (2004); TEX. FAM. CODE ANN.
§ 160.707 (Vernon 2002); VA. CODE ANN. § 20-158(B) (LexisNexis 2004). As the
8
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court observed, reproductive technologies
will grow and advance, and as they do,
the number of children they produce will continue to
multiply. So, too, will the complex moral, legal, social,
and ethical questions that surround their birth. The
questions present in this case cry out for lengthy,
careful examination outside the adversary process,
which can only address the specific circumstances of
each controversy that presents itself. They demand a
comprehensive response reflecting the considered will
of the people.
Woodward, 760 N.E.2d at 272.
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, we answer the certified question
in the negative.
Remanded.
DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J.,
concurred specially.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurring specially. I join the majority’s response to
the certified question because I agree with its conclusion that a reasonable
reading of RSA 561:1, coupled with the majority’s recitation of the statute’s
purpose, establishes that Christine C. Eng Khabbaz is not the “surviving” issue
of Rumzi Brian Khabbaz. I concur, however, with some reluctance. I feel
particularly confined by our construction of the word “surviving,” as I believe it
frustrates a critical purpose of the statute, one different from that articulated
in the majority opinion. I write separately to respectfully urge the legislature to
examine, within the context of the state’s intestacy statute, the confluence of
new, ever-expanding birth technologies and the seemingly arcane language and
presumptions attendant to the settlement of decedents’ estates. I believe that
with time and further technological advances, this confluence will engulf more
and more of our state’s families and the children produced as a consequence of
such advances.
Pursuant to RSA 21:20, Christine is clearly the issue of Mr. Khabbaz
(“The word ‘issue,’ as applied to the descent of estates, shall include all the
lawful lineal descendants of the ancestor.” (emphasis added)). Citing RSA
21:20, Christine’s mother contends that RSA 561:1, II(a) includes her daughter
as Mr. Khabbaz’s issue. In response to this contention, the majority correctly
notes that RSA 21:1 precludes the use of the statutory definition of “issue” in
the construction of RSA 561:1, II(a) when such construction “would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislature or repugnant to the
9
context of the same statute.” The majority then concludes that including all
“issue” under RSA 561:1, II(a) “would undermine the finality and orderly
distribution that the legislature clearly contemplated.”
While I agree that an expansive reading of “issue” within the context of
RSA 561:1, II(a) could serve to delay the final settlement of intestate estates in
some cases, I believe that it is important to recognize a critical purpose of the
intestacy statute; that is, the protection of an intestate decedent’s spouse and
issue and the preservation of wealth for them, pursuant to principles of equity
and equality. See, e.g., 23 Am. Jur. 2d Descent and Distribution § 4 (2002);
see also Woodward v. Commissioner of Social Sec., 760 N.E.2d 257, 264-65
(Mass. 2002) (“[W]hether posthumously conceived genetic children may enjoy
inheritance rights under the intestacy statute implicates three powerful State
interests: the best interests of children, the State’s interest in the orderly
administration of estates, and the reproductive rights of the genetic parent.”).
This protective purpose has also been recognized by our probate observers.
See 11 C. DeGrandpre, New Hampshire Practice, Probate Law and Procedure
§ 54-9, at 93 (3d. ed. 2001) (“[B]ecause the word ‘issue’ as used in the intestacy
statute (RSA 561:1) has been statutorily defined to mean ‘all lawful lineal
descendants’ of a decedent (RSA 21:20), after born children come within this
broad definition and are protected and included as takers under the intestacy
laws.” (emphasis added)).
In rejecting the application of the definition of issue in RSA 21:20 to RSA
561:1, II(a), the majority notes that “on a practical level, children may be
conceived posthumously several years after an individual’s death, and waiting
for the potential birth of a posthumously conceived child could tie up estate
distributions indefinitely.” While I agree that inordinate delay in the settlement
of intestate estates would be against the intent of the legislature, I add two
observations. First, RSA 561:1 may reasonably be read to already include an
internal timeframe for the distribution of an intestate estate, beyond which a
posthumous child, conceived either before or after the death of the parent,
would not take. Specifically, the statute provides that:
The real estate and personal estate of every person deceased,
not devised or bequeathed . . . and personally remaining in the
hands of the administrator on settlement of his or her account,
shall descend or be distributed by decree of the probate court.
(Emphasis added.) As such, the statute could reasonably be read to provide for
posthumous children to take their intestate share as “issue” when born before
the final settlement of the administrator’s account. Such a reading of the
statute could serve to preserve the finality and orderly distribution of intestate
estates contemplated by the legislature. Second, and more important, such a
statutory construction would serve to protect posthumous children from taking
10
nothing under a statute intended, at least in part, to protect the issue of the
intestate.
To construe the intestacy statute as we have done today essentially
leaves an entire class of posthumous children unprotected under the intestacy
statute. Such a result is undesirable, although seemingly required under the
present statute. The resulting anomaly in our holding is underscored by the
clear expression of the legislature’s intent in two related statutes.
Within the context of wills, RSA 551:10 provides:
Every child born after the decease of the testator, and every
child or issue of a child of the deceased not named or referred to
in his will, and who is not a devisee or legatee, shall be entitled to
the same portion of the estate, real and personal, as he would be if
the deceased were intestate.
The statute creates a rule of law, not merely a presumption, that pretermission
is accidental, in order to prevent a mistake or unintended failure by the
testator to remember the natural object of his or her bounty. In re Estate of
Treloar, 151 N.H. 460, 462 (2004). The statute and its predecessors have
served, for at least 185 years, to protect children, including posthumous
children. See Eyre v. Storer, 37 N.H. 114, 122-23 (1858). Had Mr. Khabbaz
executed a will, and neither mentioned nor referred to Christine, she
presumably would take an intestate share of his estate, even if her taking
would defeat other provisions of his will. Id. at 123 (“Being born after the
death of her father, and in no way named or provided for in his will, she must
have inherited all his property, as if he had died intestate; in other words, [his]
will would have been wholly inoperative.”). In the instant case, Mr. Khabbaz
did not execute a will, but his intentions to have and to provide for his child
were clear. Our reading of RSA 561:1, however, leaves Christine unprotected
and ignores what we know to be his intent. See In re Estate of Kirkpatrick, 77
P.3d 404, 412 (Wyo. 2003) (“The general purpose of intestacy statutes is to
distribute a decedent’s estate upon their death in a pattern that would closely
represent the distribution the decedent would have chosen had he manifested
his intent through the use of a will.”).
Far more recently, the legislature enacted RSA chapter 168-B, which
comprises a statutory scheme that recognizes artificial insemination, in vitro
fertilization, preembryo transfer, and surrogacy procedures. The statutory
chapter became effective in 1991, prior to both the 1998 and 2003 legislative
amendments to RSA 561:1. Our rules of statutory construction and our
decision today lead to an apparently unintended result — that although
assisted reproductive technologies are recognized and accepted under RSA
chapter 168-B, a class of children who are the fruit of that technology will have
11
fewer rights and protections than other children when intestacy is involved.
See Woodward, 760 N.E.2d at 265.
Finally, we have rejected Christine’s mother’s argument that we adopt
the reasoning of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in Woodward v.
Commissioner of Social Security. While I agree that Woodward is
distinguishable from the instant case because of a difference in our statutory
schemes, that difference centers on a “posthumous children” provision in the
Commonwealth’s intestacy statute. Specifically, “[p]osthumous children shall
be considered as living at the death of their parent.” Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch.
190, § 8 (2004). The Massachusetts statute does not distinguish between
those posthumous children conceived before, and those conceived after the
death of the parent. In virtually all other respects, Woodward and the case at
hand are the same.
The certified question from the United States District Court for the
District of Massachusetts asked if a child conceived, through sperm banking
and artificial insemination between a husband and wife, after the husband’s
death, was entitled to take under the Commonwealth’s intestacy laws.
Woodward, 760 N.E.2d at 259. The Supreme Judicial Court recognized that
the posthumous children provision did not, on its face, limit the definition of
posthumous children to those in utero at the time of the parent’s death. Id. at
262. The court then looked to the purpose of the provision (“to preserve wealth
for consanguineous descendants,” id. at 264), and balanced the state interests
of the best interests of children, the orderly administration of estates, and the
reproductive rights of the genetic parent. Id. at 265-70. The court concluded
that in certain limited circumstances, posthumously conceived children could
take under the Commonwealth’s intestacy statute. Those limited
circumstances existed where a genetic relationship is demonstrated between
the child and the decedent, and where the decedent affirmatively consented to
both posthumous conception and the support of any resulting child. Id. at
259, 272. Even when such circumstances existed, however, the court noted
that certain time limitations might preclude commencing a claim for
succession rights on behalf of a posthumously conceived child. Id.
While I concur with the majority opinion, I respectfully urge the
legislature to examine Woodward v. Commissioner of Social Security, the
pertinent statutes of those states cited in the majority opinion, and the few
other cases that have addressed related situations, in deciding the optimum
course of action. See, e.g., In re Estate of Kolacy, 753 A.2d 1257 (N.J. Super.
Ct. Ch. Div. 2000) (posthumously conceived children declared legal heirs of
deceased parent under state’s intestacy law in order to pursue survivor benefits
with Social Security Administration). I believe that the parents of this state
who avail themselves of the assisted reproductive technologies outlined in RSA
chapter 168-B, the children produced through such technologies, the parents’
12
lineal descendants, and those charged with the administration of intestate
estates deserve such legislative focus.
13