Amended 12/4/07
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2006-587
PHILIP J. TANGUAY & a.
v.
BURTON H. BIATHROW & a.
Argued: May 10, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 17, 2007
Decato Law Office, of Lebanon (John B. Loftus, III on the brief and
orally), for the petitioners.
Janson & Koppenheffer, LLP, of Lebanon (William K. Koppenheffer on the
brief and orally), for the respondents.
HICKS, J. The respondents, Burton and Barbara Biathrow, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (Burling, J.) granting the petition of the petitioners,
Philip, Nancy and Barbara Tanguay, to quiet title to their property, against
which the respondents assert an appurtenant easement. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts relevant to this appeal. The
petitioners and the respondents own parcels of land in Lebanon located along
the abandoned Northern Railroad corridor. The respondents’ parcel lies north
of the corridor and the petitioners’ parcel lies to the south.
In the 1800s, Benjamin Colburn owned all this land. In 1846, Colburn
conveyed his land lying south of the corridor to the Railroad by quitclaim deed
as follows:
Meaning to convey all the land I own[ ] between said
Rail Road and the Pond being about three acres . . .
more or less. Said land is bought by said Rail Road
Company Expressly for the Benefit of grading and
repairing said road and the said Rail Road Company
have the right to take and use all or any part of said
land for the above purpose and it is further agreed by
the said Northern Rail Road Company that the said
Colb[u]rn has the right and privilege to use said land
for his own use and benefit not interfering with the
above[-]granted privilege in any way, and the said
Colb[u]rn is to furnish a passway at his own Expense
to said land not obstructing in any way said Rail Road.
At the time of the transfer, Colburn retained his land to the north of the
corridor, which the respondents assert was the dominant estate Colburn
sought to benefit by reservation of the above easement.
The respondents argue that, as Colburn’s successors in title to the land
to the north, they are entitled to the use and enjoyment of the land conveyed to
the Railroad in 1846, which now encompasses a portion of the petitioners’
land. The petitioners argue, inter alia, that the 1846 deed created an easement
in gross, personal to Colburn, which terminated upon his death. The trial court
agreed with the petitioners.
The interpretation of a deed is a question of law. Motion Motors v.
Berwick, 150 N.H. 771, 775 (2004). When the language of the deed is clear
and unambiguous, a court must interpret the intended meaning from the deed
itself without resort to extrinsic evidence. Id. We review the trial court’s
interpretation of the deed de novo. Id.
Citing Burcky v. Knowles, 120 N.H. 244 (1980), the trial court ruled that
the use of the language “his own use and benefit”
without reference to any other tract of land refers to a
mere personal interest. . . . Even though a lack of a
dominant estate is not determinative that a reservation
in a deed creates an easement in gross, applying the
reasoning in Burcky, this Court finds that, in this
case, the combined effect of no dominant estate and
the language chosen by . . . Colburn referring to
2
himself [“his own”], leads this Court to the conclusion
that the parties intended the reservation to be an
easement in gross[.]
We hold that the language of the deed is unambiguous and that the trial
court correctly ruled that Colburn reserved an easement in gross. We base this
holding in large measure upon the nature of easements and the nature of the
rights associated therewith. See Arcidi v. Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 698
(2004).
An appurtenant easement is a nonpossessory
right to the use of another’s land. It creates two
distinct estates -- the dominant estate, which is the
land that benefits by the use of the easement, and the
servient estate, which is the land burdened by the
easement. An appurtenant easement is incapable of
existence separate and apart from the dominant
estate. The benefit of an appurtenant easement can be
used only in conjunction with ownership or occupancy
of a particular parcel of land.
An easement in gross is also a nonpossessory
right to the use of another’s land, but it is a mere
personal interest. There is a servient estate, but no
dominant estate, because the easement benefits its
holder whether or not the holder owns or possesses
other land. An easement in gross grants to the holder
the right to enter and make use of the property of
another for a particular purpose.
Id. at 698-99 (quotations and citations omitted).
Here, the deed provided that Colburn had the right and privilege to use
said land for his own use and benefit. While we recognize that appurtenant
easements are generally favored over easements in gross, Burcky, 120 N.H. at
248, here, the inclusion of his name, combined with the words “his own use”
demonstrates Colburn’s intent to retain a personal, nontransferable interest in
the land. Colburn expressed no intention that the easement right be reserved
“for the benefit of the property retained.” 28A C.J.S. Easements § 12(a) at 186
(1996). To the contrary, the deed reserves the right for Colburn’s “own use.”
See id. (“[I]f it appears from . . . construction [of the deed] that the parties
intended to create a right to be attached to the person . . . by whom it was
reserved, it will be deemed to be an easement in gross.”).
3
The respondents argue that an appurtenant easement was created based
upon: (1) the presence of a dominant estate to the north; (2) “the limitations
placed upon the railroad’s use of the land, and the rights Colburn retained to
use the land”; and (3) the respondents’ chain of title, which shows that their
predecessors have “claimed and used the disputed parcel” throughout the
years. They further argue that the trial court erred in drawing an inference
from the lack of words of inheritance.
The respondents argue that a dominant estate is imposed by the
following language: “said Colb[u]rn is to furnish a passway at his own Expense
to said land not obstructing in any way said Rail Road.” This language,
however, makes no mention of a dominant estate; it merely expresses the
parties’ intention that Colburn was to “furnish” his own access to the land and
that the Railroad had no obligation to provide access.
The respondents then argue that even if this language is not interpreted
to impose a dominant estate, the “lack of a dominant estate does not
necessar[ily] result in an easement in gross.” While this may be an accurate
statement of the law, it does not affect our holding here, which is based upon
the unambiguous language of the deed reserving an easement to Colburn for
“his own use.”
The respondents also urge that an appurtenant easement is created by
language in the deed which limited the Railroad’s use of the land to “grading
and repairing” the railroad bed but gave Colburn the broad right to use the
land in a manner “not interfering” with the Railroad’s use. However, any
restrictions that Colburn, as the grantor, placed upon the Railroad’s use of the
land in the transfer of the property are irrelevant to the type of easement
reserved by Colburn. Similarly, the scope of the use retained by Colburn also
has no bearing on this issue.
The respondents’ remaining arguments regarding this issue are without
merit and do not warrant further discussion. Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322
(1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
4