THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-231
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER DOYLE
Argued: September 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 17, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (James W. Kennedy, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Sherman & Ricker, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Michael A. Ricker on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from the Superior Court’s
(Coffey, J.) denial of the defendant’s motion to dismiss the indictment. We
affirm and remand.
The trial court approved the following facts in the interlocutory appeal
statement. On March 8, 2005, Gail Webster was acting as supervisor of the
checklist for the Town of Windham’s annual town election. As supervisor of
the checklist, Webster was the “election official,” see RSA 652:14 (Supp. 2006),
responsible for registering voters and maintaining the town’s voter checklist,
see RSA 652:15 (1996). At the same time, however, Webster was running in
the election for “Trustee of Cemetery.”
At the election, the defendant allegedly became involved in a fight
between his father and a third party. Webster attempted to locate a police
officer to quell this skirmish and, the State alleges, was pushed by the
defendant. As a result, the State charged the defendant with felonious assault
upon a town officer pursuant to RSA 659:41 (1996). The indictment alleged
that the defendant “did knowingly cause unprivileged physical contact to Gail
Webster by striking her in the chest with his hand or hands while she was
acting in her official capacity as a town officer at an election.”
The defendant moved to dismiss the indictment, arguing that because
Webster was on the ballot for trustee of the cemetery she was disqualified from
acting as an election official, see RSA 658:24 (1996), and thus was not a town
officer “discharging a duty of h[er] office” as required by RSA 659:41. The trial
court denied the motion, ruling that RSA 658:24 did not prevent the
defendant’s prosecution under RSA 659:41 because, “[w]hile as a matter of law
Ms. Webster ought to have been disqualified from acting as Supervisor of the
Checklist at the Windham election, in reality she was not.”
To obtain a conviction for assault upon a town officer, the State must
prove that: (1) the defendant assaulted a “town, city, or ward officer”; and (2)
at the time of the assault, said officer was “in the discharge of any duty of his
office at any election.” RSA 659:41. The defendant argues that the State
cannot carry this burden because, pursuant to RSA 658:24, Webster was
automatically disqualified from acting as supervisor of the checklist at the
Windham election. Therefore, according to the defendant, all acts conducted
by Webster at the election were void, and, as a result, Webster was not
discharging “a duty of h[er] office” at the time of the alleged assault as required
under RSA 659:41. The State disagrees and emphasizes that, regardless of
whether she should have been disqualified, Webster was discharging duties of
her office at the time of the assault. The State contends that Webster therefore
remains protected under RSA 659:41 as, at minimum, a de facto town officer.
Resolution of this case requires an analysis of RSA 658:24 and 659:41.
In interpreting the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used and discern the legislative intent from the statute
as written. ElderTrust of Fla. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H. 693, 697 (2007). We
will not consider what the legislature might have said, or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. However, we are the final arbiters of
the legislature’s intent as it is expressed in the words of the statute considered
as a whole. Id.
With these principles in mind, we turn first to the disqualification
statute, RSA 658:24. In pertinent part, RSA 658:24 provides:
2
Any person whose name appears on a ballot for an elective
position . . . shall be disqualified from performing duties as
an election official in that election. A person so disqualified
shall not be considered to have vacated any office but rather
only to be absent therefrom. A temporary replacement shall
be appointed as provided in RSA 658:19-658:22.
At the outset, we agree with the defendant that RSA 658:24 is self-
executing. The legislature clearly evidenced its intent to make disqualification
compulsory by using the auxiliary verb “shall.” See City of Rochester v.
Corpening, 153 N.H. 571, 574 (2006). “[T]he word ‘shall’ is generally regarded
as a command; although not controlling, it is significant as indicating the
intent that the statute is mandatory.” McCarthy v. Wheeler, 152 N.H. 643, 645
(2005). Had the legislature intended disqualification to be conditional, it would
have chosen more permissive language, such as “may” or “might.” See City of
Rochester, 153 N.H. at 574. We therefore agree with the defendant that
Webster’s candidacy for trustee of the cemetery automatically disqualified her
from registering voters at this particular Windham election.
The more difficult question posed by this appeal is what effect this
disqualification has on Webster’s status at the time of the election, considering
she was nevertheless performing duties customary for a supervisor of the
checklist. See RSA 652:15. We do not believe, as the defendant suggests, that
it necessarily follows from Webster’s disqualification that all duties performed
by her at the election were null and void ab initio. We find no support for this
proposition in the language of RSA 658:24. Indeed, the only remedy that the
disqualification statute explicitly provides for is the appointment of a
“temporary replacement” for any disqualified officer. RSA 658:24. On its face,
RSA 658:24 appears to be more limited in its effects than the defendant urges.
We believe that for purposes of this appeal, the most salient language of
RSA 658:24 is found in the second sentence. There, the legislature explains
that a disqualified town officer is not “considered to have vacated any office but
rather only to be absent therefrom.” RSA 658:24. In other words, a
disqualified officer retains possession of his or her respective office even though
legally the officer is absent. Id. This distinction becomes significant in light of
the specific language of the assault statute, RSA 659:41:
Any person who shall assault a town, city, or ward officer
. . . in the discharge of any duty of his office at any election
shall be guilty of a class A felony or a class B felony, but
never less than a class B felony, other provisions of the law
to the contrary notwithstanding.
3
(Emphasis added.) The legislature’s use of the phrase “any duty of his office”
means that the focus in applying this criminal statute is upon whether the
officer was discharging duties customarily assigned to his office. Id. The
statute does not, as the defendant urges, turn upon the individualized duties of
the particular town officer. Were we to say that it did, we would in essence be
ignoring the legislature’s inclusion of the word “office” in RSA 659:41. See
State v. Rix, 150 N.H. 131, 132 (2003) (“Courts can neither ignore the plain
language of the legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not see fit
to include.”). The legislature chose to focus on the duties of the office rather
than the duties of the officer. We therefore find that town officers are afforded
protection under RSA 659:41 when they are assaulted while discharging a duty
ordinarily assigned to their office.
Webster meets this standard. As discussed above, although Webster had
been disqualified to act, she was still in possession of the office of supervisor of
the checklist. See RSA 658:24. She therefore retained her title as a town
officer despite her legal absence. See id. Because Webster was aiding in the
administration of the checklist, a responsibility customarily assigned to the
supervisor of the checklist, she was also engaged in a duty of her office. See
RSA 652:15. That Webster was disqualified to so act is of no consequence
since she was still discharging duties of “her office.” RSA 659:41.
However, even if we were to agree with the defendant that a criminal
charge under RSA 659:41 requires analysis of the individual town officer’s
duties, Webster would nevertheless remain protected because she acted as a de
facto officer. “Broadly speaking, an officer de facto is one who has the
reputation of being the officer he or she assumes to be, and yet is not a good
officer in point of law.” 67 C.J.S. Officers and Public Employees § 339 (2002).
Under the doctrine, “[a] person who enters into an office and undertakes the
performance of the duties thereof by virtue of an election or appointment, is an
officer de facto, though he . . . has subsequently become disabled to hold the
office.” Center Hill Sch. Dist. No. 32 v. Hunt, 110 S.W.2d 523, 525 (Ark. 1937)
(quotation omitted); see also Health Facility Inv. v. Ga. Dept. of Human
Resources, 233 S.E.2d 351, 352 (Ga. 1977) (“[A]lthough a person may be
absolutely ineligible to hold” public office, his official acts while in office “are
valid as the acts of an officer de facto.” (quotation omitted)). The practical effect
of the doctrine is to remove any distinction between the acts of a de facto and a
de jure officer insofar as the public and third persons are concerned. 67 C.J.S.
Officers and Public Employees § 349 (2002).
To qualify as a de facto officer, the officer’s title need not be good in law
but she must be in unobstructed possession of her office and discharging its
duties in full view of the public. State v. Porter, 158 S.E.2d 626, 628 (N.C.
1968); see also State v. Oren, 627 A.2d 337, 339 (Vt. 1993). Moreover, as we
have stated previously, the de facto officer doctrine is:
4
founded upon considerations of policy and necessity, for the
protection of the public and individuals whose interests may be
affected thereby. Offices are created for the benefit of the public,
and private parties are not permitted to inquire into the title of
persons clothed with the evidence of such offices and in apparent
possession of their powers and functions.
State v. Boiselle, 83 N.H. 339, 341-42 (1928) (quotation omitted). Accordingly,
once a person is deemed a de facto officer, “[f]or the good order and peace of
society [her] authority is to be respected and obeyed until in some regular mode
prescribed by law [her] title is investigated and determined.” Id. at 341. It has
been universally accepted that the regular mode for challenging such an
officer’s title is a suit in which the officer is a party, such as a quo warranto
proceeding. See, e.g., State v. Mitchell, 458 A.2d 1089, 1090 (Vt. 1983).
While we have rarely considered the precise contours of the de facto
officer doctrine, see Boiselle, 83 N.H. at 341-42, the Supreme Court of Vermont
has addressed cases similar to this one and applied the doctrine. See State v.
Mitchell, 458 A.2d at 1090; State v. Oren, 627 A.2d at 340. In State v.
Mitchell, the defendant was convicted under a statute providing for an
enhanced penalty for assaults upon “a law enforcement officer performing a
lawful duty.” Mitchell, 458 A.2d at 1089-90. The defendant argued on appeal
that his victim had failed to complete a statutorily-required training course and
thus his appointment as deputy sheriff was void. Id. at 1090. As a result, the
defendant asserted that his victim had not been a law enforcement officer
“performing a lawful duty” as required by the statute. Id. The court found it
unnecessary to pass upon the defendant’s argument because, irrespective of
whether he had the required qualifications for the position, the victim had been
operating under color of law and was thus a de facto officer. Id. Accordingly,
the court held that the defendant was barred from challenging the officer’s title
collaterally in a criminal suit. Id.
Similarly, in State v. Oren, the defendant appealed his conviction for
“hindering a law enforcement officer” after discovering that the purported
officer’s commission had expired seven days prior to the incident with which he
was charged. Oren, 627 A.2d at 338. The defendant asserted that the State
could not prove that his victim was an officer, a material element of the charge,
and therefore the case against him should be dismissed. Id. After considering
evidence indicating that the officer’s commission had lapsed because of a
typographical error in the recording of the expiration date of her appointment,
the court upheld the defendant’s conviction. Id. at 339. In support, the court
reasoned that, regardless of the technical lapse of her appointment, the officer
was a de facto officer at the time of the incident because, in part, she was
acting in the “unobstructed possession” of the office. Id. As a result, the court
5
held that the officer’s status was unassailable by the defendant and the
conviction should be affirmed. Id.
Even if Webster’s legal authority to act technically ceased prior to the
incident giving rise to the charge, id. at 338-39, as in Oren, Webster was in
unobstructed possession of her office at the time of the underlying incident and
discharging her duties in full view and acquiescence of the public. Id. at 339.
We agree with the Vermont Supreme Court that in such cases, where the
public officer appears to retain the imprimatur of the State and is not a mere
usurper, public policy requires that third parties be permitted to rely upon
such officer’s actions “without the necessity of investigating their title.” Id. To
serve this end, the de facto officer doctrine is applicable.
In this case, the defendant has not challenged the legitimacy of Webster’s
appointment to the office of supervisor of the checklist. Nor has the defendant
argued that Webster was not in the unobstructed possession of her office and
discharging its duties in full view and acquiescence of the public at the time of
the incident. To be sure, the record indicates that the deficiency in Webster’s
qualifications caused by RSA 658:24 was not even noticed until after the
defendant was indicted. While Webster’s “rightful authority was gone, color of
authority took its place.” State v. Boiselle, 83 N.H. at 342. Webster was at the
election acting under color of title and was thus a de facto officer. See 67
C.J.S. Officers and Public Employees § 343 (2002) (“Persons having color of
title may be regarded as de facto officers, even though legally they . . . do not
possess the statutory qualifications for the office.”). Accordingly, the validity of
Webster’s acts and her title cannot be collaterally attacked by the defendant in
this criminal case. See Mitchell, 458 A.2d at 1090.
We emphasize that the de facto officer doctrine does not completely
insulate Webster or her actions from challenge. For instance, it is well-settled
that an exception to the doctrine, not relevant here, is that an officer with
defective title is not permitted to invoke the doctrine when a party to a suit.
Oren, 627 A.2d at 339; 67 C.J.S. Officers and Public Employees § 349 (2002).
If this were, therefore, a quo warranto suit, Webster would be unable to invoke
the de facto officer doctrine in her defense. See, e.g., Mitchell, 458 A.2d at
1090. However, in this criminal prosecution of the defendant, Webster is not
considered a party. See id. at 1090. Thus, this exception to the de facto officer
doctrine does not apply. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court because
Webster, as a de facto officer, was discharging duties of her office as required
for a charge under RSA 659:41.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6