THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-928
IN THE MATTER OF JANE L. CARR AND JAMES R. EDMUNDS
Argued: October 17, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 6, 2007
Harvey & Mahoney, P.A., of Manchester (J. Campbell Harvey on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Mosca Law Office, of Manchester (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Jane L. Carr (mother), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Barry, J.) approving the recommendation of the Marital
Master (Dalpra, M.) establishing the child support obligation for the
respondent, James R. Edmunds (father). We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. When the parties were divorced
in 2000, they executed a permanent stipulation, which, among other things,
awarded sole legal and physical custody of their two minor, adopted children to
the mother. In the stipulation, the parties agreed that “it [wa]s in the best
interests of the children that [the father] voluntarily relinquish his parental
rights to the children and that [the mother] assume sole responsibility for
them.” They also agreed that the father would “forthwith file a Probate Court
action relinquishing his rights to the children.” The Superior Court (Sullivan,
J.) approved the stipulation, but added: “If the probate court does not approve
the termination of the [father]’s parental rights, the [mother] shall file a motion
within thirty days of the denial for modification of the stipulation.”
Six years later, on March 3, 2006, the mother filed a motion requesting
that the court order child support under the New Hampshire Child Support
Guidelines (the guidelines). See RSA 458-C:7, I (2004) (amended 2007). The
father objected. Both parties submitted financial affidavits and completed
child support guidelines worksheets. The parties disagreed about the amount
of child support owed. The mother calculated the monthly amount at $648,
while the father calculated it at $594. At a hearing, the mother requested that
the father be ordered to add the children to his dental insurance policy and pay
half of any uncovered orthodontic costs.
After the hearing, the trial court concluded that it was authorized to
order child support. It found that the father had made reasonable efforts to
relinquish his parental rights pursuant to the stipulation, but had been
informed that he could not do so under RSA chapters 170-B or 170-C. In
establishing the amount of support, the trial court found that “a deviation from
the guidelines [wa]s appropriate” because “the [father] ha[d] relied upon the
parties’ prior agreement and ha[d] had little, if any, contact with the children
since the parties were divorced.” Accordingly, the trial court determined that
the father’s child support obligation was $250 per month. It also ordered the
parties to split the costs of “uninsured medical expenses.” The mother appeals
this decision.
We will uphold the trial court’s decision with regard to child support
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or tainted by an error of law. In the
Matter of State & Estate of Crabtree, 155 N.H. 565, 570 (2007).
“New Hampshire’s child support guidelines are codified in RSA chapter
458-C, and establish a uniform system to determine the amount of child
support awards.” In the Matter of Baker & Winkler, 154 N.H. 186, 187 (2006)
(citation omitted). “The purpose of RSA chapter 458-C is not only to ensure
uniformity in determining the amount of child support, but also to ensure that
both the custodial and non-custodial parents share in the support
responsibility for their children, according to the relative percentage of each
parent’s income.” In the Matter of Barrett & Coyne, 150 N.H. 520, 523-24
(2004) (citations omitted). To this end, “[t]hrough a complex scheme of
definitions and formulae, the legislature provided guidelines from which the
trial court . . . determines a parent’s total child support obligation.” Id. at 524
(citations omitted); see RSA 458-C:2 (Supp. 2006) (amended 2007); RSA 458-
C:3 (2004) (amended 2007). “There is a rebuttable presumption that a child
support award calculated under the guidelines is the correct amount of child
support.” Baker & Winkler, 154 N.H. at 187 (citation omitted); RSA 458-C:4, II
(Supp. 2006). The presumption may be overcome and the trial court may
2
deviate from the guidelines when a party shows by a preponderance of the
evidence that the application of the guidelines would be “unjust or
inappropriate” because of “special circumstances.” Baker & Winkler, 154 N.H.
at 187; RSA 458-C:4, II; RSA 458-C:5, I, II (Supp. 2006) (amended 2007).
These guidelines, however, must be applied in all child support cases,
including orders modifying an existing support order. Baker & Winkler, 154
N.H. at 187; RSA 458-C:4, I (Supp. 2006).
The mother argues that the trial court improperly based its deviation
from the guidelines upon the father’s reliance upon the parties’ prior agreement
that the father would relinquish his parental rights, and his lack of contact
with the children after the divorce. The mother reasons that RSA 458-C:5, I,
limited the trial court to considering as “special circumstances” only those
issues that either are fiscal in nature or affect a parent’s ability to provide for a
child’s needs. She also claims that the trial court erred in failing to address
her requests for dental insurance coverage and uncovered orthodontic
expenses.
The father counters that the mother is judicially and equitably estopped
from claiming that the parties’ agreement is not a special circumstance
warranting a downward deviation from the guidelines, and, even if she is not
estopped, the trial court’s bases for deviation were proper under RSA 458-C:5, I
(h) and (j). He also contends that: the trial court’s order regarding health
insurance and uninsured medical expenses sufficiently addressed the mother’s
requests for dental insurance and uncovered orthodontic expenses; the trial
court was not required to make a distinct order with respect to such expenses;
and the trial court was not required to make written findings with respect to
orthodontic costs because the mother never asserted that orthodontic
treatment constituted a special circumstance warranting an upward
adjustment in the child support award.
We first address the father’s estoppel arguments. “The doctrine of
judicial estoppel generally prevents a party from prevailing in one phase of a
case on an argument and then relying on a contradictory argument to prevail
in another phase.” Cohoon v. IDM Software, 153 N.H. 1, 4 (2005) (quotation
and citations omitted); see also Porter v. City of Manchester, 155 N.H. 149, 156
(2007). While the circumstances under which judicial estoppel may be invoked
vary with each situation, the following three factors typically inform the
decision whether to apply the doctrine: (1) whether the party’s later position is
clearly inconsistent with its earlier position; (2) whether the party has
succeeded in persuading a court to accept that party’s earlier position; and (3)
whether the party seeking to assert an inconsistent position would derive an
unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment on the opposing party if not
estopped. Porter, 155 N.H. at 157; Cohoon, 154 N.H. at 4-5.
3
The father argues that because the parties’ agreement at the time of the
stipulation to sever the legal relationship between himself and his children was
a special circumstance under RSA 458-C:5, I, the mother is now judicially
estopped from claiming that that agreement does not qualify as a special
circumstance under that same statute. We disagree.
Specifically with respect to the third judicial estoppel factor, the father
argues that the mother would gain an unfair benefit and he would suffer an
unfair detriment if the mother is not estopped. However, RSA 458-C:7, I, gives
either parent the right to apply for modification of a child support order every
three years, without requiring the moving parent to show a substantial change
of circumstances. A purpose of this statute is to resolve inequities in child
support orders, In the Matter of Peirce & Peirce, 146 N.H. 611, 613 (2001), and
to allow the trial court to account for non-substantial changes in the parties’
economic circumstances and the effect of those changes on the parties’ needs.
Moreover, under RSA 458-C:7, I, the mother was entitled to automatic review of
the existing support obligations by the court. Id. at 614. In reviewing the
modification petition, the trial court was required to recalculate the parties’
total support obligation based upon their current incomes, In the Matter of
Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55, 60 (2005), and reassess whether existing
special circumstances warranted deviation from that obligation. It is therefore
statutorily irrelevant that the parties’ agreement was considered a special
circumstance six years earlier, and, as such, the mother is entitled to argue
that the prior agreement is not presently a special circumstance. The mother
did not gain an unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment upon the father
when she sought to modify child support pursuant to a statutory de novo
review process designed to ensure that child support orders remain equitable.
Because the father has failed to establish that any unfairness resulted from the
mother’s allegedly inconsistent positions, judicial estoppel does not apply.
The father also contends that the mother is equitably estopped from
claiming that the parties’ agreement is not a special circumstance. “Equitable
estoppel serves to forbid one to speak against his own act, representations or
commitments communicated to another who reasonably relies upon them to
his injury.” J.G.M.C.J. Corp. v. C.L.A.S.S., Inc., 155 N.H. 452, 462 (2007)
(citation omitted). The party asserting equitable estoppel must prove: (1) a
knowingly false representation or concealment of material facts; (2) a recipient
who was intentionally, or through culpable neglect, induced to rely upon the
false representation or concealment, and ignorant of the truth; and (3) a
resultant injury. Id. “Under certain circumstances, an estoppel may arise
from silence or inaction, as opposed to an actual misrepresentation. This form
of estoppel, however, is limited to situations where the silent party has
knowledge and a duty to make a disclosure.” Guri (Cushing) v. Guri, 122 N.H.
552, 555 (1982) (citations omitted).
4
The father claims that estoppel may arise from the mother’s failure to
return to the trial court for modification of the support order within thirty days
of the probate court’s decision not to approve the termination of the father’s
parental rights. We disagree. The purpose of child support is to provide
economic support for the children, not the obligee parent. See RSA 458-C:1.
Regardless of the parents’ actions, the children should not be deprived of the
amount of support to which they are entitled. Therefore, equitable estoppel
cannot apply to prevent a court from awarding the proper amount of support to
protect the children, particularly where the legislature has explicitly permitted
parents de novo review of existing support obligations. See RSA 458-C:7, I.
Accordingly, the doctrine of equitable estoppel does not apply.
We now address whether the trial court properly deviated from the child
support guidelines pursuant to RSA 458-C:5, I. In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislative intent as expressed in
the words of the statute considered as a whole. Petition of State of N.H. (State
v. Johanson), 156 N.H. ___, ___ (decided September 5, 2007). When examining
the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. Finally, we interpret a statute in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Bendetson v.
Killarney, Inc., 154 N.H. 637, 641 (2006).
RSA 458-C:5, I, allows for deviation from the guidelines and provides, in
pertinent part:
Special circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the following, if raised by any party to the action or by
the court, shall be considered and may result in
adjustments in the application of support guidelines
provided under this chapter. The court shall make
written findings relative to the applicability of the
following:
. . . .
(h) Parenting schedule;
. . . .
(j) Other special circumstances found by the court to
avoid an unreasonably low or confiscatory support
order, taking all relevant circumstances into
consideration.
(Emphasis added.)
5
The father first argues that his reliance upon the parties’ prior agreement
requiring him to relinquish his parental rights may constitute a special
circumstance under RSA 458-C:5, I(j). We disagree.
“When the legislature uses the phrase ‘including, but not limited to’ in a
statute, the application of that statute is limited to the types of items therein
particularized.” In the Matter of Clark & Clark, 154 N.H. 420, 423 (2006)
(citations omitted); see also In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. 264,
267 (2006). Except for subsection j, all of the special circumstances listed in
RSA 458-C:5, I, are economic in nature and relate to the impact of a parent’s
financial condition upon his or her ability to meet a child’s needs. As a result,
the “other special circumstances” that a court may consider under subsection j
must similarly involve economic factors.
This interpretation is consistent with the stated purpose of RSA chapter
458-C “[t]o minimize the economic consequences of divorce to children,” In the
Matter of Jerome & Jerome, 150 N.H. 626, 630 (2004) (emphasis added;
quotation and brackets omitted), and ensure that children are not deprived of a
standard of living equal to that of the subsequent family of the parent paying
child support, In the Matter of Dolan & Dolan, 147 N.H. 218, 221 (2001). See
also RSA 458-C:1, II (Supp. 2006). It would defeat the statute’s purpose to allow
factors unrelated to the economic circumstances of the parents and children to
dictate whether and to what extent children are financially supported.
Furthermore, we have previously interpreted the special circumstances
set forth in RSA 458-C:5, I, as addressing “matters of support adjustments
based upon income and expenses.” In the Matter of Plaisted & Plaisted, 149
N.H. 522, 526 (2003). We have also held that although gifts and in-kind
benefits do not constitute income for child support purposes, trial courts may
consider their impact upon the financial condition of the parties as special
circumstances under RSA 458-C:5, I(j). Clark, 154 N.H. at 424, 425; Fulton,
154 N.H. at 268. Consistent with this prior case law, we conclude that the
“other special circumstances” that a court may find to avoid an unreasonably
low or confiscatory support order must be economic in nature.
Accordingly, standing alone, the father’s reliance upon the parties’ prior
agreement cannot, as a matter of law, qualify as a special circumstance under
RSA 458-C:5, I(j). No evidence in the record demonstrates how the father’s
reliance upon the stipulation affected his present financial situation such that
the guidelines support amount is confiscatory. Moreover, the trial court did
not find that the father suffered any economic detriment as a result of the
agreement. Therefore, we reject the father’s argument that the trial court’s
decision to deviate from the guidelines based upon his reliance upon the prior
agreement may be upheld under RSA 458-C:5, I(j).
6
The trial court’s other basis for deviation was the father’s lack of contact
with the children since the divorce. The father asserts that this lack of contact
coupled with the mother’s assumption of sole financial responsibility for the
children represent the parties’ “parenting schedule,” which is a special
circumstance under RSA 458-C:5, I(h). He argues that this “parenting
schedule” warrants a downward deviation from the guidelines amount. We
disagree.
RSA 461-A:1, VI (Supp. 2006) defines “parenting schedule” as “the
schedule of when the child is in the care of each parent.” Under a prior version
of RSA 458-C:5, I(h), which listed as a special circumstance “split or shared
custody arrangements,” RSA 458-C:5, I(h) (2004), we noted that sharing equal
physical custody of children may result in a downward adjustment of the
obligor parent’s support obligations, see In the Matter of Folley & Folley, 149
N.H. 393, 395 (2003); Wheaton-Dunberger v. Dunberger, 137 N.H. 504, 508
(1993). This reduction may be appropriate in such circumstances because the
obligor parent assumes virtually the same child-rearing expenses as the obligee
parent. Cf. Wheaton-Dunberger, 137 N.H. at 508-09. The same rationale does
not apply to this case.
Here, pursuant to the “parenting schedule,” the children stay with the
mother at all times, and, consequently, the mother assumes all the child-
rearing expenses. The father has no visitation rights or parenting rights or
responsibilities, and, therefore, incurs no costs in caring for the children
outside of his support obligations. In these circumstances, where the father
assumes no child-rearing expenses as a result of the parenting schedule, it
would be contrary to the purpose of the child support statute to allow the
father to pay less than the guidelines amount. Cf. Bourdon v. Bourdon, 105
N.H. 432, 433-34 (1964); Guggenheimer v. Guggenheimer, 99 N.H. 399, 403
(1955). Therefore, we reject the father’s contention that a downward deviation
from the guidelines was justified under RSA 458-C:5, I(h).
Furthermore, to the extent the father also contends that his lack of
contact with the children constituted another special circumstance under RSA
458-C:5, I(j), we reject that argument for the same reasons set forth above with
respect to the father’s reliance upon the prior agreement. The father’s lack of
contact is not economic in nature and has no relation to the parties’ financial
situation. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s finding that special
circumstances warranted a downward deviation from the guidelines, and
remand to the trial court for calculation of the father’s support obligation under
the guidelines. See In the Matter of Gordon & Gordon, 147 N.H. 693, 700
(2002).
Finally, the mother contends that the trial court erred in failing to
address her requests for dental insurance coverage and payment of uncovered
7
orthodontic expenses. The record is ambiguous as to whether the trial court
ruled upon these requests. We decline to examine these issues without the
benefit of a clear finding by the trial court. Weare Land Use Assoc. v. Town of
Weare, 153 N.H. 510, 513 (2006). Accordingly, we remand to the trial court for
clarification or consideration of these requests by the mother.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8