THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2006-730
IN THE MATTER OF RICHARD L. STAPLEFORD AND CHERYL STAPLEFORD
Argued: June 7, 2007
Opinion Issued: September 28, 2007
Walker & Buchholz, P.A., of Manchester (Kevin E. Buchholz on the brief
and orally), for the children.
Law Offices of Paula J. Green, PLLC, of Manchester (Paula J. Green on
the brief and orally), for Cheryl Stapleford.
Mark H. Campbell, of Manchester, for Richard L. Stapleford, filed no
brief.
HICKS, J. The parties’ minor children, currently thirteen and fifteen
years old, appeal a recommended order of a Marital Master (Cross, M.)
approved by the Derry Family Division (Sadler, J.) denying their motion to
intervene in their parents’ divorce proceedings. We affirm.
The record supports the following. Cheryl Stapleford (mother) and
Richard Stapleford (father) were married on October 17, 1992. On December
10, 2004, the parties filed for divorce. On July 27, 2005, the court appointed a
guardian ad litem (GAL) to represent the interests of the parties’ two children.
On April 14, 2005, the Derry Family Division entered a temporary order
awarding the mother primary physical custody of the children.
On May 17, 2006, the GAL submitted a preliminary report
recommending, against their preference, that the children live primarily in
Milford with their mother. Subsequently, upon his attorney’s recommendation,
the father retained Attorney Kevin Buchholz to represent the children. On
August 9, 2006, Buchholz filed a motion, on behalf of the children, to modify
the court’s temporary orders. The court denied the motion because the
children were not parties to the case. Buchholz then filed a motion to intervene
on behalf of the children.
At a hearing held on the motion to intervene, Buchholz asserted a due
process and statutory right of the children to be heard. He argued that the
court cannot give substantial weight to the children’s preferences consistent
with RSA 461-A:6, II (Supp. 2006) if they are not allowed to intervene when a
GAL makes a recommendation contrary to their preferences.
The mother argued that intervention was unnecessary because the GAL
had already represented the children’s preferences in his reports. The GAL
explained that the children wanted to live in Chester with their father because
“they lived in Chester their entire life, their grandparents are ill . . . and they
want to be there for their grandparents.” He also noted that their preference,
in his opinion, had more to do with their familiarity with Chester than with
whom they wanted to live. The GAL opposed intervention, asserting that it
would unduly empower the children, encourage them to violate rules, make
parenting harder, and otherwise confuse them.
The master denied the motion to intervene, finding that the GAL had
represented the children’s best interests and had adequately reported their
preferences. He further noted in his order:
The children’s attorney offers more specific
examples than the GAL of why the children feel as they
do, but not only has the Court already heard some of
those specifics from the parties themselves, but the
examples are also not qualitatively different as to
cause concern about the appropriateness of the
Court’s Temporary Order dated June 14, 2006.
On appeal, the children argue that: (1) they have a statutory right to
intervene as parties to their parents’ divorce; (2) the trial court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion in failing to apply the proper intervention
test and denying their motion to intervene; (3) they have a due process right to
2
intervene; and (4) they were denied due process at the hearing on the motion to
intervene. We address these issues in order.
The children argue that RSA 461-A:6, II creates a statutory right to
intervene for mature minors. We review questions of statutory interpretation
de novo. State v. Boulais, 150 N.H. 216, 218 (2003). The statute states, in
pertinent part, that “[i]f the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that a
minor child is of sufficient maturity to make a sound judgment, the court may
give substantial weight to the preference of the mature minor child as to the
determination of parental rights and responsibilities.” RSA 461-A:6, II. When
construing a statute, we examine its language, ascribing the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used by the legislature. Boulais, 150 N.H. at 218. We
can neither ignore the plain language of the legislation nor add words which
the lawmakers did not see fit to include. Appeal of Astro Spectacular, 138 N.H.
298, 300 (1994). Here, RSA 461-A:6, II does not address intervention at all,
and we will not add those words to the statute. Accordingly, the statute does
not create a right for mature minors to intervene in their parents’ divorce
proceedings.
We next address the children’s claim that the court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion in failing to apply our customary
intervention test and denying intervention. The children point to the
traditional intervention test, which provides: “A person who seeks to intervene
in a case must have a right involved in the trial and his interest must be direct
and apparent; such as would suffer if not indeed be sacrificed were the court to
deny the privilege.” Snyder v. N.H. Savings Bank, 134 N.H. 32, 35 (1991)
(quotations, brackets and emphasis omitted).
In New Hampshire, this standard has never been applied to children
seeking to intervene in their parents’ divorce. The children arguably have a
right and interest involved in the outcome of the divorce, most notably
regarding the issue of custody. However, the children are minors, maturity
notwithstanding, and minors do not have the same legal rights as do adults in
the legal system. See Miller v. Miller, 677 A.2d 64, 66 (Me. 1996) (“[A]t
common law . . . children do not possess the requisite legal capacity to
participate in litigation in their own names.”). This is why the law provides for
representation of a minor’s interests through a GAL. See RSA 461-A:16 (Supp.
2006); see also 43 C.J.S. Infants § 329 (2004). The traditional intervention
test, therefore, cannot be applied to the minors in this case to allow them to
intervene in their parents’ divorce. Accordingly, we cannot say that the trial
court committed an unsustainable exercise of discretion in failing to apply the
traditional intervention test.
The children next argue that their due process rights under the
Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and Part I, Article 2
3
of the New Hampshire Constitution were violated at the hearing below and by
the trial court’s denial of their motion to intervene.
We first note that although the children’s brief refers to “substantive due
process,” the brief addresses purely procedural due process concerns. Merely
using the word “substantive” is insufficient to articulate a substantive due
process argument. Cf. Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 429 (1999) (“[A] mere
laundry list of complaints regarding adverse rulings by the trial court, without
developed legal argument, is insufficient to warrant judicial review.” (citation
omitted)). Accordingly, we will conduct only a procedural due process analysis.
We address the children’s argument under the State Constitution, citing
federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983).
This court is the final arbiter of the due process requirements of the State
Constitution. In re Brittany S., 147 N.H. 489, 491 (2002).
We first address the children’s argument that they have a due process
right to intervene in their parents’ divorce. The first step of a due process
analysis is to determine whether a legally protected interest has been
implicated. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. 314, 328 (2006). We will
assume in this case, without deciding, that the “children have a [protected]
liberty interest in the outcome of their parents’ divorce.” Miller, 677 A.2d at
68.
Next, we determine whether due process requires that the children be
permitted to intervene in their parents’ divorce by employing a three-prong
balancing test, considering: (1) the private interest affected by the official
action; (2) the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the
procedures used and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including the
function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that additional or
substitute procedural requirements would entail. In re Father 2006-360, 155
N.H. ___, ___, 921 A.2d 409, 411 (2007); Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319,
335 (1976).
We first address the children’s interest. The minors’ “most immediate
interest . . . is in the custodial outcome.” Miller, 677 A.2d at 68. More
specifically, the children’s interest is in achieving the best possible outcome,
whether that is in line with their preferences at the time or not. RSA 461-A:6
(Supp. 2006) includes many factors for the court’s consideration, all of which
aim to protect the children’s interests by achieving the best outcome for them,
in satisfaction of the first prong.
We next address the risk of an erroneous outcome for the children
without their intervention. We find that the children’s interests are well
4
protected by the existing process. “The [GAL] is already an advocate for the
best interest of the children in all of its complex dimensions.” Id. at 70; see
also RSA 461-A:16. RSA 461-A:16 ensures that the GAL conducts a detailed
investigation and advocates for the children’s best interests. The court need
not accept the GAL’s recommendation, and the court may agree or disagree
with a minor’s wishes. Poorly performing GALs are subject to fines and
disciplinary action under RSA 461-A:16, VI(c), (d). Further, the adversarial
nature of a divorce proceeding provides an effective check and balance system.
A parent who opposes the GAL’s recommendation will likely expose any
mistakes made by the GAL, through cross-examination or otherwise.
Finally, we examine the State’s interest, including the function involved
and the fiscal and administrative burdens that intervention by the children
would entail. In divorce proceedings, the State’s primary interest is “the best
interests of the child.” RSA 461-A:6, I. As discussed above, we find that the
best interests of the children are well-protected by the current system.
Additionally, we agree with Miller that “[d]ivorce litigation would be complicated
exponentially by the involvement of children as parties.” Miller, 677 A.2d at
70. If children were allowed to intervene, they could participate in discovery,
depose and cross-examine witnesses, and appeal the court’s ruling. Should
siblings disagree among themselves, they could each hire their own attorney to
advocate for their individual preferences. We need not further detail the chaos
that would ensue if we were to hold that every mature minor has a due process
right to intervene in their parents’ divorce litigation.
Accordingly, after weighing the above factors, we hold that the children
have no due process right to intervene in their parents’ divorce. Because the
State Constitution is at least as protective of individual liberties in these
circumstances as the Federal Constitution, see In re Samantha L., 145 N.H.
408, 414 (2000); Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335, we reach the same result under
the Federal Constitution.
Given that we hold, as a matter of law, that the children have no right to
intervene in their parents’ divorce, we need not address their argument that
they were denied due process at the hearing on the motion to intervene.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5