THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2006-761
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
v.
JOSEPH MARINO & a.
Argued: May 23, 2007
Opinion Issued: July 18, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (K. Allen Brooks, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris and Rachel A. Hampe on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the
respondents.
DALIANIS, J. The respondents, Joseph and Rose Marino, appeal the
Superior Court’s (Vaughan, J.) order granting partial summary judgment to the
petitioner, the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES),
and denying their cross-motion for partial summary judgment on DES’ claim
that they violated the State Water Pollution and Waste Disposal Act (Water
Pollution Act), see RSA ch. 485-A (2001 & Supp. 2006), and the State
Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act (Shoreland Protection Act), see RSA
ch. 483-B (2001 & Supp. 2006). The respondents also appeal the trial court’s
determination, following a bench trial, that they violated the State Fill and
Dredge in Wetlands Act (Wetlands Act), see RSA ch. 482-A (2001 & Supp.
2006). Additionally, they appeal the civil penalties and injunctive relief the trial
court imposed for their statutory violations. We affirm.
The record supports the following: Since 1991, the respondents have
owned an approximately .13 acre lot with 150 feet of frontage on Back Lake in
Pittsburg. In October 2004, they began to construct a single-family home
there. Shortly thereafter, they received phone calls from DES informing them
that their construction possibly violated the Shoreland Protection Act because
the act prohibited any construction within fifty feet of the shoreline without
DES approval. See RSA 483-B:9, II(b) (Supp. 2006). They were also advised
that there was no septic system approval on file with the State and that until
the above issues were resolved, they should cease construction. See RSA 483-
B:6, I(c) (2001). At the end of October, DES sent a letter to the respondents
reiterating these points, advising them to cease construction “immediately,
until further notice” and requesting that they “submit all relevant information
. . . regarding the project, including . . . your building plans, a site plan
showing setbacks from the Back Lake reference line, and temporary erosion
control measures.” In their letter in response, the respondents contended that
the Shoreland Protection Act did not apply to their lot because it was a
nonconforming lot of record, see RSA 483-B:10 (2001), and they directed DES
not to contact any of their contractors.
On November 2, 2004, the parties met to discuss these issues. Among
other things, DES advised the respondents not to install the 1000-gallon
plastic holding tank, which they had purchased, but instead to hire a septic
designer to design a septic system. The respondents were also advised to apply
for a waiver to the setback requirements.
DES sent the respondents a letter on November 8, 2004, confirming that
before a water supply could be connected to the structure, a state-approved
septic design had to be obtained, and that because the lot did not meet setback
requirements, the respondents had to seek a waiver from DES. Despite these
communications with DES, the respondents did not seek any State permits to
construct their home.
In January 2005, DES filed a petition for permanent injunction and civil
penalties against the respondents for violating the Shoreland Protection, Water
Pollution and Wetlands Acts. Immediately after being served with it, the
respondents asked their builder to rush the project to completion.
The home was completed in April 2005. It is located between fifteen and
twenty feet from the edge of Back Lake. Although the structure contains
various plumbing fixtures, including a pressure tank with pipe connections,
three sink fixtures, two toilet fixtures, a shower stall, a washing machine and a
dishwasher, none of these fixtures are yet connected to an active water source.
2
But for the lack of water to the home, it would be a fully functioning single-
family home.
In May 2005, the court granted the State’s petition for a preliminary
injunction. Before the preliminary injunction was granted, however, the
respondents had installed an artesian well and overflow drain on the property
and placed a holding tank on the lot to collect and contain sewage and
wastewater produced from their use of the home.
In September 2005, DES moved for partial summary judgment, arguing
that the respondents violated: (1) the Water Pollution Act by constructing a
building from which wastes will discharge before obtaining a permit from DES,
see RSA 485-A:32, I (2001); (2) the Wetlands Act by installing an overflow drain
without obtaining a dredge and fill permit from DES, see RSA 482-A:3, I (2001)
(amended 2006); and (3) the Shoreland Protection Act by constructing a
primary structure within fifty feet of Back Lake without DES authorization, see
RSA 483-B:9, II(b), :10, I. The respondents objected and cross-moved for
partial summary judgment. The trial court granted partial summary judgment
to DES on its Water Pollution and Shoreland Protection Act claims, but denied
its motion on its Wetlands Act claim. The court denied the respondents’ cross-
motion for partial summary judgment in its entirety.
Following a bench trial and a view of the property, the trial court ruled
that the respondents violated the Wetlands Act by installing an overflow drain
and landscaping the property without obtaining a dredge and fill permit from
DES. See RSA 482-A:3, I; RSA 482-A:12 (2001). For these violations, the court
imposed a civil penalty of $10,000 and ordered the respondents to apply for
“after-the-fact authorization from . . . DES for any alterations made to the
banks of Back Lake.” See RSA 482-A:14, III (2001). For the Shoreland
Protection Act violations, the court imposed a civil penalty of $50,000, which
represented $1,000 per day for each day of violation. See RSA 483-B:18 (Supp.
2006). The court also ordered the respondents to obtain DES approval for a
septic system that complied with the pertinent law and to submit to a review by
DES as to the proper size of the structure to be located on the property. For
the Water Pollution Act violations, the court fined the respondents $5,000. See
RSA 485-A:43 (2001).
I
The respondents first argue that the trial court erred when it granted
DES’ motion for partial summary judgment on DES’ Shoreland Protection Act
claim and ruled that the respondents violated the act by building their home
within fifty feet of Back Lake without authorization. They contend that
because they did not violate the act, the trial court erred when it imposed a
civil penalty of $50,000 upon them.
3
The respondents assert that the trial court’s ruling that they violated the
Shoreland Protection Act is erroneous because RSA 483-B:10, I, permitted
them to build their home within fifty feet of Back Lake without DES approval.
They further contend that as there is no express requirement in RSA 483-B:10
that they obtain DES approval, they cannot have violated the act by failing to
obtain this approval. Finally, they argue that RSA 483-B:10, I, is
unconstitutional because it constitutes an unconstitutional delegation of
legislative power to the executive branch or because it is impermissibly vague.
We will affirm a trial court’s grant of summary judgment if, considering
the evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the non-movant, our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter
of law. Stewart v. Bader, 154 N.H. 75, 87 (2006). We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
We begin by analyzing whether RSA 483-B:10, I, allowed the respondents
to build their home within fifty feet of Back Lake without DES authorization.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Carlisle v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 152 N.H. 762, 773 (2005). This court is the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a
statute considered as a whole. DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Victoria, 153 N.H.
664, 666 (2006). We first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not
subject to modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78
(2005). We will neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add
words that it did not see fit to include. Id. Furthermore, we interpret statutes
in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.
DaimlerChrysler Corp., 153 N.H. at 666. Our goal is to apply statutes in light
of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to
be advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Carlisle, 152 N.H. at 773.
The Shoreland Protection Act, of which RSA 483-B:10, I, is a part, is, as
its title suggests, aimed at protecting the state’s shoreland as well as its public
waters and preventing “uncoordinated, unplanned and piecemeal development
along the state’s shorelines.” RSA 483-B:1 (2001). RSA 483-B:6 (Supp. 2006)
expressly requires “any person intending to” engage in certain activities to
obtain the necessary permits pursuant to other statutory schemes and to
“demonstrate to the satisfaction of [DES] that the proposal meets or exceeds
the development standards of [RSA chapter 483-B].” RSA 483-B:6, II
authorizes DES to “grant, deny, or attach reasonable conditions” to the permits
listed in RSA 483-B:6, I, “to protect the public waters or the public health,
safety or welfare.” “Such conditions shall be related to the purposes of [RSA
chapter 483-B].” RSA 483-B:6, II. In this way, the Shoreland Protection Act
“functions statewide as an additional layer of regulation[,] which overlays
4
existing state and municipal permitting schemes, such as building permits,
wetlands permits, and septic system approvals.” Opinion of the Attorney
General, No. 04-0002 (Sept. 2, 2004).
RSA 483-B:9 (Supp. 2006) sets forth the minimum development
standards. Among other things, RSA 483-B:9: (1) requires that primary
structures be set back behind the primary building line, which is fifty feet from
the reference line (e.g., the high water level or highest observable tide line); (2)
prohibits certain activities and substances within the shoreland; and (3)
establishes specific requirements for septic systems and prevention of erosion.
See RSA 483-B:4, XVII (2001). RSA 483-B:2 (2001) explains that the minimum
development standards of RSA chapter 483-B are intended to serve numerous
public policies related to preserving shoreland and public waters, in addition to
wildlife habitats, and to controlling development along the shoreland.
RSA 483-B:10 pertains to nonconforming lots of record. RSA 483-B:10,
I, provides:
Except when otherwise prohibited by law, present and
successive owners of an individual undeveloped lot may construct
a single family residential dwelling on it, notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter. Conditions may be imposed which, in
the opinion of the commissioner, more nearly meet the intent of
this chapter, while still accommodating the applicant’s rights.
We disagree with the respondents that this provision allowed them to
build their home within fifty feet of the edge of Back Lake absent DES
authorization. The plain meaning of the provision allows DES to impose
conditions on any construction of a single-family home on a nonconforming
undeveloped lot of record. The right to build a single-family home on a
nonconforming undeveloped lot of record, therefore, is not absolute, but is
contingent upon conditions that DES may impose upon the construction. The
use of the word “applicant” is further evidence that the legislature intended
RSA 483-B:10, I, to require DES approval before a single-family home was
constructed on a nonconforming undeveloped lot of record.
RSA 483-B:10, I, grants authority to DES, not the individual home
owner, to determine how to “more nearly meet the intent of this chapter, while
still accommodating the applicant’s rights.” Based upon our interpretation of
RSA 483-B:10, I, we conclude that the trial court did not err when it ruled that
the respondents violated this provision by building their home within fifty feet
of Back Lake without obtaining DES approval. We do not address the
respondents’ arguments regarding conditions that DES has since imposed or
threatened to impose upon them pursuant to the authority granted it under
RSA 483-B:10, I, as these issues are not properly part of this appeal.
5
We next address the respondents’ assertion that RSA 483-B:10, I, is
unconstitutional. The constitutionality of a statute is a question of law, which
we review de novo. Gonya v. Comm’r, N.H. Ins. Dep’t, 153 N.H. 521, 524
(2006). “In reviewing a statute, we presume it to be constitutional and we will
not declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds.” Id. Because the
respondents argue only under the State Constitution, we base our decision
upon it alone, citing federal cases for guidance only. Id.
The respondents first contend that RSA 483-B:10, I, violates Part I,
Article 37 of the State Constitution because it impermissibly delegates
unlimited legislative authority to DES. “Under the separation of powers article
of the New Hampshire Constitution, the General Court may not create and
delegate duties to an administrative agency if its commands are in such broad
terms as to leave the agency with unguided and unrestricted discretion in the
assigned field of its activity.” Smith Insurance, Inc. v. Grievance Committee,
120 N.H. 856, 861 (1980) (quotation and ellipses omitted). Thus, we have
ruled unconstitutional statutes that are “devoid of either a declared policy or a
prescribed standard laid down by the legislature.” Id. “To avoid the charge of
unlawfully delegated legislative power, [a] statute must lay down basic
standards and a reasonably definite policy for the administration of the law.”
Union School District v. Comm’r of Labor, 103 N.H. 512, 516 (1961) (quotation
omitted). We hold that RSA 483-B:10, I, lays down such basic standards and a
reasonably definite policy and thus does not constitute an impermissible
delegation of legislative authority in violation of Part I, Article 37 of the State
Constitution.
RSA 483-B:10, I, permits the commissioner of DES to impose conditions
that “more nearly meet the intent of this chapter, while still accommodating the
applicant’s rights.” The conditions imposed by the commissioner, therefore,
must be consistent with the policies underlying RSA chapter 483-B. See RSA
483-B:1.
The legislature has set forth, in detail, in RSA 483-B:1 and RSA 483-B:2,
the policies underlying RSA chapter 483-B. These policies are sufficiently
definite to pass constitutional muster. As described by the legislature in RSA
483-B:1, these policies include: (1) protecting the state’s shoreland and
maintaining the “integrity of public waters”; (2) protecting public waters and
controlling their use and that of adjacent shoreland “for the greatest public
benefit”; and (3) preventing “uncoordinated, unplanned and piecemeal
development along the state’s shorelines, which could result in significant
negative impacts on the public waters of New Hampshire.” As described in RSA
483-B:2, they also include: (1) maintaining “safe and healthful conditions”; (2)
providing for the “wise utilization of water and related land resources”; (3)
preventing and controlling water pollution; (4) protecting wildlife habitats,
archaeological and historical resources, commercial fishing and maritime
industries, freshwater and coastal wetlands, and public use of waters; (5)
6
controlling “building sites, placement of structures, and land uses”; (6)
conserving “shoreland cover and points of access to inland and coastal waters”
and “natural beauty and open spaces”; (7) preserving “the state’s lakes, rivers,
estuaries and coastal waters in their natural state”; (8) promoting “wildlife
habitat, scenic beauty, and scientific study”; (9) anticipating and responding to
“the impacts of development in shoreland areas”; and (10) providing for
“economic development in proximity to waters.”
The conditions imposed by the commissioner also must comport, as
much as possible, with the minimum development standards set forth in RSA
483-B:9, as the legislature intended these standards to serve the policies set
forth in RSA 483-B:2. See RSA 483-B:2. These standards require, among
other things, that primary structures be set back behind the primary building
line, which is fifty feet from the reference line. See RSA 483-B:9, II(b).
Pursuant to the minimum development standards, how far back a new
leaching system must be set back from the shore depends upon certain soil
conditions. RSA 483-B:9, V(b). The minimum development standards also
include requirements pertaining to erosion and siltation as well as minimum
lot size and shoreland frontage. See RSA 483-B:9, V(c), (d).
Because RSA 483-B:10, I, impliedly incorporates the basic standards set
forth in RSA 483-B:9 and the reasonably definite policies set forth in RSA 483-
B:1 and RSA 483-B:2, it does not constitute an unlawful delegation of
legislative power to DES.
The respondents’ final argument regarding RSA 483-B:10, I, is that it
violates their state constitutional right to due process because it is
impermissibly vague. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 12. Vagueness may
invalidate a statute either because it “fails to provide people of ordinary
intelligence a reasonable opportunity to understand what conduct it prohibits”
or because it “authorizes or even encourages arbitrary and discriminatory
enforcement.” State v. Porelle, 149 N.H. 420, 423 (2003). “A party challenging
a statute as void for vagueness bears a heavy burden of proof in view of the
strong presumption favoring a statute’s constitutionality.” State v. MacElman,
154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006). The specificity required by due process “need not be
contained in the statute itself, but rather, the statute in question may be read
in the context of related statutes, prior decisions, or generally accepted usage.”
In re Justin D., 144 N.H. 450, 453-54 (1999).
The respondents assert that the statute was unconstitutionally vague as
applied to them. In an as-applied challenge, we examine whether the statute
provided the respondents with a reasonable opportunity to know that their
particular conduct was prohibited. See MacElman, 154 N.H. at 309. As
previously discussed, the plain language of RSA 483-B:9, which prohibits
building a home within fifty feet of the reference line of Back Lake, and the
plain language of RSA 483-B:10, I, which permits DES to impose conditions
7
upon a lot owner’s construction of a single-family home on a nonconforming
undeveloped lot, put the respondents on notice that they could not build a
single-family home within fifty feet of the edge of Back Lake without first
obtaining DES approval to do so. Accordingly, we conclude that RSA 483-B:10,
I, is not unconstitutionally vague as applied to the respondents.
The respondents also appear to argue that the statute was impermissibly
vague on its face. We will assume, without deciding, that the respondents may
challenge the statute facially. See MacElman, 154 N.H. at 307. But cf.
Chapman v. United States, 500 U.S. 453, 467 (1991) (because “First
Amendment freedoms are not infringed by the [criminal statute at issue], . . .
the vagueness claim must be evaluated as the statute is applied”). The
respondents’ facial challenge fails for the same reasons as their as-applied
challenge and their contention that the statute impermissibly delegates
unlimited legislative authority to DES.
II
The respondents next argue that the trial court erred when it found that
they violated the Wetlands Act. The Wetlands Act provides, in pertinent part:
“No person shall excavate, remove, fill, dredge or construct any structures in or
on any bank, flat, marsh, or swamp in and adjacent to any waters of the state
without a permit from [DES].” RSA 482-A:3, I. The trial court found that the
respondents violated this act by failing to obtain a permit before placing fill on
the banks of Back Lake and installing an overflow drain from their well there.
See id. The trial court based its findings in part upon a view it took of the
subject property.
We will not disturb the findings of the trial court unless they lack
evidentiary support or are erroneous as a matter of law. Thompson v. C&C
Research & Dev., 153 N.H. 446, 449 (2006). We review legal conclusions, as
well as the application of law to fact, independently for plain error. Id. Our
inquiry is to determine whether the evidence presented to the trial court
reasonably supports its findings, and then whether the court’s decision is
consonant with applicable law. Id. “[T]he findings of the trial court are within
its sound discretion, particularly when a view has been taken.” Husnander v.
Town of Barnstead, 139 N.H. 476, 479 (1995).
The respondents contend that the trial court’s finding that they placed
fill on the banks of Back Lake was erroneous because no “direct evidence”
supported it. As there is circumstantial evidence to support this finding, in
addition to the trial court’s view of the property, we uphold it. See id. It was
within the trial court’s discretion to resolve conflicts in the testimony, measure
the credibility of witnesses, and determine the weight to be given evidence. See
Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003).
8
The respondents concede that they had an overflow drain for their
artesian well installed into the bank of Back Lake, which required digging a
trench that was approximately two feet wide and four feet deep. At trial, they
also did not dispute that they refilled the trench for the overflow drain after it
was dug. They contend, however, that none of this work constituted
“excavat[ing], remov[ing], fill[ing], [or] dredg[ing]” as those terms are used in the
Wetlands Act. RSA 482-A:3, I. We hold, as a matter of law, that digging a
trench and refilling it after it is dug constitutes “excavat[ing], remov[ing],
fill[ing],” or “dredg[ing]” as those terms are used in the Wetlands Act. Id.
The respondents also assert that because they did not know that they
needed an overflow drain when the well was first dug, they could not have
anticipated a need for a permit and should not have been found to have
violated the act by failing to obtain one. Whether the respondents knew before
or after the well was dug that they needed an overflow drain is immaterial.
Once they knew that one was needed, the Wetlands Act prohibited them from
“excavat[ing], remov[ing], fill[ing],” or “dredg[ing]” without first obtaining a
permit from DES. RSA 482-A:3, I.
The respondents next argue that the trial court erred when it imposed a
civil penalty of $10,000 upon them under the Wetlands Act absent any
evidence that their conduct negatively affected the wetlands. RSA 482-A:14, III
provides, in pertinent part, that the court may “levy upon any person who
violates this chapter . . . a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per
violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
violation.” Nothing in RSA 482-A:3, I, or RSA 482-A:14, III requires the trial
court to find that a person’s failure to obtain a permit before “excavat[ing],
remov[ing], fill[ing],” or “dredg[ing]” damaged the wetlands. Accordingly, we
hold that the trial court’s imposition of a civil penalty of $10,000 upon the
respondents was not unlawful.
We decline to address the respondents’ assertion that this civil penalty
contravened the Eighth Amendment to the Federal Constitution and Part I,
Article 18 of the State Constitution as they have failed to demonstrate that they
argued this assertion to the trial court and, thus, preserved it for our review.
“This court has consistently held that we will not consider issues raised on
appeal that were not presented in the lower court.” LaMontagne Builders v.
Brooks, 154 N.H. 252, 258 (2006) (quotation omitted). But see Sup. Ct. R. 16-
A (plain error rule). “We require issues to be raised at the earliest possible
time, because trial forums should have a full opportunity to come to sound
conclusions and to correct errors in the first instance.” Tiberghein v. B.R.
Jones Roofing Co., 151 N.H. 391, 393 (2004) (quotation omitted). As the
appealing parties, the respondents bear the burden of demonstrating that they
raised their issues before the trial forum. Id. We also decline to consider these
claims under the plain error rule as the respondents do not invoke this rule
and we see no plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
9
III
Finally, the respondents contend that the trial court erred when it fined
them $5,000 under the Water Pollution Act for their failure to obtain prior
approval to construct a building from which waste would discharge. See RSA
485-A:32, I, :43. RSA 485-A:43, I, provides:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
subdivision or who shall knowingly fail, neglect or refuse to obey
any order of [DES] . . . , or who shall knowingly make any
misstatement of material fact for which said person is personally
responsible in connection with an application for an approval
pursuant to this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if a
natural person.
RSA 485-A:43, III permits the trial court to levy a fine of not more than $5,000
“for such violation, failure, neglect, refusal or any misstatement for which said
person is personally responsible.”
The respondents contend that no fine should have been levied because
they never disobeyed a DES order or made any misstatement of material fact in
connection with an application under the act. The trial court, however, fined
them because they violated RSA 485-A:32, I, by failing to obtain prior approval
to construct a building from which waste would discharge. See RSA 485-A:32,
I, :43. The trial court, therefore, did not err by imposing a $5,000 fine upon
them for violating the Water Pollution Act.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10