THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-456
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
STEPHEN DESCHENES
Argued: June 14, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 24, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Stephen Deschenes, appeals his
convictions, after a jury trial, for aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA
632-A:2, I (2007), arguing that the superior court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by: (1) allowing the State to impeach his credibility as a witness with
three prior convictions for assault and battery, including one in which the
victim was female; (2) allowing the State to offer extrinsic evidence to impeach
his credibility; and (3) refusing to instruct the jury to weigh, with “great caution
and care,” the testimony of a police officer concerning an unrecorded post-
arrest interrogation of the defendant. We affirm.
I
The jury could have found the following facts. At around midnight on
June 7, 2003, the victim went to a bar on Lake Avenue in Manchester. She left
at about 1:30 a.m. Just outside the bar, the defendant attracted the victim’s
attention and invited her to his apartment for a beer. She accepted.
The victim and the defendant walked to the building where the defendant
resided and went upstairs to his one-room apartment. He went in first and
turned the stereo on “pretty loud.” When the victim entered the apartment, she
sat down on the defendant’s bed, the only available piece of furniture.
After the victim sat down, the defendant walked over to a nightstand. He
then turned to face her, while holding a knife. He put the knife about six
inches from the victim’s throat, and told her to take off her clothes. She did so,
and the defendant followed suit.
Once both the victim and the defendant were undressed, the defendant
held the victim’s head down and forced her to perform oral sex. He then had
intercourse with her while he held her hands down.
At trial, the defendant characterized his encounter with the victim
differently. In particular, he claimed that the victim agreed to have sex with
him in exchange for drugs, and that after they had sex, she began yelling at
him and threatening him when he failed to provide the promised drugs.
Fifteen or twenty minutes after the defendant had intercourse with the
victim, he told her she was free to go. At that point, both the victim and the
defendant put their clothes back on and left the building through a back door.
When she reached the street, the victim began running in the direction of her
home. On her way, she encountered several Manchester police officers and
told them she had just been raped.
In late July, the defendant was interviewed by Manchester Police
Detective Richard Brennan (Detective Brennan). During the interview,
Detective Brennan asked whether he had ever been arrested. The defendant
admitted that he had been arrested, but did not offer that he had also been
convicted nine times.
The defendant was arrested in August for the alleged rape and
interrogated by Manchester Police Officer Dan Brennan (Officer Brennan).
Officer Brennan did not record the interrogation on either audiotape or
videotape. Subsequently, the defendant was indicted on several counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault.
2
Before trial, the State filed a motion in limine seeking to admit the
defendant’s prior convictions solely for the purpose of impeaching his
credibility in the event he testified. The Trial Court (Abramson, J.) granted the
motion in part, allowing the State to use seven of the nine convictions it sought
to introduce, including the three at issue in this appeal: (1) a February 1994
felony conviction for assault and battery on a female household member; (2) an
April 1994 felony conviction for assault and battery; and (3) a November 1994
felony conviction for assault and battery. The trial court also allowed, for
impeachment purposes only, the admission of: (1) a July 2000 misdemeanor
conviction for disobeying a police officer; (2) a July 2002 conviction for giving a
false name to a police officer; (3) an August 1996 felony conviction for receiving
stolen property, a crime the trial court deemed to involve dishonesty; and (4) a
May 1996 felony conviction for unarmed robbery, a crime the trial court
considered sufficiently different from the charged offenses in this case so as not
to create undue prejudice. The two convictions the trial court excluded were a
1996 conviction for armed robbery, which it deemed too prejudicial in a trial on
allegations that involved the use of a weapon to threaten the victim, and a
1993 conviction for assault and battery, which the trial court excluded for
being more than ten years old.
In response to the defendant’s motion for clarification and/or
reconsideration, the trial court ruled that “the State is precluded from
referencing that the defendant’s prior conviction for assault and battery of a
female household member, date of conviction being February 18, 1994 . . .
involved ‘a female household member.’”
At trial, the defendant elected to testify. During a conference in
chambers, counsel for the State asked for permission to inquire about the
February 1994 assault and battery conviction in the following way: “Mr.
Deschenes, were you convicted of assault and battery in that you did assault
and beat Michelle Fontaine?” Defense counsel objected, arguing that the
proposed question would “bring[ ] into evidence half of the prejudicial
information that is cited in [the trial court’s] ruling, which is that he assaulted
a female.” In response, the Trial Judge (Barry, J.) ruled:
[T]he State can use the prior conviction. You can use the essence
or the body of what’s in the complaint on each one with the
limitation that you cannot use the words “a household member”
with regard to the complaint or indictment that Judge Abramson
has previously ruled on, and you cannot go into the underlying
facts beyond that nor ask about the sentences imposed in any
instance.
On direct examination, the defendant testified that he was convicted of assault
and battery three times in 1994. On cross-examination, he answered in the
3
affirmative when asked whether he “assault[ed] and beat Michelle Fontaine” in
February 1994. When the defendant’s testimony concluded, the trial judge
instructed the jurors that they could consider the defendant’s convictions “only
with regard to [his] credibility . . . that is, in deciding whether or not [they]
believe[d] him and for no other purpose whatsoever.” The trial judge gave
another more detailed limiting instruction before the jury retired to deliberate.
Also on cross-examination, the State asked the defendant about the
interview Detective Brennan had conducted with him the month before his
arrest. Specifically, the defendant was asked whether Detective Brennan asked
him about his criminal history and whether he told Detective Brennan about
his prior convictions. After the defendant said that the detective “may have”
asked him about his criminal history but that he did not remember, counsel for
the State gave the defendant a document, without objection, to refresh his
recollection. Thereafter, the defendant repeated his testimony that Detective
Brennan “may have” asked him about his criminal history. Then, when asked,
one by one, whether he had told the detective about his prior seven
convictions, the defendant gave answers such as “I may and I may not have.”
Subsequently, the State called Detective Brennan. He testified that he
asked the defendant “if he had ever been arrested before” and that the
defendant “stated yes, he had been” but did not disclose any of the seven
convictions admitted into evidence. Detective Brennan did not testify that he
asked the defendant whether he had ever been convicted of a crime. Based
upon Detective Brennan’s rebuttal testimony, the State contended, during its
closing argument, that the defendant lied about his criminal record in his
interview with Detective Brennan.
Finally, after the close of the evidence, the defendant requested the
following jury instruction:
The State has offered into evidence statements allegedly made by
the defendant to the police. These statements were made at the
Manchester police station during an interrogation conducted while
the defendant was in the custody of the Manchester Police
Department. The statements were not recorded. Because of the
absence of a recording of these statements, you should weigh the
statement’s usefulness with great caution and care. As well, the
failure of the police to tape record the interrogation may be
considered by you in evaluating the testimony and credibility of the
officer as to what the defendant actually said.
The trial judge denied the defendant’s request.
4
After the defendant was convicted, he filed a motion for a new trial,
arguing that the admission of the three 1994 assault and battery convictions
was unfairly prejudicial because those convictions, like his current
prosecution, involved crimes of violence, and that the trial judge’s ruling on a
similar issue in a different case entitled him to a new trial. The trial judge
denied the motion. This appeal followed.
II
The defendant first argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by allowing the State to impeach his credibility with evidence of his
three 1994 assault and battery convictions. More specifically, he contends
that: (1) the 1994 convictions were not especially probative because the State
could have “fully accomplish[ed]” the intended impeachment of his credibility
with the four other convictions that were admitted; (2) admitting evidence of
convictions for assault and battery was unfairly prejudicial in a prosecution for
crimes involving the use of force; and (3) admitting evidence that one of the
1994 convictions involved a female victim was especially prejudicial because
the victim in this case was also a woman. We disagree.
We review a trial court’s ruling to admit evidence of prior convictions
under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. McGill, 153
N.H. 813, 815 (2006). To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The defendant’s 1994 convictions were admitted pursuant to New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609 which provides, in pertinent part:
For the purpose of attacking the credibility of a witness,
evidence that the witness has been convicted of a crime shall be
admitted if elicited from the witness or established by public record
during cross-examination but only if the crime (1) was punishable
by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law
under which he or she was convicted, and the court determines
that the probative value of admitting this evidence outweighs its
prejudicial effect to the defendant, or (2) involved dishonesty or
false statement, regardless of the punishment.
N.H. R. Ev. 609(a). In the context of New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403, we
have explained that
[f]actors to consider in balancing a conviction’s probative value
against its prejudicial effect include the impeachment value of the
prior conviction, the date of the conviction and the witness’s
5
subsequent history, the degree of similarity between the past crime
and any conduct of the witness currently at issue, the importance
of the witness’s testimony, and the centrality of the credibility
issue.
Zola v. Kelley, 149 N.H. 648, 655 (2003). While we use similar factors when
conducting the balancing tests established by Rules 403 and 609(a), those two
tests strike different balances, and the Rule 609(a) test is the more
exclusionary. See id. at 653.
“Prior convictions are admissible to impeach a defendant even if the
crimes do not directly involve a lack of veracity.” State v. Demeritt, 148 N.H.
435, 442 (2002) (quotation and brackets omitted). This is “because the jury
should be informed what sort of person is asking them to take his word,” and
“[l]ack of trustworthiness may be evinced by his abiding and repeated contempt
for laws which he is legally and morally bound to obey.” Id. (quotation omitted;
emphasis added). Again in the Rule 403 context,
[e]vidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is
to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror,
provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of
human action that may cause a jury to base its decision on
something other than the established propositions in the case.
Zola, 149 N.H. at 655 (quotation omitted). Finally, because evidence of a prior
crime is inherently prejudicial to the defendant, State v. Skidmore, 138 N.H.
201, 202 (1993), a trial court must provide a limiting instruction when
evidence of prior convictions is introduced to impeach a defendant’s credibility,
State v. Cassell, 140 N.H. 317, 318 (1995).
In its pre-trial order on the State’s motion in limine, the trial court cited
Demeritt, 148 N.H. at 442, for the proposition that “[l]ack of trustworthiness
may be evinced by [a witness’s] abiding and repeated contempt for laws which
he is legally and morally bound to obey.” Based upon that understanding of
probative value, the trial court reasoned that because none of the 1994
convictions “involve[d] a sexual assault of the victim,” they were sufficiently
different from the defendant’s current charges to diminish their prejudicial
effect and make them admissible under the balancing test of New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 403. We note that while the trial court referred to the Rule
403 balancing test, its initial reference to that test makes clear that its
reference to Rule 403 was akin to a scrivener’s error; what it describes as the
Rule 403 balancing test in its order is, in actuality, the more exclusionary Rule
609(a) balancing test. See Zola, 149 N.H. at 653. Accordingly, we, like both
parties, will treat the trial court’s order as having applied the correct balancing
test – the one stated in Rule 609(a).
6
We find no unsustainable exercise of discretion in the trial court’s
application of the Rule 609(a) balancing test. The defendant’s primary
argument is that in light of the other four convictions admitted for
impeachment purposes, the three 1994 assault and battery convictions had
only minimal impeachment value but, as convictions for crimes of violence, had
a considerable prejudicial effect.
Given the probative value of a witness’s “abiding and repeated contempt
for laws,” Demeritt, 148 N.H. at 442 (quotation omitted), we conclude that the
number of convictions a witness has – which may evidence the degree to which
his contempt for laws is “abiding and repeated” – may also be probative of
trustworthiness. Accordingly, we cannot agree that because the defendant was
“fully” impeached by the four other convictions, the trial court was compelled
to find that the three at issue had only minimal impeachment value. Moreover,
to the extent that “abiding and repeated contempt for laws” evinces a lack of
credibility, three convictions for the same or similar offenses within nine
months could be especially probative, even when those convictions occurred
nearly ten years ago and come close to invoking the “ten-year presumptive bar
of Rule 609(b),” Zola, 149 N.H. at 655. Similarly, the fact that the three
disputed convictions involved crimes different from those implicated in the four
other convictions might suggest a relatively broad-spectrum contempt for the
law, which may also be probative of truthfulness.
With regard to the prejudicial effect of convictions for crimes that do not
involve dishonesty or false statement, there are two pertinent considerations:
(1) the inherent ability of a crime “to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its
sense of horror, provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of
human action,” id.; and (2) when the witness is also the defendant, the
similarity between the conviction introduced for impeachment purposes and
the crime for which the defendant is on trial, id. While the trial court did not
address the first aspect of prejudicial effect, it would not have unsustainably
exercised its discretion by determining that assault and battery is not as
inherently horrifying as some other felonies that a party could seek to
introduce for impeachment purposes.
The second aspect of prejudicial effect is best understood as being
measured along a continuum. At the end of the continuum we would label
“least prejudicial” would be a conviction for the crime that is the most different
from the one for which the defendant is on trial. At the “most prejudicial” end
would be a conviction for the very same crime for which the defendant is on
trial. Here, the disputed assault and battery convictions fall somewhere in
between. According to the defendant, his assault and battery convictions, as
convictions for crimes of violence, are substantially similar to the crime for
which he was on trial. The trial court drew a different line, based upon the
7
lack of a sexual element in the 1994 crimes, and determined that assault and
battery was materially different from aggravated sexual assault. Neither view is
illogical or unreasonable, and deciding which one to adopt is a quintessential
exercise of judicial discretion. Moreover, while the trial judge did allow the
State to elicit the fact that one of the defendant’s 1994 assault and battery
victims was named Michelle, there was not a sexual element to that crime, and
the jury was not informed that it occurred in a domestic context, both of which
diminish the prejudicial effect of that conviction.
We will reverse the trial court’s decision to admit the defendant’s three
1994 assault and battery convictions only if it was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. See McGill, 153 N.H. at
815. It was not. It may well be reasonable to consider a person with seven
felony convictions to be more contemptuous of the law than a person with four
such convictions, and it may also be reasonable to view the crime of assault
and battery as sufficiently different from the crime of aggravated felonious
sexual assault that the prejudicial value of the former would not outweigh its
probative value in a prosecution for the latter. While it appears that the trial
court reasonably could have ruled in the defendant’s favor, that is not the test.
Our review is limited to determining whether the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion. Finally, because the decisions of the superior court
have no precedential effect, and because decisions about the admissibility of
evidence are fact driven, case specific and subject to judicial discretion, we
decline the defendant’s invitation to analyze the evidentiary rulings in this case
in light of the order from another case before the same trial judge submitted in
support of the defendant’s motion for a new trial. To conclude, we hold that
the trial court’s decision to admit the disputed convictions did not constitute
an unsustainable exercise of discretion that warrants reversal of the
defendant’s convictions.
III
The defendant next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion by allowing the State to introduce testimony from Detective
Brennan concerning the pre-arrest interview with him in July 2003.
Specifically, the defendant contends that New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
608(b) prohibits a party from using extrinsic evidence to prove specific
instances of conduct in order to attack the credibility of a witness. The State
counters that the trial court properly admitted Detective Brennan’s testimony
to rebut the defendant’s evasive answers on cross-examination, and that even
if the trial court erred by allowing the testimony, the error was harmless. We
agree with the State that upon this record, any error in allowing Detective
Brennan’s testimony was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. See State v.
Taylor, 141 N.H. 89, 92 (1996).
8
It is well settled that the erroneous admission of evidence may be
harmless if the State proves, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was
not affected by the admission. State v. Wall, 154 N.H. 237, 245 (2006). An
error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of
the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if
the inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to
the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id.
The defendant argues that the admission of Detective Brennan’s rebuttal
testimony, which the State mentioned in its closing argument, was especially
damaging because credibility was an important issue at trial. While we
acknowledge the importance of the defendant’s credibility to his defense, we
must nonetheless accurately characterize the disputed testimony and place it
in context to properly determine whether its introduction affected the jury’s
verdict.
To begin, it is not at all clear that the disputed testimony even qualifies
as impeachment evidence. On direct examination, the defendant said that he
may or may not have told Detective Brennan about his prior convictions.
Thus, when Detective Brennan testified that the defendant had not done so, he
did not necessarily expose the defendant as untruthful in his trial testimony
but, rather, merely confirmed what the defendant had already admitted as a
possibility, i.e., that he had not told the detective about his prior convictions.
Moreover, the detective never testified that he had asked the defendant about
prior convictions, only that he had asked about prior arrests. At most, then,
the detective’s testimony established that the defendant interpreted a question
about arrests as not calling for an answer regarding the convictions, if any,
resulting from those arrests. The defendant’s decision not to mention
convictions in response to a question about arrests could have had little if any
effect upon the jury’s appraisal of his credibility.
In context, it is also important to note that in this case, the jury had to
assess both the defendant’s and the victim’s credibility when determining
whom to believe. The record before the jury included evidence that bolstered
the victim’s credibility, such as testimony about her demeanor from the police
officers she encountered shortly after she left the defendant, which supported a
finding that she was telling the truth about the assault she reported, rather
than retaliating against the defendant for failing to provide her with the drugs
he says he had promised her in exchange for sex. The record also included
evidence that undermined the defendant’s credibility, including his prior
convictions for crimes involving dishonesty. Against the backdrop of all the
other credibility evidence the jury had to consider, and the relatively benign
character of Detective Brennan’s testimony, we conclude, as a matter of law,
that the disputed testimony could not have affected the verdict of a reasonable
jury. Accordingly, if its admission was erroneous, the State has carried its
9
burden of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that any such error was
harmless. Wall, 154 N.H. at 245.
IV
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by refusing to give
the jury instruction he requested concerning the “great caution and care” the
jury should use in weighing the usefulness of testimonial evidence about an
unrecorded police interview when such evidence is introduced by the State.
Specifically, the defendant asks us to follow Commonwealth v. DiGiambattista,
813 N.E.2d 516 (Mass. 2004), in which the Supreme Judicial Court of
Massachusetts, in an exercise of its superintendence powers, id. at 531-32,
instructed the Massachusetts trial courts that
when the prosecution introduces evidence of a defendant’s
confession or statement that is the product of a custodial
interrogation or an interrogation conducted at a place of detention
(e.g., a police station), and there is not at least an audiotape
recording of the complete interrogation, the defendant is entitled
(on request) to a jury instruction advising that the State’s highest
court has expressed a preference that such interrogations be
recorded whenever practicable, and cautioning the jury that,
because of the absence of any recording of the interrogation in the
case before them, they should weigh evidence of the defendant’s
alleged statement with great caution and care.
Id. at 533-34.
The purpose of jury instructions is to explain the rules of law applicable
to a case. State v. Place, 152 N.H. 225, 227 (2005). It is within the sound
discretion of the trial court to determine whether or not a particular jury
instruction is necessary. State v. Gauntt, 154 N.H. 204, 206 (2006). We
review the trial court’s decision not to give a jury instruction for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 514 (2006).
To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the defendant must
demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. Place, 152 N.H. at 227.
The State points out that none of our previous opinions advance the
proposition that police testimony concerning unrecorded interviews is
inherently unreliable. In addition, the State directs our attention toward
People v. Buck, 838 N.E.2d 187 (Ill. App. Ct. 2005), appeal denied, 844 N.E.2d
967 (Ill. 2006), in which the Illinois Appellate Court explained that: (1) no
other state has followed Massachusetts in adopting the rule stated in
DiGiambattista, Buck, 838 N.E.2d at 206; and (2) the Supreme Judicial Court
10
has held that because the rule it stated in DiGiambattista did not involve
constitutional rights, it applied only prospectively, id. (citing Com. v. Dagley,
816 N.E.2d 527, 534 (Mass. 2004)).
We cannot say that the trial judge unsustainably exercised his discretion
by declining to give the DiGiambattista instruction because we have never
adopted the rule stated in that case. We have recognized that videotaping
custodial interrogation may lessen inherent speculation, avoid unwanted
claims of coercion, and generally assist all parties in assessing what transpired
during the interrogation, such that, to the extent possible, custodial
interrogations of juveniles should be videotaped. State v. Farrell, 145 N.H.
733, 739 (2001). We have also recognized that listening to a defendant be
inculpated by his or her own voice has a persuasive power unrivaled by
contradictory testimonial evidence, thus making inequitable the admission of
selective recordings of a post-Miranda interrogation, and persuading us to hold
that in order to admit into evidence the taped recording of an interrogation,
which occurs after Miranda rights are given, the recording must be complete.
State v. Barnett, 147 N.H. 334, 337-38 (2001). But we have never expressed
the reservations about unrecorded interrogations articulated by the
DiGiambattista Court, and, likewise, we have never adopted the rule
established by that case. Because DiGiambattista is not the law of New
Hampshire, the trial judge’s decision not to give the requested instruction was
not an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Place, 152 N.H. at 227.
Moreover, notwithstanding the defendant’s suggestion that we adopt
DiGiambattista, the facts of this case are substantially different from those of
DiGiambattista. In DiGiambattista, it was undisputed that the police elicited a
confession from the defendant through various forms of trickery.
DiGiambattista, 813 N.E.2d at 520, 524. The lack of an electronic record of the
confession in that case “resulted in the expenditure of significant judicial
resources (by three courts), all in an attempt to reconstruct what transpired
during several hours of interrogation . . . and to perform an analysis of the
constitutional ramifications of that incomplete reconstruction,” and left the
Court to conclude that “[w]e will never know whether, if able to hear (or even
view) the entirety of the interrogation, the impact of the officers’ trickery and
implied offers of leniency might have appeared in context sufficiently
attenuated to permit the conclusion that DiGiambattista’s confession was
nevertheless voluntary.” Id. at 529.
Here, by contrast, there is little factual dispute concerning what
happened during the defendant’s interrogation. The State introduced Officer
Brennan’s testimony that the defendant confessed to raping the victim, while
the defendant introduced his own testimony that rather than confessing to
Officer Brennan, the officer told him that he had raped the victim, presumably
as a part of his interrogation strategy. However, both sides agree that the
11
defendant told Officer Brennan that he had sex with the victim and that her
participation was not fully consensual. The key dispute is over what the
defendant meant when he told Detective Brennan that his sexual conduct with
the victim “was not one hundred percent consensual,” and the defendant
offered testimony on that very issue at trial. In light of the defendant’s own
admission that he told Officer Brennan that he had non-consensual sex with
the victim and his subsequent explanation of what he meant by “non-
consensual,” determining whether he said “yes” or “no” when Officer Brennan
asked him whether he raped the victim is relatively inconsequential. Because
the concerns raised by the DiGiambattista Court are not present in the factual
circumstances of this case, we decline to use this case to decide whether to
adopt DiGiambattista for New Hampshire, and leave that issue for another day.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12