THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2006-040
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
NATHAN RAVELL
Argued: February 22, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 19, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Peter C.L. Roth, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Nathan Ravell, appeals his conviction after
a bench trial in Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) on nine counts of possession of
child pornography in violation of RSA 649-A:3 (Supp. 2006). We affirm.
The following appears in the record: The defendant was arrested when
he was preparing to meet with someone whom he believed was a fourteen-year-
old boy, but who was, in fact, an undercover police officer. At the time of his
arrest, the defendant possessed a CD-ROM containing pornographic images of
children in violation of RSA 649-A:3, I(e), which makes it a felony for a person
to knowingly “buy [ ], procure[ ], possess[ ], or control[ ] any visual
representation of a child engaging in sexual activity.” After pleading guilty, the
defendant was convicted in Cheshire County Superior Court and sentenced for
possession of child pornography.
Subsequently, the defendant was charged in Carroll County with
possessing pornographic images of children found on his home computer.
Among those images were five that the Carroll County Superior Court found
were “the same” as those on the CD-ROM that had been the basis for the
Cheshire County convictions. The defendant moved to dismiss the Carroll
County indictments, citing his right to be shielded from multiple punishments
for the same offense under the Double Jeopardy Clauses of the Federal and
State Constitutions. See U.S. CONST. amend. V; N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 16.
The trial court denied this motion.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motion to dismiss. He urges us to vacate his convictions and sentences on the
Carroll County indictments, arguing that they violate the prohibition against
double jeopardy under the Federal Constitution. He does not advance a double
jeopardy argument under the State Constitution.
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Federal Constitution provides that no
person shall “be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life
or limb.” U.S. CONST. amend. V; see Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 164 (1977).
It “protects a defendant’s rights in three ways: First, it protects against a
second prosecution for the same offense after an acquittal. Second, it protects
against a second prosecution for the same offense after a conviction. Third, it
protects against multiple punishments for the same offense.” State v. Bailey,
127 N.H. 811, 814 (1986) (quotation omitted); see United States v. Ursery, 518
U.S. 267, 273 (1996). The defendant asserts a violation of the third category of
protections. To the extent that he asserts a violation of the second category of
protections, this argument is not developed, and we decline to review it. In the
Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. ___, ___, 911 A.2d 14, 30 (2006). We
therefore focus our discussion upon whether, by denying his motion to dismiss
the Carroll County indictments, the trial court subjected the defendant to
multiple punishments for the same offense.
To determine whether a defendant is subject to multiple punishments for
the same offense, we must determine the “unit of prosecution” intended by the
legislature. State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638, 647 (1999) (federal double jeopardy
analysis); see Sanabria v. United States, 437 U.S. 54, 69-70 (1978). “We give
the language of a statute its commonsensical meaning.” Cobb, 143 N.H. at 647
(quotation omitted).
RSA 649-A:3, I(e) pertains to “any visual representation of a child
engaging in sexual activity.” “Visual representation” is further defined as “any
pose, play, dance or other performance, exhibited before an audience or
2
reproduced in or designed to be reproduced in any book, magazine, pamphlet,
motion picture film, photograph or picture.” RSA 649-A:2, IV (1996).
We have already held that this language “shows a legislative intent that
the displaying or possessing of each photograph constitutes a separate
offense.” Cobb, 143 N.H. at 647 (emphasis added). “The legislature intended
the unit of prosecution to be each separate book, magazine, pamphlet, motion
picture film, photograph, or picture.” Id. at 647-48. Put another way, the
legislature intended the unit of prosecution to be each separate visual
representation or each image. Here, therefore, it did not violate the Federal
Double Jeopardy Clause to punish the defendant for each image he possessed.
Consistent with the legislature’s intent, he could be punished in Cheshire
County for the five images he possessed on the CD-ROM and punished in
Carroll County for the identical five images he possessed on his computer hard
drive without violating double jeopardy.
We find support for our interpretation of the statute in RSA 649-A:1
(1996), the legislature’s statement of intent. RSA 649-A:1 reads in pertinent
part:
I. The legislature finds that there has been a proliferation of
exploitation of children through their use as subjects in sexual
performances. . . .
II. . . . [T]he legislature urges law enforcement officers to
aggressively seek out and prosecute those who violate the
provisions of this chapter.
The purpose of the statute, therefore, is to prevent the proliferation of child
pornography through the aggressive enforcement of the statute’s provisions. It
is consistent with this intent to punish the defendant separately for each image
possessed on his CD-ROM and computer hard drive. Given this intent, “it is
unreasonable to suggest that the legislature intended a single penalty without
regard for the volume of child pornography . . . [and] the number of separate
volitional acts required to obtain and store it.” State v. Multaler, 643 N.W.2d
437, 451 (Wis. 2002) (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). By using the
word “any,” “a term of great breadth” which, “[r]ead naturally . . . has an
expansive meaning,” United States v. Ickes, 393 F.3d 501, 504 (4th Cir. 2005)
(quotation omitted), the legislature gives this statute great reach, consistent
with its stated intent. The small unit of prosecution was intended to stop
proliferation in each and every instance.
Courts in other jurisdictions have similarly interpreted their analogous
state statutes. In Multaler, for instance, the court construed a statute that
criminalized the possession of “any undeveloped film, photographic negative,
photograph, motion picture, videotape or other pictorial reproduction . . . of a
3
child engaged in sexually explicit conduct.” Multaler, 643 N.W.2d at 450
(quotation omitted). The court ruled that the legislature’s use of the word “any”
evinced its intent to prosecute for “each photograph or pictorial reproduction.”
Id. at 451. The court concluded that “each image [the defendant] possessed
could be prosecuted separately” and punished separately. Id.
The defendant contends that the legislature intended each “distinct
visual representation” to be the unit of prosecution and that the prohibition
against double jeopardy is triggered by punishment for “duplicate copies of the
same visual representation.” He asserts that because the images on the CD-
ROM and on his hard drive were identical, he could not be punished separately
for possessing each image. We disagree. The statutory language at issue
unambiguously demonstrates that the possession of “any” visual
representation constitutes a separate offense, regardless of whether that visual
representation is a duplicate copy of another visual representation. “If the
legislature had intended possession, regardless of the number of [visual
representations], to be the unit of prosecution, it could have phrased the
statute accordingly; e.g., ‘it is unlawful to possess one or more [visual
representations of a child engaging in sexual activity].’” State v. Stratton, 132
N.H. 451, 455 (1989). The legislature’s intent was to combat the proliferation
of child pornography by targeting any visual representation of a child engaged
in sexual activity. To interpret the statute in the way the defendant suggests
would dilute this far-reaching proscription.
The defendant also argues that because the statute is ambiguous, the
rule of lenity applies. The rule of lenity “forbids interpretation of a federal
criminal statute so as to increase the statutory penalty where Congress’ intent
is unclear”; it “is applicable only where statutory ambiguity has been found.”
Cobb, 143 N.H. at 647 (quotations omitted). Because we hold that the statute
is unambiguous, the rule of lenity does not apply.
Additionally, the defendant asserts that our interpretation of the statute
will lead to absurd results such as permitting multiple punishments of a
defendant for multiple images contained on a computer hard drive, where the
hard drive has backed up those images automatically. Such a result may well
be distinguishable, however this case is not before us.
Therefore, for all of the reasons set forth above, we conclude that the trial
court did not err when it denied the defendant’s motion to dismiss the Carroll
County indictments. Subjecting him to punishment for these indictments did
not violate the Federal Double Jeopardy Clause’s protection against multiple
punishments for the same offense.
Affirmed.
4
GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DUGGAN, J., with whom
BRODERICK, C.J., joined, dissented.
DUGGAN, J., dissenting. I would hold that the statute is ambiguous,
apply the rule of lenity, and vacate the defendant’s convictions. Accordingly, I
respectfully dissent.
I
The Federal Double Jeopardy Clause “does not prohibit the imposition of
all additional sanctions that could, in common parlance, be described as
punishment.” Hudson v. United States, 522 U.S. 93, 98-99 (1997) (quotations
omitted). Instead, it “protects only against the imposition of multiple criminal
punishments for the same offense, and then only when such occurs in
successive proceedings.” Id. at 99 (citations omitted). “The Clause . . . does no
more than prevent the sentencing court from prescribing greater punishment
than the legislature intended.” United States v. Patel, 370 F.3d 108, 114 (1st
Cir. 2004) (quotation omitted). “The limited effect of the Double Jeopardy
Clause on multiple punishment claims derives from the principle that the
power to define criminal offenses and prescribe punishments . . . belongs solely
to the legislature.” Id.
Where, as here, a defendant asserts a double jeopardy violation, arguing
that he is being punished multiple times under the same statute for the same
offense, courts must inquire what “unit of prosecution” was intended by the
legislature as the punishable act. Sanabria v. United States, 437 U.S. 54, 69
(1978); State v. Stratton, 132 N.H. 451, 455 (1989). “[O]nce [the legislature]
has defined a statutory offense by its prescription of the allowable unit of
prosecution, that prescription determines the scope of protection afforded . . . .”
Sanabria, 437 U.S. at 69-70 (quotations and citations omitted). Identifying the
appropriate unit of prosecution is a matter of statutory interpretation. United
States v. Verrecchia, 196 F.3d 294, 297-98 (1st Cir. 1999). Where the statute
is ambiguous or legislative intent is unclear, courts should apply the rule of
lenity to resolve the ambiguity. Bell v. United States, 349 U.S. 81, 83 (1955);
State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 811, 814 (1986).
II
To be sure, the legislature could make the possession of each individual
picture – whether an identical copy of another picture or not – a crime. The
question presented by this appeal, however, is whether it did. Answering this
question requires a determination as to whether the legislature intended the
five images at issue to constitute different “units of prosecution” for which the
defendant can be punished separately under the statute. In making this
determination, we construe Criminal Code provisions according to the fair
5
import of their terms and to promote justice. RSA 625:3 (1996); State v.
Porelle, 149 N.H. 420, 424 (2003).
The plain language of the statute does not provide a clear answer. RSA
649-A:3, I(e) (Supp. 2006) provides, “A person is guilty of a felony if such
person: . . . [k]nowingly buys, procures, possesses, or controls any visual
representation of a child engaging in sexual activity.” Thus, pursuant to the
statute, the “unit of prosecution” is any “visual representation.” A visual
representation is defined as “any pose, play, dance or other performance,
exhibited before an audience or reproduced in or designed to be reproduced in
any book, magazine, pamphlet, motion picture film, photograph or picture.”
RSA 649-A:2, IV (1996). The phrase “any pose, play, dance or other
performance” is ambiguous. On one hand, it could mean, as the majority
holds, each individual picture. It could, however, be read to mean that
identical copies of pictures are not separate visual representations because
each identical copy contains the same identical pose. Where the legislature
wanted to penalize conduct involving copies of pornographic images, it was able
to do so in clear and plain language. See RSA 649-B:3, I(b) (Supp. 2006).
Here, it did not.
While the majority cites State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638, 647-48 (1999), as
support for the position that “the legislature intended the unit of prosecution to
be each separate visual representation or image,” Cobb is not controlling here
because in that case, the court specifically noted that “[e]ach photograph is
different.” Cobb, 143 N.H. at 647. Here, by contrast, each of the photographs
at issue is identical to another for which the defendant already had been
punished.
The majority also cites State v. Multaler, 643 N.W.2d 437 (Wis. 2002), as
support for the position that a unit of prosecution is each separate image.
However, it is not clear from the opinion in Multaler whether the defendant
there was being punished, as in Cobb, for different photographs or, as here, for
identical copies of the same photograph. Rather, in Multaler the defendant
argued, in regard to his multiplicity claim, that the legislature intended the
unit of prosecution to be one charge for each disk, not for each image on a
disk. Id. at 448.
Furthermore, the majority’s interpretation of the word “any” is not a
universally held position. For example, one court held:
If the word “a” is used, the courts have discerned a
legislative intent that each item of contraband be the
basis for a separate unit of prosecution; if the word
“any” is used, the courts have discerned a legislative
intent that all of the contraband be viewed in the
6
episodic sense with only a single unit of prosecution
intended.
State v. Farnham, 752 So. 2d 12, 14 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2000).
Nor does the statutory scheme, when viewed in its entirety, make clear
what “unit of prosecution” the legislature intended to punish. RSA 649-A:1
(1996) sets forth the legislature’s statement of its purposes in enacting the
statute. It provides:
Declaration of Findings and Purposes.
I. The legislature finds that there has been a
proliferation of exploitation of children through their
use as subjects in sexual performances. The care of
children is a sacred trust and should not be abused by
those who seek to profit through a commercial
network based upon the exploitation of children. The
public policy of the state demands the protection of
children from exploitation through sexual
performances.
II. It is the purpose of this chapter to facilitate the
prosecution of those who exploit children in the
manner specified in paragraph I. In accordance with
the United States Supreme Court’s decision in New
York v. Ferber, this chapter makes the dissemination
of visual representations of children under the age of
16 engaged in sexual activity illegal irrespective of
whether the visual representations are legally obscene;
and the legislature urges law enforcement officers to
aggressively seek out and prosecute those who violate
the provisions of this chapter.
Although both of these paragraphs emphasize the indisputably important
interest in protecting children from exploitation, neither sheds any light upon
whether the legislature viewed the possession of, for example, five identical
copies of an image to be a more serious offense than the possession of, for
example, four. Nor, upon review, does the legislative history shed any light on
this issue. Thus, since the phrase “visual depiction” is ambiguous, we must
turn to the rule of lenity.
III
“The rule of lenity is not to be applied lightly: it applies only if, after
seizing everything from which aid can be derived, [the court] can make no more
7
than a guess as to what [the legislature] intended.” United States v. Rolfsema,
468 F.3d 75, 80 (1st Cir. 2006) (quotation omitted).
Under the rule of lenity, grievous ambiguity in a penal
statute is resolved in the defendant’s favor. The
simple existence of some statutory ambiguity,
however, is not sufficient to warrant application of that
rule, for most statutes are ambiguous to some degree.
Rather, the rule only applies if there is a grievous
ambiguity or uncertainty in the statute.
United States v. Councilman, 418 F.3d 67, 83 (1st Cir. 2005) (quotations and
citations omitted); see also State v. Parker, 154 N.H. ___, ___ (decided March
16, 2007).
Here, the statute contains textual ambiguity and, for the reasons stated
above, neither the plain language of the statute, nor its legislative history
provides any clarity. See, e.g., Dixson v. United States, 465 U.S. 482, 491
(1984) (“If the legislative history fails to clarify the statutory language, our rule
of lenity would compel us to construe the statute in favor of . . . [the] criminal
defendant[ ] in th[is] case[ ].”). Furthermore, because this ambiguity can result
in a defendant being subjected to significantly higher punishment depending
upon how it is interpreted, the ambiguity is “grievous.” Therefore, the rule of
lenity applies and we should resolve the statute in the defendant’s favor.
Accordingly, lenity requires that a “unit of prosecution” does not include
possession of identical copies of an image for which a defendant already has
been punished.
IV
Using a possession offense to punish a defendant for possessing identical
copies of an image does not appeal to a sense of fairness. It would make little
sense for a defendant who possesses five identical copies of an image to be
punished with five separate felony convictions, while another defendant who
possesses three or four identical images receives only three or four such
convictions. The legislature has created other means to punish this conduct.
For example, although it is a very real concern that a defendant who
possesses multiple copies of an image will sell or distribute at least some of
those copies to other individuals, our statute punishes sales and distribution
separately from possession. Compare RSA 649-A:3, I(a) with RSA 649-A:3, I(e).
Since our legislature has created a separate mechanism to punish individuals
who sell or distribute child pornography, it is through that mechanism that
such conduct should be punished. Likewise, since our legislature has created
a separate mechanism for punishing individuals who reproduce child
pornography through computerized means, see RSA 649-B:3, I(b), it is through
8
that mechanism that such conduct could also potentially be punished. The
conduct at issue here, while grave, seems to have been cabined into a crime
where it simply does not fit.
To the extent a defendant has a large quantity of identical pornographic
images, the quantity of images can be used as evidence in connection with, for
example, a prosecution for selling or delivering pornography under RSA 649-
A:3, I(a) or for reproducing images contrary to RSA 649-B:3, I(b). This
approach is consistent with how courts have analyzed “unit of prosecution”
and double jeopardy issues in drug cases prosecuted under statutes
criminalizing possession of, possession with intent to distribute, and
distribution of controlled substances. See, e.g., Commonwealth v. Rabb, 725
N.E.2d 1036, 1041-43 (Mass. 2000) (involving charges for sale of and intent to
sell controlled substances).
V
Finally, the majority’s holding is decided solely under the Federal
Constitution. Nothing in today’s opinion prevents another defendant from
bringing a state constitutional claim in a future case. See Stratton, 132 N.H. at
454 (upholding prosecution on six indictments for possession of six different
firearms by a convicted felon because “proof of the elements of the crimes as
charged [would] in actuality require a difference in evidence”); see also State v.
Sanchez, 152 N.H. 625, 630 (2005). Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, I
respectfully dissent.
BRODERICK, C.J., joins in the dissent.
9