THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-360
IN RE FATHER 2006-360
Argued: November 14, 2006
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, attorney, on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the New Hampshire Division for Children,
Youth and Families.
Paula J. Werme, of Boscawen, by brief and orally, for the father.
Carolyn M. Kirby, of Goffstown, by brief, for Hillsborough County.
HICKS, J. The father, P.S., appeals decisions of the Superior Court
(Brennan, J.) denying his requests for appointment of counsel in abuse and
neglect proceedings under RSA chapter 169-C (2002 & Supp. 2006) involving
his daughter. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the record. P.S.’ daughter, E.S., was born
in 1990 and lived with her mother. E.S. has never lived with her father, who
resides in Pennsylvania. P.S. unsuccessfully sought custody of his daughter in
1992 and 1995 in the superior court.
In February 2005, the police placed E.S. in protective custody due to
allegations that her mother was abusive and/or neglectful. The New
Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families (DCYF) filed a petition for
abuse and neglect pursuant to RSA 169-C:3, XIX(b) (2002). P.S. was not
named in the petition. The Milford District Court held a preliminary hearing
and issued an order on February 17, 2005, finding that E.S. was neglected by
her mother and awarding DCYF legal custody. Although P.S. was informed of
the hearing by telephone, he did not attend. As part of the order, the court
“denied until further hearing” P.S.’ visitation with his daughter.
An adjudicatory hearing was held on March 10, 2005. P.S. attended the
hearing pro se. The court again found that E.S. was a neglected child and
awarded legal custody to DCYF. P.S. was given visitation rights conditioned
upon the discretion of DCYF in consultation with the guardian ad litem. This
arrangement was continued by the court at a dispositional hearing held in
April 2005, which P.S. attended pro se.
On May 19, 2005, Hillsborough County (County) sent P.S. a copy of its
motion requesting that the court order him to complete a financial affidavit for
purposes of determining the reimbursement he owed to the County and the
State pursuant to RSA 169-C:27 (2002). Section V of the statute charges the
County with collecting reimbursement for services, on behalf of the State, from
the person or persons chargeable by law for the care and necessities of a child.
RSA 169-C:27, V. On May 31, 2005, the district court granted the County’s
motion and P.S. submitted a financial affidavit. On June 14, 2005, the court
granted the County’s motion for parental reimbursement. P.S. failed to make
any payments and in August 2005, the County filed a motion for contempt,
which was granted by the court.
In April 2005, a local attorney filed an appearance in conjunction with a
motion for temporary custody on behalf of P.S. in the district court. At a “Bill
F.” review hearing held on July 14, 2005, see In re Bill F., 145 N.H. 267 (2000),
the court denied P.S.’ motion for custody of his daughter on the basis that he
“is unfit to perform his parental duties.” Through his attorney, P.S. filed a
motion for reconsideration on September 1, 2005, which was denied by the
district court. On September 9, 2005, Attorney Paula Werme, on behalf of P.S.,
filed an appearance and a motion to be appointed as counsel.
The district court initially granted the motion, but then reversed its
decision after determining that RSA 169-C:10, II(a) (2002) precluded
appointment of counsel for P.S. The district court also issued a protective
order prohibiting unauthorized contact between P.S. and his daughter. On
November 22, 2005, P.S. filed a petition for writ of certiorari in superior court
arguing, inter alia, that he was entitled to court-appointed counsel. He also
asked the superior court to appoint counsel, which request was denied.
2
On February 24, 2006, the superior court granted DCYF’s motion to
dismiss P.S.’ writ as untimely filed. P.S. appeals these decisions, raising
numerous issues in his notice of appeal. We bifurcated the appeal and address
here only the issues regarding appointment of counsel.
On appeal, P.S. argues that RSA 169-C:10, II(a) violates his due process
rights by prohibiting assignment of court-appointed counsel in RSA chapter
169-C proceedings. DCYF counters that due process does not require
appointment of counsel for indigent parents who are not the subject of abuse
or neglect accusations in RSA chapter 169-C proceedings.
The Child Protection Act requires the court to
appoint counsel to represent an indigent parent who
has been accused of abusing or neglecting his or her
own child. RSA 169-C:10, II(a). The statute also
states that the court “may appoint” counsel for an
indigent parent not accused of abuse or neglect “if the
parent is a household member and such independent
legal representation is necessary to protect the
parent’s interests.” Id. . . . RSA 169-C:10, II(a),
however, specifically provides that “[t]he court shall
not appoint an attorney to represent any other persons
involved in a case brought under this chapter.”
In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. 237, 239 (2002). Because P.S. was not accused of
abuse or neglect, and was never a member of the household, the district and
superior courts denied his requests for court-appointed counsel.
P.S. relies upon the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution and Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution. We first
address this issue under the State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. In the Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. 200, 203
(2006).
“This court is the final arbiter of the due process requirements of the
State Constitution.” In re Brittany S., 147 N.H. 489, 491 (2002). There is no
dispute that a natural parent’s role in family life is a fundamental liberty
interest under Part I, Article 2 of the State Constitution. In re Shelby R., 148
N.H. at 239. Having determined that a natural parent has a legally protected
interest, we next determine whether due process requires appointment of
counsel to an indigent natural parent by balancing three factors: (1) the
private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of an erroneous
deprivation of such interest through the procedures used and the probable
value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and (3) the
3
government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and
administrative burdens that additional or substitute procedural requirements
would entail. Id. at 240.
The primary private interest of a non-custodial parent who is not
accused of abuse or neglect is the parent-child relationship. Id. P.S. also
argues that he has a significant financial interest given that Hillsborough
County, on behalf of the State, can seek the recovery of incurred expenses in
proceedings conducted pursuant to RSA chapter 169-C. RSA 169-C:27.
An indigent parent has the right to court-appointed counsel in certain
limited situations. RSA 169-C:10 specifically affords counsel for an indigent
parent accused of abuse or neglect. In Shelby R., we held in a plurality
decision that accused step-parents in abuse and neglect proceedings also have
a constitutional right to court-appointed counsel. In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. at
243. For both parent and step-parent, the interests affected include the
potential for a breakdown of the family relationship and having his or her name
entered in DCYF’s central registry as an abusive or neglectful parent. RSA
169-C:35 (Supp. 2006); In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. at 244 (Duggan, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Although an unaccused, non-custodial parent’s interests may be similar
in part, on balance they are less compelling. Although such a parent does face
potential exposure to parental reimbursement expenses, a protected property
interest, he or she does not share the same interests of preserving a marital
relationship or a family dynamic that a parent living in the household would
have. Cf. In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. at 240. Moreover, an unaccused parent is
not faced with the potential of having his or her name entered in DCYF’s
central registry.
Next, we examine the risk that an unaccused, non-custodial parent will
be erroneously deprived of his or her interests through the procedures used.
We find this risk to be minimal. P.S. argues that “[a] parent without an
attorney cannot be expected to navigate the complex legal consequences under
multiple provisions of the Child Protection Act . . . after a Petition for
Abuse/Neglect [has been] filed on the other parent.”
RSA 169-C:19-e (2002) provides:
A parent who has not been charged with abuse or
neglect shall be afforded, upon request, a full hearing
in the district or family court regarding his or her
ability to obtain custody. At the hearing, the parent
shall be provided the opportunity to present evidence
pertaining to his or her ability to provide care for the
4
child and shall be awarded custody unless the state
demonstrates, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that he or she has abused or neglected the child or is
otherwise unfit to perform his or her parental duties.
This provision, which provides for what is known as a “Bill F. hearing,”
protects the unaccused parent’s rights and places the burden upon the State to
show that the parent seeking custody is unfit. In re Bill F., 145 N.H. at 274-
76. The parent thus has the right to present evidence, but does not have to
carry the burden of proof. This, together with the facts that the district court is
not bound by the technical rules of evidence and that the proceedings are held
before a judge without a jury, In re Brittany S., 147 N.H. at 493, significantly
reduces the risk that an unaccused parent will suffer an erroneous deprivation
of the interests discussed above.
In addition, in abuse and neglect proceedings, the dispositional order is
not permanent and is subject to review. See RSA 169-C:22 (2002) (review
required upon party’s motion for changed circumstances); RSA 169-C:24
(2002) (required annual review and discretionary review upon party’s request).
Finally, we examine the government’s interest,
including the function involved and the fiscal and
administrative burdens that the provision of court-
appointed counsel would entail. The purpose of the
Child Protection Act is “to provide protection to
children whose life, health or welfare is endangered
and to establish a judicial framework to protect the
rights of all parties involved in the adjudication of
child abuse or neglect cases.” RSA 169-C:2, I. We
identify two important State interests advanced by the
Act: (1) protecting children; and (2) protecting the
rights of all parties involved in abuse or neglect
proceedings.
In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. at 241.
RSA chapter 169-C is to be liberally construed “[t]o provide effective
judicial procedures through which the provisions of [RSA chapter 169-C] are
executed and enforced and which recognize and enforce the constitutional and
other rights of the parties and assures them a fair hearing.” RSA 169-C:2, II(c)
(2002); In re Shelby R., 148 N.H. at 241. With this in mind, we weigh the
government’s interest in assuring the parties involved have a fair hearing
against the burden of requiring that counsel be appointed for unaccused, non-
custodial parents. In this case, we recognize that providing court-appointed
counsel to all unaccused, non-custodial parents in abuse and neglect
5
proceedings would place substantial fiscal as well as administrative burdens
upon the State. See id.
Accordingly, after balancing the interests outlined above, the minimal
likelihood of a deprivation of these interests, and the fiscal and administrative
burdens on the State, we hold that due process does not require that counsel
be appointed for an unaccused, non-custodial parent in RSA chapter 169-C
proceedings.
Because the State Constitution is at least as protective of individual
liberties in these circumstances as the Federal Constitution, see In re Tracy M.,
137 N.H. 119, 122 (1993), we reach the same result under the Federal
Constitution.
We need not address the remaining arguments contained in P.S.’ brief
because this appeal was expressly limited to the issues regarding appointment
of counsel.
Orders denying appointment
of counsel affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6