THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-905
DEAN LEBARON AND MARILYN PITCHFORD, TRUSTEES
OF THE DEAN LEBARON TRUST - 1998
v.
JOAN M. WIGHT
BARBARA OLDMAN
v.
JOAN M. WIGHT
Argued: October 17, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2007
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Derek D. Lick on the brief and
orally), for the petitioners.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (Timothy E. Britain and John T.
Alexander on the brief, and Mr. Alexander orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, Joan M. Wight, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (McHugh, J.) denying her motion to dismiss and finding that
the petitioners, Dean LeBaron and Marilyn Pitchford, Trustees of the Dean
LeBaron Trust – 1998, and Barbara Oldman, maintain a right of first refusal to
the respondent’s property. We reverse.
The record supports the following facts. In 1961, Barbara Cummer Paul
conveyed seven numbered lots by separate warranty deeds (1961 deeds) to
petitioner Barbara Oldman. The lots are located within the Grace Hill
Development complex along Lake Sunapee in Newbury. Each deed also
conveyed a one-seventh interest in an access lot, which provided access to the
lake.
Each deed contained the following language: “conveyance of the lot
hereinabove described is . . . subject to the following covenants, restrictions
and reservations, which shall be held to run with and bind the land hereby
conveyed and all subsequent owners and occupants thereof for a period of fifty
(50) years from July, 1956.” The only covenant at issue concerns the right of
first refusal contained in the 1961 deeds, which provides:
The land hereby conveyed shall not be sold or
transferred to anyone other than the grantee’s spouse,
lineal descendants, or spouses of lineal descendants
without giving at least thirty (30) days written notice to
the grantor or her assign or to the owners of the lot or
lots next adjoining the lot hereby conveyed, the said
notice containing the price and the terms of the
proposed sale and giving the grantor or her assign or
the adjoining owner or owners the first opportunity to
buy, at the same price and on the same terms . . . .
In 1971, Oldman conveyed the seven lots by a single warranty deed
(1971 deed) to Oliver and Elizabeth Wight, the respondent’s predecessors in
interest. The 1971 deed provides, in pertinent part:
Notwithstanding the foregoing reference to seven
individual numbered lots, it is understood and agreed,
and the same is made a covenant running with and
binding the premises and the grantees and their heirs
and assigns for a period of fifty (50) years from the
date hereof, that the premises herein conveyed shall be
deemed to be and held as a single entity as if, in the
original subdivision of land belonging to Barbara
Cummer Paul as shown on said Plan, the land
embraced within said seven individual numbered lots
had been established and constituted as a single lot;
and said single lot, as so deemed and held, shall be
and is subject to the covenants, restrictions and
2
reservations contained in said several deeds of
Barbara Cummer Paul. Without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, it is expressly provided that no more
than one single-family residence shall be constructed
on said entire premises.
By letter dated August 31, 2006, the respondent informed the petitioners
that she had entered into a purchase and sale agreement with a third party for
the above land at a price of two million dollars. Attached to the letter were a
notice of sale and right of first refusal, a waiver and release form and the
unsigned purchase and sale agreement with the buyer’s name redacted. The
petitioners had until October 5, 2006, to exercise their right of first refusal.
Before the October 5 deadline, the petitioners filed suit against the
respondent, requesting a declaration from the court that they maintain a right
of first refusal entitling them to more information concerning the sale, and
seeking to enjoin the sale. The respondent filed a motion to dismiss alleging,
among other things, that the right of first refusal had expired in July 2006. In
an order dated October 17, 2006, the court denied the respondent’s motion to
dismiss, finding that the 1971 deed extended the right of first refusal for fifty
years commencing in 1971. On November 30, 2006, the third party buyer
withdrew from the transaction. This appeal followed.
“In reviewing the trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we determine
whether the facts as alleged establish a basis for legal relief.” Donnelly v.
Eastman, 149 N.H. 631, 632 (2003) (quotation omitted).
I. Mootness
We first address whether this appeal is moot, given that at the time of
this appeal, there is no third party offer to purchase the property and the
petitioners therefore cannot exercise any right of first refusal. See Roy v.
George W. Greene, Inc., 533 N.E.2d 1323, 1325 (Mass. 1989) (“[U]nless the
context of the agreement dictates otherwise, the term ‘right of first refusal’ . . .
refer[s] to a right that arises only after the owner has received an enforceable
offer to buy.”).
The doctrine of mootness is designed to avoid deciding
issues that have become academic or dead. However,
the question of mootness is not subject to rigid rules,
but is regarded as one of convenience and discretion.
A decision upon the merits may be justified where
there is a pressing public interest involved, or future
litigation may be avoided.
3
Sullivan v. Town of Hampton Bd. of Selectmen, 153 N.H. 690, 692 (2006)
(quotation and citations omitted). The issue in this appeal is whether the
petitioners hold an enforceable right of first refusal. As the respondent notes in
her brief, this issue is likely to arise in future litigation if the respondent enters
into another purchase and sale agreement with a third party buyer. We
believe, therefore, that an exception to the doctrine of mootness is justified in
this case.
II. Right of First Refusal
“[T]he proper interpretation of a contract, such as a deed, is a question of
law for this court.” Baker v. McCarthy, 122 N.H. 171, 174-75 (1982); see
Petition of Rattee, 145 N.H. 341, 345 (2000). “If the language of the deed is
clear and unambiguous, we will interpret the intended meaning from the deed
itself without resort to extrinsic evidence.” Rattee, 145 N.H. at 345 (quotation
omitted). Where there is “no ambiguity in the terms used by the parties, [we]
will review whether, as a matter of law, the interpretation of the trial court is
consonant with the intentions of the parties as expressed in the words they
used in formulating their contract.” Baker, 122 N.H. at 175.
The parties do not dispute that the 1961 deeds created a right of first
refusal for the grantor, her assign, and abutters. This restriction, as laid out in
the 1961 deeds, expired “fifty (50) years from July, 1956.” The petitioners
allege, however, that the 1971 deed incorporated by reference the right of first
refusal mentioned in the 1961 deeds and extended it “for a period of fifty (50)
years from [1971]” to 2021.
The language in the 1971 deed is unambiguous. There is no need,
therefore, to resort to extrinsic evidence. See Rattee, 145 N.H. at 345. The
fifty-year period applies only to the covenant that the seven individual lots and
the access lot shall be “held as a single entity” and treated as “a single lot.” A
semicolon concludes this provision, followed by a provision which states that
this new “single” lot “is subject to the covenants, restrictions and reservations”
contained in the 1961 deeds. There is no language creating a new fifty-year
period applicable to those “covenants, restrictions and reservations.” Cf. North
Bay Council, Inc. v. Bruckner, 131 N.H. 538, 545-46 (1989) (noting
reasonableness of reading ten-year restriction on use of land in first clause of
deed as not applicable to fourth clause containing right of first refusal, where
clauses were separated by semicolons). Had the drafters intended, at the time
the deed was created, to apply a new fifty-year period to the right of first refusal
contained in the 1961 deeds, language could have been included to specifically
create a new fifty-year period applicable to this provision. Cf. Baker, 122 N.H.
at 176 (relying, in part, on the absence of language in interpreting right of first
4
refusal in deed). We hold, therefore, that the right of first refusal expired on
July 31, 2006.
The trial court and the petitioners note that the respondent herself
apparently believed the right of first refusal was extended by the 1971 deed as
evidenced by the notice she sent the petitioners in August 2006, one month
after the fifty-year provision in the 1961 deeds had expired. A subsequent
grantee’s interpretation of language in a deed, however, has no bearing upon
our interpretation, which focuses upon the intention of the parties at the time
of the conveyance. See Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 565-66 (1994).
Having held that the right of first refusal has expired, we need not
address the other issues raised on appeal.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
5