THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-254
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JEREMY JENNINGS
Argued: April 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: August 8, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
James T. Brooks, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from two rulings of the
Superior Court (Groff, J.), one granting a motion to suppress statements filed
by the defendant, Jeremy Jennings, and the other granting his motion to
dismiss two sexual assault indictments. See Sup. Ct. R. 8. We affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
I. Suppression
After a suppression hearing during which the court heard testimony from
several witnesses, including the defendant, the court found the following facts:
On March 15, 2005, Sergeant Raymond Jackson of the Milford Police
Department spoke with H.J., a minor, concerning allegations that her father,
the defendant, had sexually assaulted her. The following day, Jackson learned
that the defendant would be arriving at approximately 3:30 p.m. at 17 Cedar
Street in Hudson (“the residence”) to pick up his children. During a meeting,
Jackson, Lieutenant William Avery and Detective Matthew Keller of the Hudson
Police Department, and Assistant County Attorney Roger Chadwick decided
that Jackson and Keller would approach the defendant at the residence and try
to get him to speak with them “voluntarily.” As such, it was determined that
the defendant would not be read his Miranda rights.
Jackson and Keller drove to the residence in an unmarked police cruiser
and positioned themselves on a side street across from the residence.
Lieutenant Avery and Chadwick parked approximately four houses away on the
opposite side of the street.
Shortly thereafter, the defendant arrived in a pick-up truck and parked
in the driveway. Jackson and Keller pulled their cruiser up, parked to the side
of the driveway, and got out of the vehicle. The defendant got out of his truck.
Jackson approached the defendant, identified himself, and displayed his badge,
while Keller remained at the cruiser. Jackson told the defendant that he would
like him to come to the Hudson police station so that he could ask him some
questions. Jackson told the defendant that “it was voluntary” as to whether he
went to the police station. The defendant asked why Jackson wanted to speak
with him. Jackson replied that he could not explain at that moment, but that
it had to do with the welfare of the defendant’s children. The defendant then
inquired about where his children were and Jackson indicated that they were
in a “safe place.” The defendant testified that he thought he was required to go
with Jackson.
The defendant twice asked Jackson if he could follow him to the police
station in his truck. Both times Jackson replied that it would be better if the
defendant went in the unmarked police cruiser with himself and Keller. He
instructed the defendant to turn off his truck, leave both of his cellular
telephones in the truck, take the keys out and lock the doors. The defendant
complied. Jackson then took the defendant’s truck keys and gave them to
Keller. Jackson testified that throughout this interaction the defendant
appeared calm and was agreeable.
Subsequently, Keller conducted a patdown search of the defendant and
asked him to remove all of the items in his pockets. Following the patdown,
Keller returned all of the items to the defendant except for the keys to the
truck. Keller then opened the door to the unmarked police cruiser and told the
defendant that he could take the front seat and Jackson would sit in the back.
Keller and Jackson then transported the defendant to the Hudson police
station.
2
Upon arrival at the police station, the cruiser entered the garage and the
door closed behind it. Keller opened the cruiser door for the defendant and
escorted him directly to a small interview room, containing one square table
and three chairs. Throughout the interview, the defendant sat in a chair
across from the door. Although the door was initially open, it was closed
throughout the interview.
Jackson sat in a chair across from the defendant. He testified that he
informed the defendant that he was not under arrest and was free to leave at
any time. However, the trial judge found that “there was no evidence indicating
that the defendant understood this to be true.” Jackson also testified that he
informed the defendant that the interview would be recorded. However, the
recording system was not turned on until shortly after the interview began, so
these preliminary statements were not recorded.
Jackson asked the defendant if he would like some water and the
defendant replied that he would not. Jackson then questioned the defendant
about H.J.’s allegations. Throughout the interview, Jackson confronted the
defendant with H.J.’s allegations and indicated that he believed them. During
the interview, the defendant made incriminating statements.
After approximately one hour, Jackson left the interview room. Before
doing so, he told the defendant that if he needed anything he could “give a little
whack” on the door. He also told the defendant that he would be leaving the
door closed but if the defendant wanted, he could open the door. The
defendant was not told that he could leave the room.
Detective Forgione of the Nashua Police Department then interviewed the
defendant for approximately thirty-five to forty minutes. Upon entering the
room, Forgione closed the door and told the defendant, “you know that this
video is being taped.” The defendant indicated that he did. Detective Forgione
then stated, “and you were told you could leave at any time.” The defendant
replied affirmatively. The trial court found Forgione’s statement, which was
videotaped, to be “more of an off-handed comment rather than an indication
that the defendant was actually free to leave at any time.”
During the interview, Forgione sat in a chair next to the defendant but in
front of the door. He confronted the defendant with H.J.’s allegations,
frequently indicating that he had no doubt “that something happened in
Nashua.” The defendant made incriminating statements to Forgione.
At the close of the interview, Forgione told the defendant “to just hang
out.” Forgione then left the interview room and closed the door. The defendant
was not advised that he could leave the room. He was subsequently arrested,
and at approximately 6:35 p.m. that same evening, was transported to the
3
Milford police station. He was eventually indicted on five counts of sexual
assault.
The defendant moved to suppress the statements made to Sergeant
Jackson and Detective Forgione, arguing that the detectives violated Part I,
Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments of the United States Constitution by subjecting him to a custodial
interrogation without informing him of his rights as required by Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). The court agreed.
On appeal, the State argues that the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendant was in custody is erroneous. The State argues that the critical
factor in the custody determination should be that the defendant was told at
the outset and later reminded that he was free to leave, and specifically asks us
to overturn the trial court’s finding that Forgione’s statement “and you were
told you could leave at any time” was an offhand comment rather than an
actual indication that the defendant was free to leave. We agree with the trial
court that we cannot “turn a blind eye toward a custodial relationship simply
because the police ma[d]e a thinly veiled attempt to clothe their custody of the
defendant in the language of voluntariness.” Accordingly, we affirm its ruling.
We first address the issue under the New Hampshire Constitution,
referring to federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-33 (1983). “Custody entitling a defendant to Miranda protections requires
formal arrest or restraint on freedom of movement to the degree associated
with formal arrest.” State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 382-83 (2003) (citation
omitted). In the absence of formal arrest, we must determine whether a
suspect’s freedom of movement was sufficiently curtailed by considering how a
reasonable person in the suspect’s position would have understood the
situation. Id. “The location of questioning is not, by itself, determinative: a
defendant may be in custody in his own home but not in custody at a police
station.” State v. Johnson, 140 N.H. 573, 578 (1995) (quotations and citations
omitted). To determine whether a reasonable person in the defendant’s
position would believe himself in custody, the trial court should consider, “the
totality of the circumstances of the encounter, including ‘the suspect’s
familiarity with his surroundings, the number of officers present, the degree to
which the suspect was physically restrained, and the interview’s duration and
character.’” State v. Grey, 148 N.H. 666, 670 (2002) (quoting State v. Graca,
142 N.H. 670, 675 (1998)). “Because the ultimate determination of custody
requires an application of a legal standard to historical facts, it is not merely a
factual question but a mixed question of law and fact.” State v. Ford, 144 N.H.
57, 62 (1999). Thus, we review the ultimate determination of custody de novo.
Id. at 63.
We begin with the State’s challenge to the trial court’s factual findings.
We will not overturn the trial court’s factual findings relevant to the question of
4
custody unless they are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. State
v. Locke, 149 N.H. 1, 6 (2002), cert. denied, 538 U.S. 1043 (2003).
After reviewing the transcript of the suppression hearing and the
videotape of the defendant’s interview we cannot conclude that the court’s
findings are contrary to the manifest weight of the evidence. In particular, with
respect to the court’s characterization of Forgione’s statement “and you were
told you are free to leave” as an offhand remark, the videotape confirms the
nature of the remark, as well as the unlikelihood that, in the context in which
it was made, it would have communicated to any reasonable person that he or
she was actually free to leave. Just minutes before Forgione entered the room,
Sergeant Jackson instructed the defendant that he could knock on the
interview room’s door if he needed anything. The implication of this statement
was that the defendant could not leave the room, much less the station.
Following this, Forgione’s question as to whether the defendant had at an
earlier time been told he was free to leave did not communicate that he was
currently free to leave.
Having upheld the trial court’s factual findings, we turn to the State’s
argument that the defendant was not in custody for purposes of the State
Constitution. As noted above, custody determinations involve an examination
of the totality of the circumstances, including, but not limited to, factors such
as the number of officers present, the degree to which the suspect was
physically restrained, the interview’s duration and character, and the suspect’s
familiarity with his surroundings. Grey, 148 N.H. at 670. The trial court’s
order contains factual findings bearing upon these factors and other pertinent
considerations.
For example, with respect to the number of officers present, the trial
court found that two officers drove to the residence in an unmarked car and
parked the car next to the driveway. One then approached the defendant and
flashed his badge while the other waited near the car. In addition, another
officer, joined by an assistant county attorney, was parked in a car across the
street. The fact that three officers and a prosecutor went to meet the defendant
certainly bolsters the trial court’s custody determination.
Similarly, although the defendant may not have been placed in handcuffs
or any similar device, he was restrained from early on in the encounter. After
the police asked the defendant to come to the police station for questioning,
they twice refused his request to follow them to the station in his own truck.
Instead of allowing him to travel independently, Jackson instructed him to turn
off his truck, remove the keys, leave his cellular telephones behind, and lock
the doors. The police also patted him down and confiscated his keys. This
stands in sharp contrast to State v. Carpentier, 132 N.H. 123, 127 (1989),
where officers provided transportation to the police station for the defendant’s
convenience, and State v. Carroll, 138 N.H. 687, 696 (1994), where the
5
defendant drove himself to the police station. By denying the defendant access
to his truck and phones, the police effectively ensured that he was dependent
upon them for any further transportation or communication with the outside
world.
Moreover, at the police station, the police continued to exert control over
the defendant in a manner that limited his freedom. The defendant was
brought into the station through a closed-door garage and escorted directly to
an interview room. He was seated in the chair furthest from the door and the
door was closed.
In addition to the fact that the defendant was whisked away to the
unfamiliar surroundings of the police station, the duration and character of the
encounter and interview suggest that he was in custody. During the initial
encounter at the defendant’s residence, the police informed him that they
wished to speak with him about his daughter’s welfare, giving no indication
that a crime had been alleged or that he was suspected of any wrongdoing.
Within minutes of being inside the interview room, however, Jackson
confronted the defendant with his daughter’s allegations of sexual assault and
said he was certain she was telling the truth. Both Jackson and Forgione then
repeatedly confronted the defendant in this manner. Coupled with the control
exercised by the police from the beginning of the encounter, this clear
indication that the police believed the defendant to be guilty of sexual assault
would have signaled to a reasonable person that his freedom of movement was
curtailed to the degree associated with formal arrest.
Furthermore, the police interviewed the defendant for nearly two hours
in the closed-door, confined atmosphere of the interview room. See Grey, 148
N.H. at 670 (finding no custody where defendant made statements in “the
familiar environment” of his grandparents’ home); State v. Goupil, 154 N.H.
208, 226 (2006) (no custody where interview occurred in defendant’s
grandmother’s home, “surroundings that were both comfortable and familiar”
to defendant). There was no evidence that during his time at the police station,
the defendant was actually free to move about the station. See Carroll, 138
N.H. at 696-97 (defendant enjoyed freedom of movement around the police
station during interview). Moreover, when the police were through questioning
him, the defendant was told to “hang out” and was then formally arrested,
without ever being allowed to move about, let alone leave the station. See
Carroll, 138 N.H. at 696 (defendant was permitted to leave police station on two
occasions after interviews in which he made statements implicating himself in
murder); see also Carpentier, 132 N.H. at 127 (after three-hour interview,
defendant asked to leave police station, police drove him back to work, and
defendant was not arrested until ten days later).
In arguing that the trial court erred in concluding that the defendant was
in custody, the State emphasizes the fact that the defendant was told he was
6
free to go. A person who is clearly advised that he is free to leave is ordinarily
not in custody. See, e.g., Locke, 149 N.H. at 7 (“Given the repeated advice that
he was free to leave, we conclude that a reasonable person in the defendant’s
position would not have believed that he was restrained to the degree
associated with formal arrest.”). Sergeant Jackson testified that once inside
the interview room, he informed the defendant that he was not under arrest
and was free to leave at any time. However, as the trial court expressly found,
there was no evidence that the defendant understood. See id. at 4 (defendant
informed he was not in custody and was free to leave and defendant stated that
he understood). Moreover, there was no evidence that even if he did
understand, a reasonable person actually would have felt free to do so given
the above-described circumstances.
There are times when actions speak louder than words. Ultimately,
“police conduct should be judged in terms of what was done rather than what
the officer may have called it at the time.” Turmel, 150 N.H. at 387 (Brock,
C.J., dissenting) (quotation omitted). Here, as noted above and as found by the
trial court, many indicia of custody were present, and the accusatory nature of
the interview is undeniable. By the time the police confronted the defendant in
the closed-door interview room with both his daughter’s accusations and their
own certainty that the accusations were true, a reasonable person in the
defendant’s position would have found his freedom curtailed to the extent that
Miranda warnings were required. Thus, we think it implausible “that the
defendant could have risen from his seat and freely exited the interview room
in the middle of an escalating period of interrogation and gone along on his
merry way, especially when the detectives had developed a theory which
directly implicated him, and it was their intention to question him further at
that point about his involvement.” State v. Dedrick, 132 N.H. 218, 223 (1989)
(quotation omitted), cert. denied, 494 U.S. 1007 (1990).
In light of our discussion of the totality of the circumstances, we agree
with the trial court that even if Sergeant Jackson informed the defendant that
it was “voluntary” as to whether he went to the police station and once inside
the interview room told the defendant he could leave at any time, “it would be
naive of the court to suggest that a reasonable person in the position of the
defendant would have believed that he could have simply declined to
accompany the detectives to the police station, and once there to have believed
he would be allowed to get up and leave.” Accordingly, we affirm the trial
court’s ruling that the defendant was in custody for purposes of Part I, Article
15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and that his statements must therefore
be suppressed. Because the defendant prevails under the State Constitution,
we need not address his claim under the Federal Constitution.
7
II. Double Jeopardy
The defendant was indicted for five counts of aggravated felonious sexual
assault. Three of the indictments alleged pattern sexual assaults under RSA
632-A:2, III (2007). Each pattern indictment alleged that the defendant
digitally penetrated H.J. on more than one occasion over a period of two
months or more and within a period of five years. Indictment No. 05-1067
alleged that assaults occurred between January 2002 and November 2003 in
Nashua. Indictment No. 05-877 alleged that assaults occurred between
December 2003 and August 2004 at Wellesley Street in Milford. Indictment
No. 05-879 alleged that assaults occurred between September 2004 and March
2005 at King Street in Milford.
The defendant filed a motion to dismiss, arguing that the indictments
violated his double jeopardy rights under the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution. The trial court agreed, and
dismissed indictments Nos. 05-877 and 05-879. Using our decision in State v.
Richard, 147 N.H. 340 (2001), as a point of departure, the trial court held that
the pattern indictments subjected the defendant to multiple punishments for
the same offense because each indictment charged the same variant of sexual
assault, and the cumulative time frame of all the indictments was less than five
years. On appeal, the State argues that the pattern sexual assault statute
allows the charging of multiple patterns involving the same type of sexual
assault during a single five-year period, when the indictments each rely upon a
different set of acts and each set of acts is alleged to have occurred during a
different time frame and at a different location. Therefore, argues the State, the
charging of multiple patterns in this case does not run afoul of double
jeopardy. We agree, and reverse the trial court’s dismissal of the indictments.
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Federal Constitution serves three
primary purposes. “First, it protects against a second prosecution for the same
offense after an acquittal. Second, it protects against a second prosecution for
the same offense after a conviction. Third, it protects against multiple
punishments for the same offense.” State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 811, 814 (1986)
(quotation omitted). This case involves an alleged violation of the third category
of protection.
In determining whether a defendant is subject to multiple punishments
for the same offense, we must determine the unit of prosecution intended by
the legislature. Richard, 147 N.H. at 342. When a statutory provision is
ambiguous, the rule of lenity demands that all doubt be resolved against
turning a single transaction into multiple offenses and thereby expanding the
statutory penalty. State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638, 647 (1995). However, the rule
of lenity “is applicable only where statutory ambiguity has been found. Lenity
thus serves only as an aid for resolving an ambiguity; it is not to be used to
beget one.” Bailey, 127 N.H. at 814 (quotation and citation omitted). We
8
review the plain language of the pattern statute to discern the legislature’s
intent.
The pattern statute in pertinent part provides: “A person is guilty of
aggravated felonious sexual assault when such person engages in a pattern of
sexual assault against another person, not the actor’s legal spouse, who is less
than 16 years of age.” RSA 632-A:2, III. “Pattern of sexual assault” is defined
as “committing more than one act under RSA 632-A:2 or RSA 632-A:3, or both,
upon the same victim over a period of 2 months or more and within a period of
5 years.” RSA 632-A:1, I-c (2007). RSA 632-A:2 (2007) and RSA 632-A:3
(2007) provide different statutory variants for aggravated felonious sexual
assault and felonious sexual assault.
The defendant argues that the pattern sexual assault statute is intended
to define as a single pattern all sexual assaults of the same variant that occur
within a five-year period, and that the pattern indictments subject him to
multiple punishments for the same offense because they all allege the same
variant of sexual assault against the same complainant within the same five-
year period. The pattern statute on its face contains no such limit.
Moreover, to read such a limit into the statute would undermine its very
purpose. The purpose of the pattern statute is to address the “legitimate
concern that many young victims, who have been subject to repeated,
numerous incidents of sexual assault over a period of time by the same
assailant, are unable to identify discrete acts of molestation. These young
victims may have no practical way of recollecting, reconstructing,
distinguishing or identifying by specific incidents or dates all or even any of the
acts of sexual assault.” State v. Fortier, 146 N.H. 784, 790-91 (2001)
(quotation and citations omitted).
In State v. Richard, the defendant made a claim similar to the one being
made here, arguing that the pattern statute was intended to define as a single
pattern any and all variants of sexual assault under RSA 632-A:2 and :3
committed against a single victim during a common time frame, regardless of
the number of underlying acts. Richard, 147 N.H. at 342-43. We disagreed,
noting:
The legislature broadly defined the proscribed pattern
to include the commission of two or more acts under the
aggravated felonious sexual assault statute, RSA 632-A:2, or
two or more acts under the felonious sexual assault statute,
RSA 632-A:3, or a combination thereof. Reading “pattern of
sexual assault” as encompassing all statutory variants of
sexual assault committed against a victim during a common
time frame would lead to an absurd result. Such an
interpretation would effectively limit the criminal exposure of
9
a perpetrator to a single conviction when a victim is unable
to recall discrete assaults due, in part, to their frequency,
while defendants whose victims have discrete recall would
remain accountable for multiple convictions under the
single-act sexual assault provisions, RSA 632-A:2, I-II; RSA
632-A:3, I-IV. To interpret the pattern statute as the
defendant suggests would allow a perpetrator to benefit from
the fact that his repetitive assaults may have blurred a
victim’s memory. Such a result is illogical.
Id. at 343 (citations omitted).
For similar reasons, reading “pattern of sexual assault” to encompass
every assault of a given variant that occurs within five years would lead to an
absurd result. State v. Warren, 147 N.H. 567, 568 (2002) (presumption that
legislature would not enact statute that would lead to absurd result). The more
plausible reading of the statute allows the State to charge more than one
pattern of a given sexual assault variant within a five-year time frame, each as
an individual unit of prosecution, when the evidence of discrete patterns so
warrants. Because the indictments in this case charge three discrete patterns
of sexual assault, as permitted by the statute, and because the prosecution at
trial would have to prove that the acts occurred within each of the alleged,
discrete periods of time, State v. Hannon, 151 N.H. 708, 713-14 (2005), the
defendant is not subject to multiple punishments for the same offense and his
federal double jeopardy right is not infringed.
We were careful to note in Richard that “[w]hen seeking convictions on
multiple pattern indictments that charge numerous assaults within a common
time frame inflicted on a single victim . . . the pattern indictments cannot rely
on the same underlying act or acts to comprise the charged pattern.” Richard,
147 N.H. at 343. The same requirement applies here. The requirement is met,
however, because the pattern indictments allege three separate sets of acts
during three discrete time periods at three different locations.
As in Richard, we note that when pursuing multiple pattern indictments
involving a particular victim, the State should be mindful of its obligation to
exercise meaningful prosecutorial discretion. Id. at 344. Furthermore, a
defendant’s double jeopardy rights might preclude multiple pattern charges in
a particular case depending upon the nature of the evidence. As in Richard,
these issues are left for another day. Id.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS,
J., concurred in part and dissented in part.
10
DALIANIS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. Because I agree
with the majority’s analysis in Part I of its opinion, I concur in that part of the
opinion. I write separately because I would affirm the trial court’s dismissal of
the indictments on double jeopardy grounds and, thus, dissent from Part II of
the opinion.
The Double Jeopardy Clause of the Federal Constitution provides that no
person shall “be subject for the same offence to be twice put in jeopardy of life
or limb.” U.S. CONST. amend. V. It “protects a defendant’s rights in three
ways: First, it protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after
an acquittal. Second, it protects against a second prosecution for the same
offense after a conviction. Third, it protects against multiple punishments for
the same offense.” State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 811, 814 (1986) (quotation
omitted); see United States v. Ursery, 518 U.S. 267, 273 (1996). The defendant
asserts a violation of the third category of protection.
To determine whether the defendant was subject to multiple
punishments for the same offense, we must determine the proper unit of
prosecution intended by the legislature. See State v. Richard, 147 N.H. 340,
342 (2001). “We give the language of a statute a commonsensical meaning,”
and apply the rule of lenity only if we find the statutory language to be
ambiguous. State v. Cobb, 143 N.H. 638, 647 (1999) (quotation omitted).
The Criminal Code defines a “pattern of sexual assault” to mean
“committing more than one act under RSA 632-A:2 or RSA 632-A:3, or both,
upon the same victim over a period of 2 months or more and within a period of
5 years.” RSA 632-A:1, I-c (2007). In Richard, we determined that the
legislature intended the unit of prosecution in a pattern offense to be the
pattern itself. See Richard, 147 N.H. at 342-44. This is consistent with our
decision in State v. Fortier, 146 N.H. 784, 791 (2001), in which we explained
that the legislature intended the pattern statute to “criminalize a continuing
course of sexual assaults, not isolated instances.” Thus, in Fortier, we ruled
that the “essential culpable act” in a pattern offense was “the pattern itself,
that is, the occurrence of more than one sexual assault over a period of time,
and not the specific assaults comprising the pattern.” Fortier, 146 N.H. at 791.
To secure a conviction under the pattern statute, therefore, “the State must
prove to a unanimous jury . . . (1) that the defendant engaged in more than one
prohibited act under RSA 632-A:2 or 632-A:3; and (2) that the acts occurred
over a period of two months or more and within a period of five years.” State v.
Hannon, 151 N.H. 708, 713-14 (2005) (quotation omitted).
I believe that the indictments at issue violate the Federal Double
Jeopardy Clause because they charge a single offense – a single pattern – in
more than one count. See United States v. Brandon, 17 F.3d 409, 422 (1st
Cir.), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 820 (1994). Each indictment alleges the same
prohibited act against the same victim during the same five-year period. Here,
11
there are not “multiple patterns of sexual assault involving a single victim . . .
during a common time frame,” but only one pattern. Richard, 147 N.H. at 343.
As we explained in Richard, “When seeking convictions on multiple pattern
indictments that charge numerous assaults within a common time frame
inflicted on a single victim, . . . the pattern indictments cannot rely on the
same underlying act or acts to comprise the charged pattern. . . . [T]wo
indictments charging a common time period cannot charge the same type of
sexual assault.” Id.
The majority contends that the patterns alleged are different because
they comprise “three separate sets of acts during three discrete time periods at
three different locations.” I disagree. While in Richard, the indictments “each
charged a particular variant of sexual assault different from the type charged in
the other patterns,” here, each indictment charged the same variant of sexual
assault. Id. Moreover, different patterns were not alleged merely because the
same five-year period was divided into separate increments and the assaults
were alleged to have occurred at different addresses. “The Double Jeopardy
Clause is not such a fragile guarantee that prosecutors can avoid its limitations
by the simple expedient of dividing a single crime into a series of temporal or
spatial units.” Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 169 (1977); cf. State v. Sweeney,
151 N.H. 666, 678 (2005) (time and location are not essential elements of
aggravated felonious sexual assault or felonious sexual assault). The
statutorily proscribed conduct is a continuous offense, a pattern of conduct,
which a prosecutor cannot individuate temporally or geographically. See
Brown, 432 U.S. at 169.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, I would affirm the trial court’s
dismissal of the indictments.
12