THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2006-003
NEW HAMPSHIRE MOTOR TRANSPORT ASSOCIATION EMPLOYEE BENEFIT
TRUST
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE GUARANTY ASSOCIATION & a.
Argued: September 12, 2006
Opinion Issued: December 21, 2006
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (James Q. Shirley
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Nixon Peabody LLP, of Manchester (John E. Friberg, Jr. & a. on the brief,
and Mark D. Robins orally), for respondent New Hampshire Insurance
Guaranty Association.
Orr and Reno, P.A., of Concord (Lisa Snow Wade on the brief and orally),
for respondent New Hampshire Life and Health Insurance Guaranty
Association.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, New Hampshire Motor Transport
Association Employee Benefit Trust (Trust), appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Fitzgerald, J.) denying its motions for summary judgment and granting
the summary judgment motions of the respondents, New Hampshire Insurance
Guaranty Association (NHIGA) and New Hampshire Life and Health Insurance
Guaranty Association (NHLHIGA). The trial court ruled that neither NHIGA nor
NHLHIGA was obligated to cover claims that the Trust’s insolvent insurer was
unable to pay because the Trust itself was an insurer and because the policy
under which the Trust’s unpaid claims arose was for reinsurance rather than
direct insurance. We affirm.
The facts are not in dispute. The Trust is a non-profit multiple-employer
welfare arrangement (arrangement) organized under the federal Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1983 and RSA chapter 415-E (2006). Its
purpose is to provide a health care benefit program for the employees of
members of the New Hampshire Motor Transport Association. The Trust is
administered by Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield. Each member employer
pays into the Trust a fixed amount per employee, and all employers pay the
same amount per employee, regardless of their individual claim histories. The
money is deposited into a pooled account, which is used to pay claims
submitted by or on behalf of those covered by the Trust and to cover the
Trust’s administrative expenses. If, in a given year, employer contributions
exceed the amount needed to cover administrative expenses and pay claims,
the surplus is used to reduce the amount that Trust members are required to
contribute the following year. On the other hand, if claims exceed the amount
the Trust has collected from its members in a given year, the members are
required to make additional contributions, based upon the number of
employees they have, to cover the shortfall.
By statute, “[e]ach arrangement shall maintain specific excess insurance
with a retention level determined in accordance with sound actuarial principles
and approved by the commissioner [of insurance].” RSA 415-E:3, III. To meet
that statutory requirement, the Trust purchased a policy of specific excess loss
insurance from Legion Insurance Company (Legion). Under the policy, the
Trust was responsible for the first $125,000 of every claim for health benefits
submitted to it. For any claim that exceeded that amount, the Trust was to
pay benefits in the first instance, subject to full reimbursement from Legion up
to a lifetime maximum of $4,875,000 per covered person.
In April 2002, Legion was placed into rehabilitation by the Pennsylvania
Commonwealth Court, and in July 2003, that court entered an order of
liquidation. When Legion was placed into rehabilitation, it owed the Trust
approximately $412,971 in unpaid claims. After the Pennsylvania court
entered its order of liquidation, the Trust asked both NHIGA and NHLHIGA to
assume responsibility for those unpaid claims. NHIGA declined on the ground
2
that the New Hampshire Insurance Guaranty Association Act (Guaranty Act),
RSA chapter 404-B (2006), does not provide coverage for policies of life and
health insurance, and NHLHIGA declined on the ground that “a stop-loss group
insurance plan is not a covered product” under the New Hampshire Life and
Health Insurance Guaranty Association Act (Life & Health Guaranty Act), RSA
chapter 408-B (2006). The Trust then filed a declaratory judgment petition,
and all parties moved for summary judgment.
In its motion for summary judgment, NHIGA argued, inter alia, that: (1)
the Legion policy was not direct insurance, and is thus excluded from coverage
under the Guaranty Act by RSA 404-B:3; and (2) the Trust’s claims against
Legion were not “covered claims” under RSA 404-B:5, IV because they were for
amounts due an insurer. The trial court agreed.
In its motion for summary judgment, NHLHIGA argued, inter alia, that it
had no obligation to cover the Legion policy because the Trust’s claims arose
from a policy of reinsurance, thus excluding them from coverage under RSA
408-B:5, II(b)(2). The trial court agreed. This appeal followed.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.
Belanger v. MMG Ins. Co., 153 N.H. 584, 586 (2006). Like the trial court, we
begin with the Trust’s arguments for coverage from NHIGA under the Guaranty
Act, and then discuss the Trust’s argument for coverage from NHLHIGA under
the Life & Health Guaranty Act.
I
The purpose of the Guaranty Act is “to provide a mechanism for the
payment of covered claims under certain insurance policies to avoid excessive
delay in payment and to avoid financial loss to claimants or policyholders
because of the insolvency of an insurer . . . and to provide an association to
assess the cost of such protection among insurers.” RSA 404-B:2. Moreover,
chapter 404-B “shall be liberally construed to effect the purpose under RSA
404-B:2.” RSA 404-B:4. However, “[t]he statutory framework of NHIGA
prevents it from becoming a substitute insurer,” Benson v. N.H. Ins. Guaranty
Assoc., 151 N.H. 590, 598 (2004), and the protection provided by NHIGA is
limited in a variety of ways, see id. at 598-99. For example, NHIGA is obligated
to pay only “covered claims,” RSA 404-B:8, I(a)-(b), a category that excludes
“any amount due any reinsurer, insurer, insurance pool, or underwriting
association, as subrogation recoveries or otherwise,” RSA 404-B:5, IV.
The Trust conceded at oral argument that if we determine it to be an
insurer, it has no claim against NHIGA, and so we begin with that issue. To
resolve it, we must construe the term “insurer” as used in RSA 404-B:5, IV. In
matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative intent
3
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Debonis v.
Warden, N.H. State Prison, 153 N.H. 603, 605 (2006). We interpret statutes in
the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. City of
Rochester v. Corpening, 153 N.H. 571, 573 (2006).
Chapter 404-B defines the terms “insolvent insurer” and “member
insurer,” see RSA 404-B:5, V-VI, but because those definitions pertain to
providers of insurance whose policyholders might be protected by the Guaranty
Act rather than to potential recipients of payments from NHIGA, they do not
aid us in construing the term “insurer” in RSA 404-B:5, IV. The statute, in
fact, does not define the term “insurer.” When statutory terms are undefined,
we ascribe to them their plain and ordinary meaning. Appeal of Town of
Nottingham, 153 N.H. 539, 553 (2006). In common usage, an “insurer” is “one
that contracts to indemnify another by way of insurance.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1173 (unabridged ed. 2002). The common definition
of “insurance” includes both “the action or process of insuring . . . against loss
or damage by a contingent event (as death, fire, accident, or sickness),” id., and
“a device for the elimination or reduction of an economic risk common to all
members of a large group and employing a system of equitable contributions
out of which losses are paid,” id. Based upon the stipulated facts concerning
the operation of the Trust and the common definition of the term “insurer,” we
concur with the trial court’s determination that the Trust is an insurer. The
Trust insures its members’ employees against the risk of illness and injury by
collecting contributions from its members and paying claims out of those
contributions. That makes the Trust an insurer.
Our conclusion is consistent with the statutory scheme governing the
Trust’s operations as an arrangement. Arrangements such as the Trust are
regulated under RSA chapter 415-E and are “established or maintained for the
purpose of offering or providing health benefits.” RSA 415-E:1, I. For the
purposes of RSA chapter 415-A (2006), which pertains to standards for
accident and health insurance, “multiple-employer welfare arrangements . . .
shall be deemed to be engaged in the business of insurance.” RSA 415-A:1, I.
Thus, with regard to the Trust’s core function, providing health benefits to the
employees of its members, the Trust has been deemed by the legislature to be
engaged in the business of insurance.
To support its argument that it is not an insurer, the Trust identifies a
number of statutory requirements pertaining to insurance companies to which
it is not subject, such as licensure by the insurance department, registration
with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, payment of
premium taxes, and the like. However, the question before us is not whether
the Trust is an insurance company properly qualified to sell policies to
members of the public; we are faced with the broader question of whether the
Trust is an insurer. Whether or not the Trust is an insurance company, it does
4
insure the employees of its members against the risk of illness and injury, and
that is sufficient, under our plain-meaning analysis, to make it an insurer for
the purposes of RSA 404-B:5, IV. That statute bars payments due insurers,
not payments due licensed insurers or insurance companies, and we will not
add words to the statute that the legislature did see fit to include. See
Debonis, 153 N.H. at 605.
The Trust also relies upon our opinion in Marshall v. Keene State
College, 147 N.H. 215 (2001). In that case, we held that Keene State College
(KSC), which maintained a self-funded employee benefit plan, was not an
insurer for purposes of RSA 417-E:1 (1998). Marshall, 147 N.H. at 218.
However, the statutory language we construed in that case made RSA chapter
417-E applicable to “each insurer that issues or renews any policy of group or
blanket accident or health insurance,” id. at 217 (quotation and citation
omitted), and our decision was based upon the fact that KSC did not issue or
renew any policies of group or blanket accident or health insurance, id. at 217-
18. Marshall is inapplicable to our analysis in this case because RSA 404-B:5,
IV does not qualify the term “insurer” in the same way as the statute in
Marshall qualified that term.
The Trust further argues that because arrangements that do not fully
insure themselves are required by statute to purchase excess insurance, it is
implausible that the legislature intended for arrangements such as the Trust
not to enjoy the protection of the Guaranty Act. While that argument has an
initial appeal, implicating, as it does, notions of equity and fundamental
fairness, it has little support in the Act itself. RSA 404-B:5, IV could have been
drafted to exclude payments of amounts due insurers except for arrangements
required to purchase excess insurance, but it was not, and it is not our
function to add provisions to the statute that the legislature did not see fit to
include. Nottingham, 153 N.H. at 546. Moreover, a construction of the term
“insurer” that places the burden of Legion’s insolvency upon the Trust is not
out of character with the provisions of RSA chapter 404-B that: (1) exclude
amounts due to reinsurers, insurance pools, or underwriting associations from
the definition of “covered claim,” RSA 404-B:5, IV; (2) generally limit NHIGA’s
obligation to “covered claims existing prior to the determination of insolvency
and arising within 30 days after the determination of insolvency,” RSA 404-B:8,
I(a); and (3) limit the amount of NHIGA’s obligation to $300,000, regardless of
the actual amount of the covered claim, id. In short, “[t]he protection [NHIGA]
provides is limited based upon its status as a nonprofit entity and the method
by which it is funded.” Benson, 151 N.H. at 598.
The Trust devotes considerable attention to two out-of-state cases, Iowa
Contractors Workers’ Compensation Group v. Iowa Insurance Guaranty Assoc.,
437 N.W.2d 909 (Iowa 1989), and Maryland Motor Truck Assoc. Workers’
Compensation Self-Insurance Group v. Property & Casualty Insurance
5
Guaranty Corp., 871 A.2d 590 (Md. 2005), arguing that we should follow Iowa
Contractors rather than Maryland Motor Truck and hold that the Trust is not
an insurer. The respondents, in turn, contend that Maryland Motor Truck is
the better reasoned opinion. Notwithstanding the trial court’s reliance upon
Maryland Motor Truck and the parties’ arguments over which case we should
follow, we find neither opinion particularly instructive.
Both Iowa Contractors and Maryland Motor Truck involved self-
insurance groups, composed of employers, that protected their members from
their own “risks of adverse workers’ compensation claims,” Iowa Contractors,
437 N.W.2d at 917; see Maryland Motor Truck, 871 A.2d at 591; see also King-
Jennings v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 144 N.H. 559, 561 (1999) (explaining that
“[a]n employer obtains workers’ compensation insurance . . . in order to avoid
personal liability for workers’ compensation benefits that would be due to an
employee who suffers a work related injury”). Here, by contrast, the risk
insured against is not any risk of a Trust member, but rather the risks of the
members’ employees. Given the fundamental difference between one or more
employers self-insuring against the risk of workers’ compensation claims and
an employer’s participating in an arrangement to provide its employees with
coverage against their own risks of illness and injury, the most that can be
said, based upon Iowa Contractors and Maryland Motor Truck is as follows: If
New Hampshire law were to regard a workers’ compensation self-insurance
group as an insurer, then the Trust, which provides coverage for the risks of its
members’ employees, would clearly qualify as an insurer. But if New
Hampshire law were to follow Iowa Contractors, and consider a workers’
compensation self-insurance group not to be an insurer, that would not be
determinative of the status of the Trust, which, unlike a workers’ compensation
self-insurance group, does not provide coverage for its own risks.
We conclude our discussion of the Guaranty Act by addressing the
Trust’s reliance upon RSA 404-B:4, the Guaranty Act’s liberal construction
provision. We are, of course, obligated to follow that statutory mandate, but
our power to liberally construe a statute extends only to the extent that the
statutory language reasonably allows. See Appeal of Cote, 144 N.H. 126, 130
(1999). In this case, the statutory language does not reasonably allow the
determination that the Trust is not an insurer.
Because the trial court correctly determined that the Trust is an insurer
for the purposes of RSA 404-B:5, IV, we affirm its grant of summary judgment
in favor of NHIGA.
II
The purpose of the Life & Health Guaranty Act “is to protect, subject to
certain limitations, the persons specified in RSA 408-B:5, I against failure in
6
the performance of contractual obligations, under life and health insurance
policies . . . because of the impairment or insolvency of the member insurer
that issued the policies or contracts.” RSA 408-B:2, I. Like the Guaranty Act,
the Life & Health Guaranty Act is to “be liberally construed to effect the
purpose under RSA 408-B:2.” RSA 408-B:3. According to the coverage and
limitations section of chapter 408-B:
This chapter shall provide coverage to the persons specified
in paragraph I for direct, non-group life, health, annuity, and
supplemental policies or contracts, for certificates under direct
group policies and contracts, and for unallocated annuity
contracts issued by member insurers, except as limited by this
chapter.
RSA 408-B:5, II(a). NHLHIGA contends, inter alia, that it was not obligated to
cover the Trust’s unpaid claims against Legion because excess loss insurance
is not a covered product under RSA 408-B:5, II(a). We agree.
The Trust’s only argument for coverage under the Life & Health Guaranty
Act is that if its Legion policy was a policy of health insurance, as NHIGA
suggested in its rejection letter and argued in its brief, then NHLHIGA is
obligated to cover its claims under that policy.
NHLHIGA provides coverage for direct health insurance policies. See
RSA 408-B:5, II(a). While chapter 408-B does not define the term “health
insurance,” we have no difficulty concluding that the specific excess loss policy
Legion issued the Trust was not a direct health insurance policy. Under that
policy, Legion insured the Trust. The risk the policy insured against was the
Trust’s direct risk of claims against it in excess of $125,000. See United Food
& Commercial Workers v. Pacyga, 801 F.2d 1157, 1161-62 (9th Cir. 1986)
(explaining, in ERISA preemption context, that employee benefit plan’s excess
loss insurance was not health insurance and provided no coverage to plan
participants, who were insured by the plan, not by the excess loss carrier). Of
course, claims against the Trust necessarily arise from illness or injury
suffered by the Trust’s members’ employees, but because the Trust itself was
not insured against its own illness or injury, its policy from Legion was not a
direct health insurance policy. See Cuttle v. Federal Employees Metal Trades
Council, 623 F. Supp. 1154, 1157 (D. Me. 1985) (explaining, in ERISA
preemption context, that employee benefit plan’s excess loss insurance directly
benefited plan itself and only indirectly benefited plan participants who
received health insurance under the plan).
The Trust argues that its Legion policy was health insurance because
RSA chapter 404-G:2, VII (2006) includes “group excess loss insurance” within
its definition of “health insurance.” However, that definition is expressly
7
limited to chapter 404-G, see RSA 404-G:2. Even if excess loss insurance is
properly considered health insurance, it is not direct health insurance, which
is the only kind of health insurance covered by the Life & Health Guaranty Act,
see RSA 408-B:5, II(a), and the Act’s liberal construction mandate does not give
us the authority to ignore the legislature’s use of the term “direct,” see
Winnacunnett Coop. Sch. Dist. v. Town of Seabrook, 148 N.H. 519, 525-26
(2002) (“When construing a statute, we must give effect to all words in a statute
and presume that the legislature did not enact superfluous or redundant
words.”).
Because the Trust’s Legion policy was not a form of insurance covered by
the Life & Health Guaranty Act, we affirm the trial court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of NHLHIGA.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8