THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-317
CLINT J. ST. ONGE
v.
DAVID R. MACDONALD
Argued: January 5, 2007
Opinion Issued: January 26, 2007
Law Offices of Andrew D. Myers, of Derry (Andrew D. Myers on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Desmarais, Ewing & Johnston, PLLC, of Manchester (Scott A. Ewing and
Emily M. Doherty on the brief, and Mr. Ewing orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Clint J. St. Onge, appeals an order of the Trial
Court (Groff, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendant, David
R. MacDonald, on the plaintiff’s claim for negligent infliction of emotional
distress. We affirm.
The trial court found, and the parties do not dispute, the following
relevant facts. On August 6, 2000, the plaintiff was driving his motorcycle with
his girlfriend, Cariann Christie MacDonald, as a passenger, while the
defendant followed them in his car. At some point, the plaintiff’s motorcycle
left the roadway and crashed, causing MacDonald’s death. In 2003, the
plaintiff filed a suit claiming that the defendant’s negligent operation of his
vehicle caused the crash.
The plaintiff’s suit included a claim for negligent infliction of emotional
distress for his emotional harm at having observed MacDonald’s death, and a
claim for his own injuries. The defendant moved for summary judgment as to
the emotional distress claim, which the trial court granted. The parties settled
the plaintiff’s personal injury claim prior to trial. The plaintiff now appeals the
trial court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the defendant on his
emotional distress claim.
While the plaintiff presents numerous questions for resolution, they all
relate to a single inquiry: did the trial court err in determining that the plaintiff
and MacDonald were not “closely related” so as to satisfy the requirements of
Graves v. Estabrook, 149 N.H. 202 (2003), for bystander recovery in a negligent
infliction of emotional distress claim? We hold that the trial court did not err.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Belanger v. MMG Ins. Co.,
153 N.H. 584, 586 (2006). If no genuine issue of material fact exists, and if the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary
judgment is proper. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
In New Hampshire, a bystander’s claim for negligent infliction of
emotional distress must meet the requirements set out in Corso v. Merrill, 119
N.H. 647 (1979). Under Corso, for the plaintiff to recover for his emotional
harm at witnessing another’s injury, he must show: (1) causal negligence of
the defendant; (2) foreseeability; and (3) serious mental and emotional harm
accompanied by objective physical symptoms. O’Donnell v. HCA Health Servs.
of N.H., 152 N.H. 608, 611 (2005). At issue here is the foreseeability
requirement.
We employ the three-factor test set out in Dillon v. Legg, 441 P.2d 912
(Cal. 1968), to determine whether the harm was foreseeable. Graves, 149 N.H.
at 204. That test requires the trial court to determine:
(1) Whether plaintiff was located near the scene of the accident as
contrasted with one who was a distance away from it. (2) Whether
the shock resulted from a direct emotional impact upon plaintiff
from the sensory and contemporaneous observance of the
accident, as contrasted with learning of the accident from others
after its occurrence. (3) Whether plaintiff and the victim were
closely related, as contrasted with an absence of any relationship
or the presence of only a distant relationship.
2
Id. (quotation omitted). These factors are not a rigid framework, but are flexible
and allow the courts, on a case-by-case basis, to decide what an ordinary
person under the circumstances should reasonably have foreseen. Id. The
third factor, regarding the relationship of the plaintiff and the victim, is the
only issue on appeal.
In Graves, we held that the close relationship required by the Dillon test
need not be one defined only by blood or marriage. Graves, 149 N.H. at 206.
Instead, we determined that a plaintiff must show a relationship that is of
significant duration and which is deep, lasting and genuinely intimate, i.e., a
relationship that is stable, enduring, substantial, and mutually supportive,
cemented by strong emotional bonds and providing a deep and pervasive
emotional security. Id. at 209. When determining whether a plaintiff and a
victim are “closely related,” the trial court is to take into account: (1) the
duration of the relationship; (2) the degree of mutual dependence; (3) the extent
of common contributions to a life together; (4) the extent and quality of shared
experience; (5) whether the plaintiff and the injured person were members of
the same household; (6) their emotional reliance upon each other; (7) the
particulars of their day-to-day relationship; and (8) the manner in which they
related to each other in attending to life’s mundane requirements. Id. at 209-
10.
In Graves, we determined that the plaintiff had met the standard for
alleging the existence of a sufficiently close relationship, in part, because she
alleged that she and the decedent were engaged to be married and had lived
together for more than seven years. Id. at 210. Construing all reasonable
inferences in favor of the plaintiff, we determined that it was reasonable to infer
that the plaintiff and her fiancée “enjoyed mutual dependence, common
contributions to a life together, emotional reliance on each other and attended
to life’s mundane requirements together.” Id.
Here, the trial court found that the plaintiff’s relationship with
MacDonald did not meet the requirements of Graves. According to the trial
court, although the plaintiff and MacDonald had known each other prior to
becoming romantically involved, they had only been dating for about five to six
months. Also, the trial court found that although the plaintiff claimed that he
and MacDonald had intended to marry or live together, at the time of her death
they had not made either commitment. Therefore, the trial court found that,
while “the plaintiff and [MacDonald] enjoyed some level of mutual dependence,
common contributions to a life together, emotional reliance on each other and
attended to some of life’s mundane requirements together, it [could not]
characterize their five to six month relationship as one in which the law
provides a cause of action for the plaintiff against the defendant.”
3
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred because the
defendant presented the trial court with an insufficient record when moving for
summary judgment, and that material facts were in dispute. Additionally, the
plaintiff contends that the trial court misinterpreted Graves and thus erred as
a matter of law.
Regarding the plaintiff’s factual arguments, when rendering its decision,
the trial court had before it the motions, depositions, affidavits and other
pleadings submitted by both parties. Thus, any shortcomings in the record
provided by the defendant were remedied by the plaintiff’s filings. Therefore,
we do not agree that the trial court had an insufficient record upon which to
rule.
As to the plaintiff’s claim that material facts were in dispute, we also do
not agree. There is no dispute that the plaintiff and MacDonald’s relationship
lasted for approximately five to six months. Likewise, there is no dispute that
they had talked about marrying or living together at some undetermined time.
Moreover, there is no dispute that the plaintiff and MacDonald were, to some
degree, mutually dependent and emotionally reliant upon one another. In fact,
during oral argument before this court, the defendant stated that he accepted
as true all of the facts pled by the plaintiff regarding his relationship with
MacDonald. Thus, there are no material facts in dispute.
The question is, therefore, whether the undisputed facts demonstrate, as
a matter of law, a relationship sufficient to meet the requirements of Graves.
As noted, we review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.
Belanger, 153 N.H. at 586. While we do not doubt that the plaintiff and
MacDonald shared some degree of emotional reliance or mutual dependence,
we hold that they were not “closely related” as the term is defined in Graves.
The plaintiff and MacDonald were involved in a relationship lasting
approximately six months. In that brief time, they did not live together and
had not married or become engaged, nor was there any prospect of them doing
so for some time. Moreover, at the time of MacDonald’s death, both she and
the plaintiff were unemployed and living with their respective parents. Thus,
they could not financially support each other, and it was unlikely that they
could become members of the same household at any point in the foreseeable
future, or that they could make any more than minimal contributions to a life
together. Also, although the plaintiff contends that he and MacDonald met or
spoke on the telephone frequently, and spent time dining out, camping or
visiting relatives together, such interactions reveal little, if anything, about the
particulars of their day-to-day relationship or the manner in which they related
to each other in attending to life’s mundane requirements. To extend Graves to
include relationships such as the one between the plaintiff and MacDonald
4
would invite a significant expansion of bystander liability in New Hampshire, a
result we have consistently refused to permit. Graves, 149 N.H. at 205-06.
Construing all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor, we agree with
the trial court that the plaintiff and MacDonald were not, as a matter of law,
“closely related” as the term is defined in Graves. Accordingly, we conclude
that the trial court did not improperly interpret Graves and we uphold the
grant of summary judgment.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
5