THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2006-333
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SEAN D. BROWN
Argued: October 25, 2007
Opinion Issued: November 30, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jeffrey S. Cahill, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Sean Brown, appeals his conviction on four
counts of sale of a narcotic drug in violation of RSA 318-B:2 (2004) following a
jury trial in Superior Court (Groff, J.). We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following. On January 21, 2005, Officer Kevin
Collins, working for the Narcotics Intelligence Division of the Nashua Police
Department, arranged to have a person cooperating with the police purchase
drugs from the defendant in a hand-to-hand sale. Collins arranged for
observation of similar controlled buys at different locations between the
cooperating person and the defendant on January 24, January 28, and
February 9.
On February 23, 2005, Detective Joseph Molinari, an undercover police
officer for the Narcotics Intelligence Division, solicited a second person to
purchase heroin for him from the defendant. That person met with the
defendant at Molinari’s request again on March 7.
The defendant was indicted by a grand jury on four counts of sale of a
narcotic drug under RSA 318-B:2 and two counts of conspiracy to commit sale
of narcotic drug under RSA 629:3 (2007). Over the defendant’s objections, all
charges were consolidated for trial. A jury found the defendant guilty of the
four sale charges; the conspiracy charges were dismissed at the end of the trial.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in joining the
charges leveled against him. We will uphold the trial court’s decision not to
sever the charges unless we conclude that the decision constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118, 120
(2003). To show that the trial court’s decision is unsustainable, the defendant
must demonstrate that the ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
The defendant has an absolute right to sever unrelated charges. State v.
McIntyre, 151 N.H. 465, 466 (2004). Unrelated offenses are those that are not
related. Ramos, 149 N.H. at 128. Related offenses are those that are based
upon the same conduct, a single criminal episode, or a common plan. Id. The
only issue on appeal is the trial court’s consolidation of the charges based
upon the existence of a common plan.
The distinguishing characteristic of a common plan is the existence of a
true plan in the defendant’s mind that includes the charged crimes as stages in
the plan’s execution. McIntyre, 151 N.H. at 467. That a sequence of acts
resembles a design when examined in retrospect is not enough; the prior
conduct must be intertwined with what follows, such that the charged acts are
mutually dependent. Id.
The State contends that the following facts support the trial court’s
finding that the defendant had a common plan: the defendant followed a strict
routine for selling heroin in that buyers always contacted the defendant by
telephone, the defendant always conducted exchanges at locations that were
close to each other, and the defendant always requested cash. The fact that
the sales all took place under similar circumstances is not sufficient; acts must
be intertwined such that they are mutually dependent in order to be considered
part of a common plan. Id.
The State contends that this case is similar to State v. Schonarth, 152
N.H. 560 (2005). In that case, Schonarth was charged with numerous counts
2
of theft by deception for repeatedly stealing from an elderly victim, Emerson.
Schonarth, 152 N.H. at 562. First, Schonarth received financing from Emerson
for property that Emerson was trying to sell and then falsely informed Emerson
that he had obtained a mortgage. Id. at 561. When this alleged loan did not
close, Schonarth told Emerson that Providian Bank had purchased the
mortgage company and that Providian would now provide Schonarth with a
mortgage. Id. Schonarth subsequently asked Emerson periodically for funds
to satisfy requirements Schonarth alleged that Providian had imposed on the
mortgage, despite the fact that Schonarth never applied for a mortgage at all.
Id. Schonarth then asked Emerson for funds to pay for various expenses, all of
which in some way related to Schonarth’s ability to acquire a mortgage. Id.
We ruled that, “[v]iewed objectively, the defendant’s actions
demonstrated a prior design that included the charged acts as part of its
consummation.” Id. at 562. We noted that Schonarth engaged in “increasingly
grandiose schemes connected to [his] alleged desire to repay his debt to the
victim.” Id. We are not persuaded that such a prior design with mutually
dependent acts exists in the instant case.
The defendant in Schonarth developed an elaborate plan to defraud a
single elderly victim of money based upon a single premise of financing for
property. Each time Schonarth attempted to defraud his victim, his success
was dependent on his previous schemes such that the acts were so intertwined
as to be mutually dependent. Schonarth was not merely taking advantage of
opportunities as they arose; he exhibited forethought and premeditation in his
scheming. The defendant in this case, unlike Schonarth, was not targeting any
one individual. The defendant did not formulate a plan that was dependent
upon the success of each sale; he merely took advantage of opportunities as
they arose. In fact, each of the sales could have taken place independently of
all the others, demonstrating that the sales were not so intertwined as to be
mutually dependent.
We find this case similar to Petition of State of N.H. (State v. San
Giovanni), 154 N.H. 671 (2007). The defendants in that case were charged
with multiple counts of theft by deception involving several victims. San
Giovanni, 154 N.H. at 673. The defendants operated St. Jude’s Residence,
which they marketed as a drug and alcohol treatment center. Id. at 672. Some
patients who gave money to the defendants for services from St. Jude’s alleged
that the defendants had obtained their money by creating false impressions
about St. Jude’s services. Id. at 673. The State sought to join fifteen of these
complaints made by fifteen different victims, alleging a common plan by the
defendants. Id. The trial court found that the defendants’ actions were not
part of a common plan because “[t]he defendants could have committed their
alleged conduct as to one victim, but not to another, and still succeeded as to
3
the first.” Id. at 674. We upheld the trial court’s decision, noting that “[h]ere,
we have discrete offenses committed against multiple victims.” Id. at 676.
The acts of the defendants in San Giovanni were not mutually dependent
because each theft was a discrete event with a different victim. Unlike
Schonarth, the success of each theft had no bearing upon the success of any
other theft. Similarly, in the instant case, each of the sales committed by the
defendant was a discrete event and involved different people. The success of
any individual sale did not depend upon the success of any other sale. Since
the acts were not so intertwined as to be mutually dependent, there can be no
common plan and joinder of the offenses was error.
The State argues that even if joinder of the charges was improper, the
error was harmless. It is well settled that error is harmless only if it is
determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was not affected by
the error. State v. Abram, 153 N.H. 619, 628 (2006). The State bears the
burden of proving that an error was harmless. Id. The State argues that the
evidence presented at trial would have been admissible in hypothetical,
separate trials under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b) and, therefore,
any error in joining these charges was harmless.
Under Rule 404(b), evidence of other crimes, wrongs or acts is
inadmissible unless: (1) it is relevant for a purpose other than to show the
defendant’s bad character or disposition; (2) there is clear proof that the
defendant committed the other crimes or acts; and (3) prejudice to the
defendant does not substantially outweigh the probative value of the evidence.
State v. Smalley, 151 N.H. 193, 196 (2004). The State bears the burden of
demonstrating the admissibility of the prior bad acts. Id. In order to meet its
burden under the first prong, the State is required to specify the “purpose for
which the evidence is offered and . . . articulate the precise chain of reasoning
by which the offered evidence will tend to prove or disprove an issue actually in
dispute, without relying upon forbidden inferences of predisposition, character,
or propensity.” Id. (quotation omitted). The State contends that the evidence of
the other crimes would be relevant for the purpose of showing knowledge and
intent as well as identity.
While the State argues that the evidence of the other drug sales could be
used to prove the defendant’s knowledge and intent, as well as identity, the
State has failed to articulate “the precise chain of reasoning” upon which it
bases this conclusion. The State concludes, without any explanation from the
record, that the evidence could be used for this non-propensity purpose and
that the prejudice to the defendant would not substantially outweigh the
probative value of the evidence. We conclude that the State has not met its
burden to show how this evidence is relevant to show knowledge, intent or
identity, without relying upon forbidden inferences of predisposition or
4
propensity. See United States v. Garcia-Rosa, 876 F.2d 209, 221 (1st Cir.
1989), judgment vacated in part sub. nom. by Rivera-Feliciano v. United
States, 498 U.S. 954 (1990).
Without proving that the evidence could be used for a non-propensity
purpose, the State has failed to show that the evidence could be admitted in
separate trials under Rule 404(b). Since the State has failed to show that the
evidence could be admitted under Rule 404(b) at separate trials, the State has
failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the verdict was not affected by
the trial court’s error.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5