THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2006-669
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID S. CONNOR
Argued: October 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 14, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
James T. Brooks, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, David S. Connor, appeals his convictions on
three counts of arson, see RSA 634:1 (2007), following a jury trial in Superior
Court (Mangones, J.). We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following. The defendant’s convictions stem
from three separate fires, all occurring in the early morning hours of August
19, 2004. The first fire was started at an apartment building at 295 Amherst
Street in Manchester. It was later determined that the fire originated from a
pickle jar containing flammable liquid, found on a shelf in a first floor
community closet. Fingerprints were lifted from the jar and sent to the state
forensic lab for analysis. The two additional fires occurred at 291 Manchester
Street and 459 Beech Street.
At trial, Timothy Jackson, a criminalist at the state lab who was qualified
as an expert in latent fingerprint analysis, testified to his identification of the
fingerprints found on the pickle jar. According to his testimony, the latent
fingerprint methodology utilized by the state lab follows a four-step procedure
known as “ACE-V” – analysis, comparison, evaluation, and verification.
Jackson testified that his opinion is formed following the analysis, comparison,
and evaluation of the latent print to the known print. However, the ACE-V
methodology requires an additional step, where a second technician
independently analyzes, compares and evaluates the relevant fingerprints in
order to verify the findings of the first technician. Following the verification of
his identification, Jackson is then able to generate a report and issue his
opinion.
During the State’s direct examination, the defendant objected to Jackson
offering his opinion without first testifying about the verification step, arguing
there was insufficient foundation for his expert opinion without it. The State
responded by asking several questions regarding the verification of Jackson’s
fingerprint identification. However, when Jackson testified about the
verification process and the opinion of Lisa Corson, the verifying technician in
this case, the defendant objected to each question on the grounds of hearsay.
These objections were overruled.
The State concluded its direct examination of Jackson and the court
recessed for lunch. Following the luncheon recess, the defendant moved to
strike Jackson’s entire testimony, arguing it was hearsay and also violated his
right to confrontation, citing Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004). The
court denied the motion. On appeal, the defendant argues the trial court erred
in failing to sustain his hearsay and Crawford objections.
We review a trial court’s rulings on the admissibility of evidence under an
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard, and reverse only if the defendant
demonstrates the rulings are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. State v. Hammell, 155 N.H. 47, 48 (2007). Hearsay is a
statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or
hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted. N.H. R.
Ev. 801(c). In general, hearsay is not admissible unless an exception to the
general rule applies. N.H. R. Ev. 802. Since no exception applies in this case,
and the statements were offered for their truth, the disputed statements were
inadmissible hearsay.
The State first argues that Jackson’s testimony about Corson’s opinion
was not hearsay because it was not offered for the truth of her opinion, but
2
rather to aid the jury in evaluating the reliability of Jackson’s opinion by
showing his compliance with the ACE-V methodology. We do not agree.
Jackson did not merely testify that all four steps of this procedure had been
followed. Instead, he described the verification process, and the results of the
verification conducted here. Specifically, Jackson testified that the verifying
technician “would have been given the photograph and the lift. They could
have determined what they wanted to use for their comparison. . . .[T]hey will
go through the entire ACE methodology to render their opinion.” In addition,
Jackson testified to Corson’s opinion, stating that she had also determined that
the latent print found on the pickle jar “[w]as, in fact, made by the left middle
finger from the individual whose name appears on the fingerprint card of David
Connor.”
Contrary to the State’s assertion, we conclude that Jackson’s testimony
regarding the process undertaken and Corson’s ultimate opinion was offered
for its truth, as distinguished from mere satisfaction of procedure. The
verification process, as described by Jackson, supports our conclusion.
Jackson’s testimony clearly illustrates that the verification is not conducted to
ensure he had followed the applicable procedures. Corson did not simply
check that the equipment or procedure used by Jackson was proper or that
Jackson employed the correct number of comparison points in making his
determination. Rather, it is clear that her task was to affirm Jackson’s
identification by undertaking an independent analysis, comparison and
evaluation of the fingerprint, and ultimately forming her own opinion. By its
very nature, the purpose of this verification, as described by Jackson, lies in
the truth of Corson’s opinion, that is, that her independent ACE procedure
resulted in the same conclusion, thus corroborating Jackson’s opinion. See
Simpkins v. Snow, 139 N.H. 735, 737 (1995) (statement offered for its truth
when it has no significance unless a true representation). Jackson’s testimony
relating to the verification process and Corson’s independent opinion extends
well beyond establishing Jackson’s compliance with procedure. Under these
circumstances, this evidence constitutes inadmissible hearsay unless it falls
under an exception to the rule.
The State argues Jackson’s testimony is admissible under Rule 703
because Jackson relied upon Corson’s opinion in forming his own. We
disagree. New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 703 provides that facts or data
upon which an expert bases his opinion need not be admissible if of a type
reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or
inferences upon the subject. See State v. Fernandez, 152 N.H. 233, 244
(2005). Here, there is no evidence that Jackson relied upon Corson’s
verification as a basis for his opinion. In fact, Jackson testified that his
analysis was complete, and his opinion formed, prior to Corson’s verification,
but that he could not release this determination until after it had been verified.
Thus, contrary to the State’s assertion, Jackson did not rely upon Corson’s
3
verification as a basis for his opinion; it was simply a necessary prerequisite to
the release of his already formed opinion.
The Illinois Appellate Court addressed a similar issue in Kim v. Nazarian,
576 N.E.2d 427 (Ill. App. Ct. 1991). Kim concerned a medical malpractice
action involving the failure of a radiologist to properly diagnose an illness based
upon his review of the patient’s X-rays. Id. at 429. The trial court allowed two
defense experts to testify, over the plaintiff’s objection, to the results of their
consultations with colleagues regarding the X-rays. Id. at 431-33. Both
experts admitted to forming an opinion prior to distributing the X-ray films to
colleagues. Id. at 431, 432.
On appeal after a defendant’s verdict, the court held that the verification
testimony was not permissible under Rule 703, concluding, “If the expert’s
colleague merely corroborates the opinion independently arrived at by the
expert, such corroboration might reinforce the expert’s confidence in the
opinion; the corroborative opinion, however, is not the basis of the expert’s
opinion.” Id. at 434. It further stated that Rule 703 does not allow “an expert’s
testimony to simply parrot the corroborative opinions solicited from
nontestifying colleagues.” Id. This rationale is equally applicable here.
Jackson’s testimony proves he did not rely upon Corson’s opinion in forming
his own. Rather, Corson’s verification simply corroborated what Jackson had
already determined to be an identification of the defendant’s fingerprint. See
Wilkie v. State, 715 P.2d 1199, 1204 (Alaska Ct. App. 1986) (testimony
regarding other experts properly excluded; Rule 703 not applicable because
expert had come to his conclusion based upon own observations). Because
Jackson did not rely upon Corson’s opinion in forming his opinion, Rule 703 is
not applicable.
We acknowledge that some jurisdictions have held Rule 703 applicable
under these circumstances, finding that the testifying expert’s opinion is not
final until verified and, therefore, the expert relies upon the verification in this
sense. See State v. Jones, 368 S.E.2d 844, 848 (N.C. 1988). In Jones, a
fingerprint expert utilizing a methodology similar to ACE-V testified to the
verification by a second technician performed in that case. Id. at 846. On
appeal, the State argued this testimony was admissible under Rule 703. Id.
The Jones Court agreed, holding that the other examiner’s verification formed a
basis for the expert’s opinion. Id. at 848. It explained:
[The expert] specifically stated that his identification “has to
be verified . . . before it can be . . . mailed out.” It is thus
clear that, under standard S.B.I. operating procedures,
without verification of his own opinion by another examiner
the witness could not have arrived at, and testified to, a final
conclusion regarding the fingerprint. The opinion of the
4
other examiner thus necessarily forms a part of the basis for
the opinion to which the witness testified . . . .
Id.
However, this rationale fails to recognize that Jackson formed his opinion
without any contribution from Corson. As the dissent in Jones noted, while
the expert may not have been able to testify to his conclusions regarding the
fingerprint without verification, it does not follow that the opinion of the other
examiner forms a part of the basis for the testifying expert’s opinion. Id. at 849
(Webb, J., dissenting). As is the case here, “[t]he witness had formed his
opinion at the time the verification was made. The verification may have made
him more confident that he was right but he did not form his opinion based on
the verification.” Id. (Webb, J., dissenting). Jackson’s testimony demonstrates
that his expert opinion was formed independent of Corson’s verification, not
based upon it. Thus, Rule 703 is not applicable.
The defendant also objects to Jackson’s testimony based upon Crawford.
Because we agree with the defendant that the trial court erred on hearsay
grounds, however, we need not address this issue.
The State contends that even if the trial court erred in admitting the
fingerprint evidence, the error was harmless. An error is harmless only if it is
determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was not affected by
the error. State v. Pseudae, 154 N.H. 196, 202 (2006). The State bears the
burden of proving the error was harmless. Id. An error may be harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is
of an overwhelming nature, quantity or weight and if the inadmissible evidence
is merely cumulative or inconsequential to the strength of the State’s evidence
of guilt. Id.
Although Jackson’s identification of the defendant’s fingerprint would
have been admitted even if the trial court had not erred, given the record, we
cannot conclude that the admission of Corson’s opinion was harmless beyond
a reasonable doubt. Jackson’s opinion was crucial to the State’s evidence of
guilt, as the fingerprint lifted from the pickle jar was the critical piece of
evidence physically linking the defendant to the fire at 295 Amherst Street.
The defense’s cross-examination of Jackson focused upon errors that could be
made in the process of a fingerprint identification and its general reliability.
However, any question raised in this respect is severely undermined by
evidence of Corson’s opinion affirming Jackson’s identification in this case.
Her opinion necessarily and improperly bolsters the reliability of Jackson’s
determination–a determination significant to the State’s case. Further, the
alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is largely circumstantial and not of
an overwhelming nature, quantity or weight, thereby amplifying the importance
5
of the jury’s acceptance of Jackson’s opinion. Therefore, we cannot conclude
that Corson’s opinion did not affect the verdict, and was harmless error,
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Accordingly, we hold the trial court erred in allowing Jackson to testify to
Corson’s opinion, and that this error was not harmless. Because consideration
of this evidence was not limited to the 295 Amherst Street fire, we reverse the
defendant’s convictions on all three indictments.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred; HICKS,
J., dissented.
HICKS, J., dissenting. Because I think that the verification testimony
had a non-hearsay purpose, I respectfully dissent. To me, the non-hearsay
purpose for the admission of the fact of verification by an independent
examiner is simply to show the effect on the hearer, independent of its truth or
falsity.
Many relevant oral expressions made out of court may be offered
for a variety of purposes other than to prove the facts asserted.
When this is done, the hearsay rule is not a bar. A common
example is where an utterance is offered to show the effect on the
hearer for the purpose of proving circumstantially the state of mind
of the person to whom the statement is made or to show the
information he had as bearing on the reasonableness of his
subsequent conduct.
Ellsworth v. Watkins, 101 N.H. 51, 53 (1957) (citations omitted).
The State’s fingerprint expert, Timothy Jackson, testified that “according
to standard operating procedures I’m not even allowed to brief the submitting
agency on my findings until they are verified if an identification has been
made.” Thus, testimony regarding Jackson’s receipt of verification under the
ACE-V protocol is admissible for the non-hearsay purpose of showing “the
reasonableness of his subsequent conduct” in rendering his opinion on the
fingerprint evidence. Id.
The ACE-V protocol is accepted in a number of jurisdictions. See, e.g.,
United States v. Mahone, 453 F.3d 68, 71 (1st Cir. 2006) (noting that “other
federal courts have favorably analyzed the ACE-V method under Daubert [v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993),] for footwear and
fingerprint impressions”). As Jackson’s testimony indicates, an opinion of an
examiner is of little use in court or out unless it is verified. Accordingly,
6
verification evidence should be admissible in some limited form with a limiting
instruction.
In this case, the proper procedure would have been for the defendant to
request, and the trial court to give, an instruction that the verification
testimony was not to be considered for its truth but for the limited purpose of
explaining how Jackson was able to render his opinion under the ACE-V
protocol. As the defendant failed to request such an instruction, I would
affirm. Cf. State v. W.J.T. Enterprises, 136 N.H. 490, 494 (1992) (noting that
although defendants challenging evidence admitted for a non-hearsay purpose
“may have been entitled to a limiting instruction regarding the purpose for
which the testimony was admitted, none was requested”).
7