THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2006-394
APPEAL OF TODD MALOUIN
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: January 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: June 13, 2007
McDowell & Osburn, P.A., of Manchester (Mark D. Morrissette on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Devine and Nyquist, P.A., of Manchester (Merrick C. Weinstein on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Todd Malouin, appeals from a decision
of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (Board) that he did not
suffer a compensable work-related injury. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Malouin was employed for
approximately ten years by the respondent, Oasis Health & Sports Center, Inc.,
d/b/a The Executive Health & Sports Center (Club). At the time of his injury
in 2004, Malouin served the Club as a personal trainer and was also the
director of medical outreach.
Unlike the rest of the Club’s personal trainers, who were paid on an
hourly basis, Malouin was paid a salary. In addition, both Malouin and the
other personal trainers received commissions based on the number of personal
training sessions they had with members (clients) of the Club. Club staff,
including the personal trainers, were permitted, but not required, to perform
personal workouts while they were on duty. Club management suggested or
encouraged that some members of the staff, including Malouin, perform
personal workouts during their shifts as a way of attracting additional clients.
On September 17, 2004, Malouin was scheduled to finish work at 5:00
p.m. After finishing with his last client at approximately 4:00 p.m., he began a
personal workout and intermittently filled out payroll sheets. At approximately
4:45 p.m., while using one of the Club’s strength-training machines, Malouin
suffered a rupture of his left biceps tendon.
Malouin sought workers’ compensation benefits. The Board rejected his
contention that he suffered a work-related injury under RSA 281-A:2, XI
(1999), and denied his motion for reconsideration and rehearing. This appeal
followed. Malouin contends that the Board erred in ruling that his injury was
excluded from the definition of “injury” under a 1997 amendment to RSA 281-
A:2, XI. Alternatively, he contends that his injury is compensable under the
savings clause of the amendment. Finally, he argues that the Board’s
application of the amendment violated the equal protection guarantee of Part I,
Articles 12 and 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
I
In denying Malouin’s claim, the Board interpreted provisions of the
Workers’ Compensation Law, RSA chapter 281-A (1999 & Supp. 2006). We will
not overturn the Board’s decision except for errors of law, or if we are satisfied
by a clear preponderance of the evidence that its decision is unjust or
unreasonable. The Board’s findings of fact will not be disturbed if they are
supported by competent evidence in the record, upon which the Board’s
decision reasonably could have been made. See Appeal of Lorette, 154 N.H.
271, 272 (2006); see also RSA 541:13 (2007). Interpretation of a statute is a
question of law, which we review de novo. Lorette, 154 N.H. at 272. On
questions of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole.
Appeal of Kraft Foods, 147 N.H. 572, 574 (2002). Our goal is to apply statutes
in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy
sought to be advanced by the entire statutory scheme. Cloutier v. City of
Berlin, 154 N.H. 13, 17 (2006).
II
Malouin’s entitlement to workers’ compensation benefits depends upon
whether he suffered an “injury” under RSA 281-A:2, XI. The statute reads, in
pertinent part:
“Injury” or “personal injury” as used in and covered by this
chapter means accidental injury or death arising out of and in the
2
course of employment . . . . Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, “injury” or “personal injury” shall not mean accidental
injury, disease, or death resulting from participation in
athletic/recreational activities, on or off premises, unless the
employee reasonably expected, based on the employer’s instruction
or policy, that such participation was a condition of employment or
was required for promotion, increased compensation, or continued
employment.
(Emphasis added.) To determine whether an injury arose “out of and in the
course of employment,” a claimant must prove:
“(1) that the injury arose out of employment by demonstrating that
it resulted from a risk created by the employment; and (2) that the
injury arose in the course of employment by demonstrating that (A)
it occurred within the boundaries of time and space created by the
terms of employment; and (B) it occurred in the performance of an
activity related to employment, which may include a personal
activity if reasonably expected and not forbidden, or an activity of
mutual benefit to employer and employee.”
Appeal of Estate of Balamotis, 141 N.H. 456, 458 (1996) (quoting Murphy v.
Town of Atkinson, 128 N.H. 641, 645-46 (1986)).
In its decision, the Board used the above-quoted test and found that:
In applying that test to the current facts, there is little doubt that
the claimant’s injury arose during the course of his employment.
The claimant was performing the same actions that he might
expect to demonstrate to a club member who had retained his
services as a personal trainer. Sufficient evidence exists to find
that the injury occurred within the “boundaries of time and space
created by the terms of employment,” and that the activity was not
only reasonably expected and not forbidden, but was expressly
permitted and even encouraged by the employer. Furthermore, the
activity had a mutual benefit to both the employer and the
employee, in that the activity aided the employee’s knowledge and
use of the equipment and increased his visibility and exposure to
members of the club who might retain his services. Members who
hired the personal trainers for various sessions both increased the
club’s revenue and the commission paid to the individual
employee.
Neither party has contested these findings. Subsequently, the Board examined
the exclusionary language of RSA 281-A:2, XI and stated:
3
The first issue that must be addressed is whether the claimant was
engaging in athletic/recreational activity and would thus fall into
the statutory exclusion. It is difficult to characterize the claimant’s
activities at the time as anything but athletic/recreational. Even
though such activities were also the business of the employer, that
fact does not remove the claimant’s activity from the statutory
characterization. And the statute contains no exception for
athletic/recreational activities that are directly related to an
injured worker’s employment activities.
Finally, the Board considered whether Malouin fell within the statute’s savings
clause (“unless the employee reasonably expected, based on the employer’s
instruction or policy, that such participation was a condition of employment or
was required for promotion, increased compensation, or continued
employment”). The Board ruled that he did not, as “[n]othing indicate[d] that
[his] work-out was required for his continued employment, promotion or
increased compensation.” Accordingly, the Board denied his claim for workers’
compensation benefits.
Both parties contest the effect of the last sentence of RSA 281-A:2, XI,
which was added to the statute in 1997. See Laws 1997, 163:1. The Club
contends that the language is “clear and unambiguous” and precludes
compensation for Malouin’s injury. Malouin argues that the amendment was
“designed to exclude injuries that arose out of activities that were not usual,
normal or customary with respect to an employee’s work activities.” He
contends that the language is ambiguous, and must consequently be
construed in his favor.
The term “athletic/recreational activities” is not defined in RSA chapter
281-A, nor have we previously construed the term. When the issue raised
presents a new question of statutory construction, we begin our analysis with
an examination of the statutory language. Appeal of Ann Miles Builder, 150
N.H. 315, 318 (2003). Although we give undefined language its plain and
ordinary meaning, we must keep in mind the intent of the legislation, which is
determined by examining the construction of the statute as a whole, and not
simply by examining isolated words and phrases found therein. Id. When a
statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the
statute for further indication of legislative intent. Kraft Foods, 147 N.H. at 574.
Where the statutory language is ambiguous or where more than one reasonable
interpretation exists, however, we review legislative history to aid in our
analysis. Ann Miles Builder, 150 N.H. at 318.
Although the words “athletic” and “recreational” are both susceptible to
plain and ordinary meanings, the term “athletic/recreational activities” does
not enjoy the same level of clarity. The words “athletic” and “recreational” are
separated by a slash. The slash “is inherently ambiguous: its function may be
4
conjunctive . . . or disjunctive.” B. Garner, The Redbook: A Manual on Legal
Style § 1.80, at 43 (2002); see also Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 622 (unabridged ed. 2002) (providing seven definitions for slash
symbol, including “or” and “and or”). The pertinent definitions of “activity” may
be read to include an employment or vocational component, as well as a non-
vocational component. See Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 22
(“an occupation, pursuit, or recreation in which a person is active . . . a form of
organized, supervised, and often extracurricular recreation (as athletic games,
dramatics, or dancing)” (emphases added)).
Consequently, we believe that the term “athletic/recreational activities”
may reasonably be construed in a variety of ways, including: (1) the
conjunctive “athletic and recreational activities,” where the activities in
question are both athletic and recreational in nature, to the exclusion of
athletic activities that are vocational in nature; and (2) the disjunctive “athletic
or recreational activities,” where the activities in question are either athletic or
recreational in nature, and could either include or exclude athletic activities
that are vocational in nature.
In light of these varied reasonable interpretations, we conclude that the
term “athletic/recreational activities” in RSA 281-A:2, XI is ambiguous. See,
e.g., Warner v. Clarendon Ins. Co., 154 N.H. 331, 334 (2006) (where relevant
insurance policy language susceptible to more than one reasonable
interpretation, one providing coverage and the other limiting coverage, policy
provision considered ambiguous). Consequently, we look to the legislative
history of RSA 281-A:2, XI to aid in our analysis. See Ann Miles Builder, 150
N.H. at 319.
Both parties agree that the 1997 statutory amendment was arguably
adopted in reaction to our decision in Appeal of Estate of Balamotis. In
Balamotis, the decedent was a field service engineer, employed by Digital
Equipment Corporation, who played volleyball with his co-workers several
times per week during his lunch-hour break. Balamotis, 141 N.H. at 457.
Although the volleyball game was not among several company-sponsored
activities available to employees, it was not forbidden. Id. During one of those
lunchtime volleyball games, the decedent died, presumably as a result of an
aggravated heart condition. Id. Pursuant to the version of RSA 281-A:2, XI in
effect at that time, the Board denied compensation to the decedent’s estate,
ruling that his death did not arise out of and in the course of his employment.
Id. Holding that, in general, on-premises recreational activities conducted
during the workday arise out of the employment and that the decedent’s injury
arose in the course of his employment, we reversed and remanded the case for
a determination of the cause of death. Id. at 459, 461.
Balamotis informs our examination of the legislative history concerning
the 1997 amendment to RSA 281-A:2, XI. That legislative history, however,
5
reveals that the legislature was concerned over the availability of workers’
compensation benefits for injuries sustained while employees participated in a
variety of pursuits, occurring both during and after work hours, and both on
and off work premises. When the amendment was introduced in the Senate as
SB 38, the voiced concern was for “participation in athletic activities.” N.H.S.
Jour. 221 (1997). At a hearing on SB 38, there were concerns over “a sport or
activity,” “activities not performed in the duties of your job,” “sports activities,”
and “recreational activity.” Hearing on SB-38 Before the Senate Comm. on Ins.
at 1-3 (January 14, 1997). At subcommittee work sessions on SB 38, the
“Comments and Recommendations” annotations indicate that there were
concerns with “sporting or exercise activities,” “activities,” “healthy exercise
activities,” “athletic activities,” “fitness programs,” “wellness programs,” and
“exercise or physical conditioning activities done for job related fitness,
physical conditioning and performance.” Subcommittee Work Session Before
the House Comm. on Labor, Industrial & Rehabilitative Services at 1-3 (April 3
and 9, 1997) [hereinafter Subcommittee Work Session].
Much of the legislative history indicates that the legislature intended the
1997 amendment to RSA 281-A:2, XI to apply to those sorts of activities at
issue in Balamotis and other earlier cases where the claimant’s injury occurred
during a recreational athletic activity separate from the claimant’s usual
employment functions. See, e.g., Appeal of Cooper, 141 N.H. 184 (1996)
(holding injury compensable where chemical company employee was injured
playing softball for company softball team). Other parts of the legislative
history, however, indicate concerns with purely athletic activity, sports, non-
athletic recreational activities, and certain employment-related physical fitness
programs or activities.
Without further examination, we believe the legislative history is
inconclusive as to the exact definition intended by the legislature for the term
“athletic/recreational activities.” Indeed, the subcommittee work session
comments indicate that Representative Maxfield believed that the change
proposed by SB 38 was “vague by design.” Subcommittee Work Session, supra
at 1.
The Club argues that Malouin’s personal workout “can only be
characterized” as falling within the term “athletic/recreational activities.” Due
to the ambiguous nature of the term and the inconclusive legislative history,
we assume, without deciding, that for the purpose of this case, Malouin’s
workout was an “athletic/recreational activity.”
6
III
Given our assumption, above, we turn our attention to the statute’s
savings clause, which reads:
unless the employee reasonably expected, based on the employer’s
instruction or policy, that such participation was a condition of
employment or was required for promotion, increased
compensation, or continued employment.
RSA 281-A:2, XI. The Board found that Malouin did not fall within the
statute’s savings clause, as “[n]othing indicate[d] that [his] work-out was
required for his continued employment, promotion or increased compensation.”
Conspicuous by its absence in the Board’s conclusion, however, is any
reference to the term “condition of employment.” If Malouin reasonably
expected that participation in his workout was a “condition of employment,”
then the statute would not preclude compensation for his injury. Either the
Board neglected the term or equated it with one or more of the follow-on
statutory terms. In giving the term effect as we must, we hold that the Board
erred in either case. See N.H. Motor Transport Assoc. Employee Benefit Trust
v. N.H. Ins. Guaranty Assoc., 154 N.H. ___, ___, 914 A.2d 812, 818 (2006)
(“When construing a statute, we must give effect to all words in a statute.”).
At the subcommittee work sessions on SB 38, Representative Clegg had
successfully moved to amend the bill by including “condition of employment” in
the last sentence. Subcommittee Work Session, supra at 2-3. Given the varied
definitions of the word “condition,” the term “condition of employment” might,
at first blush, appear to be ambiguous in nature. See Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 473 (defining “condition” as, among other things,
“something established or agreed upon as a requisite to the doing or taking
effect of something else” or “a mode or state of being”). If we were to use the
first definition of “condition” in our construction of the term “condition of
employment,” the term could refer to those things requisite or mandatory for
Malouin to gain employment by the Club. To define “condition of employment”
in that manner within the context of the complete statutory language, however,
would be problematic for two reasons. First, we could be in the peculiar
position of including, as compensable, injuries resulting from activities
undertaken by a claimant prior to his employment. Second, such a
construction would render redundant and superfluous the final words of the
savings clause (“was required for . . . continued employment”). We would have
little tolerance for such results. See Weare Land Use Assoc. v. Town of Weare,
153 N.H. 510, 511 (2006) (“The legislature will not be presumed to pass an act
leading to an absurd result.”); N.H. Motor Transport, 154 N.H. at ___, 914 A.2d
at 818 (“When construing a statute, we . . . presume that the legislature did not
enact superfluous or redundant words.”).
7
If, however, we rely upon the second definition of “condition” in our
construction of the term “condition of employment,” as used in the savings
clause, the term would refer to the usual or normal employment environment
at the Club. Given our rules of statutory construction, we hold that this latter
construction is the only reasonable one for the purpose of maintaining the
savings clause as a “clear and exacting statutory standard.” See Kraft Foods,
147 N.H. at 575; see also Ann Miles Builder, 150 N.H. at 318 (“[W]e must keep
in mind the intent of the legislation, which is determined by examining the
construction of the statute as a whole, and not simply by examining isolated
words and phrases found therein.”).
In addition, this construction is consistent with our decision in Maheux
v. Cove-Craft Co., 103 N.H. 71 (1960). In Maheux, the claimant suffered
permanent injury to his eye while engaged, at the place of his employment
during the noon lunch hour, in operating a table saw to manufacture a
checkerboard for his own use. Maheux, 103 N.H. at 72. While the
commissioner of labor had denied the claimant compensation under the
Workers’ Compensation Law, the trial court found that Maheux’s injury was
suffered in the course of, and arose out of, his employment, stating that
the plaintiff had never been told not to use any machine for
personal use during the noon hour and that for several months
prior to the accident such use had been made by employees who
ate their lunch at the factory. The Court further found it was a
custom or practice for such employees to use their employer’s
machines during the lunch hour for individual projects, and that
the defendant employer had through the knowledge of its owner
. . . and that of a supervisory employee . . . notice of this practice
or custom.
Id. (quotations, ellipses, and brackets omitted). We affirmed the decision of the
trial court, stating:
The plaintiff could fairly infer not only that the use which he
was making of the employer’s machinery was known to the
employer and so a permitted use, but also that under the terms
upon which he was hired, it was a use encouraged by the employer
as a condition of the employment.
Id. at 75 (citation omitted).
Most important, our conclusion is in accordance with “our practice to
liberally construe the Workers’ Compensation Law, resolving all reasonable
doubts in statutory construction in favor of providing the broadest reasonable
effect to the statute’s remedial purpose of compensating injured employees,”
Appeal of Hypertherm, 152 N.H. 21, 24 (2005).
8
Accordingly, we hold that the Board erred as a matter of law in finding
that Malouin’s claim failed under the statute’s savings clause. We need not
determine here the absolute parameters for the statutory term “condition of
employment.” Instead, under the facts of this case, we simply conclude that
Malouin reasonably expected that the on-premises personal exercise workout
of a salaried personal trainer at a health and sports club, conducted during the
course of his normal working hours for an employer that both permitted and
encouraged its personal trainers to perform such workouts while they were on
duty in order to provide a direct benefit to the club by securing additional
clients, was encompassed by the term “condition of employment” for the
purpose of RSA 281-A:2, XI. Of course, if the legislature disagrees with our
construction of the statutory language, it is free to amend it as it sees fit. See
Marceau v. Concord Heritage Life Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 216, 221 (2003).
Because of our holding that Malouin’s participation in his personal
workout was encompassed by the term “condition of employment” in RSA 281-
A:2, XI, we need not address his argument concerning the equal protection
guarantee of the New Hampshire Constitution. Instead, we remand this case to
the Board for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; GALWAY, J., with whom
DALIANIS, J., joined, dissented.
GALWAY, J., dissenting. “We are the final arbiter of the meaning of the
workers’ compensation statute, and the nature and extent of compensation to
the injured employee is governed by the express statutory language and that
which can be fairly implied therefrom.” Appeal of Woodmansee, 150 N.H. 63,
67 (2003) (emphasis added). In construing a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to words used, considering the statute as a whole and
interpreting it consistent with its purpose. Appeal of Denton, 147 N.H. 259,
260 (2001). Any reasonable doubt in construing a workers’ compensation
statute is resolved in favor of the injured employee. Appeal of Hypertherm, 152
N.H. 21, 24 (2005). In this jurisdiction, statutory words and phrases are
interpreted according to their common and approved usage, unless the terms
have a technical or otherwise peculiar meaning. Appeal of Town of Hampton
Falls, 126 N.H. 805, 809 (1985); see also RSA 21:2 (2000). The compensation
appeals board’s decision will not be overturned unless it is erroneous as a
matter of law or the petitioner has demonstrated that the order is unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Kraft Foods, 147 N.H. 572, 574 (2002).
RSA 281-A:2, XI provides, in relevant part:
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, “injury” or “personal
9
injury” shall not mean accidental injury, disease, or death
resulting from participation in athletic/recreational activities, on or
off premises, unless the employee reasonably expected, based on
the employer’s instruction or policy, that such participation was a
condition of employment or was required for promotion, increased
compensation, or continued employment.
The majority concludes that portions of RSA 281-A:2, XI are ambiguous, and
that, even assuming the petitioner was participating in an athletic/recreational
activity, he is entitled to workers’ compensation because his personal workouts
were a condition of his employment. Because I disagree with both conclusions,
I respectfully dissent.
First, the majority concludes that the phrase “athletic/recreational
activities” is ambiguous. “Athletic/recreational activities,” when read in
context, however, is not ambiguous. According to the majority, the phrase may
be read as covering activities that are both athletic and recreational, to the
exclusion of vocational athletic activities, or as covering activities that are
athletic or recreational, which could include vocational athletic activities. The
statute, however, includes in the definition of “injury” only those
athletic/recreational activities in which the employee, based upon the
employer’s instruction or policy, reasonably expects to participate because of
his employment. It is immaterial whether the athletic/recreational activities in
question are vocational in nature. What is relevant is whether the employee’s
participation in the activity was related to his employment on account of his
employer’s instruction or policy. Because the majority’s conclusion that RSA
281-A:2, XI is ambiguous relies upon the possibility that vocational athletic
activities might be included, and because, under the unambiguous language of
the statute, it is irrelevant whether the activities are vocational, I believe the
majority incorrectly concludes that the phrase “athletic/recreational activities”
is ambiguous.
Next, the majority concludes that the “savings clause” of RSA 281-A:2, XI
appears to be ambiguous, but is not. We stated in Kraft Foods, however, that
the requirement of RSA 281-A:2, XI, that participation in a particular activity
be a “condition of employment” or be “required for promotion, increased
compensation, or continued employment,” is a “clear and exacting statutory
standard.” Kraft Foods, 147 N.H. at 574. The majority’s opinion disregards
the conclusion in Kraft Foods and concludes that this language, which has not
changed since Kraft Foods was decided, is now ambiguous. Because, however,
RSA 281-A:2, XI is not ambiguous, we need not look beyond the statute for
further indication of legislative intent, Kraft Foods, 147 N.H. at 574, and we
need only determine whether the compensation appeals board (board) correctly
applied the statute as written.
As to whether the petitioner’s personal workouts were a “condition of
10
employment,” the majority relies upon differing common definitions of the term
“condition” in concluding that the phrase “condition of employment” is
susceptible of varying interpretations and is thus ambiguous. The phrase
“condition of employment,” however, is one with a peculiar, and specific, legal
meaning. See RSA 21:2. Because we have stated that RSA 281-A:2, XI
provides a clear and exacting standard, it is to this specific definition we must
look, and not to the varied common definitions. A “condition of employment” is
a “qualification or circumstance required for obtaining or keeping a job.”
Black’s Law Dictionary 314 (8th ed. 2004). Here, the petitioner testified that
the Club did not require him to perform personal workouts while on duty and
that he was interviewed for hire based upon what he knew and could teach,
rather than upon what he could physically do. Thus, performing personal
workouts at the Club was not a qualification or circumstance required for
obtaining or keeping his job, and was not, therefore, a condition of his
employment. Accordingly, I would conclude that the board did not err in
determining that the petitioner’s personal workouts were not a condition of
employment.
Additionally, the board determined that the petitioner’s personal
workouts were not required for promotion, increased compensation, or
continued employment. Because the petitioner does not argue that his
personal workouts were required for promotion or continued employment, we
need only analyze whether the petitioner reasonably expected, based upon the
Club’s instruction or policy, that his personal workouts were required for
increased compensation.
Although performing personal workouts was a method that personal
trainers could use to attract clients, thereby increasing their commissions, the
petitioner, as noted previously, testified that the Club did not require the
trainers to perform any personal workouts. Additionally, the petitioner testified
that the Club had a policy, which he followed, requiring him to remove the
Club-issued shirt identifying him as an employee during any personal
workouts. Moreover, according to the petitioner, although he primarily
attracted clients through demonstrations of his knowledge, he also did so
because he was well known in the community due to having had his own
television show for a time, having been a competitive bodybuilder during the
1990s, his degree in exercise science, and his time as a model. Furthermore,
the petitioner testified that around the time of his injury he had a
“tremendous” client base which required him to work out after the Club had
closed, when few people were present, because being approached by clients
during the Club’s regular hours was “almost bothersome.” Finally, the
petitioner could not point to any data that showed a correlation between his
personal workouts and the attraction of new clients. Therefore, the petitioner
did not reasonably expect, based upon the Club’s instruction or policy, that his
personal workouts were for the purpose of increasing his compensation
because they were not done for the purpose of attracting clients to increase his
11
commissions. The board, therefore, correctly determined that the petitioner’s
personal workouts were not required for increased compensation.
Because the petitioner’s personal workouts, including the one during
which he was hurt, fall under the unambiguous exclusionary language in RSA
281-A:2, XI, the board properly determined that he did not suffer an “injury”
for purposes of workers’ compensation. Because the board did not err as a
matter of law, and because the petitioner has not otherwise shown the board’s
decision to be unjust or unreasonable, I believe that the board’s decision
should be affirmed. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.
DALIANIS, J., joins in the dissent.
12