THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2006-366
CHARLES HUDSON
v.
DIRECTOR, NEW HAMPSHIRE DIVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Argued: February 21, 2007
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2007
Law Offices of Richard N. Foley, of Portsmouth (Richard N. Foley on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general, of Concord (Nancy J. Smith, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Charles Hudson, appeals the denial by the
Superior Court (McHugh, J.) of his petition to review a decision of the hearings
examiner that upheld the suspension of his driver’s license by the defendant,
the director of the division of motor vehicles. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the hearings examiner or appear in the
record. Hudson was involved in a single-person accident while driving a
motorcycle in Portsmouth on August 17, 2005. Officer Michael Maloney of the
Portsmouth Police Department arrived at the scene and questioned Hudson.
He observed that Hudson smelled of alcohol and his eyes were bloodshot and
glassy. Maloney administered a horizontal gaze nystagmus test, which Hudson
failed. He also took a preliminary breath test (PBT), which revealed a blood
alcohol content (BAC) of 0.168.
Maloney arrested Hudson for driving while intoxicated, and he was
transported to Portsmouth Regional Hospital for medical treatment. At the
hospital, Maloney presented him with an administrative license suspension
(ALS) form, which he read and signed. He then consented to a blood test,
which, upon laboratory testing, revealed a BAC of 0.17.
The Portsmouth Police Department referred the ALS form, arrest report
and laboratory results to the New Hampshire Department of Safety for ALS
purposes. The department suspended Hudson’s license. Hudson requested
administrative review of the record by a hearings examiner, alleging failure to
comply with the applicable regulations due to mistakes in the transmittal slip
that accompanied his blood test to the laboratory. The hearings examiner
upheld the order of suspension, finding that Hudson submitted to a properly
administered alcohol concentration test that disclosed an alcohol concentration
of 0.08 or more and was therefore subject to a suspension of his operating
privileges under RSA 265:91-a, II(b) (2004) (repealed and replaced by RSA 265-
A:30). Hudson appealed the hearings examiner’s decision to the superior
court, which denied the petition, finding that any violations in the taking of the
blood were de minimis.
On appeal, Hudson argues that the court erred in finding that the
violations were de minimis. Specifically, he argues that the blood test results
should have been excluded because there was no indication of the type of non-
alcoholic cleanser used and because the transmittal slip: (1) states the wrong
date and time the blood was drawn; (2) does not provide the name and title of
the person withdrawing the blood; and (3) does not list the type of non-
alcoholic cleanser used to prepare the skin.
In an appeal to the superior court from an ALS hearing, the plaintiff
bears the burden to show that the order upholding the suspension was clearly
unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of fact on questions properly before
the hearings officer are deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA
263:75 (2004); Saviano v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 151 N.H. 315,
318 (2004). Resolution of this appeal requires statutory interpretation, which
is a question of law that we review de novo. Debonis v. Warden, N.H. State
Prison, 153 N.H. 603, 605 (2006). In matters of statutory interpretation, we
are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 682 (2005). We first
examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used. Id.
2
The parties do not dispute that the State’s form did not comply with the
methods prescribed by the commissioner of the department of safety in New
Hampshire Administrative Rules, He-P 2202.03(b), (f)(1), (4) and (5) (current
version at N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C 6402.02), which required in pertinent part:
(b) A cleanser shall be used to clean the area of skin where the
blood specimen will be drawn. The cleanser shall contain no
ingredients that would interfere with an analysis for alcohol or
drugs.
. . .
(e) The person who collects the blood specimen pursuant to RSA
265:85, I, 270:52 I or 215-A:11-d, I shall complete a blood
specimen collection form.
(f) The completed blood specimen collection form shall include:
(1) The name and title of the person withdrawing the
specimen . . . .
. . . .
(4) The date and time the specimen was drawn in
accordance with He-P 2202.03;
(5) The type of non-alcoholic cleanser used to prepare the site
. . . .
Thus, the issue before us is whether the hearings examiner should have
excluded the blood test as evidence when the transmittal slip failed to comply
with the methods prescribed by the commissioner. Under RSA 265:85, IV
(2004): “No tests of blood, urine or breath authorized by RSA 265:84 shall be
considered as evidence in any proceeding before any administrative officer or
court unless such test is performed in accordance with methods prescribed by
the commissioner of the department of safety.”
For almost thirty years we have construed the exclusionary language in
RSA 265:85, IV and its predecessors as relating solely to the standards for
testing the blood, and not to the methods by which it was obtained. State v.
Groulx, 109 N.H. 281, 282 (1969) (construing predecessor of RSA 265:85). In
the past, we have not excluded the results of blood tests where the sample was
improperly sealed, State v. Paul, 116 N.H. 252, 253-54 (1976), there was a
twelve-day delay between obtaining and testing the sample, State v. Varney,
117 N.H. 163, 164 (1977), or the sample was taken by a person not specifically
3
permitted to do so by the statute, Groulx, 109 N.H. at 281-83, because,
although these methods may have been required by regulation or statute, the
violations did not relate to the standard for testing the blood.
In State v. LaFountain, 108 N.H. 219, 222 (1967), Justice Grimes
dissented, stating that the method of securing the blood sample is an
important part of the test because it relates to the test’s reliability. Despite his
dissent, the court has consistently construed the exclusionary language such
that the method and timing by which the blood is obtained are not part of the
standards for conducting the chemical test. Varney, 117 N.H. at 164. Thus,
violations of regulations governing the methods used in obtaining the blood do
not require exclusion of the test results under RSA 265:84, IV; such violations
may affect the weight given to the test, but not its admissibility under the
statute. Paul, 116 N.H. at 254 (citing LaFountain, 108 N.H. at 231).
Here, there is no evidence in the record that the violations affected the
reliability of the blood test itself and no argument presented that the blood test
itself was not performed in accordance with the regulations governing the
standards for testing blood. Therefore, the admission of the blood test by the
hearings examiner was not error. The superior court ruled that any violations
in the taking of the blood were de minimis. Particularly in light of such
corroborating evidence as Hudson’s PBT result, the superior court could
properly assign little weight to the violations in considering the blood test
results. Finding no error, we affirm.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4