THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2007-786
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF DONALD A. DOMEY
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: October 29, 2008
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (John C.
Kissinger, Jr. on the brief and orally), for petitioner Larrie Bratko,
Guardianship Services of New Hampshire.
Hamblett & Kerrigan, PA, of Nashua (J. Daniel Marr and Andrew J. Piela
on the brief, and Mr. Marr orally), for petitioner George Domey.
Kalil & LaCount, of Rye (Earl L. Kalil, Jr. on the brief and orally), for the
respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Larrie Bratko and George Domey, co-
guardians over the person and estate of Donald Domey, the ward, appeal a
decision of the Hillsborough County Probate Court (Cloutier, J.) awarding the
respondent, Judith Domey, damages and support arrearages. We reverse.
I
The record supports the following facts. In October 2003, Donald Domey
suffered a stroke that rendered him totally incapacitated. He became a patient
in the rehabilitative unit at Greenbrier Terrace Rehabilitation Center
(Greenbrier) in Nashua until November 2004, when he was moved to a long-
term care room.
In February 2004, his brother, George Domey, filed an ex parte petition
seeking a guardianship over his person and estate. The petition alleged that
Donald’s wife, Judith, had failed to act in Donald’s best interest, had engaged
in physically and verbally abusive behavior toward him and had forced him to
execute legal documents despite his incapacity. In March, the probate court
appointed George Domey and Larrie Bratko, a professional guardian, as co-
guardians. The court also appointed Attorney Jody Wilbert as guardian ad
litem for Donald.
Over the ensuing months, the co-guardians attempted to identify
Donald’s assets, a task made difficult because of Judith’s lack of cooperation
and an atmosphere of mistrust between the parties. In May, the co-guardians
filed a motion to compel Judith to allow an appraisal of the marital home in
Salem and to produce a complete list of all accounts and holdings that were
either in Donald’s name or held jointly by them. The guardian ad litem filed a
report with the court supporting the motion, indicating that she remained
involved in this matter “in particular, because the guardians have been
thwarted in their efforts to perform their duty to provide for the physical
wellbeing of the ward, as well as to prepare an inventory of the assets of the
ward.” She concluded that Judith, “together with various of her children and
her parents, either cannot or will not cooperate with the duly appointed
guardians” and that it “is clear that the Court’s intervention is necessary to
assure that the guardians have access to financial information so that they can
establish a plan that will provide for both the ward and for his wife.” The court
granted the motion.
In September, the guardian ad litem filed a supplemental report with the
probate court. She concluded that “based on her communications with the
professionals intimately involved in Mr. Domey’s care, [she] remains convinced
that Mr. Domey is in need of a guardian. Absent a disinterested guardian, Mr.
Domey would be at the mercy of those who may be unwilling or unable to
acknowledge his frailty, or who may lean on him to ‘decide’ things that are not
in his best interest.”
Larrie Bratko completed an inventory in December, which showed more
than $730,000 in total assets. Of these, approximately $353,177 were liquid
assets and approximately $385,500 were real estate, primarily the marital
home. Additionally, Donald’s estate had an income of approximately $5,700
per month, including pensions and social security. The probate court approved
the inventory filing.
2
In January 2005, Greenbrier notified the co-guardians that the overdue
bill for services to Donald exceeded $63,000. Although Judith had informed
the co-guardians that her husband had long-term disability insurance
coverage, when he was moved from rehabilitative care to long-term custodial
care, his expenses ceased to be covered. Larrie Bratko then filed a motion to
liquidate Donald’s assets in order to pay the Greenbrier bills, which the court
granted.
In April, Judith filed petitions for spousal support and estate planning.
The co-guardians objected to both, noting that there “[was] no specific
statutory authority or guidelines within NH RSA 464-A:26-a for the relief
requested.” The co-guardians also expressed concern about Judith’s failure to
cooperate with their efforts to identify Donald’s assets. In addition, they noted
that the proposed estate plan “creates a foreseeable risk that the ward will be
deprived of sufficient assets to cover his needs.”
The guardian ad litem also objected, noting that “this case differs from
many similar cases in that the Guardian ad Litem has more than adequate
reason to believe that the ward . . . needs additional protection beyond that
which would be afforded if he were merely a Medicaid recipient.” As she
explained, “[t]he ward’s continuing need for guardians, and potentially for
counsel and a Guardian ad Litem, requires that funds be available to the ward.
In other words, if the ward is ‘impoverished,’ as Medicaid recipients must be to
become eligible for same, it is foreseeable that his needs will not be adequately
met.” The guardian ad litem concluded that Judith’s past conduct led the
guardian ad litem to believe that it was not in Donald’s best interest for her to
support the petition for estate planning absent monetary protection for his
needs.
In September, the probate court approved the parties’ stipulation for
estate planning and for spousal support. The stipulation provided that the co-
guardians were to pay Greenbrier any outstanding balance; pay $50,000 into a
special needs trust for Donald’s benefit; pay enough assets to Judith to bring
the assets held in her name to the Medicaid spousal resource limit of $95,100;
prepay Donald’s funeral expenses; apply the remainder of the assets towards
the Domeys’ outstanding mortgage on the homestead in Salem; and transfer to
Judith all of Donald’s interest in real estate in Pittsburg, New Hampshire and
Florida. In addition the co-guardians were to pay monthly support to Judith
out of her husband’s income.
By October, it became apparent that there were significantly fewer assets
in the estate than the parties realized at the time of the stipulation because
Donald’s care at Greenbrier had eroded the liquid assets of the estate, leaving
approximately $75,000. In January 2006, Donald qualified for Medicaid. The
co-guardians submitted annual accountings to the probate court for the years
3
2004-2007. Judith objected to each of the accountings and requested a
hearing. Following a three-day bench trial in June 2007, the court issued an
order removing the co-guardians and awarding Judith damages of $84,838 and
support arrearages of $33,415.
II
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the probate court erred: (1) by
finding that they breached duties owed to Judith and ruling that they were
personally liable for such damages; and (2) by ruling that they breached a duty
to conduct estate planning prior to the time court authorization had been
obtained.
“The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-
A:4 (2007). “Consequently, we will not disturb the probate court’s decree
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of
law.” In re Angel N., 141 N.H. 158, 161 (1996) (quotation and brackets
omitted).
III
The first issue is whether the probate court erred in ruling that the
petitioners had a fiduciary duty to impoverish the ward in order to qualify him
for Medicaid so that his assets could be protected for his spouse. The
petitioners argue that “[i]n the absence of any statutory or case law authority
imposing a duty of guardians to disregard the interests of the ward and act to
advance the spouse’s objectives, it was clear error for the probate court to so
rule.” We agree.
The powers and duties of guardians in this state are specified in RSA
chapter 464-A (2004 & Supp. 2007). “When interpreting the language of a
statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used and
discern the legislative intent from the statute as written.” In re Guardianship
of Luong, 157 N.H. ___, ___, 951 A.2d 136, 141 (2008). “We will not consider
what the legislature might have said, or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include.” Id. “When the language of a statute is plain and
unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent.” Id.
The purpose of RSA chapter 464-A is “to promote and protect the well-
being of the proposed ward in involuntarily imposed protective proceedings.”
RSA 464-A:1 (2004). RSA 464-A:26, I (2004) reads, in pertinent part:
4
It is the duty of the guardian of the estate to protect and preserve
it, to retain, sell and invest it as hereinafter provided, to prosecute
or defend actions, claims or proceedings in any jurisdiction for the
protection of the estate’s assets, to account for it faithfully, to
perform all other duties required by law, and at the termination of
the guardianship to deliver the assets of the ward to the persons
entitled thereto. The guardian of the estate shall apply the money
and property for the support, care, and education of the ward,
but, the guardian may not use funds from the ward’s estate for
room and board which the guardian or his or her spouse, parent,
or child have furnished the ward unless a charge for the service is
approved by order of the court made upon notice to at least one of
the next of kin of the ward, if notice is possible.
Under the plain language of the statute, its primary objective is to protect
the well-being of the ward. The primary duty of the guardian is to protect the
estate’s assets in order to apply them for the support and care of the ward.
Prior to 1979, the statutory duties of the guardian included applying the
income of the ward’s estate “for the comfortable maintenance and support of
his ward, and his household and family, if any he have.” RSA 462:4 (repealed
1979). The legislature omitted this language in the current statute and we will
not “add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” In re
Guardianship of Luong, 157 N.H. at ___, 951 A.2d at 141.
The respondent argues that pursuant to RSA 546-A:2 (2007), the
guardians owed her a duty of support. RSA 546-A:2 provides that “[e]very
person whose income or other resources are more than sufficient to provide for
his or her reasonable subsistence compatible with decency or health owes a
duty to support or contribute to the support of his or her wife, husband, child,
father or mother when in need.” The respondent suggests that, read in
conjunction with RSA 464-A:26, I, which imposes a duty upon the guardian to
perform “all other duties required by law,” the guardian assumes the ward’s
legal duty to support his spouse pursuant to RSA 546-A:2.
RSA 546-A:2 creates a right in, among others, a wife to sue for support
when there is a showing of need and when there are “more than sufficient”
resources to provide for the reasonable subsistence of her husband. See St.
Joseph Hosp. of Nashua v. Rizzo, 141 N.H. 9, 11 (1996). We do not disagree
that in meeting the requirement imposed under RSA 464-A:26, I, to perform
“all other duties required by law,” a guardian may be required to consider the
needs of the ward’s spouse. Cf. In re Wszolek Estate, 112 N.H. 310, 316 (1972)
(in managing the assets of her ward, guardian has “secondary duty” to consider
the interest of ward’s granddaughter in joint account). The guardianship
statute does not, however, impose a fiduciary duty upon a guardian to
impoverish his or her ward in order to qualify the ward for Medicaid so that the
5
ward’s assets can be protected for the spouse, nor does it impose a fiduciary
duty upon guardians to provide for the ward’s spouse in the absence of
findings pursuant to RSA 546-A:2. We reverse the probate court’s ruling to the
contrary and its assessment of $33,415 in damages for spousal support
arrearages.
The second issue is whether the probate court erred in ruling that the
petitioners breached a duty to conduct estate planning. The probate court
awarded the respondent $84,838 as “damages which had to be paid to the
nursing home for the failure to initiate estate planning so Mr. Domey could
qualify for Medicaid.” The petitioners argue that the court’s decision is
erroneous as it “failed to follow the procedure for estate planning specifically
set out in RSA 464-A:26-a.” The respondent argues that the petitioners had “a
duty to preserve the Ward’s estate through timely estate planning and timely
Medicaid planning, which would have preserved sufficient assets to provide for
[her] comfort and support.”
RSA 464-A:26-a, I, provides that where a “ward’s wishes cannot be
ascertained, the probate court may authorize the guardian of the estate to plan
for the testamentary distribution of the ward’s estate in order to minimize
taxation or to facilitate distribution of the ward’s estate to family, friends, or
charities who would be likely recipients of gifts from the ward.” (Emphasis
added.) The statute thus establishes a process whereby the guardian of an
estate has the option to petition the probate court for authorization to engage
in estate planning, but the statute does not establish any duty on the part of
the guardian to do so. We hold that the probate court erred as a matter of law
in ruling that the co-guardians breached a duty to conduct estate planning and
we reverse the court’s assessment of $84,838 in damages.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6