THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-574
BARRY O. UPTON
v.
TOWN OF HOPKINTON
Argued: February 14, 2008
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2008
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (Daniel D. Muller, Jr. and John G.
Cronin on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the petitioner.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Russell F. Hilliard and Matthew R.
Serge on the brief, and Mr. Hilliard orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Barry O. Upton, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) upholding the decision of the planning board
(board) for the respondent, Town of Hopkinton (Town), to condition its approval
of his subdivision plan upon his paying one-third of the cost to improve a
portion of Branch Londonderry Turnpike (Turnpike). We affirm.
The record reflects the following facts. The petitioner owns a 21.1-acre
parcel on the Turnpike on the outskirts of Hopkinton. The Turnpike in this
area is a class V gravel road surrounded by wetlands. Currently, there are five
single-family residences along the Turnpike, including the petitioner’s.
In August 2006, the petitioner applied to the board for subdivision
approval. He proposed replacing the existing single-family residence on his
property and creating four new residential lots. The board considered the
application at public hearings in September, October, November and December
2006. In addition, the board took a site walk of the property, and reviewed
comments from the Town’s consultant engineer, fire chief, public works
director and road committee, as well as from the Town of Bow, the City of
Concord, and the Central New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission.
Among the concerns raised was “access to the development should [the]
. . . Turnpike be closed due to flooding.” The flooding was estimated to occur
approximately 500 feet from the petitioner’s development. The fire department,
for instance, was concerned about responding to an emergency should the
Turnpike be closed. There was also concern about school bus access to the
subdivision in the event that the Turnpike was closed. The board was informed
that the Turnpike had been closed for flooding three times in 2005 and three
times in 2006. The public works director estimated that “anytime [the town]
receive[s] 2-inches of rain the road needs to be closed temporarily due to its
elevation and its location through a wetland.” When the Turnpike is closed,
residents must travel through Bow and Concord to access their properties.
Even when the Turnpike is not closed, the chief of the fire department noted
that this particular location “has one of the furthest response times.”
Additionally, the Central New Hampshire Regional Planning Commission
opined that the petitioner’s development would result in an additional thirty-
eight to forty vehicle trips per day, which might “warrant road upgradings in
Hopkinton.” The commission observed that “based on the origins and
destinations of trips from the subdivision’s residents, . . . the majority of trips
may be along [the] . . . Turnpike heading generally northerly towards I-89 or to
center Hopkinton or Contoocook.”
At the November hearing, board members observed that because the
proposed development would double the number of homes on the Turnpike and
would be on the outskirts of town, the board could deny the application if it
found that the application would result in a “scattered or premature
subdivision . . . as would involve danger or injury to public health, safety or
prosperity by reason of the lack of . . . . drainage, transportation, schools, fire
protection, or other public services, or necessitate the excessive expenditure of
public funds for the supply of such services.” RSA 674:36, II (Supp. 2007).
Given this, a majority of the board believed that the petitioner needed to
address “the issue of safety as a result of the condition of [the] . . . Turnpike,”
perhaps by paying for a portion of the cost of improving the road.
At the December hearing, the board considered what was needed to
improve the Turnpike. The public works director stated that while he planned
2
to rebuild a culvert along the Turnpike, he did not believe that this alone would
alleviate the flooding. The petitioner’s surveyor and engineer opined that “a
box culvert or bridge [was] needed to rectify the situation. The work would
require the raising of the road along with the dredging of the brook.” The
Town’s consultant engineer concurred. The estimated cost of installing a box
culvert was between $250,000 and $300,000. The public works director
informed the board that the Turnpike was not on the ten-year improvement
schedule “as there are other roads that are more heavily traveled that [are] of a
higher priority.” Ultimately, the board voted to approve the subdivision with
the condition that the petitioner bear one-third of the cost of installing a box
culvert.
The petitioner appealed to the superior court, arguing that this condition
violated RSA 674:21, V (Supp. 2007). In his petition, the petitioner conceded
that RSA 674:21, V gave the board the “authority to assess off-site
improvement costs to developers,” but he asserted that the costs in this case
did not bear a rational nexus to his proposed subdivision. “In this case,” he
contended, “the proposed project has no relationship to the area of the road in
need of repair.” The trial court found to the contrary, and this appeal followed.
Superior court review of planning board decisions is limited. Summa
Humma Enters. v. Town of Tilton, 151 N.H. 75, 79 (2004). The superior court
must treat the factual findings of the planning board as prima facie lawful and
reasonable and cannot set aside its decision absent unreasonableness or an
identified error of law. Id.; see RSA 677:15 (Supp. 2007). The appealing party
bears the burden of persuading the trial court that, by the balance of
probabilities, the board’s decision was unreasonable. Summa Humma Enters.,
151 N.H. at 79; see RSA 677:15. The review by the superior court is not to
determine whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but to
determine whether there is evidence upon which they could have been
reasonably based. Summa Humma Enters., 151 N.H. at 79. Our review of the
superior court’s decision is equally deferential. Id. We will uphold the decision
on appeal unless it is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id.
The petitioner first argues that because the need to upgrade the
Turnpike was not “created” by his proposed development, the board could not
lawfully require him to pay one-third of the cost of improving the Turnpike.
Imposing this condition, he asserts, violated RSA 674:21, V(a), which provides,
in pertinent part: “Upgrading of existing facilities and infrastructures, the need
for which is not created by new development, shall not be paid for by impact
fees.” He contends that it also violated the Town’s ordinance, which contains
an identical provision.
The interpretation and application of statutes present questions of law,
which we review de novo. Babiarz v. Town of Grafton, 155 N.H. 757, 759
3
(2007). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Id. When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from
the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have
said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. These
same rules of construction apply to zoning ordinances. Fox v. Town of
Greenland, 151 N.H. 600, 605 (2004); see Feins v. Town of Wilmot, 154 N.H.
715, 719 (2007).
Impact fees “are charges assessed by a municipality to shift the cost for
capital improvements necessitated by a development to the developer and new
residents.” 15 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and
Zoning § 17.01, at 221 (3d ed. 2000). They are “functionally the same as the
developer exactions traditionally made as part of the subdivision or site review
process.” Id. RSA 674:21, V defines an impact fee as “a fee or assessment
imposed upon development, including subdivision [or] building construction
. . . , in order to help meet the needs occasioned by that development for the
construction or improvement of capital facilities owned or operated by the
municipality, including . . . public road systems.”
Impact fees “can only be required to the extent that [they] bear[ ] a
‘rational nexus’ to the needs created by the project being constructed by the
landowner.” Id. § 17.04, at 225. Thus, RSA 674:21, V(a) provides that the
amount of an impact fee must be “a proportional share of municipal capital
improvement costs which is reasonably related to the capital needs created by
the development, and to the benefits accruing to the development from the
capital improvements financed by the fee.” See id. § 17.05, at 227-28 (statute
incorporates rational nexus test developed at common law); Land/Vest Props.,
Inc. v. Town of Plainfield, 117 N.H. 817, 823 (1977) (under common law,
subdivider could be compelled to bear that portion of cost that bore a rational
nexus to the needs created by and special benefits conferred upon subdivision)
(decided before RSA 674:21 was enacted). Only a municipality that has passed
an impact fee ordinance may assess an impact fee. Simonsen v. Town of Derry,
145 N.H. 382, 386-87 (2000).
Even if a municipality does not have an impact fee ordinance, however, it
may require “developers to pay an exaction for the cost of off-site improvement
needs determined by the planning board to be necessary for the occupancy of
any portion of a development.” RSA 674:21, V(j). Like an impact fee, the
amount of any exaction must bear a rational nexus to the needs created by the
project. Loughlin, supra § 17.04, at 225. Thus, RSA 674:21, V(j) provides that
the amount of an exaction “shall be a proportional share of municipal
improvement costs not previously assessed against other developments, which
is necessitated by the development, and which is reasonably related to the
4
benefits accruing to the development from the improvements financed by the
exaction.”
The petitioner, focusing exclusively on a single sentence in RSA 674:21,
V, and its identical analog in the Town’s ordinance, argues that it was illegal
for the board to require him to pay a portion of the cost of improving the
Turnpike because the need for improving the Turnpike predated his
subdivision application. “We do not read words or phrases in isolation, but
rather in the context of the entire statute.” Appeal of Kaplan, 153 N.H. 296,
299 (2006) (quotation omitted); see Feins, 154 N.H. at 719 (we determine
meaning of zoning ordinance from its construction as a whole, not by
construing isolated words and phrases).
In context, the prohibition in RSA 674:21, V and the Town’s ordinance
against imposing impact fees to pay for upgrades to existing facilities and
infrastructures applies only when the need for such upgrades is not
“reasonably related” to the new development. As long as the need for the
upgrade is “reasonably related” to the new development, both the statute and
the Town’s ordinance allow the Town to assess an impact fee to help pay for it.
Where the improvements are required solely because of the development, it
may be permissible for a municipality to require the subdivider to bear the total
cost of improvements. See KBW, Inc. v. Bennington, 115 N.H. 392, 394, 395
(1975). Where, as here, the improvements are not required solely because of
the development, the Town may only require the subdivider to bear “a
proportional share” of their cost. RSA 674:21, V(a). Only when the need for
the improvements bears no reasonable relationship to the proposed
development is the municipality prohibited from requiring the subdivider to pay
for a portion of the cost of the improvements.
In the instant case, the record supports the board’s determination that
the need for the improvements to the Turnpike was reasonably related to the
petitioner’s proposed development. Based upon the evidence before it, the
board reasonably could have found that the addition of four more residences
on the Turnpike made it necessary to upgrade it now. The board could
reasonably have determined that “[e]xposing more households to the risk that
emergency vehicles would be unable to respond when their services were
required” magnified the Turnpike’s existing hazard, and made it imperative
that the Turnpike be improved now. Zukis v. Town of Fitzwilliam, 135 N.H.
384, 389 (1992). Although the Turnpike’s condition existed before the
petitioner submitted his subdivision application, “a planning board must
consider current as well as anticipated realities when ruling on a request for
subdivision approval.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). Accordingly, we
hold that the board had the authority, under both RSA 674:21, V and the
Town’s ordinance, to require the petitioner to pay a portion of the cost of
improving the Turnpike.
5
The petitioner next asserts that the board erred when it found that one-
third of the cost to improve the Turnpike represented his proportional share.
In assessing a developer’s proportional share of the cost of an improvement,
“[n]o single factor can be determinative.” Land/Vest Props., Inc., 117 N.H. at
824. Factors relevant to determining a developer’s proportional share of the
cost for road improvements may include, but are not limited to: (1) the
standard to which the town currently maintains the road; (2) the frontage of
the proposed subdivision; (3) the potential traffic increase necessitated by the
proposed subdivision; (4) the character and potential for development of the
neighborhood served by the road; and (5) the number of residences presently
fronting on or normally trafficking these roads. Id.
The petitioner contends that the board erred because it relied exclusively
upon the fact that his development would nearly double the number of homes
on the Turnpike to justify the fee assessed. The record does not support this
contention. In calculating the petitioner’s proportional share, the board also
considered evidence concerning the character of the neighborhood served by
the Turnpike and the Turnpike’s current condition. See id. Specifically, the
board observed that school-aged children lived in some of the residences on the
Turnpike, and noted that the Turnpike in Hopkinton was a scenic gravel road
that was closed because of flooding three times in the last year. Elsewhere, as
in Bow, the Turnpike is paved. The board also examined the additional
distance that emergency vehicles must travel to access Turnpike residences
when it is closed, and the response time of emergency vehicles to properties on
this portion of the Turnpike.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we hold that the trial court did
not err when it upheld the board’s decision to condition its approval of the
petitioner’s subdivision upon his paying one-third of the cost to improve the
Turnpike.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6