THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2007-202
GLENN L. TONNESEN
v.
TOWN OF GILMANTON
Argued: January 17, 2008
Opinion Issued: March 13, 2008
Donahue Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC, of Exeter (Robert M. Derosier and
Robert D. Ciandella on the brief, and Mr. Ciandella orally), for the petitioner.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Barton L. Mayer and Matthew R.
Serge on the brief, and Mr. Serge orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Glenn L. Tonnesen, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his petition for a declaratory judgment
that, pursuant to RSA 674:16, V (Supp. 2007), aircraft takeoffs and landings
are a valid and permitted use of his property. We affirm.
The record reflects the following facts. The petitioner owns
approximately 230 acres of land in the rural zoning district of the Town of
Gilmanton on which he intends to retire. His retirement plans include his
private recreational use of a helicopter from this property. The use of land for
aircraft takeoffs and landings is not permitted in three of the town’s six zoning
districts, and is permitted only by special exception in the rural district and
two other districts.
On July 17, 2006, the petitioner requested that the town’s zoning board
of adjustment (ZBA) grant him a special exception to use part of his property as
a landing area for his helicopter. The ZBA denied this request and his
subsequent motion for rehearing. The petitioner appealed and sought a
declaratory judgment. Following a hearing on the merits, the superior court
denied his petition for declaratory relief and affirmed the ZBA’s denial of a
special exception. On appeal to this court, the petitioner challenges only the
trial court’s ruling on his declaratory judgment petition.
The petitioner’s sole argument on appeal is that the town’s ordinance
violates RSA 674:16, V. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law,
which we review de novo. N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709,
713 (2007). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of
the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Id. We first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible,
construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We
interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include. In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426, 436
(2006).
We apply these same rules of construction to zoning ordinances. Fox v.
Town of Greenland, 151 N.H. 600, 605 (2004). Thus, we construe the words
and phrases of an ordinance according to the common meaning and approved
usage of the language, id., “unless it appears from their context that a different
meaning was intended,” Feins v. Town of Wilmot, 154 N.H. 715, 719 (2007)
(quotation omitted). Moreover, we determine the meaning of a zoning
ordinance from its construction as a whole, not by construing isolated words
and phrases. Id.
RSA 674:16, V provides:
In its exercise of the powers granted under this subdivision,
the local legislative body of a city, town, or county in which there
are located unincorporated towns or unorganized places may
regulate and control accessory uses on private land. Unless
specifically proscribed by local land use regulation, aircraft take
offs and landings on private land by the owner of such land or by a
person who resides on such land shall be considered a valid and
permitted accessory use.
2
“[T]he statute clearly states that aircraft takeoffs and landings on private land
are valid and permitted accessory uses unless specifically proscribed by local
ordinance.” Spengler v. Porter, 144 N.H. 163, 165 (1999).
Aircraft use on private land has, from time to time, been a contentious
issue, which RSA 674:16, V was intended to resolve. See, e.g., Treisman v.
Kamen, 126 N.H. 372 (1985). Treisman concerned the proposed use of a
heliport in Bedford. Treisman, 126 N.H. at 373. The Bedford ordinance was
silent as to the use of land for helicopter takeoffs and landings. Id. at 375-76.
Bedford officials ruled that the ordinance did not forbid the use of the
defendant’s land for a heliport and issued the necessary permits. Id. at 374.
The plaintiff, an abutting landowner, requested an injunction from the superior
court, which denied the request, ruling that because the Bedford ordinance did
not mention helicopters, using land for this purpose was permissible. Id.
In overruling the trial court, we determined that the Bedford ordinance
was a permissive zoning ordinance, which “prohibits uses for which it does not
provide permission.” Id. at 375. Thus, as a general proposition, the ordinance
prohibited heliports because it did not expressly list them as a permitted use.
Id. at 376. As we explained, a permissive zoning ordinance is “intended to
prevent uses except those expressly permitted or incidental to uses so
permitted.” Id. (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted). For the defendant’s
heliport to be a permissible use, we held, he had to have obtained a special
exception or a variance or the heliport had to be an accessory use. Id.
Because the defendant had neither a special exception nor a variance, we ruled
that the case turned on whether the heliport qualified as an accessory use. Id.
We explained that, on remand, the defendant had the burden of submitting
sufficient evidence to make a prima facie showing that his use qualified as an
accessory use. Id. at 377; see Town of Windham v. Alfond, 129 N.H. 24, 28-29
(1986) (an accessory use is “occasioned by and subordinate to the permitted
primary use and customarily or habitually associated with it” (citations
omitted)). In cases decided after Treisman, we have reiterated that permissive
zoning ordinances “prohibit uses of land unless they are expressly permitted as
primary uses or can be found to be accessory to a permitted use.” Town of
Windham, 129 N.H. at 27; see Hannigan v. City of Concord, 144 N.H. 68, 70
(1999).
Under RSA 674:16, V, however, even if a zoning ordinance is permissive,
it will not be deemed to prohibit the use of land for aircraft landings and
takeoffs merely because it fails to list this use as a permitted use. See
Spengler, 144 N.H. at 166. Rather, if a municipality wishes to prohibit use of
land for this purpose, RSA 674:16, V provides that it must “specifically
proscribe[ ]” the use of land for this purpose. In Spengler, 144 N.H. at 165, we
held that this means that in prohibiting this activity, the ordinance “must refer
to aircraft takeoffs and landings ‘with exactness and precision.’”
3
Further, RSA 674:16, V establishes that aircraft takeoffs and landings on
private land by the land’s owner or another residing on the land are accessory
uses as a matter of law. Thus, pursuant to RSA 674:16, V, landowners seeking
to use their property for aircraft landings and takeoffs need not plead and
prove that using property in this way is an accessory use (i.e., is occasioned by
and subordinate to the primary use of the property). See 15 P. Loughlin, New
Hampshire Practice, Land Use, Planning and Zoning § 9.03, at 140 (3d ed.
2000).
The petitioner contends that the town’s zoning ordinance violates RSA
674:16, V because it allows landowners in the rural zoning district to use their
land for aircraft takeoffs and landings only by special exception. The petitioner
asserts that RSA 674:16, V requires the town either to prohibit use of land for
this purpose outright or to permit it as a matter of right. As the petitioner
explains: “As an accessory use, [the petitioner] has a right [under the statute]
to engage in this activity without first seeking permission from the ZBA.”
The petitioner has set up a false dichotomy. By its plain language, RSA
674:16, V expressly allows a town to “regulate and control” accessory uses on
private land. By definition, therefore, a town need not completely prohibit use
of land for aircraft landings and takeoffs or permit this use as of right, but may
“regulate and control” use of land for this purpose. In other words, under the
statute’s plain terms, if a town has not expressly prohibited use of land for
aircraft takeoffs and landings, it need not accept every proposed use of land for
this purpose, but may accept only those proposals that comply with its
regulations. This is made clear by the last sentence of RSA 674:16, V, which
provides that aircraft takeoffs and landings shall be considered a “valid and
permitted accessory use.” Imposing conditions upon an accessory use does not
convert it into an invalid or prohibited accessory use. To so construe the
statute would negate the grant of authority to regulate accessory uses on
private land provided by the first sentence of RSA 674:16, V. Because we
construe statutes as a whole, see South Down Recreation Assoc. v. Moran, 141
N.H. 484, 487 (1996), we conclude that, like other valid and permitted
accessory uses, aircraft takeoffs and landings can be regulated by requiring
landowners to obtain a special exception.
Contrary to the petitioner’s assertions, RSA 674:16, V is silent regarding
the means by which a town may regulate use of land for this purpose. To the
extent that the petitioner contends that, as a general principle, a town may not
regulate or control an accessory use by way of a special exception, we disagree.
While the petitioner asserts that we decided this issue in Fox, 151 N.H. at 606,
he is mistaken. In that case, when we stated that “[a]n owner of property
seeking to engage in an accessory use need not apply for a special exception, so
long as the accessory use is incidental to a permitted principal use,” we were
4
describing the zoning scheme at issue. Fox, 151 N.H. at 606. We were not
broadly announcing a new rule that a town may not regulate accessory uses by
requiring property owners to obtain special exceptions. See 7 P. Rohan & E.
Kelly, Zoning and Land Use Controls ch. 40A, at 40A-1 to 40A-2 (2007) (“[s]ome
accessory uses are allowed only as uses by [special exception]”); 8 P. Rohan &
E. Kelly, Zoning and Land Use Controls ch. 44, at 44-1 (2007); see also Gratton
v. Pellegrino, 115 N.H. 619, 620 (1975) (under zoning ordinance at issue,
accessory uses may be permitted by special exception).
Finally, we believe our construction of RSA 674:16, V comports with the
fundamental right to use and enjoy one’s property protected by both the State
and Federal Constitutions. See Spengler, 144 N.H. at 166. The concept of
special exceptions was developed in early zoning ordinances “as a technique for
providing for types of land use which are necessary and desirable, but which
are potentially incompatible with uses usually allowed in a particular district.
These uses are not permissible as a matter of right because in some situations
they might pose serious problems.” 15 Loughlin, supra § 23.01, at 285-86.
For example, “[u]ses which might generate too much traffic for certain
neighborhoods, or too much noise, but which in other areas would be
acceptable,” are commonly regulated by requiring a special exception. Id.
§ 23.02, at 288-89.
To construe RSA 674:16, V as the petitioner requests would limit the
town to two choices – prohibit aircraft takeoffs and landings throughout a
zoning district or permit it throughout the district. Either choice could
unnecessarily limit the right of property owners to use and enjoy their
property. A flat prohibition could unnecessarily restrict the use and enjoyment
of land by landowners living in areas where aircraft takeoffs and landings are
acceptable; full permission could unnecessarily restrict the use and enjoyment
of land by neighboring landowners in areas where aircraft takeoffs and
landings are unacceptable. By contrast, our construction of the statute better
protects the rights of all landowners, as it avoids the dilemma presented by the
petitioner’s interpretation. Through the use of special exceptions, a town can
protect the rights of landowners both in areas where aircraft takeoffs and
landings are acceptable and in areas where they are not.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we hold that the town’s zoning
ordinance does not violate RSA 674:16, V by requiring landowners to obtain a
special exception before using their land for aircraft takeoffs and landings. We
confine our analysis to the issues raised by the petitioner on appeal, however,
and express no opinion as to whether the ordinance is lawful in other respects.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5