THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-300
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RICHARD LANGILL
Argued: February 13, 2008
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Ann M. Rice, associate attorney general,
on the brief and orally), for the State.
Samdperil & Welsh, PLLC, of Exeter (Richard E. Samdperil on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Pursuant to RSA 606:10 (2001), the State appeals the
decision of the Superior Court (Coffey, J.) to exclude expert testimony
concerning the identification of a fingerprint of the defendant, Richard Langill.
We reverse and remand.
I
The record supports the following relevant facts. On March 25, 2004,
the police responded to a report of a burglary at an apartment in Derry. The
complainant informed the police that someone had stolen $1,200 from a safe in
her bedroom bureau and approximately five dollars in coins from a bottle. On
April 1, 2004, the police lifted latent prints from the bureau, bottle, and the top
and right side of the safe. They forwarded the prints to the New Hampshire
Department of Safety State Police Forensic Laboratory (NHSPFL). In February
2005, Lisa Corson, a level one criminalist in the fingerprint unit of the lab,
identified the latent impression from the bureau as the defendant’s fingerprint.
In May 2005, the defendant was indicted for burglary. See RSA 635:1 (2007).
Before trial, the defendant moved to exclude Corson’s testimony
identifying the latent fingerprint as belonging to him. He argued: (1) Corson
was not qualified to testify as a fingerprint expert; (2) the fingerprint
methodology used by the NHSPFL, called ACE-V methodology, is generally
unreliable under RSA 516:29-a (2007), New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 702
(Rule 702), Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-Rand, 148 N.H. 609 (2002), and
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993); (3) even if
ACE-V methodology is generally reliable, Corson did not apply that
methodology reliably to his case; and (4) admission of the fingerprint evidence
would be unfairly prejudicial under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403.
The trial court held a two-day Daubert hearing on the admissibility of
Corson’s fingerprint testimony. Corson testified as an expert in fingerprint
evidence on behalf of the State, while the defendant offered the testimony of
James Starrs, an expert in the scientific status of fingerprint comparison, and
Steven Ostrowski, a level two criminalist with the NHSPFL. During the
hearing, Corson provided the following background information concerning
fingerprint identification and ACE-V methodology.
Fingerprints are comprised of patterns of friction ridge skin. Because the
friction ridge skin forms during gestation, it is permanent and unique to each
individual. A known impression or inked print is obtained from an individual
by the controlled application of black ink to the fingers’ friction ridge surfaces.
The prints are stored on a ten print card that also lists the name and date of
birth of the individual to whom the prints belong. A latent print is a chance
reproduction of friction ridge skin that is left behind when a fingertip touches
an object. The quality and clarity of latent prints varies, with latent prints
generally exhibiting greater distortions than inked prints.
Fingerprints are categorized into three levels of increasing friction ridge
detail. Level one detail, called ridge flow, consists of three basic patterns:
arch, loop, and whorl. Five percent of all fingerprints have an arch pattern,
sixty percent have a loop pattern, and thirty-five percent have a whorl pattern.
Level one detail also includes focal areas of a print, such as delta regions
(triangular shaped areas where fields of ridges have grown in together). An
examiner may also use level one detail to orient a latent print; that is, to
determine which end is up or down. An examiner cannot individualize a print
to a person using only level one detail, but can exclude a person at this level.
2
Level two details, commonly referred to as Galton points, focus upon
characteristics of ridge paths, such as places where ridges end, bifucate, or
create dots. They also include observations of the directions of these
characteristics and their locations in relation to other identifiable features of
the print. Because level two details are unique and permanent to each finger,
an examiner can individualize a print to a person at this level. Level three
detail observes tiny features or ridge attributes, such as pores on a ridge, and
the shape, edge, and width of the ridge itself.
The Scientific Working Group on Friction Ridge Analysis, Study and
Technology (SWGFAST) establishes guidelines for fingerprint analysis. The
NHSPFL has incorporated these guidelines into its standard operating
procedures. Pursuant to the SWGFAST guidelines, NHSPFL uses the ACE-V
methodology to examine fingerprints. See State v. Connor, 156 N.H. ___, ___,
937 A.2d 928, 929-30 (2007).
The first step in ACE-V methodology – analysis – requires the examiner
to scrutinize first the latent print, and then the known impression. The
examiner identifies, in order, the level one, level two, and, if possible, level
three details of the latent print to determine whether it is suitable for
comparison to a known print; that is, whether sufficient quality (clarity) and
quantity of detail is present to match the latent print to an individual. If the
latent print is not sufficient, the examiner does not analyze a known
impression. If the latent print is sufficient, the examiner obtains the inked
print and separately identifies its level one, level two, and level three details.
When these details are not consistent between both the latent and the known,
e.g., if the latent print has whorl patterns, and the known impression has no
whorl patterns, the examiner excludes the known print and stops the analysis.
If, however, the details are consistent between the prints, the examiner begins
step two of the method – comparison.
During the comparison phase, the examiner places the latent and known
prints next to each other, and observes the friction ridge detail to determine
whether, based upon similarity, sequence and spatial relationship, the details
agree between both prints. If the examiner identifies discrepancies between the
prints, the examiner determines whether such discrepancies are explainable,
e.g., whether a particular distortion in the latent print is consistent throughout
the print. When the discrepancies are not explainable, the known impression
is excluded and the process stops. Otherwise, the examiner continues to the
next step – evaluation.
During this stage, the examiner formulates a conclusion based upon the
analysis and comparison of the friction ridge details. The examiner may
determine that the latent print and the known impression are from the same
3
source (individualization or identification) or different sources (exclusion), or
that the results are inconclusive.
The final step is verification, where another qualified examiner
independently verifies the first examiner’s conclusion by conducting his or her
own analysis, comparison, and evaluation to arrive at his or her own
conclusion. Under the SWGFAST guidelines, verification is mandatory only
when an examiner makes a positive identification. Thus, when the second
examiner repeats the process, the verification is not blind because the second
examiner knows that another examiner already made a positive identification.
At the Daubert hearing, Corson testified that she applied the ACE-V
methodology to analyzing the latent print lifted from the complainant’s bureau.
She testified that she examined the latent print before looking at the known
print. She identified the latent print as having an arch pattern and determined
that it had sufficient quality and quantity of detail for individualization. Using
an enlarged picture, she further described specific level two and level three
characteristics of the latent and known prints, and demonstrated precisely how
she compared the two prints to reach her conclusion that the latent print came
from the defendant’s finger. Corson testified that, while she did not
memorialize these observations in contemporaneous bench notes, she
photographed the print to document the presence of details. Corson testified
that written notes are unnecessary because an independent qualified examiner
may observe the features from the photograph. Finally, Corson explained that
her conclusion was verified by Timothy Jackson, a criminalist with twenty
years experience and the person in charge of the fingerprint unit.
Starrs testified that, pursuant to NHSPFL’s Standard Operating
Procedures, which apply to every forensic science laboratory in the NHSPFL,
Corson was required to memorialize her observations in contemporaneous
bench notes. He opined that Corson’s failure to take such notes renders her
identification unreliable. Starrs further opined that blind verification in single
latent print cases would reduce human errors and misidentifications.
Ostrowski disputed this assertion, explaining that blind verification is
not a necessary component of the scientific process, and is instead a quality
assurance measure. He testified that, while blind verification may provide
greater quality assurance, no studies demonstrate that it diminishes or
eliminates erroneous identifications, and no oversight organization, such as
SWGFAST, currently requires blind verification. Ostrowski acknowledged,
however, that the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) may begin blindly
verifying single latent prints, and that SWGFAST had recently submitted a
draft proposal recommending blind verification for all single latent print cases.
4
Ostrowski further testified that “no part of the scientific process . . .
require[s] contemporaneous note taking of the mental process.” He explained
that scientists take notes while they are collecting their data on “things that are
constantly changing.” Because “[t]he data, in a fingerprint case, is the image of
the latent impression” and has already been collected, “[a]ny kind of note
taking would not further support the identification,” although it “would be a
means of seeing where that examiner went wrong if an erroneous identification
came to fruition later on.” Ostrowski explained that “[t]here . . . [is] no suitable
way to thoroughly document the mental process that one would go through to
come to the conclusion of individualization or not . . . to the point where
another examiner would use that to come to their [sic] own conclusion.” Thus,
while contemporaneous bench notes might assist an examiner during his or
her analysis or might save that examiner’s work for his or her future reference,
they would not allow another individual to observe the examiner’s reasoning
process. Ostrowski testified that, even if he had the initial examiner’s bench
notes, he would always redo the analysis, comparison, and evaluation of the
latent print because he would want to avoid any bias that would arise from
having previously read the notes.
Additionally, if the initial examiner who individualized a latent print was
no longer available to testify at a criminal trial, Ostrowki testified that he would
never testify to an identification based upon that examiner’s bench notes.
Instead, he would need to independently examine the images himself before
testifying to an individualization. Finally, Ostrowski testified that NHSPFL’s
protocols do not require an examiner to take contemporaneous bench notes
when verifying an individualization, and that such notes are not a component
of the ACE-V methodology.
In its ruling on the defendant’s motion to exclude, the trial court
reaffirmed that Corson was qualified to provide expert fingerprint testimony,
and concluded that ACE-V is generally a reliable methodology for analyzing
latent fingerprints. However, the trial court excluded Corson’s testimony
because “her application of the ACE-V (Analysis, Comparison, Evaluation, and
Verification) methodology to the single latent print in this case was unreliable
as a result of incomplete documentation and possibly biased verification.”
Specifically, the trial court reasoned: “[I]n light of the fact that Ms. Corson did
not document her analysis, and that [NHSPFL] does not employ a blind
verification procedure for single latent prints, there is insufficient basis for the
court to find that the ACE-V principles were reliably applied to the facts in this
case.”
The State moved for reconsideration, arguing that neither
contemporaneous notes nor blind verification are necessary for the ACE-V
methodology to have been reliably applied to this case. Specifically, the State
contended that Corson’s documentation is consistent with all relevant
5
standards and criteria; Corson did take contemporaneous notes by marking
the latent print with a shorthand “horseshoe shaped marking”; and this
documentation “is consistent with what the rest of the fingerprint community
is doing across the country.” Additionally, the State maintained that blind
verification is a quality assurance measure that is not part of the scientific
process of the ACE-V methodology, and that blind verification has not been
proven to eliminate or reduce misidentifications.
The trial court denied the State’s motion for reconsideration. Citing RSA
516:29-a, I(c), the trial court reaffirmed that in the absence of additional
evidence indicating that Corson reliably applied the ACE-V methodology to this
case, either in the form of contemporaneous bench notes or implementation of
a blind verification process for single latent print cases, Corson’s testimony was
inadmissible.
On appeal, the State argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion by “exceed[ing] its role of making a threshold determination of
admissibility, impos[ing] standards of reliability beyond those established by
th[e] scientific community, and undert[aking] the jury’s function of weighing
the credibility of the expert’s testimony.” Specifically, the State contends that
the trial court “misconstrued the focus of RSA 516:29-a, I(c)” by “requir[ing] a
detailed assessment of whether Ms. Corson properly followed the ACE-V
methodology in reaching her conclusion.” Alternatively, the State maintains
that, “even if RSA 516:29-a, I(c) required the trial court to evaluate Ms.
Corson’s implementation of the ACE-V methodology in this case, the court
erred in finding the application unreliable.”
Relying upon State v. Dahood, 148 N.H. 723, 735 (2002), the defendant
counters that “[u]nder [Rule] 702, it is not enough that the scientific principles
are reliable; the State must also put forth evidence that the test is properly
administered in each specific instance.” He argues that the State failed to
demonstrate that Corson applied the ACE-V methodology reliably in this case
because Corson’s “‘case notes’ did not detail her process or findings, and
because the verification process, indicated only by another examiner’s initials,
did not make reliable the initial examiner’s conclusions.”
II
We generally review a trial court’s determination of expert reliability
under Rule 702 for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Pelletier,
149 N.H. 243, 251 (2003). Rule 702 states:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence
or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as
6
an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education, may testify thereto in the form of an
opinion or otherwise.
Thus, expert testimony must rise to a threshold level of reliability to be
admissible. Baker Valley, 148 N.H. at 613.
In Baker Valley, we applied the Daubert framework for evaluating the
reliability of expert testimony to Rule 702. Id. at 614. Subsequently, in 2004,
after our decision in Dahood, 148 N.H. at 723, the legislature enacted RSA
516:29-a, which provides:
I. A witness shall not be allowed to offer expert
testimony unless the court finds:
(a) Such testimony is based upon sufficient
facts or data;
(b) Such testimony is the product of reliable
principles and methods; and
(c) The witness has applied the principles and
methods reliably to the facts of the case.
II. (a) In evaluating the basis for proffered expert
testimony, the court shall consider, if
appropriate to the circumstances, whether the
expert’s opinions were supported by theories or
techniques that:
(1) Have been or can be tested;
(2) Have been subjected to peer review
and publication;
(3) Have a known or potential rate of
error; and
(4) Are generally accepted in the
appropriate scientific literature.
(b) In making its findings, the court may
consider other factors specific to the proffered
testimony.
The trial court relied upon subsection (c) of RSA 516:29-a, I, in excluding
Corson’s testimony. The State contends that the trial court misconstrued the
scope of RSA 516:29-a, I(c). Specifically, the State asserts that section I of this
statute “codifies the Daubert Court’s description of the analysis under Rule
702, [requiring] a preliminary assessment of whether th[e] reasoning or
methodology is scientifically valid and of whether that reasoning or
methodology can be applied to the facts in issue.” See Daubert, 509 U.S. at
592-93. It submits that RSA 516:29-a, I(c) is properly interpreted as limiting
the trial court to “determin[ing] whether the science underlying the expert’s
7
testimony is reliable in the abstract, and whether those principles are
applicable to an issue in th[e] case, and are of assistance to the fact-finder.”
Thus, the State argues that the trial court “stepped beyond its gate-keeping
function” by construing RSA 516:29-a, I(c) “to require a detailed assessment of
whether Ms. Corson properly followed the ACE-V methodology in reaching her
conclusion.”
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Johanson), 156 N.H. 148, 151 (2007).
When examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. Further, we
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Bendetson v. Killarney, Inc., 154 N.H. 637, 641 (2006).
Section II of RSA 516:29-a unambiguously codifies the four Daubert
factors we applied in Baker Valley, 148 N.H. at 614, 616, and section I(b)
codifies Daubert’s requirement that the court preliminarily assess “whether the
reasoning or methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid,”
Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592-93. Contrary to the State’s assertion, however, it is
not clear that section I(c) also merely codifies principles outlined in Daubert.
Cf. Note, The Weight Versus Admissibility Dilemma: Daubert’s Applicability to a
Method or Procedure in a Particular Case, 1998 U. Ill. L. Rev. 231, 236 (1998)
(“in Daubert, the Supreme Court did not specifically address a judge’s gate-
keeping role concerning the application of a scientific technique or
methodology”). Therefore, we conduct a closer examination of section I(c).
As the State correctly notes, section I of RSA 516:29-a mirrors part of the
current version of Federal Rule of Evidence 702 (FRE 702). In response to
Daubert and its progeny, in 2000, Congress amended FRE 702 to its present
version. Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note (amend. 2000); see also
Kumho Tire Co., Ltd. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999); General Electric Co.
v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136 (1997). FRE 702 provides:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence
or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as
an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education, may testify thereto in the form of an
opinion or otherwise, if (1) the testimony is based upon
sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product
of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness
8
has applied the principles and methods reliably to the
facts of the case.
The third requirement for admissibility at issue here is based in large part
upon In re Paoli R.R. Yard PCB Litigation, 35 F.3d 717, 745 (3d Cir. 1994),
cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1190 (1995). See Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s
note (amend. 2000).
In that case, the Federal Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit explained:
[A]fter Daubert, we no longer think that the distinction
between a methodology and its application is viable.
To begin with, it is extremely elusive to attempt to
ascertain which of an expert’s steps constitute parts of
a “basic” methodology and which constitute changes
from that methodology. . . . Moreover, any
misapplication of a methodology that is significant
enough to render it unreliable is likely to also be
significant enough to skew the methodology.
As suggested, Daubert inters any need for us to make
such a distinction, for Daubert’s requirement that the
expert testify to scientific knowledge -- conclusions
supported by good grounds for each step in the
analysis -- means that any step that renders the
analysis unreliable under the Daubert factors renders
the expert’s testimony inadmissible. This is true
whether the step completely changes a reliable
methodology or merely misapplies that methodology.
In re Paoli, 35 F.3d at 745-46. The Third Circuit noted, however, that “if a
court finds that an expert has employed a methodology only slightly different
from a methodology that the court thinks is clearly reliable, the court should be
more likely to accept the altered methodology than if it was evaluating that
methodology as an original matter.” Id. at 745 n.14. It concluded:
Thus, . . . we think that the primary limitation on the
judge’s admissibility determinations is that the judge
should not exclude evidence simply because he or she
thinks that there is a flaw in the expert’s investigative
process which renders the expert’s conclusions
incorrect. The judge should only exclude the evidence
if the flaw is large enough that the expert lacks “good
grounds” for his or her conclusions.
9
Id. at 746 (emphasis added); see also Amorgianos v. Nat’l Railroad Passenger
Corp., 303 F.3d 256, 267 (2d Cir. 2002) (applying Third Circuit’s approach).
The Federal Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit has adopted a similar
approach: “[W]hen the application of a scientific methodology is challenged as
unreliable under Daubert and the methodology itself is otherwise sufficiently
reliable, outright exclusion of the evidence in question is warranted only if the
methodology was so altered by a deficient application as to skew the
methodology itself.” United States v. Gipson, 383 F.3d 689, 697 (8th Cir. 2004)
(quotations and brackets omitted). In adopting this approach, the Eighth
Circuit interpreted “the reliability inquiry set forth in Daubert . . . [as]
extend[ing] beyond simply the reliability of the principles and methodologies in
the abstract” because Daubert requires the trial court to “ensure that any and
all scientific testimony or evidence admitted is . . . reliable.” United States v.
Martinez, 3 F.3d 1191, 1197, 1198 (8th Cir. 1993), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 1062
(1994) (quotation omitted). Thus, the Eighth Circuit understood Daubert as
requiring a court to “conclude that the [scientific] testimony was derived from
the application of a reliable methodology or principle in the particular case”
before finding the testimony admissible. Id.
However, the court emphasized Daubert’s focus upon “the differing
functions of judge and jury”; specifically, Daubert’s notation that “vigorous
cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and careful instruction
on the burdens of proof are the traditional and appropriate means of attacking
shaky but admissible evidence.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
Accordingly, the Eighth Circuit concluded that a trial court “should make an
initial inquiry into the particular expert’s application of the scientific principle
or methodology in question,” by “requir[ing] the testifying expert to . . . attest[]
that he properly performed the protocols” at issue. Id. “If the opponent of the
evidence challenges the application of the protocols in a particular case, the
district court must determine whether the expert erred in applying the
protocols, and if so, whether such error so infected the procedure as to make
the results unreliable.” Id. (emphasis added). The Eighth Circuit emphasized:
[T]his inquiry is of necessity a flexible one. Not every
error in the application of a particular methodology
should warrant exclusion. An alleged error in the
application of a reliable methodology should provide
the basis for exclusion of the opinion only if that error
negates the basis for the reliability of the principle
itself.
Id.
We find the Eighth Circuit’s approach instructive to our interpretation of
RSA 516:29-a, I(c). RSA 516:29-a, I(c) requires a trial court to determine
10
whether “[t]he witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the
facts of the case.” (Emphases added.) Contrary to the State’s assertion, the
statute does not limit the trial court to preliminarily assessing only whether the
principles or methods “are applicable to an issue in th[e] case, and are of
assistance to the fact-finder.” Rather, RSA 516:29-a, I(c) extends further to
require the court to examine whether a witness has in actuality reliably applied
the methodology to the facts of the case before admitting the witness’s
testimony.
In the evidentiary context, however, the term “reliable” does not mandate
correctness; it signifies a much lower standard, to wit, trustworthiness. See J.
Weinstein & M. Berger, Weinstein’s Federal Evidence §§ 702.05[1][a], [2][a], at
702-72, 77 (J. McLaughlin, ed., 2d ed., 2008). The overall purpose of Rule 702
and RSA 516:29-a is simply to ensure that a fact-finder is presented with
reliable and relevant evidence, not flawless evidence. Dahood, 148 N.H. at 727;
see also In re Paoli, 35 F.3d at 746.
Indeed, it would be unreasonable to interpret section I(c) as requiring
that a single flaw or even multiple flaws in an expert’s application of a
particular methodology in all instances renders inadmissible the expert’s entire
testimony. Cf. Cayten v. N.H. Dept. of Envtl. Servs., 155 N.H. 647, 653 (2007)
(“[W]e will not interpret statutory language in a literal manner when such a
reading would lead to an absurd result.”). Errors in the application of a
methodology cannot in every circumstance contaminate the reliability of an
expert’s conclusions. Still, there may be rare instances where a single error or
multiple errors by the expert in applying the methodology might result in an
unreliable opinion or conclusion. Thus, RSA 516:29-a, I(c) must be interpreted
and applied with some flexibility to encompass the multitude of scenarios that
may be presented and to maintain the division in function between the fact-
finder and gatekeeper.
The Eighth Circuit’s approach sufficiently addresses these concerns by
requiring the flaws in application to “so infect[] the procedure as to make the
results unreliable.” Martinez, 3 F.3d at 1198. Accordingly, under RSA 516:29-
a, I(c), “when the application of a scientific methodology is challenged as
unreliable under Daubert and the methodology itself is otherwise sufficiently
reliable, outright exclusion of the evidence in question is warranted only if the
methodology was so altered by a deficient application as to skew the
methodology itself.” Gipson, 383 F.3d at 697 (quotations and brackets
omitted). Where errors do not rise to the level of “negat[ing] the basis for the
reliability of the principle itself,” Martinez, 3 F.3d at 1198, the adversary
process is available to highlight the errors and permit the fact-finder to assess
the weight and credibility of the expert’s conclusions. United States v. Morrow,
374 F. Supp. 2d 51, 68 (D.D.C. 2005) (“If actual or potential human errors do
not rise to th[e] level” of so altering the methodology as to make the test
11
inadmissible, “they simply go to the weight of the . . . evidence proffered.”
(citation omitted)); see also Gipson, 383 F.3d at 697. We emphasize that “as
long as an expert’s scientific testimony rests upon good grounds, . . . it should
be tested by the adversary process -- competing expert testimony and active
cross-examination -- rather than excluded from jurors’ scrutiny for fear that
they will not grasp its complexities or satisfactorily weigh its inadequacies.”
United States v. Vargas, 471 F.3d 255, 265 (1st Cir. 2006) (quotations and
brackets omitted).
III
The State argues that the trial court erred in finding Corson’s application
of the ACE-V methodology unreliable. The trial court based its finding of
unreliability upon two alleged errors: (1) Corson’s failure to take bench notes
memorializing how she adhered to the ACE-V methodology; and (2) NHSPFL’s
failure to employ blind verification. With respect to bench notes, the trial court
explained that it “require[d] something more than testimony that established
protocols were followed” because “the [S]tate has more opportunities to present
evidence . . . that [the] ACE-V [methodology] was reliably applied.” “[R]eview of
those notes w[ould] assist [it] in determining whether a particular identification
is based on reliable application of the ACE-V methodology.” The trial court
required blind verification “not as a means of assuring the credibility of the
result, but rather as a check and balance on the application of the
methodology.” It noted that Corson’s application of the ACE-V methodology
would be reliable if either of these alleged errors was corrected.
We first address Corson’s failure to take bench notes. In light of the
competing testimony, we assume for the purposes of this discussion that
NHSPFL protocols required Corson to take bench notes documenting her
application of the ACE-V methodology to the latent print at issue. We find,
however, that it was an unsustainable exercise of discretion for the trial court
to find Corson’s testimony inadmissible based upon this error. During the
Daubert hearing, Corson testified that she followed all other protocols in
applying the ACE-V methodology to the latent print. Using an enlarged image
of the latent print, she also detailed precisely how she applied the ACE-V
methodology to the latent print, testifying that she analyzed the latent print
first, observed its characteristics, then examined the known impression,
observed its characteristics, then compared the prints, evaluated them, and
submitted her conclusion for verification. Essentially, Corson repeated her
application of the ACE-V methodology on the stand. The defendant had the
opportunity to cross-examine Corson to uncover potential errors in her
application of ACE-V to this case; cf. United States v. Davis, 40 F.3d 1069,
1075 (10th Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 514 U.S. 1029 (1995), and 514 U.S. 1088
(1995); and a second expert could easily have reviewed Corson’s deposition or
12
Daubert hearing testimony and identified specific deficiencies in Corson’s
application of the ACE-V methodology. See Morrow, 374 F. Supp. 2d at 67-68.
In this context, while bench notes may have demonstrated that Corson
correctly applied the ACE-methodology or have served to refresh Corson’s
recollection on the stand, they were not necessary to determining whether she
applied the methodology reliably to the facts of the case. Cf. Vargas, 471 F.3d
at 265-66 (concluding that fingerprint examiner’s testimony was “more than
sufficient” to support a finding that the examiner reliably applied ACE-V
methodology to the case); Martinez, 3 F.3d at 1198 (requiring expert to “attest”
that he performed DNA protocols reliably). If anything, Corson’s failure to take
bench notes serves only to undermine her credibility and the weight of her
testimony. Cf. Vargas, 471 F.3d at 263, 265-66 (explaining that deficiencies in
examiner’s testimony better tested by the adversary process than by exclusion
from the jury’s scrutiny). It did not so infect the procedure as to negate the
basis for the reliability of the ACE-V methodology itself, as the State
demonstrated through Corson’s testimony that she had good grounds for her
opinion. Accordingly, the trial court exceeded its gatekeeping function by
finding Corson’s testimony unreliable because she failed to take bench notes.
We next address NHSPFL’s failure to employ blind verification. While the
FBI may have recently implemented blind verification for single latent prints
and SWGFAST may potentially recommend blind verification for such prints, as
Starrs testified, in the fingerprint community, the “blind verification process is
a new thing entirely.” Indeed, the trial court found that, “in general, ACE-V is
a reliable method for analyzing latent fingerprints.” “[F]ederal courts have
[also] found ACE-V to be reliable under Daubert, while noting that verification
in the ACE-V may not be blinded.” United States v. Mahone, 453 F.3d 68, 72
(1st Cir. 2006) (citations omitted). While we acknowledge that a small number
of misidentification cases using ACE-V methodology do exist, it is undisputed
that ACE-V methodology has been reliably applied in countless cases without
the use of blind verification. Further, as the testimony of Starrs and Ostrowski
demonstrates, the fingerprint community is currently debating whether blind
verification actually leads to more accurate results. To be sure, while blind
verification may ensure with a higher level of certainty that an identification is
correct, the record contains no indication that non-blind verification is
unreliable.
Given the uncertainties still existing in the fingerprint community
concerning whether blind verifications are required or even recommended, cf.
id. at 72-73, and the small number of misidentification cases, the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by requiring as a prerequisite to
admissibility that NHSPFL blindly verify Corson’s identification in this case.
The record contains no indication that NHSPFL’s failure to blindly verify
Corson’s conclusions negated the basis for the reliability of the ACE-V
13
methodology itself. At best, this failure affects the weight to be given Corson’s
testimony, not its admissibility. Id. at 72-73.
Accordingly, the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in
excluding Corson’s testimony.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
14