THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Laconia Family Division
No. 2007-733
IN THE MATTER OF JOANNE FONTAINE AND CALVIN F. DUNN, III
Submitted: August 1, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2008
Joanne Fontaine, pro se, filed no brief.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Carolyn S. Garvey and
Benjamin T. King on the brief), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, Calvin F. Dunn, III, appeals an order of the
Trial Court (Sadler, J.) finding that he was voluntarily underemployed and
establishing his child support obligation based upon his past earnings. See
RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) (2004). We vacate and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court and are not contested on
appeal. The parties were never married; they are the parents of twin daughters
born in 1994. In November 2001, the respondent sustained a self-inflicted
gunshot wound in the face, causing significant injury that required his lower
jaw to be reconstructed. He had several surgeries and testified at the hearing
that surgery and reconstruction procedures would continue for several more
years.
In 2005, the petitioner, Joanne Fontaine, filed a parenting and child
support petition. After a hearing, the trial court found that the respondent was
physically incapacitated, which limited his current ability to earn income. The
trial court determined that because his incapacity was caused by his own
voluntary act, he was voluntarily underemployed for purposes of child support.
On appeal, he argues that the trial court’s finding that he is voluntarily
underemployed is: (1) in conflict with the plain language of RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)
and our decision in In the Matter of Rossino & Rossino, 153 N.H. 367 (2006);
and (2) unsupported by the evidence.
RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) provides: “The court, in its discretion, may consider
as gross income the difference between the amount a parent is earning and the
amount a parent has earned in cases where the parent voluntarily becomes
unemployed or underemployed, unless the parent is physically or mentally
incapacitated.” Whether a party is underemployed is generally a question for
the fact finder, whose decision will be affirmed on appeal unless unsupported
by the record. In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426, 435 (2006).
We have previously held that the language of RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) requires
that a trial court first determine that a parent is not physically or mentally
incapacitated before it reaches the issue of whether the parent is voluntarily
underemployed. Rossino, 153 N.H. at 371. In this case, the trial court found
Rossino was distinguishable because “Rossino was electrocuted on the job; an
involuntary act as there is no evidence in the opinion to suggest that he tried to
electrocute himself and the respondent agreed that he was unable to work full
time.” We do not read Rossino so narrowly; moreover, RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) does
not permit such a distinction. See Appeal of Harleysville Ins. Co., 156 N.H.
532, 534 (2007) (when examining language of statute, we interpret legislative
intent from statute as written and do not consider what legislature might have
said or add words legislature did not include). Under RSA 458-C:2, IV(a), a
parent’s culpability is not relevant to a determination of whether the parent is
physically or mentally incapacitated. Rather, a determination of whether a
parent is voluntarily unemployed or underemployed requires two separate
analyses. “Only if it determined that the [parent is] not physically or mentally
incapacitated would the trial court proceed to determine whether, under the
terms of that statute, the [parent] voluntarily becomes ‘unemployed or
underemployed’ for the purposes of imputing income to him.” Rossino, 153
N.H. at 371 (quoting RSA 458-C:2, IV(a)).
Having made a finding of physical incapacitation, the trial court erred in
finding that the respondent was voluntarily underemployed. We therefore vacate
the trial court’s order and remand for such further proceedings as the trial court
may deem necessary.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
2