THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2007-037
MICHAEL J. GLICK, D.D.S.
v.
CHOCORUA FORESTLANDS LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
Argued: January 16, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 16, 2008
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III and
Benjamin T. King on the brief, and Mr. Douglas orally), for the petitioner.
Hinckley, Allen & Snyder, LLP, of Concord (Christopher H.M. Carter and
Daniel M. Deschenes on the brief, and Mr. Carter orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Michael J. Glick, D.D.S., appeals an order
of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) denying his petition for specific performance
of a right of first refusal he holds for land owned by the respondent, Chocorua
Forestlands Limited Partnership (Chocorua). Chocorua cross-appeals, arguing
that the trial court erred in finding that Glick possesses valid first refusal
rights. We reverse in part, affirm in part, and remand.
The trial court found the following facts: In March 1974, Glick
purchased a tract of land that straddles the Ossipee and Moultonborough town
line. That property is abutted by Masonian lots 122 and 129 in the town of
Ossipee, and Masonian lots 10 and 11 in the town of Moultonborough
(Masonian lots). These lots are part of a much larger tract owned by Chocorua.
From 1983 through 1986, Glick and Chocorua engaged in negotiations
regarding, among other things, Glick’s desire to obtain rights of first refusal
over the Masonian lots and Chocorua’s desire to obtain certain rights of way
across Glick’s property. These discussions culminated in an agreement, on
June 26, 1986, between Glick, his former wife, Victoria, and Chocorua (the
Agreement). Victoria’s interests in this matter were subsequently transferred to
Glick during their divorce.
In the Agreement, Chocorua agreed to: (1) convey to Glick its right, title
and interest in all rights of way allegedly burdening the Glick property within
five days of the date of the Agreement; (2) convey to Glick approximately
thirteen acres in Ossipee and Moultonborough that abutted the Glick property;
(3) split all costs incurred for survey work associated with the Agreement; and
(4) make “reasonable efforts to construct a stone and/or earthen barricade at
the easterly end of” a road located near the parties’ property. In addition,
Chocorua agreed to, at “closing,” “deliver to the Glicks rights-of-first refusal
over the” Masonian lots. Those first refusal rights were to contain, among
others, the following three terms:
(a) [Chocorua] or its successors and assigns shall, within fourteen (14)
days of executing a purchase and sale agreement with a bona fide
purchaser with respect to all or any portion of the encumbered Lots,
send to the Glicks by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of
the purchase and sale agreement.
(b) The Glicks shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of said notice
to exercise their rights-of-first refusal by tendering to [Chocorua] the
proposed purchase price by cashiers or certified check. In the event of
such a tender, closing shall be held at the same time as called for in the
purchase and sale agreement . . . . In the event such a tender is not
made within the time specified herein or in the event of a failure by [the]
Glicks to close as provided herein, the rights-of-first refusal shall
terminate as to that portion of the encumbered lots in question.
(c) In the event of termination of the rights-of-first refusal with
respect to all or a portion of the Lots as provided hereinabove, [Chocorua]
or its successor in interest where applicable may but shall not be
required to . . . record in the Carroll County Registry of Deeds an affidavit
setting forth a description of the Lots affected, and a statement that a
copy of the affidavit was mailed to the Glicks by certified mail return
receipt requested fifteen (15) days prior to the recording of the affidavit at
the Carroll Country [sic] Registry of Deeds and that no objection by the
2
Glicks was received by [Chocorua] or its successor in interest prior to
recording of the affidavit.
In the Agreement, Glick agreed to: (1) convey to Chocorua two rights of
way over his property; (2) convey to Chocorua a specified acre of land that
would facilitate Chocorua’s access to its property; and (3) pay Chocorua $6,100
for the thirteen acres. Although the Agreement provided that subsequent
conveyances would be made, it also dictated that “all obligations and rights
under this [A]greement shall survive the delivery of the deeds contemplated in
this Agreement.”
The deeds contemplated by the parties in the Agreement were recorded
on September 3, 1986, and Glick transferred $6,100 to Chocorua
approximately one month later. But the “closing” referenced in the right of first
refusal provision never occurred, and no further documents regarding those
rights were created. Instead, on October 16, 1986, the Agreement itself was
recorded in the Carroll County Registry of Deeds.
The testimony offered at trial regarding the recording of the Agreement
varied. According to Glick’s attorney at the time, Edward E. Lawson, he and
Chocorua’s attorney, David W. Rayment, agreed that the Agreement adequately
defined the rights of first refusal and, thus, that there was no need to prepare
the additional document originally contemplated by the parties. Lawson
testified that Rayment concurred that recording the Agreement itself would be
sufficient to place third parties on record notice of Glick’s first refusal rights.
In support of Lawson’s testimony, Glick submitted a letter he received several
months after the Agreement was recorded in which Lawson states that
Rayment had “agreed that recording the [A]greement was sufficient . . . [and
that t]he right of first refusal is on the record and in effect.”
Rayment, in contrast, could not recall having any conversation with
Lawson regarding the recording of the Agreement. Moreover, he asserted that
he never would have agreed to record the Agreement because it lacked
“essential terms” – such as a provision granting Chocorua access to its
remaining land in the event of the sale of the Masonian lots – and contained
provisions he did not want disclosed to the public. According to Rayment, the
parties had agreed that Lawson would draft the separate first refusal
document, but they had “simply forgotten” about the issue.
Following the recording of the Agreement, there were no further
communications between the parties regarding the rights of first refusal until
November 4, 1998. At that time, Glick received a letter from Chocorua’s then
counsel, Robert Lloyd, informing him that Chocorua had entered into a
purchase and sale agreement (P&S Agreement) with F. Colin Cabot and FCC
Acquisition Co. (Cabot) for “all of the land that is subject to an apparent right
3
to first refusal granted to [Glick] and the former Mrs. Glick by Chocorua.”
Lloyd stated that “[u]nder the terms of the right of first refusal [Glick] ha[d]
thirty (30) days from the receipt of th[e letter] to exercise [his] rights of first
refusal by tendering to [Chocorua] the proposed purchase price” of $375,000.
Attached to the letter was a copy of the P&S Agreement, which similarly
acknowledged Glick’s first refusal rights. The record indicates that the sale of
the Masonian lots was part of a much larger multi-million dollar sale of
essentially all of Chocorua’s assets to Cabot.
Following Glick’s receipt of notice of the P&S Agreement, the parties’
lawyers exchanged several communications regarding Glick’s belief that: (1)
the purported purchase price was excessive; (2) the thirty-day period originally
prescribed by the Agreement should be extended in recognition of the fact that
subdivision approval would be required for the sale of the lots; and (3) he
should be permitted to exercise his rights of first refusal over only a portion of
the Masonian lots. These communications continued until November 25,
1998, when Lloyd sent Glick and Lawson a fax, advising them that the
Agreement had been “cancelled and terminated” and that “any right of first
refusal [Glick] may have is” no longer exercisable.
That same day, Cabot’s counsel, Howard G. Seitz, sent a fax to Lloyd
confirming a conversation which they had that morning. In that fax, Seitz
acknowledged that Cabot had cancelled the P&S Agreement, but noted they
had “agreed to review the transaction pursuant to which [Cabot was] to acquire
the Chocorua lands subject to equitable adjustment for the so-called ‘Glick
Property’ with the thought, amongst others, that, if appropriate, [Cabot] might
acquire the partnership interests of Chocorua[’s] partners rather than the
property itself.”
At trial, Lawson testified that, immediately prior to receiving notification
that the P&S Agreement had been cancelled, he spoke with Lloyd and informed
him that Glick intended to exercise his first refusal rights. Glick also testified
that several days prior to receiving Lloyd’s fax, he spoke with Seitz and
informed him of the same. However, the trial court found that “no
documentation or communication was exchanged between respective counsel
or the parties that indicated that Glick was unconditionally accepting the terms
of the P&S Agreement prior to Glick’s notification of its cancellation.”
In February 1999, roughly two months after terminating the P&S
Agreement, the general and limited partners of Chocorua sold their partnership
interests, including their interest in the Masonian lots, to Cabot. In response,
Glick filed the present action, arguing that his first refusal rights entitle him “to
a decree of specific performance, compelling the defendant to sell him the . . .
[Masonian lots], at [their] fair market value.” Chocorua objected, claiming that
Glick did not have first refusal rights because the separate document
4
referenced in the Agreement was never executed. Moreover, Chocorua argued
that even if Glick had such rights, they would not have been triggered by the
transfer of the partnership interests in Chocorua to Cabot.
Both parties subsequently filed motions for summary judgment. In his
motion, Glick argued, among other things, that “once the Rights of First
Refusal were triggered [by his receipt of notice of the P&S Agreement, he] had
an option to purchase the land in question.” Because numerous material facts
remained unresolved – including the actual acreage of the Masonian lots, the
enforceability of the Agreement, whether the Agreement memorialized the
parties’ intentions, whether the parties had acted in good or bad faith, and
whether Glick had exercised his rights – the trial court denied Glick’s motion
on July 31, 2001, “with one narrow exception.” That narrow exception, as
explained by the court, was as follows:
if it is determined that Glick possessed a valid right of first refusal
(which, the Court is not finding in this Order), and if, in addition,
the terms of . . . [the] Agreement alone define that right, then Glick,
upon receipt of the . . . letter [from Chocorua], would have been the
holder of a thirty day option to purchase the property described in
the [P&S Agreement] for the price therein stated.
Following trial, the trial court issued its final order and held “[t]hat an
enforceable right[] of first refusal on the . . . Masonian lots was granted to Glick
by Chocorua and continues to encumber the said Masonian lots.” While the
court agreed with Chocorua that “it is entirely possible, perhaps probable, that
additional terms would [have] be[en] included in” the separate first refusal
document contemplated by the parties, the court held that the Agreement
nevertheless “encompassed the rights and obligations placed on each
respective party.” Accordingly, the court found that the Agreement
“represent[ed] a ‘meeting of the minds’ as to the subject first refusal right[s]”
and that the first refusal provision in the Agreement was “an enforceable
contract.”
The court, however, declined “to order a sale of the . . . Masonian lots for
any price” because the P&S Agreement “was cancelled and/or terminated prior
to Glick exercising his right[] of first refusal.” Moreover, because “the
subsequent transfer of Chocorua’s partnership interest in 1999 did not trigger
Glick’s right[] of first refusal,” the court held that Glick had no right to force the
sale of the Masonian lots. Finally, the court found that Glick failed to prove
that Chocorua had acted in bad faith by entering into the partnership sale with
Cabot.
On appeal, Glick makes three principal arguments for reversal: First, he
contends that, upon his receipt of notice of the P&S Agreement, his right of
5
first refusal ripened into an option that was irrevocable for the thirty-day
period stated in the Agreement. Second, he argues that the trial court erred in
refusing to find that Chocorua acted in bad faith. Third, he asserts that the
trial court’s July 31, 2001 summary judgment order, when considered in light
of the findings made in the final order, compels an order of specific
performance. Because we agree with Glick that, under the facts presented in
this case, the Agreement gave him a thirty-day irrevocable option to purchase
the Masonian lots, we need not reach all of his latter arguments.
I. Right of First Refusal
Glick’s first argument raises an issue we have not yet had occasion to
consider; that is, whether a right of first refusal, once triggered, is exercisable
for the entire period of time specified by the parties, even though the third-
party contract has been terminated. Glick contends that, as a matter of law, a
right of first refusal always ripens into an irrevocable option once the holder
has received notice of the burdened estate’s intent to sell. In so arguing, he
urges us to follow those authorities that have stated broadly that “[o]nce the
holder . . . receives notice of a third party’s offer, . . . the holder of the option
has a right to buy the property, a right that is a true option.” 17 C.J.S.
Contracts § 56, at 503 (1999); see, e.g., Riley v. Campeau Homes (Texas), Inc.,
808 S.W.2d 184, 188 (Tex. App. 1991) (stating that “a right of first refusal
ripens into an option when the owner elects to sell”); Chapman v. Mutual Life
Ins. of New York, 800 P.2d 1147, 1150 (Wyo. 1990) (“We agree with the view
that when the condition precedent of the owner’s intention to sell is met the
right of first refusal ‘ripens’ into an option and contract law pertaining to
options applies.”); Vorpe v. Key Island, Inc., 374 So. 2d 1035, 1036-37 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1979) (explaining that once the owner of property manifests the
intent to sell, the “right of first refusal [i]s converted into an irrevocable option
to purchase”).
Chocorua, in similarly absolute fashion, argues that a right of first
refusal only gives the holder a right to receive notice of a proposed third-party
sale and that, once such notice has been sent, “the offeree has ‘received the
bargained-for performance,’ and cannot insist that the offer remain open after
the third-party sale is abandoned.” In support of its position, Chocorua relies
primarily upon Lin Broadcasting Corp. v. Metromedia, Inc., 542 N.E.2d 629,
630 (N.Y. 1989), which held that “an offer, once made to the holder of a right of
first refusal, is [not] irrevocable for the period of time set forth in the first
refusal clause.” See also Shower v. Fisher, 737 P.2d 291, 293 (Wash. Ct. App.
1987) (indicating that a right of first refusal only gives the holder the power to
purchase for so long as the underlying third-party contract is in existence).
While we recognize that authority exists in support of both parties’
positions, we do not believe that adoption of a rigid rule that applies to all
6
contracts that contain the phrase “right of first refusal” is sound. Generally
speaking, “a right of first refusal is a conditional option which is dependent
upon the decision to sell the property by its owner.” 17 C.J.S. Contracts § 56,
at 503. It differs materially from an option contract, Polemi v. Wells, 759 P.2d
796, 798 (Colo. Ct. App. 1988), in that it is not an “offer[] and create[s] no
power of acceptance” in the holder. 3 E. Holmes, Corbin on Contracts § 11.3,
at 468 (rev. ed. 1996). Rather, a right of first refusal generally “empowers its
holder with a preferential right to purchase property on the same terms offered
by or to a bona fide purchaser.” 17 C.J.S. Contracts § 56, at 503.
However, the practical reality is that the labels – such as “right of first
refusal” – applied by contracting “parties do not always mirror the economic
reality of the instruments involved.” Walker, Rethinking Rights of First
Refusal, 5 Stan. J.L. Bus. & Fin. 1, n.14 (1999). As Corbin has observed:
Although the [r]ight that it creates may be described by divers[e]
terms (“First Right to Buy,” “Right of Pre-emption,” . . . and so on),
in no case are the legal relations [between the parties contracting
for a right of first refusal] determinable from the name alone. In all
cases, interpretation requires knowledge of the entire context,
context of facts as well as context of words.
3 E. Holmes, supra § 11.3, at 481; see also Smith Trust, 745 N.W.2d 754, 757-
58 (Mich. 2008) (holding that determination of “whether a right of first refusal
is revocable once the holder of the right receives notice of a third party’s offer”
requires interpretation of the contract language); Henderson v. Nitschke, 470
S.W.2d 410, 411 (Tex. App. Ct. 1971) (stating that “[t]he determination of the
rights of the parties [under a right of first refusal provision] requires an
interpretation of . . . the lease”).
Moreover, it has long been our practice to focus upon the intent of the
parties, as manifested in the language of the entire contract, in defining the
parties’ respective rights. Cf. Swamscot Machine Co. v. Partridge, 25 N.H. 369,
376-79 (1852) (holding that the express, unambiguous language of the parties’
agreement controls despite contrary evidence of industry custom or usage).
The parties have offered no principled reason for departing from this settled
approach simply because we are faced with language purporting to create
“rights of first refusal.” Cf. Turcotte v. Griffin, 120 N.H. 292, 294 (1980)
(upholding a trial court’s use of the rules of contract interpretation when
interpreting a lease which contained an option to purchase). We therefore
reject both parties’ implicit argument that their use of the phrase “right of first
refusal” ends the inquiry. Instead, we agree with those authorities that have
held that “the contract terms establishing a right of first refusal . . . control
whether the right . . . becomes an irrevocable option once triggered or, instead,
may be revoked by the owner if he in good faith changes his mind – and
7
withdraws his offer to sell – before the right is exercised.” Smith Trust, 745
N.W.2d at 759 (Corrigan, J. concurring); see also Henderson, 470 S.W.2d at
411.
Accordingly, we must look to all of the language of the Agreement in
resolving the present dispute. In so doing, we will give the language used by
the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the
context in which the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a
whole. Ryan James Realty v. Villages at Chester Condo. Assoc., 153 N.H. 194,
197 (2006). Absent ambiguity, however, we will determine the parties’ intent
from the plain meaning of the language used in the contract. Id. Ultimately,
the interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Barclay Square Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Grenier, 153 N.H. 514, 517 (2006).
As noted above, the Agreement unambiguously required Chocorua,
“within fourteen (14) days of executing a purchase and sale agreement with a
bona fide purchaser” for “any portion” of the Masonian lots, to “send to [Glick]
. . . a copy of” said agreement. The Agreement further provided that Glick,
upon receiving such notice, “shall have thirty (30) days . . . to exercise [his]
rights-of-first refusal by tendering to [Chocorua] the proposed purchase price
by cashiers or certified check.”
The Court of Civil Appeals of Texas addressed a similarly worded first
refusal provision in Henderson. There, the parties had entered into a lease
that granted the lessee the “prior right . . . to buy the leased premises”
according to the following terms:
If Lessor receives from a third party an acceptable bona fide offer to
buy such property, Lessor shall forthwith give Lessee written
notice thereof together with a copy of such offer. Lessee or its
nominee shall have sixty (60) days from the receipt of such notice
and offer to buy such property at the terms of such offer relating to
such property.
Henderson, 470 S.W.2d at 411 (quotations omitted; emphasis added). As in
the case before us, the lessor subsequently entered into a written contract to
sell the leased premises; sent written notice to the lessee; and, prior to the
expiration of the sixty-day period, informed the lessee that he could no longer
exercise his first refusal because the third-party offer had been revoked. Id.
When the lessee’s attempts to exercise his rights were rebuffed, the lessee filed
suit seeking specific performance. Id.
On appeal, the court rejected the lessor’s assertion that the lessee’s right
“to purchase [wa]s a mere right of refusal which cannot be called an option,”
and held that the “determination of the rights of the parties requires an
8
interpretation of” the contract. Id. In engaging in that undertaking, the court
found it significant that the first refusal provision granted lessee a definite
period of time in which to exercise its right. Id. at 412. The court then
determined that the language of the contract dictated that once the lessor “gave
lessee written notice of the proposed sale to the third party . . . the first right of
refusal matured into an option which was supported by consideration and was
irrevocable by the terms of the lease for 60 days.” Id.; see Mobil Oil Guam, Inc.
v. Tendido, 2004 Guam 7, ¶ 20 (interpreting language similar to that in the
present case as creating a “right of first refusal which ripens into an irrevocable
option to purchase”).
Here, as in Henderson, the condition precedent triggering the right of
first refusal was the occurrence of a single, isolated event; that is, Chocorua’s
execution of a purchase and sale agreement. Nothing in the contract indicates,
as Chocorua suggests, that Glick’s resultant right to purchase the property was
conditioned upon the continued existence of the P&S Agreement. If that had
been the parties’ intent, they could have crafted the condition precedent to
depend upon Chocorua’s desire to “sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of its
ownership interest to a third party.” Cf. Lin Broadcasting Corp., 542 N.E.2d at
630.
Instead, the Agreement explicitly states that, upon receiving notice, Glick
“shall have thirty (30) days . . . to exercise [his] rights-of-first refusal.”
(Emphasis added.) We agree with the Henderson court that the incorporation
of this time provision is significant. Henderson, 470 S.W.2d at 411; see Mobil
Oil Guam, Inc., 2004 Guam 7 at ¶ 29 (holding that the inclusion of a time
period evidences that the right of first refusal was intended to ripen into an
irrevocable option to purchase upon being triggered). In common parlance, the
word “shall” is “used to express a command,” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 2085 (unabridged ed. 2002); see McCarthy v. Wheeler,
152 N.H. 643, 645 (2005), or to signify something that is required or
mandatory, see Dancart Corp. v. St. Albans Rubber Co., 124 N.H. 598, 602
(1984) (explaining that, “[w]hen ‘shall’ is contained in a term requiring action
by a person identified, the word commonly . . . ha[s] a mandatory character”).
Given the mandatory nature of this time provision, as well as the lack of any
language conditioning Glick’s purchasing power upon the continued existence
of the P&S Agreement, we hold that the Agreement granted Glick an irrevocable
thirty-day option to purchase the Masonian lots.
Chocorua asserts that, even if Glick held a thirty-day option to purchase
the Masonian lots, he cannot obtain specific performance because he “never
tendered $375,000 to [Chocorua], as required under the first refusal provisions
of the” Agreement. In other words, Chocorua contends that, despite its
premature repudiation of his option, Glick was required to engage in the futile
act of offering payment in order to preserve his right to relief in this case. As
9
Justice Souter explained in Erin Food Services, Inc. v. Derry Motel, 131 N.H.
353, 362 (1988), such an argument “ignores . . . the rule excusing formal
tender to a party whose repudiation of a contract has previously indicated that
tender would be a useless act.” (Citation omitted.) Since the evidence
indicates that the option was repudiated by Chocorua, equity does not require
that Glick show a useless tender. Lowell v. First Church of Christ, 101 N.H.
363, 366 (1958) (holding that a parties’ allegation that they were ready, willing
and able to purchase the property subject to an option is sufficient for specific
performance); cf. Jesseman v. Aurelio, 106 N.H. 529, 534 (1965) (“any lack of a
written undertaking to purchase on the part of the plaintiff was supplied by the
bringing of his bill in equity, alleging that he is ready, willing and able to
purchase”).
Accordingly, because the Agreement granted Glick a thirty-day option to
purchase the property upon his receipt of notice of the P&S Agreement,
Chocorua breached the contract by rescinding the offer and Glick is entitled to
specific performance. See 81A C.J.S. Specific Performance § 45, at 215 (2004)
(“Contractual rights of first refusal to purchase realty may be enforced by a
decree of specific performance.”). The remainder of Chocorua’s arguments on
this issue are without merit and sufficient basis in the record, and, thus, do
not warrant further consideration. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322
(1993).
II. Glick’s Remaining Arguments
Glick raises several other arguments in support of his assertion that he
is entitled to an order of specific performance. For instance, he asserts that the
trial court erred in failing to find that Chocorua restructured its deal with
Cabot as a partnership sale for the sole purpose of preventing him from
exercising his first refusal. See, e.g., Quigley v. Capolongo, 383 N.Y.S.2d 935
(App. Div. 1976) (holding that a grantor of a first refusal breached the
obligation of good faith and fair dealing “by entering into a contract,
denominated a lease in the hope of circumventing plaintiffs’ rights”). In
addition, he asserts that the trial court’s July 31, 2001 summary judgment
order, when considered in light of the findings made in the final order, compels
an order of specific performance. Having already determined that the
Agreement gave Glick a thirty-day option to purchase the Masonian lots, and
that he is therefore entitled to specific performance, we need not address these
arguments.
However, Glick also contends that the trial court erred in failing to find
that Chocorua acted in bad faith in setting the purchase price for the Masonian
lots. In support of his argument, Glick points to a letter submitted at trial in
which Lloyd informed Seitz that the general manager of Chocorua “believe[d]
that he can place [a] high enough price on the right of first refusal property so
10
that Mr. Glick will not exercise acquisition.” Glick argues that, as
demonstrated by this letter, Chocorua inflated the price in the P&S Agreement
“in bad faith in an effort to discourage [him] from exercising his rights of first
refusal so as not to jeopardize the larger $10 [million] transaction that
[Chocorua] was attempting to consummate with” Cabot.
While the trial court granted Chocorua's requested finding that "Glick did
not prove his allegations that [Chocurua] acted in bad faith by purportedly
inflating the purchase price of the [l]ots, or overestimating the amount of land
contained within the lots," in its order the court expressly declined to make
findings as to both the size and value of the Masonian lots. Because these
facts are inextricably tied to Glick's bad faith argument, see Bank of Vermont v.
Kelley, No. CIV. 93-46-JD, 1994 WL 258860, at *6-7 (D.N.H. Feb. 4, 1994)
(refusing to grant summary judgment on issue of bad faith in case involving a
loan workout where disputed material facts remained regarding whether the
bank had accepted the fair market value for the property at issue); see also
Gleason v. Norwest Mortgage, Inc., 243 F.3d 130, 143 (3d Cir. 2001)
(explaining how "allocations of price by interested parties to elements of a
package [deal] may readily be manipulated to defeat contractual rights to
substantially similar price terms"); Gyurkey v. Babler, 651 P.2d 928, 934
(Idaho 1982), and we are ill-suited to make such factual findings in the first
instance, see, e.g., Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (explaining how
the trial court is in the best position to “resolv[e] conflicts in the testimony,
measur[e] the credibility of witnesses, and determin[e] the weight to be given
evidence”), we are unable to assess the trial court's rejection of Glick's bad faith
argument upon this record. For similar reasons, we are also unable to resolve
Glick's contention that the purchase price in the P&S Agreement was premised
upon an erroneous assessment of the size of the Masonian lots. See Pantry
Pride Enterprises, Inc. v. Stop & Shop Co., 806 F.2d 1227, 1231 (4th Cir. 1986)
(granting specific performance to the holder of a right of first refusal, but
remanding for findings as to the value of the encumbered property where
performance would result in a windfall). Therefore, upon remand, the trial
court shall determine whether the purchase price in the P&S Agreement was
inflated and, if it so finds, shall set a purchase price in accord with the fair
market value of the property in November 1998, when Glick should have been
permitted to exercise his right. If, however, the court finds that the price was
not inflated, Glick shall be held to his contractual obligation to proffer the
purchase price stated in the P&S Agreement.
III. Chocorua’s Cross-appeal
In its cross-appeal, Chocorua argues that the trial court erred in
concluding that the Agreement created an enforceable first refusal contract
between the parties. Specifically, Chocorua asserts that the trial court’s
finding that the Agreement “represent[ed] a ‘meeting of the minds’ as to the
11
subject first refusal right(s),” is “incompatible” with the court’s determination
“that the parties . . . intend[ed] to execute a separate document conveying the
first refusal right(s)” that could have contained additional terms. Chocorua
argues that, at most, the Agreement represented “an agreement to enter into a
contract,” which it contends is unenforceable in these circumstances. We
disagree.
A valid, enforceable contract requires offer, acceptance, and a meeting of
the minds on all essential terms. Durgin v. Pillsbury Lake Water Dist., 153
N.H. 818, 821 (2006). A meeting of the minds is present when the evidence,
viewed objectively, indicates that the parties have assented to the same terms.
Syncom Indus. v. Wood, 155 N.H. 73, 82 (2007). “The question of whether a
‘meeting of the minds’ occurred is a factual question to be determined by the
trier of fact,” Fleet Bank-NH v. Christy’s Table, 141 N.H. 285, 288 (1996), as is
the issue of whether a valid contract was created, Gulf Ins. Co. v. AMSCO, 153
N.H. 28, 43 (2005). Accordingly, on these issues, “we will sustain a trial court’s
findings and conclusions unless they are lacking in evidentiary support or
tainted by an error of law.” Syncom Indust., 155 N.H. at 82.
In this case, after considering all of the evidence – including Chocorua’s
assertion that it would have requested that additional terms be incorporated
into the contemplated right of first refusal contract – the trial court concluded
that the Agreement “encompassed the rights and obligations placed on each
respective party” and represented “a ‘meeting of the minds’ as to the subject first
refusal right(s).” There is ample evidence in the record to support this
conclusion. See 17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts § 57 (2004) (“Courts liberally find
right-of-first refusal clauses to be specific enough to be enforced, even if they are
missing some important terms.”). First, the Agreement contains a description of
the property affected by the rights of first refusal. Second, the Agreement
contains provisions describing the nature of the right of first refusal – that is, a
covenant against the Masonian lots – and the period of time in which the rights
would remain in effect – that is, a period of twenty years, extendable to eighty
years upon Glick’s election. Third, as noted above, the Agreement also contains
language describing, in detail, how the rights would be triggered and how they
would be exercised. And finally, despite the fact that the parties contemplated
the execution of a separate first refusal document, the Agreement explicitly
states that “all obligations and rights under this [A]greement shall survive the
delivery of the deeds contemplated in th[e] Agreement.”
Chocorua’s argument that the trial court erred in finding that the
Agreement created a first refusal contract appears to be premised upon an
erroneous reading of the trial court’s order. Despite Chocorua’s assertions to
the contrary, the trial court did not find that the Agreement failed to “contain
all terms that the parties regarded as material to rights of first refusal.”
(Emphasis added.) Rather, the court merely found that “the parties did indeed
12
intend to execute a separate document conveying the first refusal right(s)” and
that “possibl[y], perhaps probabl[y], . . . additional terms would” have been
included in that document. (Emphasis added.) Nothing in this language
suggests that the trial court believed that those additional terms were material.
See Lower Village Hydroelectric Assoc. v. City of Claremont, 147 N.H. 73, 75
(2001) (explaining that “[a] written memorandum is sufficient to establish a
contract if it demonstrates that the parties have manifested their intent to be
bound to the essential terms of a more detailed forthcoming agreement”
(emphasis added)). To the contrary, this language, when considered in light of
the court’s determination that the Agreement “encompassed the rights and
obligations placed on each respective party,” indicates that the court found the
purported additional terms proffered by Chocorua to be minor details. See id.
at 76 (explaining how a contract can exist regardless of whether the parties
“contemplated further negotiations of minor details”). Because we disagree
with Chocorua’s interpretation of the trial court’s order, we cannot find that the
court erred in holding that the Agreement created “an enforceable contract.”
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court on this issue.
Reversed in part; affirmed
in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
13