THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-662
CHRISTOPHER BENNETT & a.
v.
TOWN OF HAMPSTEAD
TOWN OF HAMPSTEAD
v.
CHRISTOPHER BENNETT & a.
Argued: May 7, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 11, 2008
Sumner F. Kalman, Attorney at Law, P.C., of Plaistow (Sumner F.
Kalman and Thea S. Valvanis on the brief, and Mr. Kalman orally), for the
petitioners.
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward & Loughman, P.L.L.C., of Salem (Diane M.
Gorrow on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. In these consolidated cases, the petitioners, Christopher
Bennett, Alycia Bennett, and Bennett Landscaping, Inc. (collectively Bennett),
appeal two rulings by the Trial Court (McHugh, J.) concerning attorney’s fees.
We hold that RSA 676:17, II (Supp. 2007) required the trial court to award
attorney’s fees to the respondent, Town of Hampstead (town), because the town
prevailed in its action for injunctive relief against the petitioners. We further
hold that, because the trial court did not find that Bennett’s due process rights
were violated, Bennett is not entitled to attorney’s fees for its declaratory
judgment action against the town. Accordingly, we affirm.
I
The trial court found the following relevant facts. Since March 1998,
Christopher and Alycia Bennett have owned and resided at property located in
a residential zone of the town that prohibits commercial uses. In June 1998,
the town’s zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) granted Bennett a special
exception “to permit a home occupation – use of premises in connection with
landscaping and property maintenance business.” When applying for the
special exception, Bennett informed “the ZBA that fertilizer and other materials
would be stored in the garage, that there would be one full-time employee plus
two college students working during the summer, that the proposed business
would not be injurious or obnoxious, and that the lot was screened from view.”
In 2005, an abutter complained to the town that there was “noise, smoke
and dust from heavy machinery, [and a] smell of manure and composting
materials,” coming from Bennett’s property. The abutter also complained that
the property had “unsightly stockpiles of loam, compost and other materials
. . . which w[ere] visible from the abutter’s property.” In response, the town’s
chief building official, Kristopher Emerson, viewed the property several times
and determined that there appeared to be a “loam/composting operation –
commercial activity on site.” He wrote a letter to that effect to Bennett, but the
letter was never picked up from the post office.
In January 2006, Emerson asked the town’s code enforcement officer,
Colleen King, to contact the abutter, who confirmed that the problems were
continuing. In February and March, King conducted home occupation
inspections of Bennett’s property, and confirmed the abutter’s complaints.
Specifically, she observed: (1) “that trees had been cleared in the rear of the
Bennett property, eliminating visual screening of the operations”; (2) “[l]arge
piles of mulch, loam and compost were stored outside, as well as pallets with
pavers and bricks, concrete partitions filled with different types of stone, and
other landscaping materials”; and (3) that there was “a large dump truck, a
large front-end loader, a large tractor, a bulldozer, a Bobcat, a skid steer, three
large trailers to transport tractors, two pickup trucks, and a backhoe all
parked outside” in the yard. She also learned that Bennett had two to three
2
full-time employees, three to four part-time employees, and six to eight part-
time summer employees. Based upon these observations, King determined
that Bennett had exceeded the terms of the special exception.
On March 27, 2006, King sent a certified letter to Bennett expressing her
conclusions. Because that letter was not picked up, King, with a police escort,
hand-delivered the same letter to Bennett on April 10, 2006. The letter stated,
in pertinent part:
On February 10, 2006, I conducted a periodic Home
Occupation Inspection for your property . . . as
required by the Hampstead Zoning Ordinance IV-6:9.
During that inspection, there was clear evidence that
Bennett Landscaping Inc. has expanded and has
grown beyond the originally approved conditions and
scope of your Home Occupation Permit. In addition,
there have been complaints regarding the noise,
equipment, offensive odors and change to the
residential character of the neighborhood.
You are hereby notified that your Home Occupation
Permit is being revoked and that you must cease and
desist all operations of Bennett Landscaping . . .
effective May 5, 2006. Permit holders whose permits
are revoked may make application to the [ZBA] for a
new permit on changed circumstances of the business.
The application deadline for the May [ZBA] meeting is
Thursday, April 13, 2006.
After Mr. Bennett met with King later that day, King wrote a letter to Bennett
dated April 12, which stated: “In the spirit of cooperation and balancing your
business needs with what is allowed by Hampstead Zoning, I agreed to amend
the date of the Cease and Desist on your Home Occupation permit from May 5,
2006 to July 10, 2006.” By letter dated April 21, Bennett advised King that it
needed time to review its options and would not agree to remove the business
from the property.
On May 1, 2006, the town’s attorney sent Bennett a letter informing it
that “to remedy the zoning violations, [Bennett needed to] within five business
days of [its] receipt of th[e] letter come up with an agreement with the Town to
remedy the violation.” The letter also advised Bennett:
[U]nder RSA 676:17, should the Town have to initiate
a court action against you to remedy the violation, you
will be subject to a civil penalty of up to $275 for the
3
first offense and $550 for subsequent offenses for each
day that you remain in violation after the date on
which you first received written notice from the Town.
That written notice . . . was given to you on April 10,
2006. Besides paying a civil penalty, you will also
have to pay for the Town’s attorney[’s] fees and costs
. . . . [I]f you do not remedy the situation by coming up
with a written agreement with the Town within five
business days, the Town will be forced to go to court
and will seek civil penalties and recovery of its
attorney[’s] fees and costs.
On May 3, Bennett filed a petition for declaratory judgment, requesting
that the trial court declare: (1) certain provisions of the town’s zoning
ordinance unconstitutional both facially and as applied because they violate
the procedural due process provisions of both the State and Federal
Constitutions; (2) that its use of the premises as a landscaping business is
protected as a preexisting use under the zoning ordinance; and (3) that the
cease and desist order by King was null and void. The town responded by filing
a petition for preliminary and permanent injunctions against Bennett.
Asserting that Bennett had violated several provisions of the town’s zoning
ordinance and had expanded the scope of its special exception, the town
requested that the court, among other things: (1) permanently restrain and
enjoin Bennett from operating a commercial business or conducting
commercial activities at its property; (2) order Bennett to remove all commercial
equipment vehicles, landscaping supplies, compost, loam and other materials
from the property; and (3) impose a penalty pursuant to RSA 676:17, I, for
each day that Bennett continued to operate a commercial business at the
property. The cases were subsequently consolidated.
The trial court granted the town’s request for a preliminary injunction,
and enjoined Bennett from operating a construction business on the property,
causing noise by the screening of loam, and engaging in the commercial
composting of any materials on the property. The court further directed
Bennett to remove any piles of commercial compost stored on the property, and
cease operation of noisy and heavy equipment at the back of the property
except during business hours. The trial court did not, however, prevent
Bennett from operating its landscaping business.
After a two-day trial, at which the trial court viewed Bennett’s property
and the abutting properties, and heard the testimony of nine witnesses, the
trial court ruled that Bennett’s use of the property was not protected as a
preexisting nonconforming use, and that Bennett was not using the property in
compliance with the special exception for a landscaping business. The court
also explicitly rejected Bennett’s assertions that: (1) the town’s zoning
4
ordinance was unconstitutional; (2) its due process rights were violated; (3) it
had no complete and adequate remedy at law; and (4) it was entitled to
attorney’s fees because it was either “forced to litigate against an opponent
whose position [wa]s patently unreasonable,” or “forced to seek judicial
assistance to secure a clearly defined right” and it established “bad faith on the
part of the Town.”
The trial court made detailed findings of fact and rulings of law. The
court also issued a written order that “in summary fashion set forth the
reasons for its ultimate decision.” In that order, the trial court noted:
[A]ny constitutional violations that Chris Bennett
alleged were committed by the Town of Hampstead fall
into the category of “no harm no foul.” While the Town
did order him to cease his landscaping business in
April of 2006, in fact he never had to do so because a
Court Order permitting him to conduct that business
issued in July of 2006. Mr. Bennett’s counsel at the
time of trial conceded that the only damages that he
had as a result of his constitutional claims was (sic)
attorney[’s] fees. In light of its findings the Court will
not order the Town of Hampstead to be responsible for
Chris Bennett’s attorney[’s] fees in this case. . . .
[The letter from King to Bennett] states that he would
lose [the home occupation] permit by a date certain.
If in fact Mr. Bennett did nothing and the Town
actually revoked the permit on May 5, 2006 there may
well have been a due process violation. The fact that
the Town later agreed to extend the date for
surrendering said permit until July in no way changed
its initial directive to cease and desist the operation of
the landscaping business. Because Mr. Bennett
elected to bring a lawsuit, any due process violation
was corrected through the legal process and thus no
damages flow from it to him.
(Emphases added.) The trial court also “elect[ed] not to award either party
attorney[’s] fees because it d[id] not find either party had the requisite malice to
warrant the payment of th[o]se fees.”
Thereafter, the town timely moved for reconsideration, arguing that the
trial court applied the wrong legal standard in ruling upon the town’s request
for attorney’s fees. The town argued that the statute upon which it sought
5
attorney’s fees, RSA 676:17, II, did not require a finding of malice in order for it
to recover its fees, but rather that the town simply have been the prevailing
party. Because the trial court’s “[o]rder establishe[d] that the Town was the
prevailing party in its enforcement action,” the town requested reconsideration
of the denial of its attorney’s fees.
Bennett countered that the trial court had never established that the
town was the prevailing party. The trial court, however, granted the town’s
request for reconsideration. It stated: “Given that the majority of this case
involves whether or not Mr. Bennett was making an improper use of his
property, and the [court] found that he was, then the Town is the prevailing
party on this issue. Accordingly, the [court] will entertain a claim for
[attorney’s] [f]ees . . . .”
Subsequently, Bennett filed a motion requesting that the court entertain
its claim for attorney’s fees. Bennett argued that it was entitled to attorney’s
fees because its procedural due process rights had been violated, and,
consequently, it was forced to seek judicial assistance to secure those clearly
defined and established rights. See Blouin v. Sanborn, 155 N.H. 704, 708
(2007). Bennett also asserted that, because “[t]he town . . . insist[ed] it [wa]s
entitled to mandatory attorney[’s] fees by statute,” equity required the court “to
revisit the subject of attorney[’s] fees, as claimed by both parties.”
The town countered that Bennett’s motion was untimely because it was
filed after the ten-day reconsideration period. See Super. Ct. R. 59-A. The
town also argued that Bennett’s motion had no factual or legal support
because Bennett was not a prevailing party, the court never found that the
town acted with bad faith, and the court never found that Bennett “secured a
clearly defined and established right.” Thus, the town argued, Bennett had not
been awarded “affirmative relief or success on the merits” and was not entitled
to attorney’s fees. The trial court denied Bennett’s motion.
On appeal, Bennett argues that the trial court erred by: (1) awarding the
town attorney’s fees under RSA 676:17, II; and (2) failing to reconsider its
request for attorney’s fees. We address each argument in turn, but first set
forth our standard of review.
“A prevailing party may be awarded attorney’s fees when that recovery is
authorized by statute, an agreement between the parties, or an established
judicial exception to the general rule that precludes recovery of such fees.”
Blouin, 155 N.H. at 708. We will not overturn a trial court’s award of
attorney’s fees unless it is an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. In
applying this standard, we keep in mind the substantial deference given to the
trial court’s decision on attorney’s fees, and uphold the decision if the record
6
provides some support for it. Demers Agency v. Widney, 155 N.H. 658, 665
(2007); see also Town of Swanzey v. Liebeler, 140 N.H. 760, 765 (1996).
II
The trial court found authorization for its award of attorney’s fees to the
town in RSA 676:17, II. Thus, we must interpret that statute. We are the final
arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. In the Matter of Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. 498, 503-
04 (2007). When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. at 504. We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id. Unless the statutory language is ambiguous, we will not examine
legislative history to aid our analysis. Green Crow Corp. v. Town of New
Ipswich, 157 N.H. ___, ___ (decided May 30, 2008). The interpretation and
application of a statute present questions of law, which we review de novo.
ElderTrust of Fla. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H. 693, 696 (2007).
RSA 676:17, II provides, in pertinent part:
In any legal action brought by a municipality to
enforce, by way of injunctive relief as provided by RSA
676:15 or otherwise, any local ordinance, code or
regulation adopted under this title, or to enforce any
planning board, zoning board of adjustment or
building code board of appeals decision made
pursuant to this title, . . . the municipality shall
recover its costs and reasonable attorney’s fees
actually expended in pursuing the legal action if it is
found to be a prevailing party in the action.
(Emphasis added.) RSA 676:15 (1996) permits local officials who have
authority to enforce the provisions of any local ordinance, code or regulation to
“institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove [an] unlawful erection,
construction, alteration, or reconstruction” of “any building or structure or part
thereof.”
We determine the legislature’s intent as to the mandatory or directory
nature of a particular statutory provision primarily from the language used in
the provision. City of Rochester v. Corpening, 153 N.H. 571, 574 (2006). The
general rule of statutory construction is that the word “may” makes
enforcement of a statute permissive, and that the word “shall” requires
7
mandatory enforcement. Id. Thus, in Liebeler, 140 N.H. at 764, we held that,
under the prior version of RSA 676:17, II (1996), in which the legislature had
used the words “may recover,” the trial court had discretion to deny the town’s
request for fees. By amending RSA 676:17, II to use the words “shall recover,”
the legislature removed such discretion from the trial court. RSA 676:17, II
now mandates that in any legal action brought by a municipality to enforce an
ordinance, code, regulation, or zoning board decision in which the municipality
“is found to be a prevailing party in the action,” the municipality is entitled to
recover reasonable attorney’s fees actually expended in pursuing that action.
Here, the trial court found that “the Town [wa]s the prevailing party on
th[e] issue” presented in “the majority of th[e] case”; that is, “whether or not
Mr. Bennett was making an improper use of his property.” Accordingly, the
court awarded the town attorney’s fees for its enforcement action. The record
supports the trial court’s finding that the town was the prevailing party in its
enforcement action.
In its action for injunctive relief, the town asserted that Bennett violated
several provisions of the town’s zoning ordinance, and exceeded the scope of its
special exception for a landscaping business. The trial court found in favor of
the town on both questions, and, consequently, ordered Bennett to limit its
activity to the landscaping business, and to “comply with all of the Town of
Hampstead’s Home Occupation Regulations contained in the Town’s Zoning
Ordinance.” Thus, because the town prevailed in its enforcement action
against Bennett, the trial court was required to award the town reasonable
attorney’s fees for this action.
Bennett argues that awarding the town attorney’s fees in this case
conflicts with its procedural due process rights. Specifically, Bennett asserts
that the town failed to provide it adequate written notice that attorney’s fees
could be assessed prior to filing its enforcement action, and, thus, the town
cannot recover attorney’s fees when it failed to provide such