THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-179
GRAND CHINA, INC. & a.
v.
UNITED NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: September 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: November 9, 2007
Steven G. Shadallah and Stephen E. Woodbury, of Salem (Mr. Shadallah
and Mr. Woodbury on the brief, and Mr. Shadallah orally), for Grand China,
Inc.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C, of Concord (Margaret H. Nelson and Martin L.
Gross on the brief, and Margaret H. Nelson orally), for the respondent.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Russell F. Hilliard on the brief and
orally), for the intervenor.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the New Hampshire Insurance Department, as
amicus curiae.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Concord (Paula T. Rogers and Holly J.
Kilibarda on the brief), for The Property Casualty Insurers Association of
America, as amicus curiae.
William K.S. Lim, Yuen Sim N.G. Lim and Dharma Lim filed no brief.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, United National Insurance Company
(UNIC), appeals from the order of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) granting
partial summary judgment to the petitioner Grand China, Inc. (Grand China).
We affirm.
The trial court found as follows: Grand China is a restaurant in Salem,
owned and operated by petitioners William K.S. Lim, Yuen Sim N.G. Lim and
Dharma Lim. For more than twenty-five years, the Lims have purchased
liability insurance through the intervenor, Michals Insurance Agency, Inc.
(Michals). UNIC, a surplus lines insurer, provided Grand China’s liquor
liability policy. The relevant policy period was July 1, 2003, through June 30,
2004, and the policy required UNIC to give Grand China ten days written notice
of cancellation.
On November 12, 2003, UNIC sent a notice of cancellation to Grand
China, stating its intent to cancel the policy effective December 1, 2003, for
“non-payment and underwriting reasons.” Thereafter, UNIC issued a
cancellation endorsement, purporting to cancel the policy, and returned the
unused premium.
On December 13, 2003, a patron of Grand China allegedly caused an
accident in which one person was killed and another injured. Both the injured
party and the estate of the deceased party sued Grand China, alleging a breach
of a duty of care by serving alcohol to the patron.
Grand China provided timely notice of the suit to UNIC; however, UNIC
denied coverage, claiming that it had cancelled the policy before the December
13 accident. Grand China then filed a declaratory judgment petition seeking a
determination that UNIC is obligated to defend and indemnify it. Grand China
moved for partial summary judgment, arguing that UNIC’s cancellation of the
policy was ineffective because it was not sent sixty days before the purported
cancellation date, as required by RSA 417-C:2 (2006). The trial court ruled in
Grand China’s favor, and this appeal followed.
In reviewing the superior court’s summary judgment rulings, we consider
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and, if no
2
genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine whether the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. N.H. Ins. Guaranty Assoc. v. Elliot
Hosp., 154 N.H. 571, 574 (2006). We review a trial court’s application of law to
facts de novo. Gordonville Corp. v. LR1-A Ltd. P’ship, 151 N.H. 371, 373
(2004).
In matters of statutory interpretation we are the final arbiter of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Id. When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T
Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 33 (2007). We do not consider words and phrases
in isolation, but rather within the context of the statute as a whole.
Gordonville Corp., 151 N.H. at 373. This enables us to better discern the
legislature's intent and to interpret statutory language in light of the policy or
purpose sought to be advanced by the statutory scheme. Id. When
interpreting two statutes that deal with a similar subject matter, we construe
them so that they do not contradict each other, and so that they will lead to
reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the statutes.
Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 405 (2005).
RSA chapter 417-C (2006) governs the cancellation of commercial
insurance. The chapter specifically exempts “workers’ compensation policies or
any policies provided and controlled by RSA 417-A or RSA 417-B.” RSA 417-
C:6. Neither party claims that surplus lines insurance is governed by either
RSA chapter 417-A (2006) or RSA chapter 417-B (2006), nor is the policy in
question a worker’s compensation policy.
RSA 417-C:2, I, provides in pertinent part: “No notice of cancellation of a
. . . liability policy . . . shall be effective unless mailed . . . at least 60 days prior
to the effective date of cancellation . . . . ” The plain meaning of this statute is
that, unless otherwise exempted, all liability insurers must comply with the
sixty-day notice provision. UNIC’s policy with Grand China covered liquor
liability and, thus, was a liability policy within the meaning of the statute.
Having failed to give sixty days notice of the policy cancellation, UNIC must
defend and indemnify Grand China against claims arising out of the December
13, 2003 incident.
UNIC argues that it is exempt from RSA 417-C:2 because, as a surplus
lines insurer, it has a special status under insurance laws. “Surplus lines
insurance is often a source of last resort,” 1 E. Holmes & M. Rhodes, Holmes’
Appleman on Insurance 2d § 2.17, at 325 (1996), covering liability for unusual
risks that are outside of traditional markets and typically unavailable through
state-authorized carriers. “Accordingly, the insured will generally be charged a
substantial premium commensurate with the unusual or riskier nature of the
risks assumed.” Id.
3
UNIC argues that surplus lines insurance is subject to a different
statutory framework from that which applies to other kinds of insurers. UNIC
asserts that surplus lines insurers are governed exclusively by RSA chapter
405 (2006), and exempted from any other regulation by RSA chapter 406-B
(2006).
Generally, an insurance company must be incorporated in New
Hampshire and licensed through the insurance commissioner to transact
business with New Hampshire consumers. See RSA 402:10-:12 (2006); RSA
405:1. However, several types of foreign, unlicensed insurers, including
surplus lines insurers, may become authorized to offer policies through
licensed and properly appointed producers. See RSA 405:1-:12, :17-b, :24;
RSA 406-B:16. These producers may only offer policies from foreign insurers
upon satisfying the insurance commissioner that the needed coverage is
unavailable through an admitted insurer. See RSA 405:17-b, :24.
UNIC argues that the provisions of RSA chapter 405 constitute the only
regulatory provisions governing surplus lines insurers. It mistakenly points to
RSA 405:24 to demonstrate the legislature’s intention to leave surplus lines
insurance largely unregulated. RSA 405:24 explains how producers may
obtain licenses and requires them to place the following disclaimer in a
stamped form given to insured parties before issuing a policy:
The company issuing this policy has not been licensed by the state
of New Hampshire and the rates charged have not been approved
by the commissioner of insurance. If the company issuing this
policy becomes insolvent, the New Hampshire guaranty fund shall
not be liable for any claims made against the policy.
RSA 405:24 (quotation omitted). This warning to potential insureds refers only
to the rate-filing process and the New Hampshire guaranty fund. It does not
state that unlicensed insurers, such as surplus lines insurers, are wholly
unregulated or that they are subject to a separate statutory scheme.
Similarly, RSA chapter 406-B lends no support to UNIC’s assertion that
the legislature intended to exempt surplus lines insurers generally from
insurance regulations. The purpose of RSA chapter 406-B is, rather, to protect
the “many residents of this state hold[ing] policies of insurance issued by
persons and insurers not authorized to do business in this state” by subjecting
unauthorized insurers to New Hampshire laws. RSA 406-B:1. To that end, the
chapter includes various provisions protecting New Hampshire residents.
Surplus lines insurers, even though they are not licensed to do business within
the state, are exempted from the provisions of the chapter under RSA 406-
B:16, as long as the policies are “lawful[ly] transact[ed].” RSA 406-B:16; see
RSA 406-B:8, :11.
4
UNIC also argues that the trial court disregarded the statutory scheme
governing surplus lines insurers by viewing the reference in RSA 417-C:2 to
“liability polic[ies]” in isolation. We disagree. No statutory provision
concerning insurance contradicts our interpretation of RSA 417-C:2; nor, as
discussed above, do we find that surplus lines insurers are governed by a
separate framework.
UNIC further argues that there is no basis for concluding that surplus
lines policies are subject to RSA 417-C:2 because the legislature never
expressly included them. It relies upon Bianco Professional Association v.
Home Insurance Co., 144 N.H. 288, 297 (1999), to support its assertion that
there is no express statutory directive to include surplus lines policies under
RSA 417-C:2. To the contrary, RSA 417-C:2, I, expressly states that it applies
to liability policies, and the policy at issue is a liability policy. We will not
consider what the legislature might have said or add words to a statute that
the legislature did not see fit to include. Gordonville Corp., 151 N.H. at 373-
74. If the legislature had intended to exclude surplus lines insurance from
RSA 417-C:2, it could have done so. See RSA 417-C:6.
UNIC also argues that interpreting RSA 417-C:2 to govern surplus lines
policies is inconsistent with public policy and will produce an absurd result. It
asserts that applying RSA 417-C:2 to surplus lines policies will upset an
existing balance in the marketplace, in which surplus lines insurers are free to
set the terms for such coverage and policyholders are willing to accept these
terms for this otherwise unavailable coverage. Thus, UNIC argues, our holding
will have a chilling effect upon the surplus lines market, because few surplus
lines insurers will offer these high risk policies if they must comply with RSA
417-C:2.
We discern no absurd result in concluding that surplus lines insurers
must comply with the cancellation provision of RSA 417-C:2. The very scarcity
of high risk policies places New Hampshire residents in a position of little
bargaining power. If surplus lines insurers are unregulated in this area, they
would be at liberty to cancel policies without providing any