THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2007-731
ESTATE OF MARCUS R. SICOTTE
v.
LUBIN & MEYER, P.C.
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: September 12, 2008
Alfred T. Catalfo, III, of Dover, by brief, and Mullaney & Richardson, P.A.,
of Rochester (Stanley J. Mullaney orally), for the plaintiff.
Tober Law Offices, of Portsmouth (Stephen L. Tober and Kelleigh L.
Domaingue on the brief, and Ms. Domaingue orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Estate of Marcus R. Sicotte (the Estate), appeals
an order of the Superior Court (Houran, J.) dismissing its legal malpractice
case against the defendant law firm, Lubin & Meyer, P.C. (L&M). We affirm.
The following facts were recited by the trial court or are supported by the
record. On November 12, 1998, Marcus J. Sicotte and Aletia Chase engaged
L&M to represent their minor son, Marcus R. Sicotte, in a medical malpractice
action arising from Marcus’ birth injuries. Marcus’ parents signed a fee
agreement providing that L&M would be paid a contingent fee of forty percent
of the gross amount collected. Appearing next to the forty percent figure in the
fee agreement was the handwritten notation: “in any event subject to court
approval if necessary.” Also appearing were provisions for forty-five and fifty
percent contingent fee options that had been crossed out.
The medical malpractice case settled in the amount of $2,250,000. At
the hearing on the petition to approve the settlement, see Super. Ct. R. 111,
L&M sought allowance of a contingent fee of one-third. See RSA 508:4-e
(Supp. 2007); Super. Ct. R. 111(E)(2). The Court (Nadeau, J.) approved both
the minor settlement and the contingent fee, and, accordingly, L&M was paid
$750,000. Time estimates submitted to the court showed 302 hours spent on
the case.
Nearly two years later, the guardian of Marcus’ estate moved for the
return of attorney’s fees, alleging that L&M failed to: (1) inform Marcus’
parents that the court ordinarily will not allow an attorney’s fee in excess of
twenty-five percent of a minor settlement except “upon good cause shown,”
Super. Ct. R. 111(E)(2); and (2) give Marcus’ parents the option of paying an
hourly rate for L&M’s services, contrary to RSA 508:4-e, II, which provides:
No attorney shall enter into such a contingent fee arrangement
with his or her client without first advising the client of his or her
right and affording the client an opportunity to retain the attorney
under an arrangement whereby the attorney would be
compensated on the basis of the reasonable value of his or her
services.
The Trial Court (Fauver, J.) dismissed the motion without prejudice,
stating that it was not aware of any law that would permit it to reopen the fee
issue where “the Estate, then represented by L&M, did not move to reconsider
or appeal [Judge Nadeau’s order approving the fee,] as required by the court
rules.” The court noted that the dismissal was “on a procedural basis only,
and [was] not intended to be dispositive of any substantive claims that the
Estate may choose to assert in a separate action.”
The Estate then brought the instant malpractice action against L&M,
alleging that the firm breached its duties:
to represent the injured child, Marcus R. Sicotte . . . and his Estate
with the reasonable care, skill and diligence possessed and
exercised by the ordinary attorney in similar circumstances, to
carry out its fiduciary responsibility to the injured child and his
Estate by following the established rules, statutes and customs
governing attorney’s fees in the State of New Hampshire, to know
2
the established rules, statutes and customs governing attorney’s
fees in the State of New Hampshire, and to fully inform and advise
its clients of said rules, statutes and customs.
The Estate’s writ asserted causes of action in negligence, breach of contract
and L&M’s failure to train, supervise and properly instruct its agents, directors
and employees, and alleged losses including “paying an excess amount of
attorney’s fees in the medical malpractice matter of the injured child.”
The Trial Court (Fauver, J.) dismissed the Estate’s contract claim. In a
structuring conference order entered on July 13, 2006, the Trial Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) set November 1, 2006, as the deadline for disclosure of the
Estate’s experts and release of expert witness reports. On December 26, L&M
moved to dismiss, alleging that the Estate had failed to disclose its expert or
expert report by the deadline. The Estate responded that an expert was not
required and it did not intend to use one.
The Trial Court (Houran, J.) granted L&M’s motion, concluding that
expert testimony was necessary on the issue of causation. Upon
reconsideration, however, the court vacated its dismissal of the action, ruling
that “the interests of justice will be served if the plaintiff is permitted the
opportunity to make a late expert disclosure, subject to bearing the costs to the
defendant associated with that late disclosure.” The court set a new deadline
of June 1, 2007, for disclosure of the Estate’s expert witness and cautioned
that “strict compliance with these orders is essential, and failure to comply
with any portion of these orders will result in dismissal.”
The Estate filed a motion for, among other things, clarification of the
court’s order. Noting that it “respectfully . . . continues to maintain that no
expert is necessary,” the Estate asked the court to clarify, inter alia, “what type
of expert the Plaintiff is required to produce and what specifically the testimony
of such an expert would be expected to encompass.” On June 21, 2007, the
court denied the motion, referring the Estate to its previous orders.
After an additional extension, the Estate timely disclosed its expert and
expert report. L&M again moved to dismiss on the grounds that the expert
disclosure was still inadequate. The trial court granted the motion.
On appeal, the Estate argues that the trial court erred in: (1) requiring it
to call an expert; (2) not allowing it to use L&M’s expert; (3) “refusing to clarify
what type of expert testimony” was required; (4) ruling that its disclosure did
not comply with the court’s order; and (5) failing to follow Terzis v. Estate of
Whalen, 126 N.H. 88 (1985).
“It is within the sound discretion of the trial court to dismiss the case for
3
failure to comply with the court’s discovery order . . . .” Miller v. Basbas, 131
N.H. 332, 339 (1988). Accordingly, we review the court’s decision for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Whitaker v. L.A. Drew, 149 N.H. 55,
58 (2003).
We first address the Estate’s contention that expert testimony was not
required in this case. “Expert testimony is required where the subject
presented is so distinctly related to some science, profession or occupation as
to be beyond the ken of the average layperson. Expert testimony is not
required where the subject presented is within the realm of common knowledge
and everyday experience.” Boynton v. Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592, 601 (2006)
(citation omitted).
In Carbone v. Tierney, 151 N.H. 521 (2004), we explained the role of
expert testimony in legal malpractice cases. We first reviewed the elements a
plaintiff must prove to establish legal malpractice, namely: “(1) that an
attorney-client relationship existed, which placed a duty upon the attorney to
exercise reasonable professional care, skill and knowledge in providing legal
services to that client; (2) a breach of that duty; and (3) resultant harm legally
caused by that breach.” Carbone, 151 N.H. at 527. We noted that “absent
exceptional circumstances, expert testimony is necessary to inform the jury
regarding the skill and care ordinarily exercised by lawyers and to prove a
breach thereof.” Id. at 528. We then determined that “in most instances,”
expert testimony is also needed to prove causation. Id. We explained:
In legal malpractice cases, expert testimony may be essential
for the plaintiff to establish causation. The trier of fact must be
able to determine what result should have occurred if the lawyer
had not been negligent. Unless the causal link is obvious or can
be established by other evidence, expert testimony may be
essential to prove what the lawyer should have done. We thus
hold that expert testimony on proximate cause is required in cases
where determination of that issue is not one that lay people would
ordinarily be competent to make.
Id. (quotations, citations, brackets and ellipsis omitted).
The Estate contends that this case does not require expert testimony
because it is “straightforward” and “simple”: “It simply involves a factual
question, i.e., did the Defendant violate the law?” The Estate further argues
that “causation is obvious and implied, i.e., the Defendant violated the law and
took legal fees to which it was not entitled.”
We disagree. Because a plaintiff in a legal malpractice action must prove
“resultant harm legally caused by [the] breach,” id. at 527, the plaintiff must
4
“provide expert testimony to establish that [the attorney’s] breach was the legal
cause of [the] injuries,” id. at 528. The injury claimed here is the reduced
amount of the settlement inuring to the Estate due to the excessive fee paid to
L&M, as evidenced in Marcus J. Sicotte’s affidavit:
I am asking the Court to order Lubin & Meyer to return the
difference between the one-third contingent fee which was taken
for legal fees and the 25% contingent fee which is fair, reasonable,
standard and customary, plus interest, to the Estate of Marcus R.
Sicotte. In the alternative and at the election of the Estate, I would
ask that the time spent on the case by Lubin & Meyer be
independently audited for reasonableness, that the legal fee be
paid on an hourly basis rather than on a contingent fee basis, and
that Lubin & Meyer be ordered to return the difference.
Accordingly, to prove its case, the Estate must show either that: (1) if
L&M had informed Marcus’ parents of the presumptive twenty-five percent fee
limit in cases involving minors, they could, and would, have acted such that
the trial court would not have approved a fee greater than twenty-five percent;
or (2) if L&M had informed Marcus’ parents of their right to hire an attorney on
an hourly basis, they would have retained alternate counsel who would have
obtained a similar settlement or verdict at a lower cost. See id. (“The trier of
fact must be able to determine what result should have occurred if the lawyer
had not been negligent.” (quotation and ellipsis omitted)). A determination of:
(1) what fee the trial court would likely have awarded in the face of opposition
by Marcus’ parents; and (2) what results another attorney would likely have
obtained and how much it would likely have cost on an hourly basis are “so
distinctly related to . . . [the legal profession] as to be beyond the ken of the
average layperson.” Boynton, 154 N.H. at 601. Thus, expert testimony was
required.
The Estate next contends that even if expert testimony is required, the
trial court erred by not allowing it to use L&M’s expert witness to provide that
testimony. It argues that “[i]t is well-settled law and, in fact, part of the Civil
Jury Instructions in New Hampshire, that neither party ‘owns’ a witness.” The
trial court, however, did not preclude the Estate from using L&M’s expert;
indeed, the court “assume[d] without deciding that a plaintiff’s disclosure of ‘all
defendant’s witnesses’ suffices to notify the defendant that the plaintiff intends
to rely on expert testimony presented by the defendant’s noticed expert and on
one or more of the principals of the defendant professional corporation.”
Rather, the court concluded that the Estate had “disclosed no expert by which
it can meet its burden on causation.” (Emphasis added.) The court noted that
“counsel for the defendant asserts unequivocally that the testimony of the
defendant’s expert and principal attorney will be directly counter to the
plaintiff’s theory of causation” and that nothing in the record indicated to the
5
contrary.
The Estate nevertheless argues that while it “may run the risk of the
court declaring at trial that the expert testimony is insufficient to carry [its]
burden” of proof, “[t]he court cannot dismiss the case prior to trial on the basis
of anticipation and prediction” of what the expert testimony will be. We
disagree. The Estate is not entitled to wait until trial to see whether its expert’s
testimony is sufficient to meet its burden of proof; rather, the Estate was
required to disclose, by the court-ordered deadline, “a summary of the facts
and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and a summary of the
grounds for each opinion.” Super. Ct. R. 35(3)f(4). The Estate failed to make
such a disclosure and we cannot find that the trial court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion in consequently dismissing the case. See
Miller, 131 N.H. at 339.
The Estate next contends that the trial court erred by “refusing to clarify
what type of expert testimony would be required despite the Plaintiff’s request
for such clarification.” We will uphold the court’s ruling on a motion for
clarification absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Cf. State v.
Barkus, 152 N.H. 701, 705 (2005) (reviewing decision on motion for
clarification and/or reconsideration for unsustainable exercise of discretion).
In its denial of the motion, the trial court referred the Estate to our decision in
Carbone, and to specific portions of two prior orders in which it had explained
that expert testimony is required to prove causation because the Estate must
show “what result should have occurred if the lawyer had not been negligent.”
We cannot find that the trial court committed an unsustainable exercise of
discretion.
The Estate next contends that the trial court erred in ruling that its
eventual disclosure of an expert’s report failed to comply with the court’s order.
In his statement of expert conclusions, the Estate’s expert opined:
[The rules allegedly breached by L&M] are obviously
designed to prevent an attorney from attempting to charge a minor
client a fee in excess of 25% under circumstances where the client
is kept from knowing that all attorneys in the state of New
Hampshire are restricted to fees no greater than 25% in the
representation of a minor.
As such, in a circumstance where the attorney breaches the
standard of care by failing to make this disclosure and by charging
a greater fee, the client is deprived the opportunity of seeking
representation from an attorney who would have fully complied
with the standard of care by making the disclosure and charging a
fee in accordance with applicable law.
6
The trial court ruled that this disclosure did not “comply with Superior
Court Rule 35(f) and this court’s prior orders as to the third part of the
plaintiff’s burden, to provide expert testimony in support of the requirement
that the plaintiff show the resultant harm legally caused by the breach.” We
agree. While the statement mentions a lost opportunity to hire other counsel,
it says nothing of the probability that other counsel would have obtained
similarly favorable results at a lower cost. We find no error.
Finally, the Estate argues that the trial court erred in dismissing the case
despite our opinion in Terzis v. Estate of Whalen. The Estate contends that in
Terzis, we “made it clear that cases involving attorney’s fees require the highest
level of scrutiny” and argues that “[p]ursuant to Terzis[,] . . . [L&M] has the
burden of proving that their Contingent Fee Agreement was fair and
reasonable, and that the clients had full knowledge of the facts and of their
legal rights.”
While we reaffirm the observation in Terzis that “[f]ee contracts between
attorney and client are a subject of special interest and concern to the courts,”
Terzis, 126 N.H. at 92 (quotations omitted), we note an obvious difference
between Terzis and this case. In Terzis, the attorney brought suit to foreclose a
mortgage securing a fee agreement. Id. at 89. We noted the potential for
overreaching, particularly when the fee agreement was “executed long after the
attorney-client relationship has commenced, when the position of trust is well
established.” Id. at 92 (quotations omitted). We therefore adopted the position
that “any attorney seeking to enforce a contract of this kind has the burden of
proving that it is fair and reasonable, and that the client had full knowledge of
the facts and of his legal rights with relation thereto.” Id. (quotation omitted;
emphasis added).
This case, however, is not an action by L&M to enforce its fee agreement,
but a legal malpractice case brought by the client. Thus, it is the plaintiff
client that bears the burden to prove all elements of its claim. Terzis does not
relieve the Estate of that burden.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of this
case.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
7