THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2007-920
HAIR EXCITEMENT, INC.
v.
L’OREAL U.S.A., INC.
Argued: November 12, 2008
Opinion Issued: February 19, 2009
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and
Laurie A. Lacoste on the brief, and Mr. Shaines orally), for the plaintiff.
Nixon Peabody, LLP, of Manchester (W. Scott O’Connell and David W.
Ruoff on the brief, and Mr. O’Connell orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Hair Excitement, Inc. (Hair Excitement),
appeals from a judgment entered by the Superior Court (Houran, J.) rejecting
its claim that the defendant violated the Consumer Protection Act, RSA chapter
358-A (1995 & Supp. 2008). The defendant, L’Oreal U.S.A., Inc., (L’Oreal)
cross-appeals. We affirm.
I
The record supports the following facts. Hair Excitement is a New
Hampshire corporation which owns and operates a number of hair salons in
New Hampshire, Maine and Massachusetts. L’Oreal manufactures and
distributes hair care products, including Matrix and Redken brand products.
In 1993, Hair Excitement entered into purchase contracts with a Matrix
distributor for the purchase of Matrix products, a line now owned by L’Oreal,
for its salons. The contracts provided that Hair Excitement would “not resell or
redistribute Matrix retail products to anyone other than [its] legitimate salon
clients for home maintenance use.” Either party could terminate the contracts
“immediately upon notice.”
In 1997, Hair Excitement entered into a Redken Products Chain Account
Agreement (chain account agreement) with Redken Laboratories, Inc., a
subsidiary of L’Oreal. Pursuant to this agreement, Hair Excitement was
appointed “as an authorized, non-exclusive Redken Chain Account for the
Redken products.” The products to be sold under the account were either
products that Hair Excitement could only sell to consumers for their own use
or products that its professionals applied on clients at its salons. The chain
account agreement provided that Hair Excitement would “sell the products . . .
solely from Chain Account’s salons to consumers for their own use, and that it
[would] not sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer such products to anyone
other than consumers for their own use.” As for products labeled “For
Professional Use Only,” the agreement provides that Hair Excitement would
“use such products only in [its] salons.” The agreement also provided that
“[e]ither party may terminate this Agreement at any time, with or without
cause, by giving sixty (60) days prior written notice of such termination to the
other party.”
These provisions restricting the sale of L’Oreal’s products are intended to
serve as protection against the sale of products outside of salons in the so-
called “gray market.” The “gray market” is a market in which legal but perhaps
unethical methods are used to avoid a manufacturer’s distribution chain and
thereby sell goods at prices lower than those envisioned by the manufacturer.
As the trial court’s order explains:
The diversion of product, and in particular product designed
and marketed for salon-only sales, is a very large problem in the
beauty industry. Manufacturers are constantly battling this
problem, which harms the business reputations of both the
manufacturer and the salon owner, which creates a mistaken
impression that the manufacturer permits or endorses the sale of
salon-only products outside of a professional salon setting, and
which is likely to cause confusion concerning the quality of salon-
only products. Among the few tools available to manufacturers to
battle diversion are tips from informants, coding of product to
track the product’s distribution routes, and buying programs,
known at L’Oreal as “loyalty tests.” Buying programs or loyalty
tests involve the manufacturer sending in an investigator to pose
as someone other than a consumer purchasing for the consumer’s
2
own use, and are generally used by a manufacturer to confirm
whether a salon reported to be reselling in violation of contracts is
in fact doing so. Both the problem and the tools used by
manufacturers to combat it are well known and well understood
by those involved in the industry.
In December 2001, a distributor in Rhode Island informed Charles
Domroe, L’Oreal’s director of corporate security, that it had learned from at
least two sources that Hair Excitement was engaged in product diversion. As
part of its subsequent investigation, L’Oreal retained Paul Cosentino to pose as
a “collector” in order to conduct a “loyalty test” to determine whether Hair
Excitement would make an unauthorized sale of L’Oreal’s products. In early
January 2002, Cosentino, posing as Paul Kostanza, telephoned Hair
Excitement’s salon in Rochester seeking to purchase Redken and Matrix hair
care products for resale. That same day he received a return call from John
Langlois, the owner of Hair Excitement, and was directed to contact purchasing
manager, Ed Sharon, to discuss the proposed sale. Langlois knew that
Cosentino intended to resell the products. The next day Cosentino spoke by
telephone with Sharon and confided that he planned to sell the Redken and
Matrix products outside of the United States. Sharon agreed to sell the
requested products but told Cosentino that he needed to “be careful because
Hair Excitement, Inc. [was] a franchise” and it “could run into problems with
the manufacturer.” The following day, Cosentino arrived at the Rochester
salon and purchased 150 bottles of consumer-use only Redken and Matrix
products at fifty percent of their retail value. Cosentino was told that Hair
Excitement could supply whatever additional products he needed.
By letter dated February 8, 2002, L’Oreal informed Hair Excitement that
due to its alleged product diversion and based upon other independent
investigation, it was terminating the chain account agreement and would no
longer sell it any Redken products. L’Oreal also barred its distributors from
further sales of any of its product brands, including Matrix products, to Hair
Excitement.
II
Hair Excitement brought suit against L’Oreal alleging that it had violated
RSA chapter 358-A. It contended that L’Oreal willfully and knowingly
misrepresented the identity of its agent and also misrepresented the agent’s
intent with the purpose to deceive and induce it to sell the products to third
parties in violation of its purchase contracts and chain account agreement,
resulting in its termination as an approved franchise. L’Oreal brought a
counterclaim alleging that Hair Excitement violated RSA chapter 358-A
because its distribution of Redken products outside of the salon-only sales to
consumers harmed Redken’s business reputation with both salon owners and
3
consumers, created a mistaken impression that L’Oreal permits or endorses
the sale of Redken products outside of a professional salon setting, and was
likely to cause confusion concerning the quality of Redken products.
The parties agreed to bifurcate the trial of liability and damages. Over
Hair Excitement’s objection, the case was tried to the court and not to a jury.
Following a four-and-a-half-day trial, the trial court found in favor of L’Oreal on
Hair Excitement’s claim and in favor of Hair Excitement on L’Oreal’s
counterclaim. This appeal followed.
Hair Excitement argues that the trial court erred in finding that: (1) it
was not entitled to a jury trial; (2) L’Oreal did not engage in unfair and
deceptive acts under RSA chapter 358-A; (3) L’Oreal’s anti-diversion policy
contained in the distributor contracts is a legitimate business practice; and (4)
L’Oreal did not engage in price fixing. L’Oreal’s cross-appeal raises four issues,
including whether the trial court erred in ruling that: (1) the choice of law
provision in the contract was inapplicable; (2) Hair Excitement’s claims are not
barred by the economic loss doctrine; (3) Hair Excitement’s claims may not be
limited by the terms of the contract; and (4) the doctrine of unclean hands does
not bar Hair Excitement’s claims. L’Oreal does not appeal the trial court’s
ruling in favor of Hair Excitement on L’Oreal’s RSA chapter 358-A
counterclaim. Accordingly, because we affirm the trial court’s ruling in favor of
L’Oreal on Hair Excitement’s consumer protection claim, we need not address
the issues raised by L’Oreal’s cross-appeal. For purposes of this appeal, we
assume without deciding that RSA chapter 358-A applies.
III
Prior to trial, L’Oreal moved to strike Hair Excitement’s jury trial
demand. The trial court granted the motion on the basis that “there is neither
a constitutional nor statutory right to a jury trial on a claim brought under
RSA 358-A:10.” Noting that it “has the discretion to seek the advice of a jury
on such a claim,” the court declined to exercise such discretion.
Part I, Article 20 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides:
In all controversies concerning property, and in all suits between
two or more persons except those in which another practice is and
has been customary and except those in which the value in
controversy does not exceed $1,500 and no title to real estate is
involved, the parties have a right to a trial by jury. This method of
procedure shall be held sacred, unless, in cases arising on the high
seas and in cases relating to mariners’ wages, the legislature shall
think it necessary to alter it.
4
The right to a jury trial under the New Hampshire Constitution “is not
without limitation; it extends only to those cases for which the jury trial right
existed when the constitution was adopted in 1784.” State v. Morrill, 123 N.H.
707, 712 (1983); see Hallahan v. Riley, 94 N.H. 338, 339 (1947) (constitutional
guaranty of trial by jury in civil matters determined generally by historical test
of its use at common law). Part I, Article 20 “did not create or establish a right
[to a jury trial] not before existing. It was a recognition of an existing right,
guaranteeing it as it then stood and was practiced, guarding it against repeal,
infringement, or undue trammel by legislative action, but not extending it so as
to include what had not before been within its benefits.” Davis v. Dyer, 62 N.H.
231, 235 (1882). “The right does not extend . . . to special, statutory or
summary proceedings unknown to the common law.” In re Sandra H., 150
N.H. 634, 636 (2004).
“To resolve whether a party has a right to trial by jury in a particular
action, we generally look to both the nature of the case and the relief sought,
and ascertain whether the customary practice included a trial by jury before
1784.” Franklin Lodge of Elks v. Marcoux, 149 N.H. 581, 591 (2003) (quotation
and citation omitted). “When a plaintiff seeks relief for breach of codified
rights, we further consider the comprehensive nature of the statutory
framework to determine whether the jury trial right extends to the action.” Id.
The legislature enacted RSA chapter 358-A in 1970 to “ensure an
equitable relationship between consumers and persons engaged in business.”
Hughes v. DiSalvo, 143 N.H. 576, 578 (1999). RSA chapter 358-A is “a
comprehensive statute designed to regulate business practices for consumer
protection by making it unlawful for persons engaged in trade or commerce to
use various methods of unfair competition and deceptive business practices.”
Chase v. Dorais, 122 N.H. 600, 601 (1982). Thus, RSA chapter 358-A creates
new statutory rights which did not exist in New Hampshire common law in
1784 when this state adopted its constitution. Because of this, our
constitution does not confer the right to a jury trial for a claim under RSA
chapter 358-A. See Morrill, 123 N.H. at 713.
Moreover, nothing in the language of RSA chapter 358-A specifically
provides for a right to a jury trial. The statute states that:
Any person injured by another’s use of any method, act or
practice declared unlawful under this chapter may bring an action
for damages and for such equitable relief, including an injunction,
as the court deems necessary and proper. If the court finds for the
plaintiff, recovery shall be in the amount of actual damages or
$1,000, whichever is greater. If the court finds that the use of the
method of competition or the act or practice was a willful or
knowing violation of this chapter, it shall award as much as 3
5
times, but not less than 2 times, such amount. In addition, a
prevailing plaintiff shall be awarded the costs of the suit and
reasonable attorney’s fees, as determined by the court. . . .
Injunctive relief shall be available to private individuals under this
chapter without bond, subject to the discretion of the court.”
RSA 358-A:10, I (emphases added). We are the final arbiter of the meaning of a
statute as expressed by the words of the statute itself. Green Crow Corp. v.
Town of New Ipswich, 157 N.H. 344, 346 (2008). We look to the plain and
ordinary meaning of the words used in the statute and will not examine
legislative history unless the statutory language is ambiguous, consider what
the legislature might have said, or add words not included in the statute. Id.
In its ordinary meaning, the word “court” refers to a judge rather than a jury.
Had the legislature intended to provide for a jury trial, it could have expressly
done so. See, e.g., RSA 354-A:21-a, I (Supp. 2008) (in action for damages
based upon unlawful discrimination “either party is entitled to a trial by jury
on any issue of fact”). Accordingly, under the plain language of the statute, the
court is vested with the authority to decide claims brought under RSA chapter
358-A.
Nonetheless, Hair Excitement argues that its claim is similar to a
common law fraud or deceit claim. “In order to prove deceit, the plaintiff must
prove that the defendant intentionally made material false statements to the
plaintiff, which the defendant knew to be false or which he had no knowledge
or belief were true, for the purpose of causing, and which does cause, the
plaintiff reasonably to rely to his detriment.” Caledonia, Inc. v. Trainor, 123
N.H. 116, 124 (1983). Fraud must be proved by clear and convincing evidence.
Id. In contrast, to prove a violation of RSA chapter 358-A, a plaintiff must
prove that the defendant is a person, that the defendant used an unfair method
of competition or a deceptive act or practice, that the act occurred in trade or
commerce, and that the defendant’s conduct rose to “a level of rascality that
would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to the rough and tumble of the
world of commerce.” ACAS Acquisitions v. Hobert, 155 N.H. 381, 402 (2007);
see RSA 358-A:2. In addition, RSA chapter 358-A provides broader damages
than a common law fraud action, allowing treble damages, attorney’s fees and
costs. See RSA 358-A:10, I. Thus, actions brought pursuant to RSA chapter
358-A require proof of significantly different elements and satisfaction of a
different standard of proof. Accordingly, we decline to hold that RSA chapter
358-A is analogous to common law fraud or deceit.
We affirm the trial court’s ruling that RSA chapter 358-A claims are not
entitled to a trial by jury. Although Hair Excitement argues that many RSA
chapter 358-A claims have been tried before juries, we note that the issue of
whether a right to a jury trial existed was never raised or addressed in those
6
cases. See, e.g., Becksted v. Nadeau, 155 N.H. 615 (2007); Transmedia
Restaurant Co. v. Devereaux, 149 N.H. 454 (2003).
Hair Excitement next argues that the trial court erred in finding that
L’Oreal did not engage in unfair and deceptive acts under RSA chapter 358-A,
asserting that many of its requests for findings of fact granted by the court
support such a finding and that some of its requests denied by the court
constitute error and are contrary to the evidence. When reviewing a trial
court’s decision, we will “sustain [its] findings and rulings . . . unless they are
lacking in evidential support or tainted by error of law.” In the Matter of
Letendre & Letendre, 149 N.H. 31, 34 (2002). “Absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, we will not overturn its ruling or set aside its factual
findings.” Id.
RSA 358-A:2 states that it “shall be unlawful for any person to use any
unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice in the
conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” Unfair methods of
competition or unfair or deceptive acts or practices include “[c]ausing likelihood
of confusion or of misunderstanding as to affiliation, connection or association
with . . . another.” RSA 358-A:2, III. Not all conduct in the course of trade or
commerce falls within the scope of the statute. To recover under RSA chapter
358-A, a plaintiff must show that the defendant’s acts attained “a level of
rascality that would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to the rough and
tumble of the world of commerce.” Hobert, 155 N.H. at 402. “[S]elfish
bargaining and business dealings will not be enough to justify a claim for
damages under the Consumer Protection Act.” Barrows v. Boles, 141 N.H. 382,
390 (1996) (quotation omitted).
Although the trial court found that Mr. Cosentino misrepresented both
his identification and intent in approaching Hair Excitement, it also found that
those misrepresentations did not constitute a violation of RSA chapter 358-A.
As the trial court noted, “Given this state of the beauty supply industry, L’Oreal
did what is well understood in the industry and what made sense to do in this
case: It charged an investigator with approaching Hair Excitement to find out
if [it] would sell a quantity of Redken and Matrix product.” The trial court
ruled that:
L’Oreal’s conduct was not immoral, unethical, oppressive, or
unscrupulous, did not offend public policy as established by law or
by other established concepts of unfairness, was not the type
proscribed by the Consumer Protection Act, and did not attain a
level of rascality that would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to
the rough and tumble of the world of commerce. L’Oreal was
instead, in the context of a rough and tumble business, exercising
its rights under the Hair Excitement agreements. Hair Excitement
7
has fallen far short of its burden of proving that L’Oreal engaged in
an unfair or deceptive act or practice in violation of the Consumer
Protection Act.
There is sufficient evidence in the record to support these findings. The
anti-diversion provisions in the contracts and chain account agreement entered
into by the parties are included by L’Oreal to protect its brand name, trade
name, and other intellectual property rights for its salon-only products such as
Redken and Matrix. Such contractual terms are common in the industry.
Anti-diversion campaigns are prominently advertised in trade shows, training
seminars and trade publications. The beauty supply industry enforces its anti-
diversion policies by terminating its contractual relationships with distributors,
chain accounts, or salons that are caught engaging in diversion. L’Oreal
publicizes the fact that it polices salons and distributors, has a zero-tolerance
policy for diversion, and cancels contracts with salons and distributors that
engage in diversion. Hair Excitement was aware of the practices of diversion,
the gray market, and efforts by the industry to police and curtail it. We hold
that the trial court’s ruling that L’Oreal did not engage in unfair and deceptive
acts under RSA chapter 358-A is not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The third issue raised by Hair Excitement is whether the trial court erred
in finding that L’Oreal’s anti-diversion policy contained in its distributor
contracts is a legitimate business practice. Hair Excitement’s position is that
the policy violates the “first sale” doctrine under which a trademark owner
cannot control distribution of a trademarked item beyond its first sale. Section
106(3) of the Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 106(3) (2000), gives the owner
of a copyright the exclusive right to distribute copies of a copyrighted work.
“After the first sale of a copyrighted item . . . , any subsequent purchaser . . . is
. . . an owner of that item.” Quality King Distributors, Inc. v. L’anza Research
Int’l, Inc., 523 U.S. 135, 145 (1998) (quotations omitted). Pursuant to federal
law, “such an owner is entitled, without the authority of the copyright owner, to
sell that item.” Id. (quotation omitted). The “first sale” doctrine is a defense to
an infringement action under federal copyright law. Hair Excitement’s cause of
action was limited to a single theory of recovery: a violation of RSA chapter
358-A. We reject its “first sale” argument and hold that the doctrine has no
application to this Consumer Protection Act claim.
Finally, Hair Excitement argues that the trial court erred in finding that
L’Oreal did not engage in price fixing. Hair Excitement argues that the
evidence “in toto” shows that L’Oreal’s conduct surrounding its termination of
the chain account agreement supports that L’Oreal engaged in “price fixing” by
preventing Hair Excitement from purchasing L’Oreal’s products and selling
them at discount prices. As the trial court found, L’Oreal did not need a
pretext to terminate its contracts with Hair Excitement. The chain account
agreement permitted unilateral termination without cause with sixty-day notice
8
and the purchase contracts could be terminated by either party without cause
or notice. Notwithstanding that the contracts could be terminated without
cause, Hair Excitement in fact breached the express prohibitions against
reselling Matrix products to anyone “other than [its] legitimate salon clients for
home maintenance use” and against reselling Redken products to anyone
“other than consumers for their own use,” thereby giving L’Oreal cause to
terminate them. We affirm the trial court’s ruling that the evidence does not
“reasonably support” a conclusion that L’Oreal deceived Hair Excitement into
selling product with an underlying purpose of illegal price control.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9