THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-398
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MATTHEW KINCAID
Argued: September 17, 2008
Opinion Issued: November 20, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicolas Cort, assistant attorney general,
on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti and Adam Cook on the
brief, and Mr. Sisti orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Matthew Kincaid, was convicted by a
jury in Superior Court (Mangones, J.) on two counts of negligent homicide. See
RSA 630:3 (Supp. 2001) (amended 2006). We affirm.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. In September 2004, the defendant was arrested following a single
vehicle crash on Constitution Avenue in Concord. Randall Holmes, a
passenger in the vehicle, was killed. The defendant was indicted for negligent
homicide. Prior to trial, he moved to suppress evidence of his blood alcohol
content, post-arrest statements, and field sobriety tests. The Trial Court
(Fitzgerald, J.) denied his motions, and the defendant was subsequently
convicted. After his conviction, he retained new counsel. Subsequently, the
defendant filed a motion to stay sentencing, pending a competency hearing and
evaluation. He claimed he could not remember the accident due to a head
injury, and thus “could not intelligently and rationally discuss the case with
his [attorney].” The Trial Court (Mangones, J.) denied the motion without a
hearing and imposed sentence. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
post-trial motion for a competency evaluation and hearing. He asserts that he
cannot remember anything about the accident, and thus was unable to assist
his counsel meaningfully in his defense at trial. The defendant maintains that
by failing to hold a hearing on his competency, the trial court violated his right
to due process under Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. He also argues
that the trial court erred when it admitted evidence of his blood alcohol
content, post-arrest statements, and field sobriety tests under a facially
unconstitutional statute, former RSA 265:93 (2004) (current version at RSA
265-A:16 (Supp. 2008)). We first address the defendant’s claims under the
State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983), and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. Id. at 232-33.
“As the trial court is in the best position to evaluate [a] criminal
defendant’s behavior, we grant deference to its decision regarding the need for
a competency hearing.” State v. Zorzy, 136 N.H. 710, 715 (1993). “Due
process guarantees under both the Federal and State Constitutions protect
defendants from standing trial if they are legally incompetent.” Id. at 714.
“The test for competency, as formulated by the United States Supreme Court in
Dusky v. United States, 362 U.S. 402, 402 (1960), and adopted by this court, is
two-pronged.” Id. “First, the defendant must have a sufficient present ability
to consult with and assist his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational
understanding. Second, the defendant must have a factual as well as rational
understanding of the proceedings against him.” Id. (quotation and citation
omitted). We have held that a trial court, in order to comply with due process,
must order an evidentiary hearing on the issue of competency “whenever a
bona fide or legitimate doubt arises whether a criminal defendant is competent
to stand trial.” Id. at 715 (quotation omitted).
In determining whether a “bona fide or legitimate doubt” exists with
regard to a defendant’s competency, numerous factors should be considered:
In determining whether to order a competency hearing, the trial
court should consider evidence of a defendant’s irrational behavior,
2
his demeanor at trial, and any prior medical opinion on
competency. Where a trial court has before it only a tentative
speculation that the defendant is incompetent, it need not order an
evidentiary hearing into the defendant’s competence. In addition,
a trial record void of any indication that the defendant could not
assist in his defense, or rationally comprehend the nature of the
proceedings, provides substantial evidence of the defendant’s
competence.
Id. at 715 (citations and quotations omitted). The list of factors, however, is
not exclusive. A trial court should exercise its discretion based upon the
particular facts and circumstances of the case before it and order a competency
hearing as it deems necessary, so as to uphold a defendant’s right to due
process.
In this case, the defendant claims amnesia. He does not allege that he
behaved irrationally or that his demeanor at trial was out of the ordinary. He
claims, in essence, that because he could not remember what happened, the
first prong of the competency test articulated in Zorzy cannot be met. That is,
he argues that because he is not able to remember the crash, the events
leading up to it, and what transpired immediately thereafter, he lacked “a
sufficient present ability to consult with and assist his [trial counsel] with a
reasonable degree of rational understanding.” Id. at 714. Given the facts of
this case, we disagree.
The Concord Hospital Radiology report from the night of the crash lists
the diagnosis as “facial laceration,” and notes “no evidence of mandibular
fracture.” The Concord Fire Department Patient Record Report concerning the
defendant states: “Level of Consciousness: Alert,” and “[patient has] minor
facial injuries.” The record shows the defendant told a police officer at the
scene that “he had not hit his head.”
Although the record before us does not appear to provide support for the
defendant’s claim of amnesia, we assume, without deciding, that the defendant
has no memory of the accident. That claim alone, however, does not
automatically raise a bona fide or legitimate doubt triggering a due process
right to a competency hearing. There are many ways a defendant can consult
with and assist his trial counsel with a reasonable degree of rational
understanding without necessarily remembering the details or circumstances
of an event that led to his arrest. As the trial court observed in its order on the
defendant’s post-trial motion for a competency evaluation:
This matter [of the defendant’s negligent homicide charge]
had been litigated at trial over a number of days. Defendant was
represented by two conscientious defense counsel in these
3
matters. . . . A number of pretrial motions had been filed. Various
issues . . . had been raised by the defense in the context of
motions to suppress and similar pre-trial motions. However, no
issues concerning the competency of defendant to stand trial
appear to have been raised during the two year run-up to trial.
In concluding that a defendant can consult with and assist his trial
counsel with a reasonable degree of rational understanding without necessarily
remembering an event, our analysis is consistent with that employed by other
jurisdictions. As the Ohio Supreme Court has observed: “Although there are
no definitive judicial explanations of what constitutes the ability to assist in
one’s own defense, . . . it is clear that the cases without exception reject the
notion that an accused possesses that ability only if he is able to remember the
circumstances of the crime with which he is charged.” State v. Brooks, 495
N.E.2d 407, 413 (Ohio 1986) (quotations omitted), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1101
(1987); see also Com. v. Barky, 383 A.2d 526, 528 (Pa. 1978) (“We do not
believe that appellant’s amnesia alone denied him . . . the opportunity to
present a defense.”)
The record before the trial court essentially contained only a
representation that the defendant suffered amnesia. In the exercise of its
discretion, the trial court could reasonably have concluded that no bona fide or
legitimate doubt arose as to the defendant’s competency. See Zorzy, 136 N.H.
at 715. Given our deference to the trial court’s decision regarding the need for
a hearing to assess a defendant’s competence, we cannot say, on the record
before us, that it erred in denying his motion. As the United States
Constitution provides no greater protection to the defendant than Part I, Article
15, see id. at 714, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as
we do under the State Constitution.
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court committed reversible error
when it admitted evidence of his blood alcohol content, his post-arrest
statements and evidence of his field sobriety tests pursuant to a facially
unconstitutional statute, former RSA 265:93. Because the defendant has
failed to brief his arguments with respect to the admission of his post-arrest
statements and field sobriety tests, those issues are deemed waived, and we
address only his contention that the trial court erred in admitting his blood
alcohol content. See, e.g., State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996) (although
defendant’s brief claimed violation of right to due process, claim waived where
brief failed to further elaborate on argument). With respect to its admission,
the defendant argues that the statute authorizes seizure of evidence without
requiring a nexus between probable cause and the evidence sought.
In denying the defendant’s pre-trial motion, the trial court declined to
rule on the constitutionality of RSA 265:93, finding that the statute was not
4
implicated. The trial court concluded that the defendant was arrested for a
felony and impliedly consented to the blood draws that were seized pursuant to
probable cause and exigency. E.g., State v. Wong, 125 N.H. 610 (1984). The
trial court order provided:
The defendant here had impliedly consented to tests of his
blood, breath and urine by virtue of RSA 265:84. Further, . . . he
had no right under RSA 265:92 to refuse to consent to tests of his
blood, breath or urine since he was arrested for a felony. Thus,
the defendant’s blood could be tested without implicating the
testing mandates of RSA 265:93.
(Emphasis added.)
The defendant does not challenge this ruling on appeal. Because the
trial court did not rely upon RSA 265:93, we need not address the defendant’s
constitutional challenge to it. See Anglin v. Kleeman, 140 N.H. 257, 260 (1995)
(emphasizing court’s policy against reaching a constitutional issue in a case
that can be decided on a nonconstitutional ground).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5