THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry District Court
No. 2007-290
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ERNEST SOLOMON
Argued: February 21, 2008
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Michael S. Lewis, attorney, on the brief
and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Ernest Solomon, appeals the decision of the
Derry District Court (Stephen, J.) to grant a mistrial over his objection after the
original presiding justice (Coughlin, J.) became unavailable. We reverse.
The following facts are supported by the record. The defendant is
charged with three misdemeanors. Trial was initially set for May 22, 2006, but
was continued twice at the defendant’s request. On August 14, 2006, Judge
Coughlin began to hear evidence, but suspended trial during the cross-
examination of the first witness, the alleged victim in the case, so that a lawyer
could be appointed for the witness. Trial recommenced on October 23, 2006,
but was again continued when the appointed lawyer for the victim requested
time to obtain and review the transcript of her client’s earlier testimony. The
trial was scheduled to continue on January 22, 2007.
In the interim, Judge Coughlin, a member of the New Hampshire
National Guard, volunteered for duty. Specifically, on December 12, 2006,
Judge Coughlin volunteered “to be mobilized for service at Baghdad, Iraq or
other such place plus any additional temporary duty locations as needed by
the Army.” In addition, Judge Coughlin specifically waived “any and all formal
advanced notice to mobilization, such as the customary 30-day notification
notice.” As part of this waiver, Judge Coughlin stated, “Neither my employer,
my family nor I will be adversely harmed by not having 30 days to prepare for
this mobilization.” Judge Coughlin was deployed to Iraq in January 2007.
Trial recommenced before Judge Stephen on January 22, 2007. At that
time, the defendant moved to proceed pro se, and, upon being permitted to do
so, moved to dismiss the case for lack of a speedy trial. When the court denied
the motion, the defendant moved to have counsel reinstated and moved to
continue. Both motions were granted.
Following this continuance, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing
that Judge Coughlin’s absence after beginning to hear evidence violated his
right to have his trial completed by a particular tribunal, that is, the same fact
finder, under Part I, Article 16 of the New Hampshire Constitution, and the
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution. The
defendant further argued that, because Judge Coughlin volunteered to go to
Iraq, his current unavailability did not create a manifest necessity for a
mistrial.
On February 13, 2007, Judge Stephen conducted a hearing on the
defendant’s motion during which he heard argument from both the defendant
and the prosecution, and explored several alternatives to a mistrial. After it
was decided none of these options was viable, Judge Stephen declared a
mistrial, finding “there is manifest necessity for a mistrial under the
circumstances herein or ‘the ends of public justice would be defeated.’” Judge
Stephen further concluded that the fact Judge Coughlin volunteered for duty
was not critical to the mistrial analysis, noting,
The fact remains that Judge Coughlin was “called
to duty”. It was clearly up to the military to
decide whether to deploy Judge Coughlin to Iraq
regardless of whether he volunteered or not.
Considering that the military has made that
decision to deploy Judge Coughlin and now that
the military has indicated he is not available in
any manner, a mistrial is appropriate considering
2
that defense counsel has rejected all other
available alternative options.
The defendant now appeals this decision, arguing that retrial before a
different fact finder would violate his rights under both the New Hampshire and
Federal Constitutions’ Double Jeopardy Clauses. The defendant submits that
the circumstances of this case, in particular, Judge Coughlin’s voluntary
departure, do not constitute manifest necessity permitting mistrial over his
objection because his trial was terminated by the “unilateral and voluntary
decision of a trial participant,” rather than some unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstance.
The State acknowledges that jeopardy attached in this case when Judge
Coughlin began to hear evidence. See State v. Courtemarche, 142 N.H. 772,
773-74 (1998). The State argues that retrial is not barred, however, because
the military made the ultimate decision to deploy Judge Coughlin to Iraq, thus
giving rise to a manifest necessity for the mistrial declaration. We first address
the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231-32 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance only, id. at 233.
“It is fundamental that under the double jeopardy clauses of the New
Hampshire and United States Constitutions the defendant has a valued right to
have his trial completed by a particular tribunal.” State v. Pugliese, 120 N.H.
728, 729-30 (1980) (quotations omitted; emphasis added). The right to a
particular tribunal is an accused’s right to complete a trial with a chosen jury,
once sworn, or a particular judge, once evidence has commenced. See Crist v.
Bretz, 437 U.S. 28, 35-36 (1978) (describing right to a particular tribunal as
the need to protect interest of the accused in retaining a chosen jury);
Courtemarche, 142 N.H. at 773-74 (jeopardy attaches in bench trial when
judge begins to hear evidence).
Such a right exists because the State with all its
resources and power should not be allowed to
make repeated attempts to convict an individual
for an alleged offense, thereby subjecting him to
embarrassment, expense and ordeal and
compelling him to live in a continuing state of
anxiety and insecurity, as well as enhancing the
possibility that even though innocent he may be
found guilty.
State v. Bertrand, 133 N.H. 843, 853 (1991) (quotations omitted).
“Reprosecution after a mistrial has unnecessarily been declared by the trial
court obviously subjects the defendant to the same personal strain and
insecurity regardless of the motivation underlying the trial judge’s actions.”
3
United States v. Jorn, 400 U.S. 470, 483 (1971). Thus, “a trial court may
declare a mistrial over the defendant’s objections, without jeopardizing retrial,
only if there is a manifest necessity for the act, or the ends of public justice
would otherwise be defeated.” State v. Paquin, 140 N.H. 525, 528 (1995)
(quotations omitted). This power should be exercised “only with the greatest
caution, under urgent circumstances, and for very plain and obvious causes.”
State v. Gould, 144 N.H. 415, 416-17 (1999) (quotation omitted).
Manifest necessity is a variable standard which cannot be applied
mechanically. Id. at 417. However, if the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion in concluding that manifest necessity required a mistrial, then
the Double Jeopardy Clause will bar retrial. See Paquin, 140 N.H. at 528; cf.
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise
of discretion standard). “[A] mistrial is of such gravity and implicates such a
fundamental constitutional right that we will defer to a trial court’s finding of
manifest necessity only where the record affirmatively supports it.” Gould, 144
N.H. at 418. It is the State’s burden to demonstrate that the mistrial was
justified by manifest necessity. Id. at 416. The State has failed to meet its
burden here.
The record is clear that Judge Coughlin initially volunteered to go to Iraq
on this occasion, independent of any military directive. Judge Coughlin also
waived any notification period to which he was entitled. These actions alone,
however, are not determinative on the question of manifest necessity arising
from his subsequent unavailability. Indeed, we note that it is not, as the
defendant suggests, the voluntary nature of Judge Coughlin’s actions that
defeats manifest necessity here. Rather, it is the totality of the circumstances
surrounding his departure that requires this conclusion. More specifically, the
State has failed to demonstrate that any consideration was given to the
possible effect upon the defendant’s constitutional rights or that any measures
were taken to ensure those rights were protected.
Although the exact date may have been unknown, Judge Coughlin’s
departure was clearly anticipated when he volunteered for duty, yet the State
has failed to show either that any reasonable preventative measures were taken
to protect the defendant’s constitutional right to the same fact finder, or that
no such measures could have been taken. For example, the State has failed to
show that any attempt was made to reschedule the trial to an earlier date or
even to notify the defendant of the Judge’s planned departure. The record is
devoid of any effort to protect the defendant’s constitutional rights while Judge
Coughlin was still available. The United States Supreme Court has stated that
the decision to abort a trial must always be tempered “by considering the
importance to the defendant of being able, once and for all, to conclude his
confrontation with society through the verdict of a tribunal he might believe to
be favorably disposed to his fate.” Jorn, 400 U.S. at 486.
4
Implicit in this protection is the recognition not
only that there must be a barrier to manipulation
by the prosecution, but also that termination of a
trial before a verdict is returned may hurt the
defendant even without such manipulation.
Every jury has its own character and the initial
jury may be more favorably disposed to the
defendant than the next jury.
6 W. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 25.1(b) at 577 (3d ed. 2007). The
same can be said for a particular justice presiding over a trial without a jury.
The State failed to prove that the circumstances of this case justified depriving
the defendant of his constitutional right to a trial before the sworn tribunal.
The State argues that, in finding manifest necessity for a mistrial, Judge
Stephen did not act precipitously and gave significant consideration to
potential alternatives to mistrial after hearing argument from both the
defendant and the State. We agree. Indeed, the “[f]ailure of a trial court to
exercise such prudence may reflect an inadequate concern for a defendant’s
constitutional protections, and therefore diminish the deference otherwise due”
to a trial court’s finding. Gould, 144 N.H. at 417. However, Judge Stephen’s
careful consideration in this case does not negate the State’s failure to
demonstrate the existence of manifest necessity.
Similarly, we are unpersuaded by the State’s argument that this is
simply a dispute over causation. The facts leading up to Judge Coughlin’s
unavailability are undisputed – whether the “cause” of the trial’s termination is
seen as the issuance of departure orders by the military or Judge Coughlin’s
decision to volunteer for duty makes no difference in our analysis. Rather, it is
the totality of the circumstances, including the failure of the State to
demonstrate that reasonable measures to protect the defendant’s rights were
either taken or unavailable, that ultimately forms the basis of our
determination.
“Determining whether manifest necessity exists to justify the declaration
of a mistrial requires a balancing of competing concerns: the defendant’s
interests in completing his trial in a single proceeding before a particular
tribunal versus the strength of the justification for a mistrial.” People v. Hicks,
528 N.W.2d 136, 141 (Mich. 1994), cert. denied, 515 U.S. 1124 (1995), and
cert. denied, 515 U.S. 1152 (1995); see State v. Pond, 133 N.H. 738, 740 (1990)
(determining whether manifest necessity standard met requires weighing
prosecution’s and defendant’s competing interests). “The protection of
constitutional rights is a core function of the judiciary.” Opinion of the
Justices (Prior Sexual Assault Evidence), 141 N.H. 562, 574 (1997). Here,
5
although Judge Coughlin’s decision to volunteer for duty was, without
question, admirable, the record before us simply does not demonstrate
manifest necessity for a mistrial. However laudable the underlying cause,
when a judge becomes unavailable after jeopardy has attached and maintains
the ability to reasonably allow for the conclusion of that case, but fails to do so,
the State cannot meet its burden of showing manifest necessity.
Accordingly, under the unique circumstances of this case, we hold that
the Double Jeopardy Clause of the New Hampshire Constitution requires that
the trial court’s finding of manifest necessity be reversed. Because the
defendant prevails under the State Constitution, we need not reach the federal
issue. See Ball, 124 N.H. at 237.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6