THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-163
DONNA RICHARD
v.
GOOD LUCK TRAILER COURT, INC. & a.
Argued: January 17, 2008
Opinion Issued: March 21, 2008
MacMillan Law Offices, of Bradford, Massachusetts (Thomas K.
MacMillan on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Hamilton Law Offices, P.L.L.C., of Salem (Joseph L. Hamilton on the brief
and orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Donna Richard, appeals an order
entered after a bench trial in the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) ruling that the
defendants, Good Luck Trailer Court, Inc. and George Tareila, did not breach
either a contract for the sale of real property or an implied covenant of good
faith. We affirm.
In the spring of 2004, the plaintiff liquidated two pieces of investment
real estate in Haverhill, Massachusetts. In accordance with the federal “like-
kind exchange” law, see 26 U.S.C.A. § 1031 (West 2002 & Supp. 2007), she
designated defendant Good Luck Trailer Court, Inc. (trailer court) in Salem as
potential replacement property.
On July 1, 2004, the plaintiff and defendant Tareila, the primary officer,
director and shareholder of the trailer court, signed a purchase and sale
agreement for its sale for $1,800,000. The agreement provided that
[t]ransfer of title shall occur on or before September 10, 2004 . . . .
However, the closing date is contingent upon compliance with RSA
205-A regulating the sale of mobile home parks. If necessary, this
agreement shall be extended to a date that complies with the
requirements of RSA 205-A. SELLER to begin RSA 205-A
notification process immediately. SELLER will provide BUYER
with copies of all notices sent and proof of mailing and receipt by
tenants when mailed and all return receipts received by SELLER.
In addition, the agreement provided that “SELLER will notify all tenants in
accordance with RSA 205-A and inform BUYER of any tenants having exercised
any rights to purchase any or all assets hereunder.”
On August 31, Tareila informed the plaintiff by telephone that the
tenants’ association had made an offer in response to the RSA chapter 205-A
notice but, with no guarantee of financing and a closing date proposed for late
September or mid-October, the offer was unacceptable to him. Tareila
“wonder[ed] out loud” during the telephone conversation whether the plaintiff
could outbid the tenants so that he could sell the property to her. She
declined, because she thought a new bid might trigger a new notice date to the
tenants’ association. On September 2, Tareila telephoned the plaintiff again
and told her that he had decided to sell the property to her and wanted to close
as soon as possible.
On September 3, defendants’ attorney faxed a letter to plaintiff’s counsel
to confirm that Tareila had decided to proceed with the sale to the plaintiff.
Defendants’ attorney then faxed correspondence to counsel for the tenants’
association detailing numerous reasons why their offer was not accepted.
However, later that same day, defendants’ attorney informed plaintiff’s counsel
that the tenants’ association might be filing a modification to their offer and
that the plaintiff should not plan on a closing on September 8. On September
8, defendants’ attorney sent correspondence to plaintiff’s counsel stating that
“[a]s required by RSA 205-A:21, we have negotiated in good faith with [the
tenants’ association] and will be selling the mobile home park to [it] on or
before September 16, 2004.” On September 16, Tareila executed a purchase
and sale agreement with the tenants’ association for $1,800,000. On or about
September 20, the tenants’ association secured financing for the transaction.
The plaintiff filed suit for breach of her purchase and sale agreement as
well as breach of an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Following
2
a bench trial, the trial court ruled that there was no breach of the purchase
and sale agreement, which was conditioned upon compliance with RSA chapter
205-A. Because the tenants had availed themselves of their rights under RSA
205-A:21, the trial court concluded that the defendants had no alternative but
to sell the trailer court to them. The trial court also ruled that the defendants’
decision to sell the property to the tenants was not made in bad faith.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred: (1) in failing to
find that the defendants breached her purchase and sale agreement and an
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (2) in finding that the
provisions of RSA 205-A:21 commanded a sale of the trailer park to the
tenants; and (3) in failing to award her any damages.
“We will affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
unsupported by the evidence and we will affirm the trial court’s legal rulings
unless they are erroneous as a matter of law.” Krigsman v. Progressive N. Ins.
Co., 151 N.H. 643, 645 (2005); see Realco Equities, Inc. v. John Hancock Mut.
Life Ins. Co., 130 N.H. 345, 348 (1988).
RSA 205-A:21 (Supp. 2007) provides:
I. No manufactured housing park owner shall make a final
unconditional acceptance of any offer for the sale or transfer of a
manufactured housing park without first giving 60 days’ notice:
(a) To each tenant:
(1) That the owner intends to sell the manufactured housing
park; and
(2) Of the price, terms and conditions of an acceptable offer
the park owner has received to sell the park or the price, terms
and conditions for which the park owner intends to sell the
park. This notice shall include a copy of the signed written
offer which sets forth a description of the property to be
purchased and the price, terms and conditions of the
acceptable offer.
. . . .
II. During the notice period required under paragraph I, the
manufactured housing park owner shall consider any offer received
from the tenants or a tenants’ association, if any, and the owner
shall negotiate in good faith with the tenants concerning a potential
purchase. If during the notice period, the tenants decide to make
3
an offer to purchase the manufactured housing park, such offer
shall be evidenced by a purchase and sale agreement; however, the
tenants have a reasonable time beyond the 60-day period, if
necessary, to obtain financing for the purchase.
RSA 205-A:22 (2000) provides:
I. The owner of a manufactured housing park who sells or
transfers a park and willfully fails to comply with RSA 205-A:21
shall be liable to the tenants in the amount of $10,000 or 10
percent of the total sales price. . . . This civil penalty shall
constitute the sole and exclusive remedy for violation of RSA 205-
A:21 and the failure by a park owner to comply with said section
shall not affect the validity of any sale or transfer of title nor shall
such noncompliance constitute grounds to set aside a sale or
transfer in any court proceedings. . . .
II. Lack of knowledge of this section by a park owner shall not be
deemed to be a defense to an action for damages based on failure
to comply with RSA 205-A:21, I.
The plaintiff first argues that, on September 3, when defendants’
attorney faxed correspondence to counsel for the tenants’ association advising
that the tenants’ offer was rejected, this notice “effectively acknowledged
compliance [with] the notice requirements of the statute.” Accordingly, she
maintains, when the defendants changed their mind about closing with the
plaintiff later that day, their withdrawal from the purchase and sale agreement
was ineffective. Thus, the plaintiff argues, the defendants, “having reaffirmed
and revived the agreement with the Plaintiff [on September 3], [were] obligated
to consummate the deal with her and their refusal to do so resulted in a
breach.” We disagree.
Defendants’ attorney testified at trial that after the tenants’ association
made an offer to purchase the trailer court, the defendants “had an obligation
under the statute to negotiate in good faith with them.” As for the defendants’
written rejection of the tenants’ association’s offer on September 3, stating that
“we will be proceeding with the sale to the first purchaser next week,”
defendants’ attorney testified that such language “was put in as part of [his]
negotiating stance with [the tenants] in order for them to do what [the
defendants] thought was necessary under the statute, or call it off and let [the
defendants] go forward with the first contract.” He testified that the purpose of
the fax sent to plaintiff’s counsel on September 3 was to keep him posted as to
the status of negotiations with the tenants’ association. Indeed, plaintiff’s
counsel conceded that this latter fax did not promise a sale to the plaintiff.
4
“Contracts are . . . specific agreements to take specific steps to
accomplish particular results, and those commitments are the central measure
of each party’s responsibility.” Town of Allenstown v. National Cas. Co., 36
F.3d 229, 234 (1st Cir. 1994). The purchase and sale agreement between the
plaintiff and Tareila specifically made closing “contingent upon compliance with
RSA 205-A.” The record establishes that the correspondence that took place
between August 31 and September 3, 2004, represented negotiations between
the defendants and the tenants’ association consistent with the defendants’
obligation to comply with the requirements of RSA chapter 205-A, as required
by the purchase and sale agreement. The fact that the defendants sold the
trailer court to the tenants’ association did not constitute a breach of contract,
but, rather, was an event expressly contemplated in the purchase and sale
agreement. Furthermore, the plaintiff testified that she was aware that RSA
chapter 205-A made the sale of the trailer court contingent upon the tenants
not purchasing the property and that the statute required the defendants to
negotiate in good faith with the tenants. Plaintiff’s counsel testified that he was
familiar with the requirements of RSA chapter 205-A and that he advised the
plaintiff that there was a possibility that her transaction would not go through.
We hold that the record supports the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendants’ sale of the trailer court to the tenants’ association was not a breach
of contract with the plaintiff.
The plaintiff also argues that the defendants breached an implied
warranty of good faith and fair dealing. Specifically, she contends that “[o]nce
the Defendants had decided to reject the Tenants’ offer and advised the Plaintiff
of that fact, as well as the notification to the Tenants[’] counsel of same and the
request for an expedited closing, the Plaintiff claims that he was now bound to
her.” In concluding that the defendants did not act in bad faith in any aspect
of their dealings with the plaintiff, the trial court found that “[t]he defendant
disclosed the notice to purchase from the tenants as soon as it was received,
and the mere fact that he expressed the desire to sell to the plaintiff in no way
reaffirms or changes any of the language in the only writing signed by these
parties, the purchase and sale agreement dated July 1, 2004.”
“In every agreement there exists an implied covenant that each of the
parties will act in good faith and deal fairly with the other.” Seward Constr. Co.
v. City of Rochester, 118 N.H. 128, 129 (1978). “[T]he obligation of good faith
performance is better understood simply as excluding behavior inconsistent
with common standards of decency, fairness and reasonableness, and with the
parties’ agreed-upon common purposes and justified expectations.” Centronics
Corp. v. Genicom Corp., 132 N.H. 133, 140 (1989). As set forth above in the
discussion regarding breach of contract, Tareila signed a purchase and sale
agreement containing a requirement that he comply with RSA chapter 205-A
and, upon receiving an offer from the tenants’ association, his attorney
negotiated with them as required under the statute and ultimately sold the
5
trailer court to them. The record supports the trial court’s findings that “[a]ll
conversations were cordial and designed towards completing the real estate
transaction as soon as possible after the 60 day tenant notice provision
expired. The defendant was genuine in these discussions, he truly wanted to
sell the park to the plaintiff.” Based upon the written purchase and sale
agreement, however, the plaintiff’s “justified expectations” necessarily included
that the defendants might sell the trailer court to the tenants’ association if it
made a competitive offer within the sixty-day notice period. We affirm the trial
court’s ruling that the defendants did not act in bad faith.
The plaintiff also argues that the trial court erred “by determining that
the statute required a sale of the trailer park to the Tenant’s Association,”
noting that “[n]owhere in RSA 205-A:21 does it provide that a park owner must
sell to its tenants if they make an offer relatively similar to that of a third
party.” RSA chapter 205-A clearly provides tenants of a manufactured housing
park a right to make an offer to purchase the park after the owner has entered
into a purchase and sale agreement with a third party. The statute also
requires that the park owner consider an offer from the tenants and negotiate
with them in good faith. Thus, at a minimum, the statute requires that any
offer to purchase a manufactured housing park by a third party be conditioned
upon the tenants not making a comparable offer within the sixty-day period
following notice.
“After the formal notice provisions in RSA 205-A:21, I, which include
notice of price, terms and conditions, RSA 205-A:21, II envisions an
opportunity for the tenants to make an offer and, in such event, charges the
owner with the obligation to consider the tenant offer and to negotiate in good
faith toward a potential tenant purchase.” Whispering Springs Tenant Assoc.
v. Barrett, 137 N.H. 203, 206 (1993). We need not decide whether RSA 205-
A:21 “required” a sale to the tenants’ association in this case or whether the
trial court erred in so concluding; the transaction that occurred here complied
with the statute. The plaintiff does not dispute that before the sixty-day notice
period expired, the tenants’ association forwarded a purchase and sale
agreement to the owner. Indeed, as the plaintiff concedes, so long as the
requirements of the statute are met, “it would appear that [the park owner]
would be free to sell the park to either a third party or the Tenants Association,
so long as his actions were in good faith.”
Because of our holding, we need not address the plaintiff’s final
argument that the trial court erred in failing to award her any damages.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6