THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-331
ROBERT NENNI & a.
v.
COMMISSIONER, NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE DEPARTMENT
Submitted: October 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 18, 2007
Michael J. Di Cola, of Alton, by brief, for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Robert and Arlene Nenni, appeal the
order of the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) denying their motion for summary
judgment and granting summary judgment to the respondent, the
Commissioner of the New Hampshire Insurance Department (department). We
affirm.
The parties stipulated to, or the record reveals, the following facts. On or
about January 3, 2000, each petitioner purchased the Polaris II variable
annuity (Polaris II) sold by Anchor National Life Insurance Company (Anchor).
Each annuity cost $350,000, resulting in a total initial investment of $700,000.
The Polaris II is a group variable annuity product. Upon purchase of the
Polaris II, the petitioners became part of a group comprised of individuals
across the country who purchased the Polaris II. The members of this group
are covered under the master group annuity contract issued by Anchor to
Community First National Bank, Trustee.
When they purchased the Polaris II, the petitioners were each issued a
certificate evidencing coverage under the master group annuity contract. The
certificate, entitled “ALLOCATED FIXED AND VARIABLE GROUP ANNUITY
CERTIFICATE,” provided, in pertinent part:
ANCHOR NATIONAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY (“We”, “Us”, the
“Company”, or “Anchor National”) agrees to provide benefits to the
Participant under the Group Contract, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this Certificate and in consideration of
Purchase Payments We receive.
This Certificate is evidence of coverage under the Group
Contract. The coverage will begin as of the Certificate Date,
shown on the Certificate Data page.
The value of amounts allocated to the Separate Account
during the accumulation and annuity periods is not
guaranteed, and will increase or decrease based upon the
investment experience of the Variable Portfolios You choose.
. . . .
RIGHT TO EXAMINE – You may return this Certificate to Our
Annuity Service Center or to the agent through whom the
Certificate was purchased within 10 days after You receive it,
if You are not satisfied with it. The Company will refund the
Purchase Payment(s) paid. Upon such refund, the Certificate
will be void. We reserve the right to allocate Your Purchase
Payment(s) to the Cash Management Portfolio until the end of
the Right to Examine period. Thereafter, allocations will be
made as shown on the Certificate Data Page.
In 1999, the department reviewed and approved this certificate for
issuance and delivery in New Hampshire. The department, however, has not
reviewed or approved the master group annuity contract for issuance and
delivery in New Hampshire. Rather, that contract was reviewed by the
Nebraska Department of Insurance and issued in Nebraska to Community
First National Bank, Trustee.
In July 2005, the petitioners requested a copy of the master group
annuity contract from the department. They received a letter from the
2
respondent’s deputy, enclosing a copy of Anchor’s 1999 letter seeking the
department’s approval to sell the Polaris II in New Hampshire. The deputy’s
letter indicated that the approval stamp affixed by the department on Anchor’s
letter served as the department’s approval of the Polaris II contract for issuance
and delivery in New Hampshire. The letter also explained that the petitioners
had purchased a group annuity product, rather than an individual annuity
product. The letter informed the petitioners that a group certificate cannot be
sold to an individual who is not a member of the group and that the petitioners
became members of a group when they purchased the Polaris II. The letter
further informed the petitioners that when they invested in the Polaris II, they
actually invested in the stock portfolios of the Anchor Series Trust and that the
investors in the Trust constituted a group.
In November 2005, the petitioners wrote to Anchor’s parent company
requesting return of their premium investment with three percent interest,
alleging that their insurance agent had misrepresented the type of annuity they
purchased. In response, the parent company informed the petitioners that
they had, in fact, been issued group annuity contracts, as stated in their
certificates, and that, pursuant to their certificates, the ten-day period to
cancel their contracts and obtain their premium payments had already lapsed.
The parent company explained that the petitioners became members of a group
when they invested in the Polaris II and its underlying stock portfolios and, as
a result, they invested in a group annuity, not an individual annuity.
In August 2006, the petitioners filed a petition for declaratory judgment,
alleging that based upon their agent’s representations and the forms he
provided, they thought that they were purchasing individual, not group,
annuities. They alleged that when they realized that they had purchased group
annuities, they asked the department about its approval of the Polaris II. They
brought the declaratory judgment proceeding because they were not satisfied
with the answers they received from the department. They sought, among
other things, a declaration that the department violated RSA 408:52 (2006)
when it approved the Polaris II for issuance and delivery in New Hampshire.
Both parties moved for summary judgment. The trial court ruled in the
department’s favor, and this appeal followed.
We will affirm a trial court’s grant of summary judgment if, considering
the evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the non-movant, our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter
of law. Stewart v. Bader, 154 N.H. 75, 87 (2006). We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The sole issue for our review is whether the trial court erroneously
interpreted RSA 408:52. We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de
3
novo. Bendetson v. Killarney, Inc., 154 N.H. 637, 641 (2006). We are the final
arbiter of the legislature’s intent regarding the meaning of a statute considered
as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond
it for further indication of legislative intent, and we refuse to consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to incorporate into the statute. Id. Finally, we interpret a statute in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id.
RSA 408:52 provides, in pertinent part:
No registered insurance corporation or its salesmen or
agents shall sell or offer for sale any form of variable contract
unless the sale of such form of contract has been approved by the
commissioner. Such a corporation desiring to qualify such
variable contract form shall submit to the commissioner such
descriptive statistical, or documentary information as he may
require. The commissioner shall after examination of such
information approve or disapprove the sale of such variable
contract in the said form.
A variable contract is:
any life insurance policy or annuity contract issued by an
insurance company which provides that the dollar amount of
benefits or other contractual payments thereunder may vary
according to the investment experience of any separate account or
accounts maintained by the insurance company in which amounts
received in connection with such policies or contracts have been
placed.
RSA 408:27 (2006). The petitioners do not dispute that the Polaris II is a
“variable contract” within the meaning of RSA 408:27.
The petitioners argue that RSA 408:52 required the department to
approve the master group annuity contract before allowing the Polaris II to be
sold in New Hampshire. They contend that the phrase “form of contract” as
used in RSA 408:52 refers to “the actual master group contract or the form of
contract given to individual participants” under that contract. They assert that
because the department approved only the certificate, and did not approve the
master group annuity contract itself, the sale of the Polaris II to them did not
comply with RSA 408:52, and was void as a matter of law.
4
The petitioners err by reading the phrase “form of contract” in isolation.
“We do not read words or phrases in isolation, but rather in the context of the
entire statute.” Appeal of Kaplan, 153 N.H. 296, 299 (2006) (quotation
omitted). RSA 408:52 does not require the respondent to approve the “form of
contract”; it requires him to approve “the sale of such form of contract.”
(Emphasis added.) In context, therefore, the use of the word “form” refers to
the type or kind of variable contract, rather than the actual paper form.
Compare Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 892 (unabridged ed.
2002) (definition 4(e)(1) defines form as a “printed or typed document with
blank spaces for insertion of required or requested specific information”), with
Webster’s, supra (definition 9(a) defines form as “one of the different modes of
existence, action or manifestation of a particular thing or substance : KIND,
MODIFICATION, SPECIES, VARIETY”).
Here, as the trial court found, and as the parties do not dispute, the
department approved Anchor’s request to offer the Polaris II for sale in New
Hampshire. This approval complied with RSA 408:52. By approving the
Polaris II for sale in New Hampshire, the department approved the sale of the
Polaris II as a “form of variable contract.” RSA 408:52. Therefore, we affirm
the trial court’s ruling that the sale of the Polaris II to the petitioners did not
violate RSA 408:52.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5