THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2007-702
PRESTON T. KELSEY, II & a.
v.
TOWN OF HANOVER
Argued: May 21, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 20, 2008
Stebbins Bradley Harvey Miller & Brooks, P.A., of Hanover (Stephen P.
Girdwood on the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Mitchell & Bates, P.A., of Laconia (Walter L. Mitchell and Laura A.
Spector on the brief, and Ms. Spector orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Preston T. Kelsey, II, Virginia R.
Kelsey, Dirk J. Van Leeuwen, Frank Holloway, Ann Holloway, Robert
McLaughry and Ann McLaughry, appeal the decision of the Superior Court
(Vaughan, J.) upholding the dismissal of their appeal of a zoning permit
granted by the respondent, the Town of Hanover (Town), to Jerry and Claire
Strochlic. We affirm.
I
The following facts were found by the Town of Hanover Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA), recited by the superior court, or are supported by the
record. In November 2005, the Strochlics purchased property located at 1
Weatherby Terrace. The property has an unusual configuration. At its north
end it has twenty feet of frontage on Weatherby Road. This narrow width
extends southerly past adjacent wider lots whereupon the property broadens to
the west into a buildable area. Neighbors have an easement over the twenty-
foot wide strip for access to Weatherby Road from their homes to the east and
south. The easement is paved and known as Weatherby Terrace, a private
right-of-way. The Strochlics sought permits to raze an existing house on their
property and construct a new one. The Town issued a zoning permit to them
on April 28, 2006. The permit allowed the new home to be located on the lot in
conformity with the Town’s setback requirements for frontage on Weatherby
Road, not from Weatherby Terrace. A building permit was issued on July 24,
and a demolition permit was issued on September 19.
Two of the petitioners, Ann Holloway (Holloway) and Virginia Kelsey
(Kelsey), met with the Town’s zoning administrator in the fall of 2005 and again
in late May 2006 to inquire about the Strochlics’ project. In October 2006, the
Strochlics’ house was demolished and stakes for the new foundation were
fixed. On October 25, the petitioners filed an appeal with the ZBA contesting
the issuance of the zoning permit. At the hearing before the ZBA, they argued
that Weatherby Terrace, a private right-of-way, should be considered a “street”
in accordance with the Town’s zoning ordinance, and thus the setback
requirements for frontage of the Strochlics’ proposed residence should have
been calculated from Weatherby Terrace, and not from Weatherby Road. They
responded to the Town’s contention that their appeal was untimely by arguing
that they had reasonably relied upon representations of the zoning
administrator that they would be directly notified of any progress in the
Strochlics’ project and, thus, did not appeal the zoning permit within fifteen
days as required by the local ordinance. The ZBA dismissed the appeal,
concluding that it lacked jurisdiction because the appeal was untimely. See
Daniel v. B & J Realty, 134 N.H. 174, 176 (1991) (compliance with procedural
deadline for filing appeal is necessary prerequisite to establishing jurisdiction
in appellate body). The petitioners’ motion for rehearing was denied. The
superior court, see RSA 677:4 (2008), subsequently upheld the decision of the
ZBA, and this appeal followed.
II
A party seeking to have the superior court set aside a decision of a ZBA
bears the burden of establishing that its decision was unlawful or
unreasonable. Greene v. Town of Deering, 151 N.H. 795, 797 (2005). The
findings of fact made by a ZBA are deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable.
Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). We will uphold the
superior court’s affirmance or denial of a ZBA decision unless its ruling is
unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id.
2
Under RSA 676:5, I (2008), appeals to the ZBA “shall be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and with the board a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof.” (Emphasis added.) The Town’s zoning ordinance
prescribes the “reasonable time” for appealing the issuance of a zoning permit
as fifteen days and identifies public posting of the permit as the method for
providing notice. See Town of Hanover Zoning Ordinance §§1001.6, 1005.2C
(1). Section 1001.6 provides in pertinent part:
No Zoning Permit issued hereunder shall take effect until
fifteen days have passed after its issuance. Within three
days following the issuance of a Zoning Permit, the Zoning
Administrator shall post a copy of this permit in at least one
public place until fifteen days have elapsed from the date of
its issuance . . . .
During this fifteen-day period, an appeal of the Zoning
Permit may be filed with the Zoning Board in accordance
with RSA 676:5 . . . .
Section 1005.2C (1) reiterates the fifteen-day appeal period:
Any appeal taken from any decision of the Zoning
Administrator shall be taken within fifteen (15) days of the
date of the decision except for decisions that a violation
exists. With regard to decisions by the Zoning Administrator
that there has been a violation of the Zoning Ordinance, the
alleged offender shall have seven (7) days from the date of
receipt of the Notice of Violation to appeal the decision of the
Zoning Administrator.
The petitioners do not challenge the facial validity of the fifteen-day time
limit for appeals to the ZBA or the manner used for providing notice that a
permit has been issued. Rather, they advance four arguments. First, they
contend that due process bars the strict application of the fifteen-day appeal
period due to the unique circumstances of this case. Second, they contest the
trial court’s ruling that no evidence exists to suggest that they were misled by
the zoning administrator. Third, they argue that they offered sufficient
evidence in the trial court to meet their burden of proof that the decision of the
ZBA was unreasonable. Finally, they contend that the zoning administrator
failed in her constitutional duty to provide assistance to them as citizens,
thereby interfering with their right and ability to properly appeal. We address
each argument in turn.
3
III
We turn first to the petitioners’ argument that due process bars the strict
application of the fifteen-day appeal period under the Town’s zoning ordinance.
While they do not challenge the facial validity of the ordinance, they contend
that “when specific intervening acts adjust the reasonable expectations of
parties to a zoning case, the rules of due process must still be complied with.”
In particular, they claim that during the fall 2005 meeting Holloway and Kelsey
had with the zoning administrator, she created a reasonable expectation that
she would provide them with direct notice of any further progress in the
Strochlics’ proposed project, and that she misled them about the “true
pendency” of the Strochlics’ proposed project.
“It is well settled that an elementary and fundamental requirement of
due process is notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to
apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an
opportunity to present their objections.” Dow v. Town of Effingham, 148 N.H.
121, 129 (2002) (quotation omitted). Because the petitioners do not challenge
the facial validity of the zoning ordinance, we focus our review upon whether
the trial court’s affirmance of the ZBA’s dismissal of the appeal is unsupported
by the evidence or is legally erroneous with respect to the “intervening acts”
they have identified.
We first turn to the petitioners’ contention that during the fall 2005
meeting, the zoning administrator created a reasonable expectation that she
would provide Holloway and Kelsey with direct notice. At the hearing before
the ZBA, counsel for the petitioners explained that during their meeting, the
zoning administrator gave Holloway and Kelsey two sketches of the Strochlics’
lot with different interpretations of the setback requirements and discussed the
potential building envelope. Counsel contended that the petitioners left the
meeting with the “understanding” or “feeling” that they would be notified
directly as proceedings went forward concerning the lot and if any permitting
occurred. Kelsey did not attend the ZBA hearing, but Holloway did participate.
When she was asked about the basis for her belief, she responded:
You know, this was a . . . more than a year ago. . . . All I can
tell you is [the zoning administrator] was very helpful and we
left feeling that we were in the loop and [the zoning
administrator] well knew we were very concerned about the
presumed size of the house on this small piece of property
and that we were concerned about set backs.
For her part, the zoning administrator testified before the ZBA that she could
not recall ever telling anyone who came to the zoning office that she would
send them “something that wasn’t absolutely required,” that she often told
4
people to get in touch with her if they have concerns, and that due to the
“crush of business [the] staff . . . just [could not] track . . . each person’s
interest . . . if [no legal notice was] required.” This was the extent of the
evidence before the ZBA regarding the petitioners’ claim that during their
meeting in the fall of 2005 the zoning administrator somehow communicated to
Holloway and Kelsey that she would provide direct notice to them and thereby
vary the normal procedure of posting public notice as required by the Town’s
ordinance. Based upon this record, we conclude that the petitioners have
failed to establish that the trial court’s affirmance of the ZBA’s decision was
unreasonable or unlawful. See Harrington, 152 N.H. at 77.
The petitioners also contend that the zoning administrator misled them
during that same meeting regarding the pendency of the Strochlics’ application
for a permit. They claim that when she provided Holloway and Kelsey with the
two sketches, the zoning administrator presented interpretations of the setback
regulations “as if there was still a question in her mind.” According to the
petitioners, however, the zoning administrator had already decided how to
classify the private right-of-way known as Weatherby Terrace and how to apply
the setback rules to the Strochlics’ lot. The petitioners contend that because
they were misled, they were denied the opportunity to meaningfully understand
the zoning issues and prepare a proper appeal.
The petitioners’ argument, according to the Town, was not preserved for
our review. See RSA 677:3 (2008) (issue not raised in motion for rehearing
should not be considered by superior court unless good cause shown);
McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. __, __, 945 A.2d 18, 20 (2008) (ZBA should have
first opportunity to address alleged errors made in its decision). We observe
that the petitioners made no claim of being misled before the ZBA but averred
that: “At [the fall 2005] meeting, [the zoning administrator] obviously was
trying herself to identify the setback issues on this particular property, because
of the uniqueness of the lot . . . .” On appeal before us, however, they point to
an April 2005 letter issued by the zoning administrator that they assert “was
uncovered after the ZBA hearing” to demonstrate that she had already decided
how to apply the setback regulations by the time they met in the fall, but she
failed to disclose this decision during their meeting. We conclude that even
assuming, without deciding, that the claim of being misled is properly before
us, the petitioners’ argument fails on the merits.
The petitioners do not establish how the zoning administrator’s failure to
disclose her purported decision in April 2005 regarding the setback
requirements for the Strolichs’ lot interfered with their ability to comprehend
the significance of the zoning issues and to properly prepare an appeal after
they met with the zoning administrator in May 2006. Petitioners’ counsel
informed the ZBA that during this second meeting with the zoning
administrator, Holloway and Kelsey “had a chance to take a look at the file”
5
and Holloway testified that she was “astounded” at the final drawing. Even if
the petitioners were misled in the fall of 2005, they had actual knowledge of the
final footprint in May 2006. Further, they had the opportunity to see the
permit itself through, at a minimum, the public posting procedure that the
Town was required to follow under its zoning ordinance. We also note that the
question of whether the permit was in the file at the time of the May meeting
was not challenged by the petitioners before the ZBA. While the fifteen-day
appeal period may have lapsed shortly before this meeting, the alleged failure of
the zoning administrator to reveal her April 2005 letter to the petitioners
during the fall 2005 meeting had no bearing upon their understanding of the
final plans made available to them in May 2006. Nonetheless, the petitioners
failed to pursue an appeal for nearly six months after the May 2006 meeting.
Accordingly, the petitioners have not established that the trial court’s rejection
of their due process argument was unreasonable or legally erroneous.
Our analysis of the petitioners’ due process argument renders it
unnecessary for us to address their challenge to the trial court’s ruling that
“there is no evidence in the Certified Record or the pleadings that would
suggest that they were misled by actions of the zoning administrators.”
Additionally, because the substance of the petitioners’ argument that they
provided sufficient evidence and a legal basis to establish that the ZBA’s
decision was unreasonable simply reiterates their position that the zoning
administrator misled them and provided them with inadequate information, we
need not address it as a separate argument.
IV
We next address the petitioners’ argument that New Hampshire law
imposed a constitutional duty upon the zoning administrator, in response to a
direct inquiry, to properly inform them about the status of zoning approvals on
the Strochlics’ property as well as the appeal process open to them. They claim
that the trial court erroneously interpreted their argument to claim that the
zoning administrator had a duty to point out all of the applicable appeal
deadlines. Rather, they contend that they were arguing that the zoning
administrator had a duty to provide “basic information concerning an abutter’s
development plan and the basic permit and appeal process.” The Town argues
that the petitioners’ claim that the zoning administrator failed to assist them
was not preserved before the ZBA. See McNamara, 157 N.H. at __, 945 A.2d at
20. Even assuming that the trial court misconstrued the nature of the
petitioners’ argument and that the argument was preserved for our review, we
conclude that it lacks merit.
We have consistently held that municipalities have a constitutional
obligation “to provide assistance to all their citizens” under Part I, Article 1 of
our State Constitution. Carbonneau v. Town of Rye, 120 N.H. 96, 99 (1980);
6
see also Richmond Co. v. City of Concord, 149 N.H. 312, 314 (2003); Savage v.
Town of Rye, 120 N.H. 409, 411 (1980). In the context of aiding property
owners seeking municipal approval to develop their property, our focus has
been “aimed at preventing municipalities from ignoring an application or
otherwise engaging in dilatory tactics in order to delay a project.” Richmond
Co., 149 N.H. at 315. We have used reasonableness as a benchmark for
assessing whether municipalities have fulfilled their constitutional obligation to
provide assistance. See id. at 316.
In the cases the petitioners rely upon, we addressed situations in which
property owners engaged town officials in an attempt to abide by municipal
ordinances in order to develop their land. See id. at 313; Carbonneau, 120
N.H. at 97; see also Savage, 120 N.H. at 410. In Carbonneau, for example, we
admonished the Town of Rye for its position that it was “not in the business of
telling [the developer] what to do so that he [could] get approval.” Carbonneau,
120 N.H. at 99 (quotation omitted). Here, we are facing a situation in which
town residents approached a town official to both inquire and express concern
about a proposed project in their neighborhood. While we have no doubt that
the constitutional duty imposed upon municipalities to provide assistance to
their citizenry has relevance when an abutter or interested resident inquires
about a proposed project, we cannot accept the scope of the duty the
petitioners seek to impose in this case.
The petitioners contend that because Holloway and Kelsey inquired and
expressed concern about the Strochlics’ project, the zoning administrator had a
duty to provide them with basic information about the proposed plan and the
basic permit and appeal process. They point to no evidence in the record,
however, that Holloway and Kelsey raised any particular question or
demonstrated any particular confusion about the process that the zoning
administrator failed to address, including inquiries about the stages of the
process, the procedures for protecting their rights or their ability to challenge
the proposed project. We note that in their memorandum submitted to the
trial court, the petitioners summarized their exchange with the zoning
administrator, repeatedly mentioning: “specific inquiries”; “[u]pon inquiry”;
“after inquiry.” They did not identify, however, any place in the record that
documents the particulars of any asserted inquiry expressed to the zoning
administrator. At most, the record supports the conclusion that Holloway and
Kelsey inquired and expressed concern about the anticipated scope and
placement of the proposed house.
The petitioners do not suggest that any statutes, local regulations or the
particular file regarding the Strochlics’ project were unavailable to them.
Rather, the record supports the conclusion that in the fall of 2005, the zoning
administrator discussed with Holloway and Kelsey the concerns that they
expressed. In fact, Holloway testified that the zoning administrator “was very
7
helpful and . . . answered our concerns and our questions.” Though the
petitioners contend that the zoning administrator failed to provide them with
her April 2005 letter concerning setbacks for the Strochlics’ new home, the
record establishes neither how this letter finally materialized nor whether the
letter was withheld or secreted with any pretense or intent. Moreover, in May
2006, Holloway and Kelsey had the opportunity to review the final plan and the
file itself. The petitioners do not dispute that the Town followed the public
posting procedure when the permit was issued on April 28, 2006, and thus, at
a minimum, Holloway and Kelsey had an opportunity to observe this notice.
The record simply does not support a conclusion that the zoning administrator
ignored concerns or questions expressed to her by Holloway or Kelsey about
the process, engaged in dilatory tactics, or otherwise refused or failed to offer
assistance on inquiries they made or confusion they expressed.
On this record, we cannot endorse imposing upon the zoning
administrator a constitutional duty to have taken some initiative to educate
Holloway and Kelsey about the pendency of the project and about the permit
and appeal process. Accordingly, we conclude the petitioners have failed to
establish that the record supports their contention that the Town failed in its
constitutional duty to provide assistance to its citizens.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8