THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-291
JONATHAN MCNEAL & a.
v.
ROBERT M. LEBEL d/b/a RML GENERAL CONTRACTOR & a.
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 11, 2008
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief), and Bosen & Springer, P.L.L.C., of Portsmouth (Jonathan S. Springer
orally), for the plaintiffs.
Tower, Crocker & Mullins, P.A., of Jaffrey (Thomas P. Mullins on the brief
and orally), for defendant Robert M. Lebel d/b/a RML General Contractor.
Gormley & Gormley, P.C., of Nashua (Arthur O. Gormley, III on the brief
and orally), for defendant Pullman Modular Industries, Inc.
HICKS, J. The plaintiffs, Jonathan and Paula McNeal, appeal an order of
the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) in their action against the defendants,
Pullman Modular Industries, Inc. (Pullman) and Robert M. Lebel d/b/a RML
General Contractor (Lebel), arising out of the allegedly improper manufacture
and/or construction of a modular home. We affirm in part, reverse in part,
and remand.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. In April
2004, the plaintiffs contracted with Lebel for the construction of a modular
home. The eventual contract price was $359,042. The plaintiffs and Lebel
decided to purchase the home from Pullman. The home was to be constructed
near the plaintiffs’ existing home, allowing them to move into the new home
and raze the old one upon completion.
Pullman manufactured the home and delivered it to the plaintiffs’
property in August 2004. Mr. McNeal and Lebel noticed several problems,
most prominently that the plaintiffs had expected different kitchen cabinets,
the beam and joists for the attic did not allow for installation of a flat floor, and
Pullman did not deliver any of the three sets of stairs it was to supply.
Pullman eventually delivered, or built on-site, the stairs that it was responsible
for supplying and Lebel built two sets of basement stairs as he had contracted
to do. Once built, some of the sets of stairs failed to satisfy the applicable
building code.
The terms of the plaintiffs’ construction financing required the loan to be
paid by September 30, 2004, but the home was not ready for occupancy by
that date. In fact, by October 1, each of the parties had become, in the trial
court’s words, “somewhat disappointed and distrustful of one another.” Lebel
informed the plaintiffs that he would not continue construction unless he was
assured payment for work done after October 1. He requested that funds be
placed in escrow, but the plaintiffs were not willing to do so.
On October 4, 2004, the plaintiffs’ attorney sent a letter to Lebel
requesting that he prioritize his work to the exterior of the home. Lebel
interpreted this letter to amount to his termination, and, as of October 7, 2004,
stopped work on the home. The plaintiffs did not obtain a certificate of
occupancy for the new home until July 2005.
The plaintiffs sued Lebel for breach of contract, and both defendants for
negligence and violation of RSA 205-B:2 (2000) and RSA chapter 358-A (1995
& Supp. 2007). Lebel counterclaimed for amounts due under the contract and
for unpaid work performed.
With respect to the common law theories, the court concluded that “none
of the parties [is] without fault” and awarded damages as follows:
[T]he Court awards the plaintiffs a verdict of $9,250.00 against
defendant Lebel on their claims of breach of contract and
negligence. The Court awards the plaintiffs a verdict of $9,250.00
against Pullman on their claim of negligence. The Court awards
Lebel a verdict of $16,500.00 on his counterclaim against the
2
plaintiffs as it finds that they breached their contract with him by
not paying him for all the work that he did and by not allowing him
to complete his work. Thus the plaintiffs owe Lebel $7,250.00 at
present and Pullman owes the plaintiffs $9,250.00 at present.
On reconsideration, the court ruled that the plaintiffs were entitled to credit for
$1,978.36 they paid Lebel for a change order, and reduced the damage award
to Lebel by that amount. The trial court found that the evidence did not
support the claimed statutory violations.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in: (1) ruling
that they breached the contract; (2) making certain factual findings; (3)
determining damages; (4) ruling that the home contained no “substantial
defects” as that phrase is used in RSA 205-B:2; and (5) ruling that neither
defendant committed any unfair or deceptive trade practices as contemplated
by RSA 358-A:2 (1995). We will uphold the trial court’s factual findings and
rulings of law unless they lack evidentiary support or constitute a clear error of
law. Barrows v. Boles, 141 N.H. 382, 389 (1996).
The plaintiffs first challenge the trial court’s determinations of
contractual liability, asserting that Lebel materially breached and they
committed no breach. They contend that Lebel breached the contract by
leaving the job prior to completing his work after insisting upon conditions not
contemplated in the contract; specifically, the placement of funds in escrow
and assurance of end financing. They further contend that these were material
breaches, relieving them of further contractual obligations.
The trial court found that on September 30, 2004, the plaintiffs’
construction lender informed Lebel that it “would not be [disbursing] any more
monies for the Plaintiff[s’] project because they were [two] months behind in
[their] interest payments.” The court also ruled that “Lebel performed his work
in accordance with the contract until funding was withdrawn by the finance
company” and that the plaintiffs’ “unwillingness to escrow sufficient funds to
enable Lebel to complete the project was unreasonable.”
We read the court’s order as implicitly ruling that the cessation of
disbursements under the construction loan was an apparent anticipatory
breach or repudiation of the plaintiffs’ contractual obligations, entitling Lebel to
seek assurance of payment before continuing his performance. “An
anticipatory breach of contract occurs when a promising party repudiates his
obligations either through words or by voluntarily disabling himself from
performing them before the time for performance.” Syncom Indus. v. Wood,
155 N.H. 73, 83-84 (2007). Interestingly, as we noted in Syncom, the action
constituting anticipatory breach in both of our leading cases on the subject,
LeTarte v. West Side Development Group, LLC, 151 N.H. 291 (2004), and Hoyt
3
v. Horst, 105 N.H. 380 (1964), was the failure to make payments under the
contract. Id. at 84.
Our cases note that “[i]n instances of anticipatory breach, the non-
breaching party has the option to treat the repudiation as an immediate breach
and maintain an action at once for the damages.” LeTarte, 151 N.H. at 294.
As other courts have recognized, however, where the actions of the apparently
repudiating party are equivocal or uncertain, this option presents the
nonbreaching party with a dilemma. See Norcon Power v. Niagara Mohawk
Power, 705 N.E.2d 656, 659 (N.Y. 1998).
If the promisee regards the apparent repudiation as an anticipatory
repudiation, terminates his or her own performance and sues for
breach, the promisee is placed in jeopardy of being found to have
breached if the court determines that the apparent repudiation
was not sufficiently clear and unequivocal to constitute an
anticipatory repudiation justifying nonperformance. If, on the
other hand, the promisee continues to perform after perceiving an
apparent repudiation, and it is subsequently determined that an
anticipatory repudiation took place, the promisee may be denied
recovery for post-repudiation expenditures because of his or her
failure to avoid those expenses as part of a reasonable effort to
mitigate damages after the repudiation.
Id. (quotation omitted).
In the case of contracts for the sale of goods, Article 2 of the Uniform
Commercial Code (UCC) provides a means for dealing with this dilemma by
providing a right to demand adequate assurance of due performance “[w]hen
reasonable grounds for insecurity arise” and declaring a failure to provide such
assurance within a reasonable time to be a repudiation of the contract. See
RSA 382-A:2-609(1) (1994). This provision of the UCC “has been considered so
effective in bridging the doctrinal, exceptional and operational gap related to
the doctrine of anticipatory breach that some States have imported the
complementary regimen of demand for adequate assurance to common-law
categories of contract law, using UCC 2-609 as the synapse.” Norcon Power,
705 N.E.2d at 660; see also Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 251 (1981).
Although a right to demand adequate assurance under general contract
law has not previously been recognized in our case law, we conclude that the
trial court correctly applied the doctrine here. The comment to section 251 of
the Restatement (Second) of Contracts notes that that section is based upon a
principle “closely related to the duty of good faith and fair dealing in the
performance of the contract,” Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 251
comment a at 277, a duty that has long been an integral component of our
4
common law of contracts, see Centronics Corp. v. Genicom Corp., 132 N.H.
133, 139 (1989).
Because the record reveals sufficient grounds for Lebel to seek adequate
assurance of future performance, which the plaintiffs did not supply, neither
Lebel’s request for the escrow of funds, nor his cessation of work pending such
assurance was a material breach relieving the plaintiffs of further obligation
under the contract. Cf. Kunian v. Development Corporation of America, 334
A.2d 427, 433 (Conn. 1973) (where buyer under installment contract for
piecemeal delivery of plumbing and heating material fell behind in payment,
seller “had ‘reasonable grounds for insecurity’ and justifiably informed the
[buyer] that it would deliver the balance of the material only if payment of the
entire contract was guaranteed by the [buyer’s] depositing sufficient cash in
escrow to pay for the delivered materials”). We accordingly reject the plaintiffs’
argument and uphold the trial court’s rulings on this issue.
The plaintiffs also challenge a number of the trial court’s factual findings,
specifically contending that the court erred in finding: (1) that there was no
real pressure or firm deadline for the plaintiffs to move into the new house; (2)
that the plaintiffs’ financing delays created unreasonable deadlines for
completing construction; (3) that the plaintiffs’ complaint was not with the
quality of Lebel’s work; and (4) that the plaintiffs deliberately waited to get their
certificate of occupancy. We examine each challenged finding in turn.
The trial court stated that “[a]lthough the plaintiffs were anxious to get
their new home constructed and move in, they were under no time constraints
to do so because they could always continue to live in their existing house until
the new house was ready.” The court then observed that “[i]n hindsight it
appears that it was the lack of any real pressure in terms of the plaintiffs not
having a firm deadline to move into their new house that allowed the dispute
between the parties to go unresolved for far longer than it reasonably should
have.”
The plaintiffs take issue with this language, arguing that they had a firm
deadline of September 30, 2004, to pay off their construction loan. The trial
court did not find to the contrary: the court explicitly noted in its order that
“[t]he fact that the construction financing would run out on September 30,
2004 meant that there was some pressure on Lebel to have all of his work done
by that date.” We conclude that the court’s background discussion regarding
the plaintiffs’ ability to remain in their old house indefinitely was not necessary
to its legal rulings.
The plaintiffs next challenge the trial court’s statement that “[t]he
plaintiffs’ delay in getting construction financing and ultimately converting that
financing to a conventional mortgage created unreasonable deadlines for the
5
completion of the construction that could not be met.” They argue that, to the
contrary, their construction financing was in place “as of June 1, in plenty of
time to manufacture and set the house” and that it was mistakes by Pullman
and Lebel that delayed conversion to a conventional mortgage.
The court’s statement is not clearly erroneous nor does it appear to have
affected the court’s legal rulings to the plaintiffs’ detriment. The court stated
that “[l]argely because of the difficulty in obtaining construction financing,
there was a delay in getting the plaintiffs’ home built” (emphasis added), noting
that “even though the contract that Lebel had with the plaintiffs was agreed
upon in mid April, production did not begin on the plaintiffs’ house until mid
July.” The plaintiffs do not dispute that their construction financing was not
available until June 1, a month and a half after their mid-April agreement with
Lebel. They assert that Lebel still delayed placing the order with Pullman until
July 6, 2004, but we note that the court did not find Lebel blameless with
respect to delays on the project. The court’s order merely acknowledges that
for various reasons, attributable in part to each of the parties, Lebel’s time
frame for completing the project shrank from five months (May through
September) to slightly under two months (early August through September).
We find no error.
The plaintiffs also contend that the trial court erred in finding that
“[t]heir complaint was never with the quality of [Lebel’s] work, just the fact that
the construction had not been completed.” They assert that the exhibits reveal
repeated complaints to Lebel about the quality of his work. They also note that
elsewhere in its order, the trial court stated that the plaintiffs “were dissatisfied
with his failure to complete the project and with some of his work.”
We conclude that the discrepancy on this issue is of no consequence.
The challenged statement was made in the context of the court noting that the
plaintiffs’ end financing came through only a week after Lebel left the property.
The court opined that it “ha[d] to wonder as to why the plaintiffs did not invite
[Lebel] back to complete the job” when they now had the money to do so and
had no complaint with the quality of Lebel’s work. The reason the plaintiffs did
not invite Lebel back, however, is immaterial.
“Only a breach that is sufficiently material and important to justify
ending the whole transaction is a total breach that discharges the injured
party’s duties.” Fitz v. Coutinho, 136 N.H. 721, 725 (1993). Thus, the
plaintiffs’ subjective satisfaction, or lack thereof, with Lebel’s work is legally
irrelevant so long as any flaws in Lebel’s performance did not amount to a
material breach; absent material breach by Lebel, the plaintiffs were
contractually obligated to allow him to finish the job.
6
The trial court found that Lebel performed in accordance with the
contract until the construction lender stopped disbursing funds. This finding
precludes a ruling that the flaws in Lebel’s workmanship, if any, were material
breaches of the contract. Cf. id. at 724 (“The trial court is in the best position
to evaluate the evidence, and we will not reverse a finding on whether a party
performed in a substandard manner, unless the finding lacks support in the
record.”). Accordingly, any finding regarding the plaintiffs’ subjective
satisfaction with Lebel’s work is legally irrelevant, and we find no reversible
error.
Finally, the plaintiffs challenge the trial court’s finding that their
“[w]aiting to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy until July of 2005 appears at
least partially to have been calculated” and that they “elected not to get the
stairs corrected, which was an item necessary for occupancy, until the
following July.” The trial court drew an inference from the facts, apparently
not challenged, that when the plaintiffs obtained their permanent financing in
October, they ordered new kitchen cabinets, an item not necessary for
obtaining a certificate of occupancy, yet did not have the stairs repaired until
July. We cannot say this inference was impermissible.
The plaintiffs also contend that the trial court erred in its calculation of
damages. In reviewing damage awards, we view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prevailing party, and will overturn an award only if we find it to
be clearly erroneous. Syncom Indus., 155 N.H. at 88. New Hampshire law
does not require mathematical certainty in computing damages, but does
require an indication that the award of damages was reasonable. Id.
The court found that Lebel “is entitled to be paid an additional
$16,500.00.” The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in its calculation of
this amount by “conflating the value of Mr. Lebel’s work with the amount he
got paid for it.” Specifically, the plaintiffs argue that “the court calculated the
value of work done was $336,904.” They then imply, in a calculation shown in
their brief, that the court arrived at the $16,500 figure by subtracting
$320,404, the total amount paid to Lebel through September 17 (not including
a change order), from $336,904.
The record does not support this contention. Neither the court’s original
order nor its order on motion for reconsideration calculates the value of work
done to be $336,904. Rather, the court accepted Lebel’s contention, evidenced
in an October 1, 2004 invoice and later breakdown thereof, that at the time he
left the project he was owed $16,500 for work completed to date. The court
also found that at the time he left the jobsite, Lebel was owed $38,638 under
the contract (contract price of $359,042 less the $320,404 paid through
September 17, 2004). The court then found that the “fair value of the
remaining work [did not] exceed[] $22,138.00,” which is the balance left on the
7
contract after paying Lebel for the work completed after September 17, 2004
(i.e., $38,638.00 minus $16,500).
We cannot conclude, as argued by the plaintiffs, that the trial court
“conflat[ed] the value of Mr. Lebel’s work with the amount he got paid for it.”
Although Lebel did not complete performance under the contract, and some of
his work required correction, the plaintiffs “necessarily receiv[ed] the value of
the work as it [was] done, and if any advantage has accrued to [them]
therefrom, [are] liable to pay for the benefit received, – the worth to [them] of
the partial performance of the contract by the other party.” Danforth v.
Freeman, 69 N.H. 466, 468 (1898); see also Britton v. Turner, 6 N.H. 481, 492
(1834) (pronouncing this rule in case of contract for labor). “[T]he measure of
the benefit which the owner would receive from a compliance with the contract”
is the contract price. Danforth, 69 N.H. at 468. Accordingly, “[e]stimating [the
home owners’] liability under the contract completely performed at the contract
price, the benefit received, for which [they] should pay on the basis of the
contract, is conveniently ascertained by deducting from the contract price the
damage occasioned by the builders’ failure to perform the contract.” Id. at 468-
69.
Although the trial court in this case reversed the order of the calculation,
its “method of computation . . . is reasonable and in accordance with the
authorities.” Id. at 470. In other words, having found that the “the amount
necessary for the plaintiffs to finish or repair” certain incomplete or defective
work was $22,138, the court could have subtracted that amount from the
contract price to arrive at the $16,500 awarded Lebel. The court then
separately assessed Lebel for the costs of correcting the cabinets, stairs and
attic ridge beam and subtracted that total of $9,250 from the $16,500
previously awarded to arrive at a net verdict for Lebel of $7,250. While the
court could have added the cabinet, stair and ridge beam costs to the rest of
the costs of completion and performed a single damage calculation as set forth
in Danforth, it nevertheless reached the same result and we therefore find no
error.
We next address the application of RSA 205-B:2, which requires that no
person sell a new prefabricated or presite built home in New Hampshire
without a written manufacturer’s warranty that provides, inter alia, “[t]hat
such home is free from any substantial defects in materials or workmanship in
the structure, plumbing, heating, and electrical systems and in all appliances
and other equipment installed or included in such home by the manufacturer.”
The plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in failing to find that various
problems they identified are “substantial defects” under the statute, and in
thereby failing to award them costs and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 205-
B:4 (2000) (providing any action by buyer to enforce provisions of RSA chapter
205-B “shall allow for the recovery of court costs and reasonable attorney’s
8
fees”). In concluding that the evidence did not support the plaintiffs’ theory of
liability under RSA chapter 205-B, the trial court stated only that “[t]here were
no ‘substantial defects’ in the home as that phrase is used in” RSA 205-B:2.
The court provided no further analysis and gave no indication of how it
interpreted the phrase “substantial defects” in reaching its conclusion. We
note that the trial court did not find the stairs free of defect, and, in fact,
awarded $5,000 in damages for necessary repairs. The plaintiffs assert that
this issue presents us with a question of statutory interpretation; namely, a
determination of what constitutes a “substantial defect[]” under the statute.
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. We first examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to the words used.” Portsmouth Country Club v. Town of
Greenland, 152 N.H. 617, 620 (2005) (quotation omitted).
We note that the legislature has not chosen to define the term
“substantial defects,” unlike legislatures in other states that have done so. See
Cal. Civ. Code § 1797.1(d) (Deering 2005) (defining, in mobile home warranty
statute, “[s]ubstantial defects in materials and workmanship” to mean “defects
objectively manifested by broken, ripped, cracked, stained, or missing parts or
components, or workmanship resulting in improper function of materials,
components, appliances, or systems as installed or manufactured by the
contractor, dealer, or manufacturer”); N.C. Gen. Stat. § 143-143.9(14) (2007)
(defining “[s]ubstantial defect” in manufactured home warranty statute as
“[a]ny substantial deficiency in or damage to materials or workmanship
occurring in a manufactured home which has been reasonably maintained and
cared for in normal use. The term also means any structural element, utility
system or component part of the manufactured home which fails to comply
with the Code.”); Fla. Stat. ch. 320.822(15) (2007) (providing a nearly identical
definition in a statutory warranty of mobile homes and recreational vehicles);
Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 35-18-102(a)(i) (2007) (defining “[d]efect” in mobile home
warranty statute as “any insufficiency in the performance, construction,
components or material of a mobile home that renders the home or any of its
parts not fit for the ordinary use for which it was intended or for human
habitation”); Colo. Rev. Stat. § 24-32-3302(6) (2007) (providing a similar
definition in statute regulating manufactured homes).
Webster’s Dictionary defines “substantial,” in pertinent part, as “being of
moment: important, essential.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
2280 (unabridged 2002). It defines “defect” as a “want or absence of something
necessary for completeness, perfection, or adequacy in form or function.” Id. at
591. Accordingly, relying upon the plain meaning of the language used, we
conclude that the term “substantial defect[]” encompasses, at a minimum, the
9
absence of something necessary to adequately perform an important or
essential function. See id. at 591, 2280.
We conclude that the failure to deliver stairs constitutes a “substantial
defect[]” under RSA 205-B:2. Putting aside any difficulties the problems with
the stairs may have caused in obtaining a certificate of occupancy, the initial
lack of stairs connecting the first and second floors would have made it
impossible for the occupants to access the second floor, rendering the second
floor unusable. It further appears to us that the provision of access to the
second floor is an essential function which the stairs are necessary to
accomplish. Accordingly, we conclude that no reasonable finder of fact could
find other than that Pullman’s failure to deliver the stairs for which it was
responsible constitutes a “substantial defect[]” under RSA 205-B:2 and we
reverse the court’s ruling on this issue with respect to Pullman. As damages
have already been awarded for the defective stairs, we remand solely for an
award of costs and attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 205-B:4.
The plaintiffs also challenge the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendants did not engage in unfair or deceptive trade practices in violation of
the New Hampshire Consumer Protection Act. See RSA ch. 358-A. They
contend that Lebel and Pullman “were deceptive in not disclosing problems
with the stairs that would cause the house to fail its inspection, and in not
disclosing issues with the driveway and building site which may have caused
many of the house’s problems.” They also contend that the defendants
engaged in unfair and deceptive trade practices by promising to deliver and
complete a reasonably defect-free house in six weeks when “they knew they
couldn’t, or were at least indifferent as to whether they could.”
We agree with the trial court that these acts do not fall within the ambit
of the Consumer Protection Act.
Perhaps the most common application of the unfairness
doctrine involves the withholding of material information. A
consumer ordinarily protects himself by choosing among
alternative products. For his decision to be meaningful, however,
it must be based on full and accurate knowledge of the
alternatives. Some sellers have undermined this process by either
withholding or failing to generate critical data about their
products, thus making it difficult or impossible for consumers to
make informed comparisons. Here, . . . [the allegedly deceptive]
representation[s] [were] separate and distinct from any consumer
transaction and did not induce the type of misinformed decision
the Consumer Protection Act addresses.
10
Gautschi v. Auto Body Discount Center, 139 N.H. 457, 460 (1995) (quotation
and citation omitted). As the trial court concluded, “What is involved here are
routine contract and negligence issues.” Cf. State v. Moran, 151 N.H. 450,
453-54 (2004) (noting that the defendant “did not fail simply to perform his
duties under the contract” for installation of siding, but induced a customer to
pay him for materials “at a time when he clearly did not intend to perform the
work”). “An ordinary breach of contract claim does not present an occasion for
the remedies under the Consumer Protection Act.” Barrows, 141 N.H. at 390.
Thus, the trial court correctly found no Consumer Protection Act violation.
Affirmed in part; reversed
in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
11