THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-654
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PUTNAM BREED
Argued: May 6, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 2, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Elizabeth C. Woodcock, attorney, orally), for
the State.
Hinckley, Allen & Snyder LLP, of Concord (Michael J. Connolly and
Christopher H.M. Carter on the brief, and Mr. Carter orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Putnam Breed, appeals his convictions
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) of nine counts of fraudulent
handling of recordable writings, see RSA 638:2 (2007), two counts of theft by
deception, see RSA 637:4 (2007), and one count of theft by unauthorized
taking, see RSA 637:3 (2007). We affirm his theft by deception convictions and
reverse his convictions for theft by unauthorized taking and fraudulent
handling of recordable writings.
The record supports the following facts. The defendant is a medical
examiner in Massachusetts. His convictions stem from medical examiner
services he provided to Simplicity Burial and Cremation in Salisbury,
Massachusetts, and to the Bayview Crematorium (Bayview) in Seabrook, New
Hampshire, which were both owned by the same individual. See Petition of
Bayview Crematory, 155 N.H. 781, 782 (2007).
In July 2005, a grand jury returned nine indictments alleging that the
defendant had fraudulently handled recordable writings. See RSA 638:2. The
“recordable writing” at issue in each indictment was a medical certificate for
cremation (cremation certificate). See RSA 325-A:3 (2004) (repealed 2006).
Seven indictments alleged that the defendant, with a purpose to deceive, had
signed certain cremation certificates that falsely indicated that he was a New
Hampshire medical examiner. Two indictments alleged that he, with a purpose
to deceive, had signed other cremation certificates indicating that he had
viewed certain remains and had made personal inquiry into the cause and
manner of death, when, in fact, he had not done so.
In November 2006, a grand jury returned two indictments alleging that
the defendant had committed theft by deception, see RSA 637:4, and one
indictment alleging that he had committed theft by unauthorized taking, see
RSA 637:3. The theft by unauthorized taking indictment charged the
defendant with purposely submitting cremation fee forms to Bayview for
authorization and forwarding to the Massachusetts Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner in connection with the cremations of twelve decedents who had died
and were cremated in New Hampshire even though the defendant was not a
New Hampshire-appointed medical examiner. The two theft by deception
indictments alleged that, for the purpose of receiving medical examiner fees,
the defendant had signed cremation certificates indicating he had viewed the
remains of other decedents when he had not done so.
Following a six-day trial, a jury convicted the defendant on all charges.
Thereafter, he filed a motion to set aside the verdicts and for a new trial in
which he argued, inter alia, that his trial counsel was ineffective. The motion
was denied, and this appeal followed.
I. Fraudulent Handling of Recordable Writing Convictions
The defendant first argues that the fraudulent handling of recordable
writing statute, RSA 638:2, is unconstitutionally vague. RSA 638:2 provides:
“A person is guilty of a class B felony if, with a purpose to deceive or injure
anyone, he falsifies, destroys, removes or conceals any will, deed, mortgage,
security instrument or other writing for which the law provides public
recording.” The defendant contends that this statute is impermissibly vague
2
because it fails to give notice that cremation certificates are “other writing[s] for
which the law provides public recording.”
Although the defendant couches his argument in constitutional terms, in
effect, he asserts that the fraudulent handling of recordable writing
indictments fail to allege a crime because cremation certificates are not
recordable writings within the meaning of the statute. In keeping with our
practice of deciding constitutional issues only when necessary, see State v.
Wamala, 158 N.H. ___, ___ (decided Apr. 19, 2009), we will address only the
defendant’s implied statutory claim because it provides him the relief he seeks.
We review a trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. State v.
Horner, 153 N.H. 306, 309 (2006). We are the final arbiters of the legislative
intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. State v.
Dansereau, 157 N.H. 596, 598 (2008). When interpreting a statute, we first
look to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that
language according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Petition of State of N.H.
(State v. Laporte), 157 N.H. 229, 231 (2008). We do not strictly construe
criminal statutes, however, but rather construe them “according to the fair
import of their terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (2007).
In RSA 638:2, the general phrase “other writing for which the law
provides public recording” follows an enumerated list that includes wills,
deeds, mortgages and security instruments. The principle of ejusdem generis
provides that, where specific words in a statute follow general ones, the general
words are construed to embrace only objects similar in nature to those
enumerated by the specific words. State v. Meaney, 134 N.H. 741, 744 (1991).
All of the enumerated documents are documents that affect property
interests. The law provides for recording of these documents so as to give
notice to all persons regarding the status of title to the property at issue. See
66 Am. Jur. 2d Records and Recording Laws § 40, at 86 (2001). Recording
statutes pertaining to deeds and mortgages, for instance, “provide protection
for those diligent enough to conduct a search of title records.” Id. § 82, at 110.
Their purpose “is to protect subsequent judgment creditors, bona fide
purchasers and bona fide mortgagees against the assertion of prior claims to
land based upon any recordable but unrecorded instruments.” Id. Cremation
certificates, on the other hand, do not concern property interests and do not
involve a similar need for public notice. Therefore, they are not similar in
nature to the enumerated documents, and are not “writing[s] for which the law
provides public recording.”
Because cremation certificates are not recordable writings within the
meaning of the statute, the defendant’s conduct did not violate the statute. His
3
fraudulent handling of recordable writing convictions, therefore, must be
reversed.
In light of our decision, we need not address the defendant’s remaining
arguments regarding his fraudulent handling of recordable writing convictions.
We now turn to his arguments regarding his convictions for theft by
unauthorized taking and theft by deception.
II. Theft Offenses
A. Sufficiency
The defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence to convict him
of the theft offenses. To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to
the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Evans,
150 N.H. 416, 424 (2003). When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must
exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State
and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in isolation. Id.
1. Theft by Unauthorized Taking
We first examine the theft by unauthorized taking charge. A person
commits theft by unauthorized taking or transfer “if he obtains or exercises
unauthorized control over the property of another with a purpose to deprive
him thereof.” RSA 637:3, I. The theft by unauthorized taking indictment
alleged that the defendant improperly obtained money from the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts by submitting medical examiner fee forms for examinations
he conducted of New Hampshire decedents that should have been, but were
not, conducted by a New Hampshire-appointed medical examiner. The
defendant argues, and the State does not dispute, that the trial court amended
this indictment in its jury instructions by directing the jury to determine if the
defendant had the “conscious object to obtain money for services he did not
perform.”
Considering the evidence and all reasonable inferences to be drawn from
it in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational juror
could not have found that the defendant committed this offense. A rational
juror could not have found that the defendant did not perform the services for
which he received compensation from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
The State contends that the evidence was sufficient because it
establishes that the defendant “did not provide the service[ ] for which he
4
charged, i.e., an examination that complied with the New Hampshire statutes.”
The evidence, however, viewed in the light most favorable to the State, does not
demonstrate that the defendant’s compensation from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts was in any way contingent upon his examinations complying
with New Hampshire law. Rather, the evidence shows that the defendant
requested and received payment from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for
viewing bodies before they were cremated in New Hampshire and that he, in
fact, viewed these bodies. Accordingly, viewing this evidence in the light most
favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational juror could not have found
that the defendant collected money from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
for services he failed to perform.
2. Theft by Deception
We next examine the theft by deception indictments. A person commits
the crime of theft by deception “if he obtains or exercises control over property
of another by deception and with a purpose to deprive him thereof.” RSA
637:4, I. Deception includes creating “an impression which is false and which
[the] person does not believe to be true.” RSA 637:4, II(a). The two theft by
deception indictments alleged that the defendant signed cremation certificates
indicating he had viewed the remains of certain other decedents when he had
not done so, and that he engaged in this conduct for the purpose of receiving
medical examiner fees.
Considering the evidence and all reasonable inferences to be drawn from
it in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational juror
could have found that the defendant committed these offenses. A rational juror
could have found that the cremation certificates that the defendant signed with
respect to the decedents named in the indictments were false. A rational juror
could also have found that although the defendant claimed to have examined
these decedents before they were cremated, he did not do so.
In arguing that the evidence was insufficient to convict him of the theft
by deception offenses, the defendant examines each piece of evidence in
isolation. When addressing a sufficiency of the evidence argument, however,
we view the evidence in context. Evans, 150 N.H. at 424. Any conflicts in the
evidence were for the jury to resolve. State v. Wiggin, 151 N.H. 305, 309-10
(2004). As the trier of fact, the jury was in the best position to measure the
persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and was not compelled to believe
even uncontroverted evidence. In re Guardianship of Luong, 157 N.H. 429,
439 (2008).
Having concluded that the evidence was insufficient to convict the
defendant of the theft by unauthorized taking offense, we examine the
5
remainder of the defendant’s arguments only as they pertain to the theft by
deception charges.
B. Territorial Jurisdiction
The defendant next argues that the trial court lacked territorial
jurisdiction over the theft by deception offenses because they allegedly
occurred in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and because the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts was the alleged victim of the thefts.
RSA 625:4, I(a) (2007) allows a person to be convicted under New
Hampshire laws if “[e]ither conduct which is an element of the offense or the
result which is such an element occurs within this state.” “Our statute, which
substantially conforms to the Model Penal Code regarding jurisdiction, brings
within its ambit any crime which is committed wholly or partly within this
State.” State v. Harlan, 116 N.H. 598, 605 (1976), overruled on other grounds
by State v. Kelly, 125 N.H. 484 (1984). The question in this case, therefore, is
whether any part of the statutory offense of theft by deception was committed
in New Hampshire. We conclude that because this offense was partly
committed in New Hampshire, jurisdiction in New Hampshire was proper.
A person commits theft by deception “if he obtains or exercises control
over property of another by deception and with a purpose to deprive him
thereof.” RSA 637:4, I. In this case, the defendant is a Massachusetts medical
examiner who received fees from Massachusetts for viewing bodies in New
Hampshire before they were cremated here. The defendant was alleged to have
deceived the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by claiming to view bodies when
he, in fact, did not do so. He perpetrated this deception by filling out
cremation certificates stating that he viewed the bodies and by submitting
medical examiner cremation fee forms requesting payment for these views. The
medical examiner cremation fee forms were submitted to Bayview, a New
Hampshire entity, for authorization, and then forwarded to the Office of the
Chief Medical Examiner in Massachusetts.
New Hampshire had jurisdiction over these offenses because the
deception itself took place, at least in part, here. The defendant took money
from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by submitting medical examiner fee
forms to a New Hampshire entity, Bayview, in New Hampshire, that gave the
false impression that he had examined bodies in New Hampshire that he never,
in fact, examined.
C. Joinder with Fraudulent Handling Charges
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred when it joined the
theft by deception and fraudulent handling offenses. We will uphold the trial
6
court’s decision to join the charges unless we conclude that the decision
constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Ramos, 149 N.H.
118, 120 (2003). To show that the trial court’s decision is unsustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that the ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
Because the defendant does not contend on appeal that Superior Court
Rule 97-A governs this case, we examine his joinder arguments under the law
as it existed before the rule became effective on January 1, 2008. The law of
joinder before Superior Court Rule 97-A became effective gave a defendant an
absolute right to sever unrelated charges. State v. Brown, 156 N.H. 440, 442
(2007). Related offenses were those that were based upon the same conduct, a
single criminal episode, or a common plan. Id. The trial court ruled that
joinder was proper in this case because the theft and fraudulent handling
offenses were part of a common plan. The defendant contends that this was
error because the theft and fraudulent handling offenses were “independent
and not mutually dependent or part of a common plan.”
The distinguishing characteristic of a common plan is the existence of a
true plan in the defendant’s mind, which includes the charged crimes as stages
in the plan’s execution. Id. That a sequence of acts resembles a design when
examined in retrospect is not enough; the prior conduct must be intertwined
with what follows, such that the charged acts are mutually dependent. Id.
In State v. Schonarth, 152 N.H. 560, 562 (2005), for instance, we upheld
the consolidation of seventeen counts of theft by deception, all against the
same elderly victim. We ruled that, viewed objectively, the defendant’s actions
were part of a common plan because they “demonstrated a prior design that
included the charged acts as part of its consummation.” Schonarth, 152 N.H.
at 562. Not only did the charges all involve the same victim, but they were also
all based upon the defendant’s efforts to defraud the victim of his property
through increasingly grandiose schemes connected to the defendant’s alleged
desire to repay his debt to the victim. Id.
By contrast, in Petition of State of New Hampshire (State v. San
Giovanni), 154 N.H. 671 (2007), we affirmed the trial court’s decision to deny
the State’s motion to join fifteen theft by deception indictments, which all
involved different victims. The defendants operated St. Jude’s Residence, a
supposed drug and alcohol treatment center. San Giovanni, 154 N.H. at 672.
Certain patients complained that the defendants had obtained their money by
creating false impressions about St. Jude’s services. Id. at 673. Seeking to
join fifteen complaints made by fifteen different victims, the State alleged a
common plan by the defendants. Id. The trial court found that the charges
were not part of a common plan because “[t]he defendants could have
committed their alleged conduct as to one victim, but not to another, and still
7
succeeded as to the first.” Id. at 674 (quotation omitted). We upheld this
decision, noting that the indictments involved “discrete offenses committed
against multiple victims.” Id. at 676.
In Brown, as in San Giovanni, we concluded that the charges at issue
were not part of a common plan. In that case, the defendant sold drugs on
four different occasions to one person who was cooperating with the police, and
on two different occasions to another cooperating person. Brown, 156 N.H. at
441. All the charges were joined for trial. Id. We reversed, observing that
“each of the sales committed by the defendant was a discrete event and
involved different people.” Id. at 443. The sales were not so intertwined as to
be mutually dependent because “the success of any individual sale did not
depend upon the success of any other sale.” Id.
In the instant case, we are persuaded that the trial court reasonably
could have found that the theft by deception and fraudulent handling charges
constituted mutually dependent acts that were part of a prior design. The
record supports the trial court’s finding that the defendant strove to develop an
exclusive relationship with the operators of Bayview to increase the number of
examination fees he could collect. To do this, he maximized his availability to
the crematory, by, for example, signing cremation certificates when he had not
conducted the requisite examinations. The more fraudulent transactions he
participated in, the more reliant Bayview’s operators became upon his services
to carry out their own ends of processing as many bodies as possible. Based
upon these findings, the trial court reasonably found that each fraudulent
transaction or theft in which the defendant engaged was part of an overarching
plan of furthering his increasingly profitable relationship with Bayview, and, in
this way, the charges were mutually dependent. The trial court reasonably
could have found that the defendant was not merely taking advantage of
opportunities as they arose, but instead was “exhibit[ing] forethought and
premeditation in his scheming.” Id. Under these circumstances, we cannot
say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by joining the
fraudulent handling and theft by deception charges.
D. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel
Finally, the defendant contends that the trial court erred when it found
that his trial counsel rendered constitutionally effective assistance. Because
we have reversed the defendant’s convictions for fraudulent handling of
recordable writings and theft by unauthorized taking, we address only his
ineffective assistance claims that concern his theft by deception convictions.
Both Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Sixth
Amendment to the Federal Constitution guarantee a criminal defendant
reasonably competent assistance of counsel. State v. Kepple, 155 N.H. 267,
8
269 (2007). We first address the defendant’s claims under the State
Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 231-33 (1983).
To prevail upon a claim for ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant
must show, first, that counsel’s representation was constitutionally deficient
and, second, that counsel’s deficient performance actually prejudiced the
outcome of the case. State v. Sharkey, 155 N.H. 638, 640-41 (2007). To meet
the first prong of this test, the defendant “must show that counsel’s
representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness.” Strickland
v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 687-88 (1984). To meet the second prong, the
defendant “must show that there is a reasonable probability that, but for
counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been
different. A reasonable probability is a probability sufficient to undermine
confidence in the outcome.” Id. at 694.
Both prongs of the ineffectiveness inquiry involve mixed questions of law
and fact. State v. Whittaker, 158 N.H. ___, ___ (decided June 3, 2009).
Therefore, we will not disturb the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
not supported by the evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law, and we
review the ultimate determination of whether each prong is met de novo. Id.
The defendant argues that his trial counsel’s failure to object to
statements in the prosecution’s opening and closing arguments was ineffective
assistance. He contends that the prosecutor’s arguments were improper
because they implied that the defendant “was part of a larger conspiracy with
Bayview.” For example, in his opening statement, the prosecutor told the jury
that the defendant “had an exclusive business relationship with Bayview,” and
that when the police investigated Bayview, they found “a lot of stuff . . . that
really shouldn’t have been there, and business shouldn’t have been conducted
in the way it was.” In his closing, the prosecutor referred to the “shenanigans
at Bayview” and told the jury that the defendant “helped Bayview do their
thing.” The defendant contends that “[i]t is clear from these arguments that
the prosecutor’s objective was to try to bolster the State’s case against [the
defendant by] attempting to portray him as a co-conspirator in the widely
publicized atrocities committed by Bayview – conduct in which [he] was not
alleged to have played any part.” Because of the “inflammatory nature of the
wrongful conduct at Bayview,” the defendant asserts that “the prejudice of
linking [him] to that conduct is obvious.”
We first address the prejudice prong of the Strickland test. “If the
defendant is unable to demonstrate such prejudice, we need not even decide
whether counsel’s performance was deficient.” State v. Walton, 146 N.H. 316,
318 (2001) (quotation and ellipsis omitted); see Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697 (“If
it is easier to dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of lack of
9
sufficient prejudice, which we expect will often be so, that course should be
followed.”).
The defendant’s conclusion that any prejudice from the prosecutor’s
remarks is “obvious,” fails to demonstrate “a reasonable probability that the
result of the proceeding would have been different,” Walton, 146 N.H. at 318
(quotation and ellipsis omitted), had his trial counsel objected to the
prosecutor’s statements. Trial counsel’s opening and closing arguments are
not evidence, see State v. Flynn, 151 N.H. 378, 390 (2004), and, to the extent
that they were improper, they were only marginally so, see Kepple, 155 N.H. at
279. Having failed to demonstrate a reasonable probability that the result of
his trial would have been different had his counsel objected to the prosecutor’s
statements, the defendant cannot prevail upon his ineffective assistance claim.
Because the standard for determining whether a defendant has received
ineffective assistance of counsel is the same under both constitutions,
necessarily, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution. Id. at 269.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10