THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rochester District Court
No. 2007-597
GREAT TRADITIONS HOME BUILDERS, INC.
v.
MARIE O'CONNOR
Argued: May 21, 2008
Opinion Issued: June 13, 2008
Casassa and Ryan, of Hampton (Daniel R. Hartley on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Hanlon & Zubkus, of Rochester (Robert A. Zubkus on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiff, Great Traditions Home Builders, Inc., appeals
the decision of the Rochester District Court (Cappiello, J.) dismissing its
eviction action against the defendant, Marie O’Connor, for failing to satisfy the
statutory notice requirement. See RSA 540:2, III (2007). We affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. The plaintiff owns a 24-
unit apartment complex in Rochester. The defendant resides within the
complex as a tenant at will. On June 1, 2007, the plaintiff served the
defendant with an eviction notice after the defendant made several allegedly
“false and slanderous” accusations against Frank Chiaramitaro, Jr., the
president of Great Traditions Home Builders, Inc. Specifically, the defendant
had informed at least two tenants of her belief that Chiaramitaro had entered
her apartment when she was not at home and taken items. The eviction notice
specified these statements as the basis for the eviction, see RSA 540:3, III
(2007), and required the defendant to vacate her apartment by July 1, 2007.
The plaintiff filed this eviction action after the defendant did not vacate
her apartment by the prescribed date. A hearing was held on August 3, 2007,
at which the defendant moved to dismiss. The defendant argued that the
plaintiff had failed to satisfy the notice requirement set forth in RSA 540:2, III.
That statute provides, in pertinent part,
If the grounds for eviction is other good cause as set
forth in paragraph II(e) of this section, and such cause
is based on the actions or inactions of the tenant . . .
the landlord shall, prior to the issuance of the eviction
notice, provide the tenant with written notice stating
that in the future such actions or inactions would
constitute grounds for eviction.
RSA 540:2, III. The trial court granted the defendant’s motion to dismiss. This
appeal followed.
The plaintiff does not dispute that the eviction notice is for “other good
cause” based upon the defendant’s actions; that is, the statements against
Chiaramitaro. The plaintiff also acknowledges that it did not provide the
defendant written notice pursuant to RSA 540:2, III prior to serving the eviction
notice. On appeal, however, the plaintiff argues that RSA 540:2, III should not
apply given the facts of this case, or, in the alternative, that the trial court’s
interpretation leads to an absurd result, and, therefore, should not be upheld.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Chesley v. Harvey Indus., 157 N.H. ___, ___ (decided April 22, 2008).
We first examine the language found in the statute, and, where possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Cayten v. N.H.
Dep’t of Envtl. Servs., 155 N.H. 647, 653 (2007). However, we will not interpret
statutory language in a literal manner when such a reading would lead to an
absurd result. Id. We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de
novo. Id.
The plaintiff first argues that the trial court erred in applying RSA 540:2,
III to this case because the defendant’s actions caused harm that could not be
cured by any “future” action or inaction on the part of the defendant. The
plaintiff essentially argues that the need to notify or warn the defendant
against her actions is nullified under these circumstances because the damage
2
to Chiaramitaro’s reputation is already done. The plaintiff misinterprets the
statute.
The plain language of RSA 540:2, III is clear and unambiguous. This
statute makes prior written notice to the tenant mandatory if the grounds for
eviction fall under the “other good cause” provision of RSA 540:2, II (2007), and
such cause is based upon any action or inaction by the tenant. See In the
Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 354 (2006) (general use of “shall”
makes provision mandatory). The plain language does not, as the plaintiff
would have us do, weigh the amount or type of damage resulting from the
tenant’s actions or inactions in applying the statute. It does not consider
whether that damage may be “cured,” as the plaintiff describes it, by some
future action of the tenant. It simply requires that a tenant be notified that his
or her actions will be grounds for eviction, in the future, should they continue.
The plaintiff’s interpretation of the statute requires that we create an exception
based upon the type of damage suffered by the landlord; that is, whether the
damage is correctable or not. We will not interpret the statute to create such
an exception where the legislature has not seen fit to do so. Nenni v. Comm’r,
N.H. Ins. Dep’t, 156 N.H. 578, 581 (2007).
Here, the plaintiff acknowledges that its eviction notice was brought
under the “other good cause” provision of RSA 540:2, II and was based upon
certain actions by the tenant/defendant. Regardless of the fact that the
damage it allegedly suffered was an intangible harm perhaps incapable of
repair, the circumstances of this case fall squarely within RSA 540:2, III.
Because the plaintiff admits that it did not provide the required written notice
to the defendant prior to serving its eviction notice, we cannot conclude the
trial court erred in dismissing its eviction action.
The plaintiff next argues that the trial court’s interpretation of RSA
540:2, III leads to an absurd result. It asserts that it may send a notice
consistent with RSA 540:2, III, and subsequently serve the eviction notice,
without any additional actions or inactions on the part of the tenant. We
disagree.
As we have already stated, RSA 540:2, III requires that a landlord provide
a tenant with written notice that his or her actions, in the future, would be
grounds for eviction, should they continue. This alerts the tenant to the
potential consequences of continuing that conduct, prior to the tenant’s
ultimate loss of his or her home. Under the plaintiff’s interpretation, a tenant
could receive the written notice prior to an eviction notice, cease the offensive
action or inaction upon receipt of that notice, and still be evicted based solely
upon the completed past actions. As the plaintiff points out, however, under
this interpretation the written notice and subsequent eviction notice would be
inconsistent, as the written notice would indicate that “such actions” would be
3
grounds for eviction “in the future,” and yet, the tenant would be served with
an eviction notice based upon the past acts.
The plaintiff’s interpretation fails in several respects. First, the plaintiff’s
interpretation ignores the legislature’s use of the phrase “in the future.” The
plain and ordinary meaning of this phrase signifies a legislative intent to
require some additional action or inaction on the part of the tenant,
subsequent to the notice, prior to being evicted for those particular types of
actions. Moreover, the legislature’s use of the term “such actions” provides
further evidence that the written notice is intended to reference different,
subsequent actions than those that prompted application of the statute.
More significantly, the plaintiff’s interpretation is inconsistent with the
purpose of the statute. A written notice warning the tenant against certain
actions serves no purpose if the landlord could immediately evict based solely
upon those past actions. The required notice would be superfluous, as the
tenant would, in actuality, receive no warning or opportunity to cease the
action prior to losing his or her home. It is well settled in our jurisprudence
that “[t]he legislature will not be presumed to pass an act leading to an absurd
result and nullifying, to an appreciable extent, the purpose of the statute.”
Weare Land Use Assoc. v. Town of Weare, 153 N.H. 510, 511-12 (2006).
Furthermore, the plaintiff’s interpretation is inconsistent with the
statutory scheme. RSA 540:2, II, sets forth several grounds for eviction of a
tenant of restricted property, like the plaintiff’s property, that do not require a
landlord to provide prior written notice. See RSA 540:2, II. These include
substantial damage to the property, failure to pay rent, and failure of the
tenant to comply with a material term of the lease, among others. RSA 540:2,
II (a), (b), (c). The legislature further provided that, even under the “other good
cause” provision, the cause for termination “need not be based on the action or
inaction of the tenant,” but may include legitimate business or economic
reasons that do not require prior written notice to the tenant. See RSA 540:2,
V (2007). However, as for otherwise unspecified actions or inactions by a
tenant amounting to “other good cause” for eviction, the legislature explicitly
requires prior notice. Read in the context of the statute as a whole, RSA 540:2
suggests a legislative intent to provide notice to a tenant as to what constitutes
grounds for eviction, either by specific reference in the statute, or by written
notice prior to eviction, if eviction is sought through the “other good cause”
provision for actions or inactions of the tenant. In this case, while the plaintiff
is free to pursue a tort action against the defendant for her alleged slanderous
statements, it may not evict her without providing the required statutory notice
followed by further “such actions” by the defendant. If the legislature did not
intend this broad application, “it is free to amend the statute[ ] as it sees fit.”
In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. 264, 268 (2006) (quotation omitted).
4
Under the plain language of the statute, the trial court’s interpretation does not
lead to an absurd result.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5