THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2007-396
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER LEGERE
Argued: September 11, 2008
Opinion Issued: October 15, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, attorney, on the
brief, and N. William Delker, senior assistant attorney general, orally), for the
State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
Christopher Legere, by brief, pro se
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Christopher Legere, was convicted following
a jury trial in Superior Court (McGuire, J.) of the second degree murder of
John Denoncourt. See RSA 630:1-b, I(a), I(b) (2007). He appeals, arguing that
the trial court erred in admitting the testimony of various witnesses. We
affirm.
The following facts appear in the record. During the overnight hours of
June 24-25, 2006, Denoncourt rode his motorcycle to the Three Cousins Pizza
and Bar (Three Cousins) in Manchester. When he arrived he encountered
William Hill and Tracey Beardsell outside. Shortly thereafter an argument
ensued when Hill asked to ride Denoncourt’s motorcycle, but Beardsell
objected because she was concerned about his intoxication. Also, Beardsell
and Denoncourt began arguing after she told him that she was concerned
about his shirt and that he ought not wear it inside Three Cousins.
Denoncourt was wearing what was known as a “support shirt,” with symbols
indicating sponsorship of the Hells Angels motorcycle club. Three Cousins was
known as a meeting place for members of a rival group, The Outlaws. Also,
Three Cousins had a standing policy prohibiting support shirts and similar
clothing. The defendant was a member of the Outlaws. Denoncourt did not
remove his shirt.
At some point, the arguments outside attracted the attention of those
inside Three Cousins, and numerous people, including the defendant, exited
the bar. Outside the bar a melee began, though it is not clear who was
involved. During this fight, several gunshots were fired, one of which struck
Denoncourt in the chest. Denoncourt ran, but after approximately 350 feet he
collapsed and died. Immediately thereafter, Beardsell ran into Three Cousins
and announced that everyone should leave because the Hells Angels would be
coming. The bar quickly emptied, and some witnesses reported seeing the
defendant depart in a white sport-utility vehicle.
The defendant was subsequently indicted on two alternative counts of
second degree murder. Following a jury trial, the defendant was convicted on
both counts. This appeal followed.
I. Statements of Cheryl Diabo
The defendant contends that the trial court erred in permitting the
introduction of a statement to the police by an eyewitness, Cheryl Diabo, in
violation of his rights under the State and Federal Constitutions. During trial,
the State moved in limine for the admission of Diabo’s June 25, 2006
statement to the police in which she identified the defendant from a
photographic line-up, as well as her recorded interview with the police on July
24, 2006. The State sought to admit these statements because Diabo claimed
to have no current memory of the shooting or her interactions with the police.
Her memory loss was alleged to be a result of emotional trauma resulting from
the unrelated murder of her boyfriend, Mark McManus, some months after
Denoncourt’s death. The defendant objected to the admission of both
statements.
2
The trial court convened a hearing on the motion at which Diabo
confirmed that she had lost her memory of Denoncourt’s shooting and her
subsequent interactions with police. Diabo’s psychiatrist, Dr. Elizabeth
Blencowe, testified that Diabo did not have “true” memory problems, and that
continued treatment might aid in the recovery of her memory. Dr. Blencowe
also opined that while she believed Diabo was not “deliberately or consciously
trying to portray herself as not having memory,” she could not give a
professional opinion on whether Diabo was being “completely truthful” about
her memory loss.
Following this hearing, the trial court issued an order stating, in part,
that it was “not convinced that [Diabo] does not have a present memory of the
circumstances surrounding John Denoncourt’s murder.” Therefore, the trial
court did not permit the State to introduce the July 24 recorded interview. The
trial court, however, did permit the State to introduce Diabo’s statement of
identification during the photographic line-up, but only through the police.
In front of the jury, Diabo testified consistently with her testimony at the
earlier hearing. After giving some background testimony, Diabo averred that
she had no memory of the events surrounding Denoncourt’s murder and that
despite reviewing her earlier statements, her memory had not been restored.
During cross-examination, the defendant asked only two questions, both
seeking information about whether Diabo had been threatened. She answered
both questions. The State then, through Detective Joseph Mucci of the
Manchester Police Department, introduced evidence that Diabo had identified
the defendant in a photographic line-up, that she was nervous about
cooperating, and that she had stated she feared retaliation. On appeal, the
defendant contends that the introduction of Diabo’s statement of identification
violated the State and Federal Constitutions. We deal first with the defendant’s
claim under the State Constitution. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 232
(1983).
The defendant contends that admitting Diabo’s statement of
identification violated his confrontation rights under the New Hampshire
Constitution, as well as the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence. While the
United States Supreme Court has recently modified its Confrontation Clause
analysis, see Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), we have not
adopted, and neither party argues that we should adopt, Crawford as
applicable to claims under the State Constitution. Instead, we have applied the
analysis in Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56, 66 (1980). See State v. Munoz, 157
N.H. 143, 148 (2008); State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 511 (2006), cert. denied,
128 S. Ct. 63 (2007). As neither party argues for the imposition of a different
standard, we confine our analysis to the Roberts standard.
3
Under Roberts, a prior statement of an unavailable hearsay declarant is
admissible if it bears adequate “indicia of reliability,” or if there is a showing of
particularized guarantees of trustworthiness. Roberts, 448 U.S. at 66.
Reliability “can be inferred without more in a case where the evidence falls
within a firmly rooted hearsay exception.” Id.
Here, the defendant argues that Diabo was unavailable, but that her out-
of-court statement did not fall within New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
801(d)(1)(C), which he concedes is a firmly rooted hearsay exception. As noted
by the defendant, his claims under the constitution and the rules of evidence
overlap: “Thus, if Evidence Rule 801(d)(1)(C) does not cover the statement, the
[trial] court erred in admitting it both under the Rules of Evidence and under
the New Hampshire Constitution. Conversely, if that rule covers the statement,
Legere’s State constitutional claim and his evidence rule claim alike would fail.”
Even if we assume that Diabo was unavailable, we would conclude that
Diabo’s statement falls within a firmly rooted hearsay exception. Rule
801(d)(1)(C) of the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence provides that a statement
is not hearsay if the declarant testifies at trial and is subject to cross-
examination concerning the statement, and the statement is one of
identification of a person made after perceiving the person. This rule “requires
only an opportunity for cross-examination; this requirement is satisfied if the
declarant testifies and is available for cross-examination, regardless of whether
the declarant is actually cross-examined.” State v. Delgado, 137 N.H. 380, 382
(1993). “Application of Rule 801(d)(1)(C) . . . does not hinge on a contradiction
between a witness’s in-court and out-of-court statements; it turns on the
existence of a statement of identification.” Id. at 382-83. The rule is intended
“to address situations where a memory loss makes it impossible for the witness
to testify about details of the events underlying an earlier identification.” Id. at
383 (quotations and ellipses omitted). “Admitting only those portions of the
prior identification that mirrored a witness’s in-court testimony would likely
compound confusion created by omissions or inconsistencies in the witness’s
in-court testimony, and frustrate the purpose of the rule.” Id.
Here, Diabo made an earlier statement of identification, and was
produced for cross-examination at trial. The defendant, therefore, had the
opportunity to cross-examine her, thus satisfying the rule, regardless of
whether she was actually cross-examined.
Citing People v. Learn, 863 N.E.2d 1173 (Ill. App. Ct. 2007), the
defendant argues that because Diabo’s memory loss was more acute than that
of the declarant in Delgado, Delgado is not controlling. We do not agree. First,
nothing in Delgado defines a point at which a witness’s memory loss, or
professed memory loss becomes so pronounced as to render a prior
identification inadmissible. As regards Learn, the rule of evidence at issue
4
there was significantly different from Rule 801(d)(1)(C), making any meaningful
comparison difficult. See Learn, 863 N.E.2d at 1178. Additionally, the court in
Learn determined that the witness did not “testify” as contemplated by the rule
because she did not testify meaningfully to any background information before
beginning to cry and then not answering any more questions. Id. Here, in
contrast, Diabo did testify to background information and was available for
cross-examination and thus satisfied the requirements of the rule. See
Delgado, 137 N.H. at 382-83. For these reasons, we conclude that Diabo’s
prior statement of identification fell within a firmly rooted hearsay exception
and, therefore, its admission did not violate the rules of evidence or the State
Constitution.
Relying upon Crawford, the defendant next contends that the
introduction of Diabo’s identification violated his right to confrontation secured
by the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. In Crawford, the
United States Supreme Court stated that the Confrontation Clause’s “ultimate
goal is to ensure reliability of evidence” and that this reliability was to “be
assessed in a particular manner: by testing in the crucible of cross-
examination.” Crawford, 541 U.S. at 61. To preserve the goal of reliable
evidence tested by cross-examination, the Supreme Court held that testimonial
statements of witnesses absent from trial are admissible “only where the
declarant is unavailable, and only where the defendant has had a prior
opportunity to cross-examine.” Id. at 59. Here, it is undisputed that Diabo’s
identification was testimonial, and that the defendant had no prior opportunity
to cross-examine her about it. Accordingly, the admissibility of her statements
depends upon whether, despite her physical appearance at trial, Diabo was, in
effect, “unavailable” as pertains to a federal Confrontation Clause analysis.
Because this is an issue of first impression in New Hampshire, we look to the
guidance of other jurisdictions. See State v. O’Maley, 156 N.H. 125, 134
(2007).
Recently, the Supreme Court of Minnesota addressed this issue on
similar facts. In State v. Holliday, 745 N.W.2d 556 (Minn. 2008), the defendant
was charged with shooting and killing another man. Id. at 560. At trial, the
State called A.A. to testify regarding information he gave in interviews with the
police and the prosecution. Id. at 561. After taking the stand, A.A. claimed no
memory of his prior discussions. Id. He recalled only that he had talked with
someone in the prosecutor’s office, but could not remember the substance of
that conversation. Id. The contents of A.A.’s statements were then introduced
into evidence through other witnesses. Id.
The defendant argued that admitting A.A.’s statements violated the
Confrontation Clause. Id. at 564-65. In conducting a thorough analysis of
Crawford, the court noted that “[l]anguage from the Supreme Court’s Crawford
decision indicates that the admission of a witness’s prior statements does not
5
violate the Confrontation Clause where the witness appears for cross-
examination and claims that he or she cannot remember either making the
statements or the content of the statements.” Id. at 565. Specifically, it relied
upon the conclusion in Crawford that “when the declarant appears for cross-
examination at trial, the Confrontation Clause places no constraints at all on
the use of his prior testimonial statements. It is therefore irrelevant that the
reliability of some out-of-court statements cannot be replicated, even if the
declarant testifies to the same matters in court.” Crawford, 541 U.S. at 59 n.9
(quotations and citations omitted); see Holliday, 745 N.W.2d at 565.
The Minnesota court noted that the Supreme Court’s conclusion that the
Confrontation Clause does not bar the admission of prior testimonial
statements as long as the declarant is present at trial to defend or explain it
could be interpreted to mean that the declarant must actually defend or
explain the prior statement. Holliday, 745 N.W.2d at 565. We agree, however,
with the Minnesota court’s conclusion that this
interpretation both ignores the fact that the [Supreme] Court’s
language still focuses on presence and ability to act without
requiring that the record show the declarant actually did defend or
explain the statement, and is at odds with the Court’s more explicit
assertion that when the declarant appears for cross-examination at
trial, the Confrontation Clause places no constraints at all on the
use of his prior testimonial statements.
Id. at 565-66 (quotations and citation omitted).
The Minnesota court relied, as have other courts, see, e.g., State v.
Pierre, 890 A.2d 474, 499-500 (Conn.), cert. denied, 547 U.S. 1197 (2006),
upon a line of United States Supreme Court cases beginning with California v.
Green, 399 U.S. 149 (1970). In Green, the Supreme Court reversed the
California Supreme Court’s decision to exclude, on Confrontation Clause
grounds, the testimony of a witness present at trial, but who claimed not to
recall the relevant events. Id. at 151-52, 164. In so ruling, it stated that
“where the declarant is not absent, but is present to testify and to submit to
cross-examination, our cases, if anything, support the conclusion that the
admission of his out-of-court statements does not create a confrontation
problem.” Id. at 162.
Following Green, in Delaware v. Fensterer, 474 U.S. 15, 20 (1985), the
Supreme Court, after referencing Justice Harlan’s concurrence in Green that
“[g]enerally speaking, the Confrontation Clause guarantees an opportunity for
effective cross-examination, not cross-examination that is effective in whatever
way, and to whatever extent, the defense might wish,” concluded that:
6
the assurances of reliability our cases have found in the right of
cross-examination are fully satisfied in cases such as this one,
notwithstanding the witness’ inability to recall the basis for his
opinion: the factfinder can observe the witness’ demeanor under
cross-examination, and the witness is testifying under oath in the
presence of the accused.
Thus, the Court concluded that the prosecution’s expert witness testimony was
admissible even though he had forgotten the basis for his professional opinion.
Id. at 16. The Court concluded that:
The Confrontation Clause includes no guarantee that every witness
called by the prosecution will refrain from giving testimony that is
marred by forgetfulness, confusion, or evasion. To the contrary,
the Confrontation Clause is generally satisfied when the defense is
given a full and fair opportunity to probe and expose these
infirmities through cross-examination, thereby calling to the
attention of the factfinder the reasons for giving scant weight to the
witness’ testimony.
Id. at 21-22.
In United States v. Owens, 484 U.S. 554, 564 (1988), the Supreme Court
held that the Confrontation Clause was not “violated by admission of an
identification statement of a witness who is unable, because of a memory loss,
to testify concerning the basis for the identification.” Relying upon Fensterer,
the Court stated that the opportunity for effective cross-examination
is not denied when a witness testifies as to his current belief but is
unable to recollect the reason for that belief. It is sufficient that
the defendant has the opportunity to bring out such matters as the
witness’ bias, his lack of care and attentiveness, his poor eyesight,
and even (what is often a prime objective of cross-examination) the
very fact that he has a bad memory.
Id. at 559 (citation omitted). “The weapons available to impugn the witness’
statement when memory loss is asserted will of course not always achieve
success, but successful cross-examination is not the constitutional guarantee.”
Id. at 560.
Crawford neither overruled nor undermined either Fensterer or Owens.
See State v. Price, 146 P.3d 1183, 1191 (Wash. 2006); State v. Real, 150 P.3d
805, 807-08 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2007). Indeed, it specifically relied upon Green in
concluding that a declarant’s appearance at trial removes all Confrontation
7
Clause constraints on the use of prior testimonial statements. Crawford, 541
U.S. at 59 n.9. As such, Green, Fensterer and Owens remain good law.
Other jurisdictions considering the issue have also concluded that
memory loss does not render a witness unavailable for Confrontation Clause
purposes. In Pierre, the Supreme Court of Connecticut noted: “The
defendant’s argument equates a declarant’s inability or unwillingness to
remember prior statements made to the police with a general unavailability
from cross-examination in its entirety.” Pierre, 890 A.2d at 498. The court
was not persuaded by the defendant’s argument and concluded that although
the witness claimed no memory of his prior statements, he was, nonetheless,
available because he was placed on the stand, under oath and responded
willingly to questioning. Id. at 501-02.
Likewise, the Supreme Judicial Court of Maine has concluded that “a
witness is not constitutionally unavailable for purposes of Confrontation
Clause analysis when a witness who appears and testifies is impaired.” State
v. Gorman, 854 A.2d 1164, 1177 (Me. 2004) (citation omitted), cert. denied,
544 U.S. 928 (2005). Thus, a witness who claimed a lack of memory as well as
a potential for delusional thoughts due to medication was not deemed
unavailable. Id.
Accordingly, like most courts that have considered the issue, we
conclude that when a witness is presented for cross-examination, the
Confrontation Clause does not bar the admission of a prior statement. Accord,
e.g., Price, 146 P.3d at 644, 650; Real, 150 P.3d at 808; Johnson v. State, 878
A.2d 422, 428-29 (Del. 2005); People v. Gunder, 59 Cal. Rptr. 3d 817, 823-24
(Ct. App. 2007); People v. Sharp, 825 N.E.2d 706, 713 (Ill. App. Ct. 2005). But
see People v. Learn, 863 N.E.2d at 1179.
The defendant urges us to distinguish Green, Fensterer, and Owens on
the grounds that: (1) there is good reason to doubt the genuineness of Diabo’s
claim of memory loss; (2) her claim of memory loss is factually distinguishable
from Owens; and (3) there are no “realistic weapons” with which to attack
Diabo’s statement. See Owens, 484 U.S. at 560.
First, the defendant argues that “[t]he falsity of Diabo’s claim of memory
loss brings this case within the rule of cases finding no adequate opportunity
to cross-examine when a witness, properly or otherwise, simply refuses to
answer questions at trial.” See, e.g., Douglas v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 415, 420
(1965). However:
The circumstance of feigned memory loss is not parallel to an
entire refusal to testify. The witness feigning memory loss is in fact
subject to cross-examination, providing a jury with the opportunity
8
to see the demeanor and assess the credibility of the witness,
which in turn gives it a basis for judging the prior hearsay
statement’s credibility.
Gunder, 59 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 823-24. Moreover, “[t]he feigned or real absence of
memory is itself a factor for the trier of fact to establish, but does not render
the witness unavailable.” Fowler v. State, 829 N.E.2d 459, 466 (Ind. 2005),
cert. denied, 547 U.S. 1193 (2006); see also United States v. Keeter, 130 F.3d
297, 302 (7th Cir. 1997) (witness feigning amnesia during trial still subject to
cross-examination), cert. denied, 523 U.S. 1034 (1998). Regardless of the
authenticity of Diabo’s claim of memory loss, because she was present at trial
and subject to whatever cross-examination the defense wished to attempt, the
jury had the opportunity to assess her credibility and, by extension, the
credibility of her earlier statement.
Second, the defendant argues that because Diabo’s memory loss is more
acute than that in Owens, this case is distinguishable from it. While Diabo’s
claim of memory loss is more severe than in Owens, we are not persuaded that
a contrary result is compelled by that difference. Remembering that a prior
statement was made, yet not recalling the reasons for it or the circumstances
leading up to it, imparts little, if any, information about the veracity of the
declarant that could not otherwise be established or challenged by cross-
examination. Thus, we do not agree that the severity of Diabo’s memory loss
requires a departure from Owens.
Finally, the defendant contends that, in Owens, the defense had “realistic
weapons,” Owens, 484 U.S. at 560, with which to dispute the reliability of the
out-of–court statement, whereas no such dispute could be raised here. We do
not agree. Diabo testified at trial about, for example: arriving at the bar with
her boyfriend, setting up for her friend’s party in the back room, that the bar
was busier than usual that night, that she and her sister cleaned up the back
room after the party, that after cleaning up she went out into the main portion
of the bar for a drink, that she was drinking “Absolut[] grapefruit,” and that her
boyfriend stayed with her during the course of the evening. The jury had the
opportunity to assess her testimony and its reliability and the defendant had
the opportunity to confront her about any or all of these recollections.
Moreover, the defendant was able to show that which is often a prime objective
of cross-examination, that Diabo had a bad memory. See id. at 559.
Accordingly, we do not agree that the defendant was without “realistic
weapons” with which to test her credibility. For these reasons, we conclude
that Diabo was not “unavailable” for purposes of the Federal Confrontation
Clause and that her prior statement was not barred by it.
9
II. Expert Testimony
The defendant contends that the trial court erroneously admitted certain
expert testimony about the Outlaws on the ground that its prejudice
substantially outweighed its probative value. Prior to trial, the State filed two
motions in limine, to which the defendant objected, seeking the admission of
evidence about the defendant’s involvement with the Outlaws, the
organizational structure of the Outlaws, the rivalry between the Outlaws and
the Hells Angels, and the meaning of the symbols on Denoncourt’s shirt. The
State contended that the evidence was relevant to the issues of the defendant’s
identity and motive to shoot Denoncourt, as well as the credibility of other
testifying witnesses. The first motion was directed at the general admissibility
of this evidence. The second was concerned with the admission of expert
testimony. It is only the expert testimony that is now at issue.
The trial court ruled, in relevant part, that it would allow expert
testimony:
a. Relating to the histories (briefly) of the Hells Angels and
Outlaws;
b. That the Hells Angels and Outlaws have had a violent rivalry,
particularly surrounding territorial issues; and
c. The shirt the victim was wearing on June 25, 2006 was a Hells
Angels support shirt.
The trial court also ruled that the State could not introduce evidence that the
defendant was “an enforcer,” in part because it would be highly prejudicial.
At trial, the State’s expert witness, Terry Katz of the Maryland State
Police, testified about the Outlaws, Hells Angels and other similar motorcycle
groups, and about their size, history and organizational structures. Regarding
the Outlaws, Katz testified that there are local chapters organized under the
auspices of regional and national bodies, and that unauthorized formation of a
club “would subject you to severe repercussions, to include violence.” He also
stated that if a member of the Outlaws did not follow the club’s rules, the
consequences range “from being fined to taking a physical beating to be thrown
out of the club or taking a beating, all the way up to – there’ve been homicides
for people that have violated the rules.” He also testified to groups like the
Outlaws defining themselves as “one percenters,” signifying that they “exist by
their own rules, not society’s.” Katz then testified to the various terms used to
designate degrees of membership and what it means for a person to be a “full
patch member.” He defined the term “associates,” in part, by stating that
“[t]hey are people that do legal – or illegal things with [members].”
10
Katz next testified about the decades-long antagonistic relationship
between the Outlaws and the Hells Angels. He testified that the groups are
very territorial, that the territory can include clubhouses, bars and
restaurants, and that violence can result from one group’s invasion of another’s
territory. He also testified about the different groups’ “support gear,” that this
gear can be obtained in any number of ways, including over the Internet, and
that people not associated with the group can and do buy and wear this gear,
sometimes without knowledge of its meaning. He then offered the example of a
man in Florida who had, unknowingly, worn a Hells Angels shirt to an Outlaws
event and was confronted by members of the Outlaws before police intervened
to protect him.
Katz also testified that, “[u]nlike what normal people or the average
citizen would think of respect, respect in the Outlaw motorcycle gang, in my
experience, means fear. . . . So to be disrespected means you don’t fear me.”
Finally, he testified that cases involving the Outlaws are difficult to investigate
because witnesses do not want to be involved because they do not want to
make an enemy of the Outlaws. He stated that one of the mottos of the
Outlaws was “Snitches are a dying breed.” During Katz’s testimony, the
defendant raised only one objection. At no point did the defendant request, or
the trial court give, a limiting instruction to the jury.
The defendant now argues that parts of Katz’s testimony falling into
categories (a) and (b), as defined by the trial court, were unfairly prejudicial
and should not have been admitted. “We accord the trial court considerable
deference in determining the admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb
its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Yates,
152 N.H. 245, 249 (2005). To demonstrate an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, the defendant must show that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id. “New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 401 defines relevant evidence as ‘evidence having any
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.’ However, evidence that is relevant may be excluded if its
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice.”
Id.; see N.H. R. Ev. 403.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke
its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human
action that may cause a jury to base its decision on something
other than the established propositions in the case. Unfair
prejudice is not, of course, mere detriment to a defendant from the
tendency of the evidence to prove his guilt, in which sense all
evidence offered by the prosecution is meant to be prejudicial.
11
Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible error is an
undue tendency to induce a decision against the defendant on
some improper basis, commonly one that is emotionally charged.
Yates, 152 N.H. at 249-50.
The defendant does not challenge Katz’s certification as an expert.
Additionally, he acknowledges that expert evidence, at least as is relevant to
motive and the credibility of witnesses, is permissible, a view in accord with
that of courts around the country. See, e.g., Annotation, Admissibility of
Evidence of Accused’s Membership in Gang, 39 A.L.R.4th 775, 776 (1985 &
Supp. 2008) (“Gang membership has frequently been found to be probative and
admissible, for example, as evidence of a possible motive for the crime,
particularly in homicide cases where the defendant and his victim are shown to
have been members of rival gangs . . . .”). The defendant, however, argues that
despite its relevance, parts of Katz’s testimony were sufficiently prejudicial that
they ought not to have been admitted. We now turn to the defendant’s specific
claims of error.
The defendant first takes issue with some category (a) evidence,
specifically Katz’s testimony relating to: (1) what he describes as evidence of
the crimes and/or criminal propensities of the Outlaws, apart from that
relevant to the rivalry with the Hells Angels or the Outlaws’ capacity to
intimidate; (2) “one percenters” who “exist outside society’s rules;” (3) a culture
of respect based upon fear; (4) “associates” who “do legal – or illegal things”
with full members; and (5) the punishments visited upon those who do not
follow club rules. Regarding category (b) evidence, he objects to evidence
relating to incidents of violence between the groups where the defendant was
not involved, most particularly, the incident in Florida. According to the
defendant, this testimony’s probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial
effect, or, if not, there was similar, less prejudicial evidence which made this
testimony unnecessary.
As to Katz’s testimony about the Outlaws being “one percenters” who
exist by their own rules, and who have a culture of respect founded upon fear,
with violent retribution for failure to adhere to club rules, and about their
lengthy feud with the Hells Angels, we conclude that such testimony was highly
probative of both the defendant’s intent and motive, as well as on the issue of
witness credibility.
Katz’s testimony helped to explain the Outlaws’ code of conduct generally
and informed the jury of the manner in which the group would discipline those
who violated club rules. It, therefore, provided context for the kind of reaction
a member of the Outlaws might have to a person who had ventured into
Outlaws’ territory while demonstrating support for a rival club. Moreover, it
12
clarified that it was not simply support for a rival group that was at issue, but
support for a group with which the Outlaws had a long, hostile and even
violent relationship. The defendant himself believed that the issue of the
rivalry was important when, in a recorded telephone call from jail, he stated
that he believed the Hells Angels were attempting to downplay the fact that
Denoncourt “was wearing one of their shirts, coming to one of our bars.” As
such, this evidence helped to explain an otherwise inexplicable act, i.e., the
murder of a man for wearing a particular shirt. See Ayala v. State, 923 A.2d
952, 961 (Md. Ct. Spec. App.) (the evidence of defendant’s gang affiliation
served to explain the otherwise inexplicable by providing a motive for the
murder), cert. denied, 931 A.2d 1095 (Md. 2007); People v. Gonzalez, 25 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 124, 133 (Ct. App. 2005) (“The law does not disfavor the admission of
expert testimony that makes comprehensible and logical that which is
otherwise inexplicable and incredible.”); State v. Ruof, 252 S.E.2d 720, 725
(N.C. 1979) (evidence of defendant’s affiliation with Outlaws admissible to show
motive though motive not an element of the charged offense).
Furthermore, informing the jury that those who failed to follow the rules
faced violent retribution explained why an Outlaws member might react with
violence to protect the group’s territory. Evidence that these groups are willing
to use violence to enforce their rules, and that there was a need to defend what
they believed was their territory, demonstrated a motive for the defendant to
violently defend his territory to build respect through fear, and to avoid the risk
of being seen as having violated club rules by failing to protect the group’s
territory. See People v. Gonzalez, 135 P.3d 649, 657 (Cal. 2006) (“It is difficult
to imagine a clearer need for expert explication than that presented by a
subculture in which this type of mindless retaliation promotes ‘respect.’”
(quotation omitted)). As such, Katz’s testimony about the culture of violence
and the long-standing feud with rival groups, particularly the Hells Angels,
aided the jury in understanding why the defendant might violently retaliate for
the perceived slight of wearing a Hells Angels support shirt in Outlaw territory.
Additionally, evidence of the Outlaws’ violent nature and disregard for
society’s rules was probative on the issue of witness credibility because it
explained why some witnesses might be reluctant to cooperate. For example,
Detective Mucci testified that Diabo was reluctant to cooperate with the police
because she feared retaliation, and other officers testified that they had
encountered reluctant witnesses. Even the defendant’s mother, in a recorded
telephone call, stated that she was afraid of what might happen to her because
she feared retaliation. At trial at least one witness expressed reluctance to be
involved for fear of retaliation. “Evidence that a witness is afraid to testify or
fears retaliation for testifying is relevant to the credibility of that witness . . . .”
Id. Knowledge of the witnesses’ fears of retaliation coupled with the
understanding that such fears were common in cases of this nature would give
the jury a basis to evaluate their credibility.
13
As to prejudice, we note that the potential for prejudice in the
introduction of gang evidence is apparent. See People v. Cruzado, 700 N.E.2d
707, 715 (Ill. App. Ct. 1998) (“Courts acknowledge that a strong prejudice
against . . . gangs may exist, particularly in metropolitan areas.”); People v.
Davis, 779 N.E.2d 443, 456 (Ill. App. Ct. 2002), appeal denied, 787 N.E.2d 176
(Ill. 2003). This risk is of particular concern where the evidence is only
tangential to the charged offenses. People v. Albarran, 57 Cal. Rptr. 3d 92, 99
(Ct. App. 2007); People v. Partida, 16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 777, 785-86 (Ct. App.
2004), superseded by People v. Partida, 122 P.3d 765 (Cal. 2005). This
potential for prejudice, however, does not necessarily make the evidence
inadmissible; the question is whether the probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice. Yates, 152 N.H. at 249-50; N.H.
R. Ev. 403. The defendant contends that Katz’s testimony was unfairly
prejudicial because it attributes a propensity to commit crimes to the Outlaws,
and, by extension to the defendant, and because it “fosters in the jury an
antipathy toward the Outlaws” and the defendant as a member.
Katz’s testimony was directed at the general functioning of these groups
and the history of their rivalry, not at the defendant or any member of his local
chapter. While he testified that these groups have a violent past and that they
deal harshly with breaches of acceptable protocol, his statements were in the
context of explaining the reasons why a member might act violently in
upholding club rules and why witnesses might fear being involved. While this
evidence was prejudicial, we do not agree that the danger of unfair prejudice
substantially outweighed its probative value.
As for the Florida incident, we find that Katz’s testimony, considered in
context, was probative. Katz was asked to explain support gear, what it means
for people to wear it, and whether those wearing it understand the potential
dangers created by wearing it in “rival territory.” It was in this context that he
spoke of the Florida incident. His testimony demonstrated the gravity of
wearing one club’s clothing in another’s territory. As such, it was probative of
the defendant’s motive in confronting Denoncourt for wearing a Hells Angels
support shirt in an area understood as belonging to the Outlaws. Additionally,
reference to this incident was not unfairly prejudicial because Katz did not
mention any violence and did not mention the defendant, or anyone in his local
club. He spoke generally about the incident to explain one group’s reaction to
another’s support gear.
Next, the defendant objects to Katz’s testimony defining “associates,” in
part, as “people that do legal – or illegal things with [members].” The statement
was made in the context of describing the general hierarchy and functioning of
the organization and Katz made clear that associates are not members, but are
affiliated with a group through their social interactions and relationships with
14
members. Here, many witnesses to the incident were social acquaintances of
the defendant, whom they knew to be a member of the Outlaws. Thus, if the
jury determined that any witness could be considered an “associate,” it would
have a basis for evaluating that witness’s credibility. While Katz did state that
“associates” do illegal as well as legal things, he did not mention the defendant
or any person the defendant knew. Also, as pointed out by the State,
acquaintances of the defendant who were at Three Cousins, and who might
have been “associates,” admitted that they might have been using illegal drugs
that night, though not with the defendant. Therefore, there was already
testimony in evidence of illegal activity by social acquaintances of the
defendant, which diminished any potential prejudice from Katz’s statements.
Finally, the defendant objects to Katz’s testimony relating to other
incidents of violence that did not involve the defendant. Specifically, he objects
to Katz’s testimony that “[t]here [have] been homicides where individuals have
been killed between the gangs in gang fights. There have been severe beatings,
stabbings, assaults. A variety of violence directed against members, and in
some cases associates of – of those two organizations.” Immediately preceding
this statement, however, Katz was asked to explain the “relationship of
antagonism” between the Outlaws and Hells Angels. As we have already
concluded, the rivalry between these groups was probative as to the
defendant’s motive to attack a supporter of the Hells Angels. We conclude that
its probative value was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice. See Gonzalez, 25 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 133.
The defendant contends that even if the above-challenged evidence was
probative, the State had other, more pertinent evidence and need not have
introduced the objectionable portions of Katz’s testimony. As an example, in
regard to witness credibility, the defendant argues that Katz testified that
witnesses do not want to be involved in cases like this one and it is difficult to
get people to cooperate. Thus, there was no need to introduce evidence of the
Outlaws’ violence and criminal nature. He makes a similar argument regarding
the defendant’s motive. In light of this alternative evidence, the defendant
argues that the challenged evidence was minimally probative and
unnecessarily cumulative. See State v. Watkins, 148 N.H. 760, 768 (2002)
(probative value must be considered in the context of its incremental value and
the extent to which the issue is established by other evidence). We do not
agree that the evidence was as lacking in probative value as the defendant
contends.
Katz’s testimony about the violent nature of these groups, and that they
lived by their own rules and without regard to society’s rules, was evidence not
only of why the defendant acted the way that he did, but also why witnesses
were not as forthcoming as they might otherwise have been. Had Katz simply
testified that the groups were known to be violent or that other people in
15
unrelated incidents might not be cooperative, he would not have given the jury
an understanding of the nature of the relationship between the Hells Angels
and Outlaws or the degree to which witness intimidation is a factor. We
conclude that the challenged evidence was not, as the defendant contends,
minimally probative or unnecessarily cumulative, but was highly probative on
issues in dispute. Further, had the defendant feared the jury’s use of the
challenged evidence when he believed other evidence was available, he could
have requested a limiting instruction. He did not do so. For the above
reasons, we conclude that the probative value of the evidence challenged by the
defendant was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice
and, therefore, the trial court did not err in admitting it.
III. Testimony of Detective John Patti
Finally, in his pro se brief, the defendant argues that the trial court erred
in admitting certain evidence about Mark McManus. During trial, Detective
John Patti of the Manchester Police Department testified that he interviewed
McManus the day after the shooting. Patti testified only that McManus was
“shaken up” and was “concerned for his safety” during the interview. Patti did
not relate any of the substance of McManus’ statements. The defendant
objected to Patti’s testimony on the ground that it constituted hearsay. The
defendant now argues that because McManus died prior to trial, admitting
Patti’s testimony about McManus violated Crawford as well as the rules of
evidence.
As to whether Patti’s testimony violated Crawford, we conclude that the
issue has not been preserved. The general rule in this jurisdiction is that a
contemporaneous and specific objection is required to preserve an issue for
appellate review. State v. Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 246 (2003). The objection
must state explicitly the specific ground of objection. Id. The sole objection
raised during Patti’s testimony was that his statements constituted
inadmissible hearsay. As neither Crawford nor the Confrontation Cause was
raised in the trial court as an objection to Patti’s testimony, we conclude that
the issue has not been preserved.
As to the defendant’s argument under the rules of evidence, we review a
trial court’s decision on the admissibility of evidence under an unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. State v. Hall, 152 N.H. 374, 378 (2005). To
meet this standard, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s
rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to his prejudice. Id.
16
The defendant contends that Patti’s statements regarding McManus’
concerns are inadmissible hearsay. The State counters that Patti’s testimony
is admissible under the exception to the hearsay rule in New Hampshire Rules
of Evidence 803(3). That rule states, in relevant part, that, “A statement of the
declarant’s then existing state of mind, emotion, sensations, or physical
condition (such as intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain, and bodily
health), but not including a statement of memory or belief to prove the fact
remembered or believed” is not excluded by the hearsay rule. N.H. R. Ev.
803(3). To be admissible under this exception, the declaration must concern
the mental state of the declarant and have reference to the time at which the
declaration was made. Hall, 152 N.H. at 378. Here, the statements were
introduced to show McManus’ state of mind at the time he was interviewed by
the police, which included concern for his safety. We conclude that the trial
court’s decision to admit Patti’s testimony about McManus’ state of mind at the
time of his interview was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The defendant argues that even if a general statement of McManus’
“concern” was admissible, the statement that he was “concerned for his safety”
is not because it expresses a statement of memory or belief to prove the fact
remembered. We do not agree. Stating that McManus was merely “concerned”
does not explain his state of mind. Concern for one’s safety is not the same as,
for example, concern about the fates of Denoncourt or the defendant. In
testifying that McManus was concerned for his safety, Patti was relating the
then-existing state of McManus’ mind. Thus, his testimony falls within the
ambit of Rule 803(3).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
17