THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2007-844
IN THE MATTER OF KEVIN GENDRON AND JODY PLAISTEK
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 20, 2008
Phillips, Gerstein & Channen, LLP, of Haverhill, Massachusetts (Lynne A.
Saben on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Basbanes & Chenelle, of Groton, Massachusetts (Kevin A. Chenelle on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner and putative father, Kevin Gendron, brings
this interlocutory appeal from a ruling of the Derry Family Division (Sadler, J.)
ordering him to submit to genetic marker testing. See RSA 522:1 (2007). We
reverse and remand.
The following facts are taken from the interlocutory appeal statement and
its appendices. The respondent-mother, Jody Plaistek, gave birth to a child on
December 28, 2004, in Lawrence, Massachusetts. At the time of the child’s
birth, the parties were not married, but resided together in Derry, New
Hampshire. The child has the father’s last name.
Two days after the child’s birth, both parties signed his birth certificate.
They also signed a Voluntary Acknowledgement of Parentage
(acknowledgement), in which they “acknowledge[d] that [they] are the biological
parents of” the child. The acknowledgement specifically names Kevin Gendron
as the child’s father. Both parties affirmed that they “voluntarily sign[ed] th[e]
acknowledgment to establish the child’s paternity.” In so doing, they
“underst[oo]d that th[e] acknowledgement w[ould] be filed with the child’s birth
certificate[;] the names of both par[ties] w[ould] be on the child’s birth
certificate”; and the acknowledgment constituted “a legal document with the
same binding effect as a court judgment of paternity.” The parties further
indicated that they understood “the process for rescinding (canceling) th[e]
acknowledgement of paternity.” Pursuant to Massachusetts law, the birth
certificate and acknowledgement were subsequently filed in Lawrence City Hall.
See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 209C, §§ 2, 11(a) (2007).
The parties lived together until June 2007. At that time, the father
obtained a domestic violence order against the mother. He also filed a
parenting petition seeking custody of the child. In response, the mother
asserted that the father is not the child’s biological father, and requested that
the court order DNA testing to establish paternity. The mother, however, did
not dispute that the child has developed a paternal relationship with the father.
On August 31, 2007, the court held a temporary hearing on the
parenting petition. At the hearing, the father submitted the child’s birth
certificate, but not the acknowledgement. The father later located the
acknowledgment, and, on September 6, 2007, submitted it to the court in a
post-hearing motion. On September 17, 2007, the trial court ordered the
father to submit to genetic marker testing.
On September 27, 2007, the father moved for reconsideration. He
argued that paternity was established in Massachusetts when the parties
signed and filed the acknowledgement, and that New Hampshire was required
to give full faith and credit to that determination of paternity. See RSA 168-
A:2, II (Supp. 2007). On October 3, 2007, the trial court denied the father’s
post-hearing motion to accept the acknowledgement because “[p]aternity
testing [had] already [been] ordered.” On October 31, 2007, the trial court
denied the father’s motion for reconsideration, explaining:
While the court finds that the [acknowledgement] must
be given some weight, the court finds that the purpose
of the Parenting statute must also be given weight.
The purpose of the statute, NH RSA 461-A is about the
best interests of the child. The best interest of [the
child] is to have this matter resolved as quickly as
possible so the parties can try to move forward
whatever the results might be. [The child] is the one
who deserves closure on this issue. He needs to know
2
who his parents are and not be plagued with the
lingering issue between [the parties] which will
inevitably be an undercurrent of their relationship for
years to come.
On appeal, the father argues that paternity was established in
Massachusetts, and that New Hampshire must afford full faith and credit to
that determination. He asserts that the doctrine of res judicata now bars the
mother from challenging paternity. Alternatively, the father contends that the
mother should be equitably estopped from contesting paternity.
The mother first argues that we cannot consider the acknowledgement
because the father did not submit it at the temporary hearing and the trial
court did not allow its late submission. Second, assuming the
acknowledgement is part of the record, the mother claims that its signing did
not produce a final judgment, but created only a rebuttable presumption of
paternity, and that New Hampshire law applies in determining whether and to
what extent that presumption may be challenged. The mother asserts that she
may challenge that presumption pursuant to RSA 5-C:28, III (Supp. 2007),
which allows a court of competent jurisdiction to decide, after the sixty-day
statutory rescission period, a challenge to an affidavit of paternity filed in New
Hampshire. See also RSA 5-C:24 (Supp. 2007). Thus, because she challenged
the acknowledgement and, specifically, whether the father is the child’s natural
father, the mother maintains that the trial court properly ordered genetic
marker testing.
We first reject the mother’s contention that the acknowledgement is not
part of the record. Although the trial court initially denied the father’s post-
hearing motion to accept the acknowledgement, in ruling upon the father’s
later motion for reconsideration, the trial court not only considered the
acknowledgement, but gave it “some weight.” Accordingly, we will consider the
acknowledgment in resolving this appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 13 (explaining that
the record on appeal shall include all “papers and exhibits filed and considered
in the proceedings in the trial court” (emphasis added)).
We now address whether the trial court properly ordered genetic marker
testing. Resolution of this issue requires us to apply RSA 168-A:2 and RSA
522:1. The application of a statute presents a question of law, which we review
de novo. ElderTrust of Fla. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H. 693, 696 (2007).
RSA 168-A:2, II provides: “The courts of this state shall give full faith
and credit to a determination of paternity made by another state, whether
established by court or administrative order, through voluntary
acknowledgement of paternity, or by operation of another state’s law.”
(Emphases added.) If paternity has been established in that manner, the
3
father’s liabilities, including necessary support, may be enforced. RSA 168-
A:2, III.
Here, both parties voluntarily signed the acknowledgement within days of
the child’s birth. Under Massachusetts law,
Unless either signatory rescinds the acknowledgement
within 60 days of the date of signing . . . , the
acknowledgment shall establish paternity as of the
date it has been signed by such putative father and
mother and shall have the same force and effect as a
judgment of paternity, subject to challenge within one
year only on the basis of fraud, duress or material
mistake of fact . . . .
Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 11(a) (emphases added). To rescind the
acknowledgment, a party must, “within 60 days of signing the
acknowledgment, file a petition in the probate and family court in the county in
which the child and one of the parents resides,” but “[i]f neither of the parents
lives in the same county as the child, then such complaint shall be filed in the
county where the child lives.” Id.; cf. R.L.H. v. T.E.L., 514 N.E.2d 855, 855-56
(Mass. 1987) (interpreting similar statutory language in same chapter as
pertaining to venue, not jurisdiction).
If the acknowledgement has not been challenged in accordance with the
foregoing provisions, “no judicial proceeding shall be required or permitted to
ratify [the] acknowledgement,” and the acknowledgement “shall be recognized
as a sufficient basis for seeking an order of support, visitation or custody with
respect to the child without further proceedings to establish paternity.” Mass.
Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 11(a) (emphases added). The Massachusetts
legislature’s “clear intention [in enacting this statute was] to limit the ability of
a voluntary signatory to a paternity agreement to challenge the validity of that
agreement at some later time.” Paternity of Cheryl, 746 N.E.2d 488, 500
(Mass. 2001).
By signing the acknowledgement, the mother, by her own volition,
accepted that the father is the child’s biological father. Even though she
presumably had notice that genetic marker testing was available, see Mass.
Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 5(b) (2007), she did not seek such testing before signing
the acknowledgement. The mother further affirmed that she read and
understood the process for rescinding and challenging the acknowledgement.
Despite this understanding, the mother never rescinded nor challenged the
acknowledgment within the delineated time periods. Accordingly, the father’s
paternity was established on December 30, 2004, and, as the mother
understood when she signed it, the acknowledgment now has the same force
4
and effect as a Massachusetts court judgment of paternity. Mass. Gen. Laws
ch. 209C, § 11(a); see also 41 Am. Jur. 2d Illegitimate Children § 42, at 261
(2005) (“A valid acknowledgement of paternity filed with the proper agency is
equivalent to an adjudication of paternity of a child and confers upon the
acknowledged father all of the rights and duties of a parent.”).
Besides her assertion two and one-half years after the child’s birth that
the father is not the child’s biological father, the mother alleges no facts
challenging the validity of the acknowledgement itself. Compare RSA 5-C:28,
III (Supp. 2007) and Ely v. DeRosier, 123 N.H. 249, 251 (1983), with Mass.
Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 11(a) and 41 Am. Jur. 2d, supra § 42. Pursuant to RSA
168-A:2, II, we must give the acknowledgement “the same credit, validity and
effect” it has in Massachusetts, Wilson v. Shepard, 124 N.H. 392, 394 (1983)
(quotation omitted). Contrary to the mother’s assertion, the acknowledgement
did not create a presumption of paternity in Massachusetts, but, rather,
established paternity. Compare Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 11(a)
(“acknowledgement shall establish paternity”) with Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 209C,
§ 6(a) (setting forth circumstances in which a man is presumed to be the father
of a child, and not including instance where an acknowledgement of parentage
has been signed and filed). Accordingly, giving the acknowledgement full faith
and credit, we conclude that paternity has been established in this case.
For the first time at oral argument, the mother contended that she was
precluded from rescinding the acknowledgement within the statutory sixty-day
time period because Massachusetts law requires a petition for rescission to be
filed in the probate and family court in the county where the child lives. See
Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 209C, § 11(a). She asserted that, had she petitioned for
rescission in Massachusetts, a Massachusetts court would have rejected her
petition for lack of jurisdiction because the child has always resided in New
Hampshire, not Massachusetts. Thus, the mother argued that it would be
fundamentally unfair for us to give the acknowledgement full faith and credit
when Massachusetts provided her with no opportunity to rescind the
acknowledgment.
The mother did not present this argument in her brief. She also never
asserted it to the trial court, and the trial court did not consider it in reaching
its decision. We generally decline to address issues raised for the first time
during oral argument, see, e.g., Petition of Beauregard, 151 N.H. 445, 449
(2004) (declining to reach the merits of an argument raised by the appellee for
first time at oral argument); State v. Scovill, 144 N.H. 409, 414 (1999)
(declining to reach merits of State’s harmless error argument raised for first
time at oral argument); cf. Panas v. Harakis & K-Mart Corp., 129 N.H. 591,
617-18 (1987) (court will not address an issue raised for the first time on
appeal in a reply brief), because, otherwise “a party [could] wait until oral
argument and then surprise opposing counsel with a new issue not previously
5
addressed in that party’s brief,” Scovill, 144 N.H. at 414. “There is a
fundamental unfairness in not adequately and fully presenting one’s position in
the brief and waiting until oral argument to clarify it.” State v. Tucker, 145
N.H. 723, 725 (2001) (quotation omitted). Thus, “all of the substantive
arguments known to the parties should appear at least once in the briefs so
that the parties and the court may be prepared to fully discuss them during
the oral presentation of the case.” Id. at 726. Here, because the mother raised
this new substantive question for the first time at oral argument, we do not
reach the merits of this argument.
Under RSA 522:1, I(a), a “court may order genetic paternity testing upon
the motion of any party or upon its own initiative.” However, the mother, child,
and putative father are required to submit to such testing only in civil actions
“in which paternity is a contested and relevant issue.” RSA 522:1, I (emphasis
added).
Here, the unchallenged acknowledgement established the father’s
paternity, thus dispensing with the need for additional proof of paternity.
Therefore, genetic marker testing was irrelevant to determining the father’s
request for custody. See id. Indeed, we reached a similar result in Watts v.
Watts, 115 N.H. 186 (1975). There, the defendant father had acknowledged
two children as his own since their birth. Watts, 115 N.H. at 187. Over fifteen
years later, relying upon an earlier version of RSA 522:1, the defendant sought
to disprove paternity through blood tests. Id. at 188; see RSA 522:1 (1974).
We held that the presumption of paternity in that case could not be rebutted by
blood tests because the “defendant ha[d] acknowledged the children as his own
without challenge for over fifteen years.” Watts, 115 N.H. at 189. We reasoned
that “[t]o allow [the] defendant to escape liability for support by using blood
tests would be to ignore his lengthy, voluntary acceptance of parental
responsibilities.” Id.; see also McRae v. McRae, 115 N.H. 353, 355 (1975) (“To
permit the husband to raise the question of paternity after an eight-year period
of uninterrupted acquiescence, with several opportunities to raise the issue,
would contravene the policy of this State’s law to protect the child and the
spouse from the belated resort to scientific proof in an effort to escape parental
responsibility.” (citation omitted)).
Although it is the mother who is attempting to disprove the father’s
paternity in this instance, the mother has proffered, and we see, no reason for
reaching a different result. Whether the mother or father is the petitioner, the
paramount interests are certainty and finality. Cf. In re Baby Girl P., 147 N.H.
772, 776 (2002). Thus, whether genetic marker testing should be ordered does
not depend upon the party seeking to reopen paternity, but depends instead
upon whether genetic marker testing is “contested and relevant.” RSA 522:1, I.
6
The trial court apparently found that genetic marker testing was relevant
because it would be in the child’s best interests. While we agree that a child’s
best interests generally should be given consideration in determining whether
to order genetic marker testing when that issue remains relevant, cf. Bodwell v.
Brooks, 141 N.H. 508, 512 (1996); Hansen v. Hansen, 116 N.H. 329, 331
(1976), we find that the trial court erred in finding that this child’s best
interests required such testing. Certainty and finality are particularly
important in paternity determinations because “stability and continuity of
support, both emotional and financial, are essential to a child’s welfare.”
Paternity of Cheryl, 746 N.E.2d at 495 (citations omitted); see also Tregoning v.
Wiltschek, 782 A.2d 1001, 1004 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2001) (“Public policy demands
that children have the right to certainty in their relationships with their
parents. . . . If a certain person has acted as the parent and bonded with the
child, the child should not be required to suffer the potentially damaging
trauma that may come from being told that the father he has known all his life
is not in fact his father.” (citations omitted)).
In this case, the acknowledgement established the father as the child’s
legal father. Accordingly, the trial court erred in ordering genetic marker
testing. Cf. Watts, 115 N.H. at 188-89; Tregoning, 782 A.2d at 1004; Pettinato
v. Pettinato, 582 A.2d 909, 913 (R.I. 1990). Because we find that the
acknowledgement must be afforded full faith and credit, we do not reach the
father’s estoppel argument.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7