THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-102
SHELBY BAXTER, BY HER MOTHER AND NEXT FRIEND, PATRICIA BAXTER
v.
CHARLES TEMPLE & a.
Argued: January 31, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 20, 2008
Seufert Professional Association, of Franklin (Christopher J. Seufert on
the brief), and Thornton & Naumes, LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Neil T.
Leifer and Andrew S. Wainwright on the brief, and Mr. Leifer orally), for the
plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gary M. Burt and Doreen F.
Connor on the brief, and Mr. Burt orally), for the defendants.
Hall, Stewart & Murphy, P.A., of Manchester (Francis G. Murphy on the
brief and orally), for the American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology, as
amicus curiae.
DUGGAN, J. The minor plaintiff, Shelby Baxter, by and through her
mother and next friend, Patricia Baxter, appeals the exclusion by the Trial
Court (Hollman, J.) of two expert witnesses in her negligence action against the
defendants, Charles and Kelly Temple. The exclusion of these witnesses
resulted in dismissal of the plaintiff’s case. We reverse in part, vacate in part,
and remand.
I. Factual and Procedural Background
The record supports the following relevant facts. Between May 11, 1995,
and May 11, 1996, the plaintiff and her parents resided in an apartment in
Concord that they rented from the defendants. In early September 1995, the
plaintiff, who was almost fourteen months old at the time, was tested for lead
paint poisoning. The test results revealed an elevated blood lead level of thirty-
six micrograms per deciliter. On September 26, 1995, the New Hampshire
Department of Health and Human Services investigated the premises and
found substantial evidence of lead paint contamination.
The plaintiff subsequently filed this action, alleging, among other things,
that the defendants failed to warn her of the presence and dangers of the lead
paint. She contended that her exposure to and ingestion of the high levels of
lead paint present in the apartment caused her to suffer from “lead paint
poisoning and the effects thereof including but not limited to: reduced life
expectancy, brain damage, past and future pain and suffering, and loss of
expected earnings capacity . . . .”
To prove her case, the plaintiff designated three expert witnesses: (1)
Barbara Bruno-Golden, Ed.D., a neuropsychologist who evaluated the plaintiff
by administering a series of neuropsychological tests to determine her cognitive
and behavioral status; (2) William Bithoney, M.D., a pediatrician who
concluded that the plaintiff suffers from organic brain syndrome caused by
lead poisoning; and (3) Arthur Kaufman, M.Ed., a vocational rehabilitation
specialist. On the day of trial, the defendants moved in limine to exclude the
testimony of Dr. Bruno-Golden as unreliable under New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 702, RSA 516:29-a (2007), and Daubert v. Merrell Dow
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
Thereafter, the trial court held a six-day Daubert hearing. The trial court
heard testimony from: (1) Dr. Bruno-Golden; (2) Sandra J. Shaheen, Ph.D., a
pediatric neuropsychologist introduced by the plaintiff to support Dr. Bruno-
Golden’s testimony; and (3) David Faust, Ph.D., a psychologist presented by
the defendants to criticize Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony. The trial court, in a
lengthy order, subsequently ruled that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony was
inadmissible.
The plaintiff moved for reconsideration, requesting that the trial court
allow Dr. Bruno-Golden to testify to her administration and scoring of three
2
specific tests – two tests measuring IQ and one test measuring attention – that
the plaintiff alleged were “not subject to the methodological objections raised by
the defendants.” The defendants objected, arguing that these three tests could
not properly and reliably be extracted from the comprehensive battery of tests
that Dr. Bruno-Golden administered and, further, that such limited testimony
would “confuse the jury, not assist it.” The trial court agreed with the
defendants and denied the plaintiff’s motion.
Subsequently, the defendants moved in limine to exclude the testimony
of Dr. Bithoney and Mr. Kaufman, arguing that both experts’ opinions were
unreliable because they were “based almost exclusively on Dr. Bruno-Golden’s
unreliable findings.” The plaintiff conceded that Mr. Kaufman was precluded
from testifying at trial, but contended that Dr. Bithoney’s testimony was
admissible because it was based upon sufficient information independent from
Dr. Bruno-Golden’s reports. The trial court found that Dr. Bithoney’s
testimony was unreliable and inadmissible. Because the plaintiff no longer had
an expert to prove her case, the trial court concluded that the plaintiff could
not proceed and dismissed the case.
On appeal, the plaintiff contends that the trial court erred by: (1)
excluding Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony as unreliable; (2) not permitting Dr.
Bruno-Golden to testify to the results of the two IQ tests and the attention test;
and (3) excluding Dr. Bithoney’s testimony. We address only the first
argument because we agree that the trial court erred in excluding Dr. Bruno-
Golden’s testimony as unreliable.
II. Standards for Admissibility of Expert Testimony
Rule 702 states:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge
will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence
or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as
an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or
education, may testify thereto in the form of an
opinion or otherwise.
N.H. R. Ev. 702. Thus, expert testimony must rise to a threshold level of
reliability to be admissible. Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-Rand, 148 N.H.
609, 613 (2002).
In Baker Valley, we applied the Daubert framework for evaluating the
reliability of expert testimony to Rule 702. Id. at 614. Subsequently, in 2004,
the legislature enacted RSA 516:29-a, which provides:
3
I. A witness shall not be allowed to offer expert testimony
unless the court finds:
(a) Such testimony is based upon sufficient facts or
data;
(b) Such testimony is the product of reliable principles
and methods; and
(c) The witness has applied the principles and
methods reliably to the facts of the case.
II. (a) In evaluating the basis for proffered expert
testimony, the court shall consider, if appropriate to the
circumstances, whether the expert’s opinions were
supported by theories or techniques that:
(1) Have been or can be tested;
(2) Have been subjected to peer review and
publication;
(3) Have a known or potential rate of error; and
(4) Are generally accepted in the appropriate
scientific literature.
(b) In making its findings, the court may consider
other factors specific to the proffered testimony.
“Section II of RSA 516:29-a unambiguously codifies the four Daubert
factors we applied in Baker Valley, and section I(b) codifies Daubert’s
requirement that the court preliminarily assess ‘whether the reasoning or
methodology underlying the testimony is scientifically valid.’” State v. Langill,
___ N.H. ___, ___ (decided April 4, 2008) (quoting Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592-93;
citation omitted). “The trial court functions only as a gatekeeper, ensuring a
methodology’s reliability before permitting the fact-finder to determine the
weight and credibility to be afforded an expert’s testimony.” Baker Valley, 148
N.H. at 616 (citation omitted). The inquiry is a flexible one, and the focus
“must be solely on the principles and methodology, not on the conclusions that
they generate.” State v. Dahood, 148 N.H. 723, 727 (2002) (quotation omitted).
Moreover, the list of Daubert factors are “meant to be helpful, not definitive.
Indeed, those factors do not all necessarily apply even in every instance in
which the reliability of scientific testimony is challenged.” Kumho Tire Co., Ltd.
4
v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 151 (1999). Thus, one or more of these factors is
relevant only “if appropriate to the circumstances.” RSA 516:29-a, II(a).
“Importantly, the Daubert test does not stand for the proposition that
scientific knowledge must be absolute or irrefutable.” Dahood, 148 N.H. at
727. To be sure, “it would be unreasonable to conclude that the subject of
scientific testimony must be known to a certainty; arguably, there are no
certainties in science.” Id. (quotation omitted). Rather, “the proposed scientific
testimony must be supported by appropriate validation – i.e., good grounds,
based on what is known.” Id. (quotation omitted). “[A]s long as an expert’s
scientific testimony rests upon good grounds, . . . it should be tested by the
adversary process – competing expert testimony and active cross-examination –
rather than excluded from jurors’ scrutiny for fear that they will not grasp its
complexities or satisfactorily weigh its inadequacies.” Langill, ___ N.H. at ___
(quotation omitted). Thus, “[i]f [the evidence] is of aid to a judge or jury, its
deficiencies or weaknesses are a matter of defense, which affect the weight of
the evidence but do not determine its admissibility.” Dahood, 148 N.H. at 727
(citation omitted).
In Langill, we interpreted RSA 516:29-a, I(c) as requiring the trial court
to also “examine whether a witness has in actuality reliably applied the
methodology to the facts of the case.” Langill, ___ N.H. at ___. However, for the
testimony to be inadmissible, the flaws in application must so infect the
procedure as to skew the methodology itself. Id. Otherwise, “the adversary
process is available to highlight the errors and permit the fact-finder to assess
the weight and credibility of the expert’s conclusions.” Id. (citation omitted).
III. Admissibility of Dr. Bruno-Golden’s Testimony
The trial court found that Dr. Bruno-Golden used the Boston Process
Approach (BPA) in evaluating the plaintiff. It found that “the Boston Process
Approach as used by Dr. Bruno-Golden is generally accepted in the appropriate
scientific literature as a sound clinical approach to evaluating individuals for
brain injury.” However, the court concluded that the evidence failed to show
that it is “generally accepted . . . in the making of a forensic assessment.”
Therefore, the trial court found that the plaintiff had not shown that Dr.
Bruno-Golden’s methodology “is generally accepted in the appropriate scientific
literature as reliable in a legal proceeding.” In reaching this conclusion, the
trial court focused upon the plaintiff’s failure to demonstrate that the specific
battery – the entire series of tests viewed as a whole – employed by Dr. Bruno-
Golden in this case was, or could be, tested, was subject to peer review and
publication, or has a known or potential rate of error. Additionally, the trial
court concluded that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s methodology as administered to the
plaintiff was not reliable.
5
We generally review a trial court’s determination of expert reliability
under Rule 702 for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Pelletier,
149 N.H. 243, 251 (2003). “When the reliability or general acceptance of novel
scientific evidence is not likely to vary according to the circumstances of a
particular case, however, we review that evidence independently.” Dahood, 148
N.H. at 726 (citation omitted).
Here, because the reliability of the methodology used by Dr. Bruno-
Golden, the BPA, is not likely to vary according to the circumstances of each
case, we review its scientific reliability independently and make our own
determination without regard to the trial court’s findings. Id. However, we
review the trial court’s finding that Dr. Bruno-Golden did not reliably apply
that methodology to the facts of this case for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. See Langill, ___ N.H. at ___.
A. Overview of the BPA and Dr. Bruno-Golden’s Testimony
We derive the following facts from our review of the evidence in the
record and pertinent legal and scientific sources. Neuropsychology is “‘a
specialty of psychology concerned with the study of the relationships between
the brain and behavior, including the use of psychological tests and
assessment techniques to diagnose specific cognitive and behavioral deficits
and to prescribe rehabilitation strategies for their remediation.’” Hoskins v.
State, 702 So. 2d 202, 209 n.5 (Fla. 1997) (quoting Stedman’s Medical
Dictionary 1049 (25th ed. 1969)). The field of neuropsychology has developed
two major approaches to the selection of neuropsychological tests: the fixed (or
standardized) battery approach and the flexible battery approach. See Stern,
Admissibility of Neuropsychological Testimony After Daubert and Kumho, 16
NeuroRehabilitation 93, 95-96 (2001)1; see also Minner v. American Mortg. &
Guar. Co., 791 A.2d 826, 869 (Del. Super. Ct. 2000); 2 L. Russ et al., Attorneys
Medical Advisor § 23:17, at 23-20 (2005) (citing Levin, A Guide to Clinical
Neuropsychological Testing, 51 Archives of Neurology 854 (1994)). But see
1 We note that, although this particular source is not in the record, consistent with the practice of other courts,
we may consider it to fully understand the science at issue in this case. See, e.g., Ballew v. Georgia, 435
U.S. 223, 231-32 n.10, 232-39 (1978) (noting that although only “some” of the studies “ha[d] been pressed
upon [the Court] by the parties,” the Court considered all of the cited sources “carefully because they
provide[d] the only basis, besides judicial hunch, for a decision”); State v. O’Key, 899 P.2d 663, 682, 686 (Or.
1995) (en banc) (evaluating the reliability of the Horizontal Gaze Nystagmus test based partly upon its “own
research” and “numerous other sources” not in the record); see also Monahan & Walker, Judicial Use of
Social Science Research, 15 Law & Hum. Behav. 571, 571 (1991) (“Increasingly in recent decades,
courts have sought out research data on their own when the parties have failed to provide them.”). But see
Ballew, 435 U.S. at 246 (Powell, J. concurring) (criticizing majority’s “heavy reliance” upon studies not
“subjected to the traditional testing mechanisms of the adversary process.”).
6
Rabin et al., Assessment Practices of Clinical Neuropsychologists in the United
States and Canada: A Survey of INS, NAN, and APA Division 40 Members, 20
Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 33, 48 (2004) (presenting results of a
survey requesting that neuropsychologists self-identify as using one of three
approaches: a fixed battery approach, a flexible battery approach, or a flexible
approach). A battery is a group of tests used to evaluate neurological domains
of functioning.
Pursuant to the fixed battery approach, the neuropsychologist
administers a uniform series of tests, such as the Halstead-Reitan
Neuropsychological Test Battery or the Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Test
Battery, to all patients, regardless of their complaints or the referral question.
L. Russ et al., supra §§ 23:17, :18, at 23-20, 23-21. This approach allows a
neuropsychologist to identify the presence or absence of brain damage or
impairment, identify the area of the brain involved, and assess whether the
injury is recent or has had an opportunity to stabilize. Stern, supra at 96.
Under the flexible battery approach, the neuropsychologist administers a
group of core tests, uses the results in conjunction with the patient’s history to
formulate a hypothesis concerning the patient’s cognitive functioning, and then
administers additional specially selected tests to further explore cognitive
deficits identified by the core tests and test the hypothesis. L. Russ et al.,
supra §§ 23:17, :19, at 23-20 to -21, 23-22; see also Stern, supra at 95-96. In
contrast to the fixed battery approach, the flexible battery approach allows the
examiner to not only identify brain damage, but also better define the specific
nature of the impairments resulting from that damage, Stern, supra at 96,
thus providing more “in-depth testing in areas of specific deficits,” Minner, 791
A.2d at 86 (quotation omitted).
The BPA is a variation of the flexible battery approach that adds a
qualitative element to evaluating brain function. Consistent with the flexible
battery approach, the BPA, in most instances, uses a collection of core and
satellite tests to assess various domains of cognitive functioning, such as
verbal memory, visual memory, planning, attention span, language, visual
perception, academic performance, and self-control. W.P. Milberg et al., The
Boston Process Approach to Neuropsychological Assessment, in
Neuropsychological Assessment of Neuropsychiatric Disorders 65, 67 (Igor
Grant & Kenneth M. Adams eds., 1986). These core or satellite tests, however,
are not predetermined; the approach is to look at domains of behavior and an
examiner may choose from a number of published tests that will each provide a
good sampling of that behavior. Like the flexible battery approach, the BPA
also uses the concept of hypothesis testing, pursuant to which the
neuropsychologist evaluates the results of an initial cognitive battery test, in
conjunction with information from parents or teachers, to determine whether
7
and to what extent additional areas of brain function require further
exploration.
The BPA was developed in response to the perceived disadvantages
associated with a purely test-score approach to psychological assessment, like
the fixed battery approach, including the distortions in the interpretations,
conclusions, and recommendations that result from the one-sided database
associated with the test-score approach, Stern, supra at 96, and lack of
precision and sensitivity in observing and assessing particular domains of
behavior, cf. Minner, 791 A.2d at 869. See also W.P Milberg et al., supra at 65-
66. Thus, in an effort to provide a more precise delineation of functions, the
BPA rejects a completely quantitative approach to neuropsychological testing.
Instead, because qualitative data, such as direct observation of a patient’s test-
taking behavior, purportedly allows a neuropsychologist to obtain significant
information concerning the patient’s life situation, Stern, supra at 96, a
neuropsychologist assesses not only the quantitative scores a patient achieves
on a particular test, but also the qualitative nature and effectiveness of the
behavior the patient demonstrates in attempting to solve the problems
presented in the test. W.P. Milberg et al., supra at 65-67; Stern, supra at 96.
Dr. Bruno-Golden is a neuropsychologist who has supervised, reviewed
or tested well over 200 children with lead paint exposure. As of 2005, her
clinical practice was approximately seventy-percent pediatric and thirty-
percent adult. When conducting neuropsychological assessments of children,
Dr. Bruno-Golden follows the same general procedure for each child; i.e., the
BPA.
Before beginning any testing, Dr. Bruno-Golden conducts a clinical
diagnostic interview, reviews available medical and school records, and speaks
with the person referring the child. At the beginning of the testing day, she
gives the child’s parents a behavioral screening questionnaire for them to
complete while she is administering tests to the child. Consistent with the
flexible battery approach, she then administers a comprehensive
neuropsychological battery, which she prefers to administer in one full day
because it provides her with an opportunity to observe the child’s attention and
concentration as it would be during a normal school day.
Dr. Bruno-Golden begins the morning session of testing by asking the
child to draw a picture of herself for the purpose of observing the child’s
approach to the testing situation. She then administers a standardized core
test, normally an intelligence test, that allows her to screen the child’s abilities
relative to others in the child’s age group. Generally, Dr. Bruno-Golden uses
the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC), which yields a full scale IQ.
The WISC test serves as both an intellectual measure and as a screening tool
8
that identifies potential neurological issues. The WISC test has several
versions and has been updated through the years.
Next, Dr. Bruno-Golden administers the Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure
(ROCF) test, which assesses visual construction skills, non-verbal memory, and
language-based issues. The ROCF test consists of three steps: copy,
immediate recall, and delayed recall. First, the administrator shows the child a
figure and asks the child to copy that figure. The materials are then taken
away from the child, and after a few minutes, the administrator instructs the
child to draw what she remembers. The materials are again taken away, and,
thirty minutes after the copy, the administrator instructs the child to draw the
figure for a third time.
During the thirty-minute interval between the copy trial and the delayed
recall trial, the examiner may not administer tasks involving “visuospatial
stimuli,” but may administer a verbal test. J.E. Meyers & K.R. Meyers, Rey
Complex Figure Test and Recognition Trial: Professional Manual 8 (Psych.
Assess. Resources, Inc. 1995). Dr. Bruno-Golden generally obtains a written
language sample and administers the Connors Continuous Performance Test
(CCPT) during this thirty-minute interval. The CCPT is a fifteen-minute
computerized test that measures a child’s attention. The test instructs the
child to press a button every time she sees any letter that is not an “X” on the
screen. The computer scores the test and interprets the child’s performance.
After the CCPT, Dr. Bruno-Golden completes the delay recall portion of the
ROCF test and breaks for lunch. At this time, the parents return the
completed behavioral screening questionnaire.
During lunch, Dr. Bruno-Golden formulates a hypothesis by considering
the responses to the screening questionnaire and evaluating the results of the
morning tests, which together indicate whether the child exhibits cognitive or
behavioral issues that require further exploration. She then selects specific
tests for the afternoon session that will measure these potential deficits and
provide a more comprehensive neuropsychological assessment. These specific
tests allow Dr. Bruno-Golden to obtain information concerning various
domains of functioning, including sensory-motor, language, visual-spatial
judgment, academic performance, memory and learning, and problem solving.
In this case, Dr. Bruno-Golden evaluated the plaintiff for neurological
issues that might be associated with her lead paint exposure. She conducted
two evaluations – in 2002, when the plaintiff was approximately seven years
old, and in 2004, when she was approximately nine years old. During each
session, Dr. Bruno-Golden followed the methodology outlined above, using core
and satellite tests, each of which has been tested and peer reviewed, and has a
known error rate. Dr. Bruno-Golden also reviewed the plaintiff’s medical and
psychosocial history as provided by her parents as well as the plaintiff’s
9
medical and school records. On both testing days, she instructed the plaintiff
to draw a picture of herself, administered a version of the WISC test,
administered the ROCF test, obtained a language sample, and administered
the CCPT. She then evaluated the results and selected additional tests for the
afternoon sessions, including the Finger Tapping (or Finger Oscillation) Test,
the Grip Strength Test, the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test III, the Wide
Range Achievement Test-Third Revision, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, the
California Verbal Learning Test-Children’s Version, and the Children Memory
Scales.
In 2002, after evaluating the results of the morning tests, Dr. Bruno-
Golden determined that the areas of attention, problem solving, memory, and
learning, required more testing. For example, she selected a test that
measures verbal working memory for structured linguistic material to ensure
that this part of the plaintiff’s working memory was intact because, during the
morning session, the plaintiff had frequently asked the doctor to repeat herself
and the directions. Dr. Bruno-Golden also decided to conduct additional core
tests in language and motor skills because they were important to provide a
comprehensive assessment. Consistent with hypothesis testing, Dr. Bruno-
Golden ruled out potential problems based upon the results of these additional
tests. Ultimately, her conclusions were grounded in the results of the WISC III,
ROCF, and CCPT tests, which she found to be critical to her opinion.
In 2004, the plaintiff’s IQ was approximately twenty points lower than
her IQ in 2002. As a result of this decline and reported concerns from the
plaintiff’s parents and teachers, Dr. Bruno-Golden gave the plaintiff more
extensive memory testing than she had administered in 2002. Otherwise, she
selected tests that evaluated the same cognitive or behavioral constructs, but
with slight variations to account for the difference in age. Ultimately, Dr.
Bruno-Golden found the results of the WISC IV, WISC III–Digital Span, Wide
Range Achievement Test (WRAT)–Decoding, ROCF, Children’s Memory Scale,
and the CCPT to be critical in reaching her conclusions.
Based upon the results of these assessments, Dr. Bruno-Golden
concluded that the plaintiff had “impairments in the areas of visual dysgraphia
and kinetic apraxia, and persistent problems with attention/executive skills,
associated with memory and retrieval problems with both verbal and nonverbal
lengthy and more complex information.” She noted that the plaintiff’s
neurobehavioral presentation was consistent with her known history of lead
paint exposure, and opined that the plaintiff “continue[d] to be at risk for
developing language based learning problems, particularly in light of her overall
general intellectual decline since her 2002 assessment, as indicated in her
current WISC-IV scores with respect to her 2002 WISC-III scores.” Thus, Dr.
Bruno-Golden diagnosed the plaintiff with, among other things, an unspecified
organic mental disorder.
10
B. Reliability of the BPA and Dr. Bruno-Golden’s Methodology
The defendants assert that Dr. Bruno-Golden used a “completely flexible
approach” to neuropsychological assessment, not the “flexible battery
approach.” We disagree.
First, as Dr. Shaheen testified, the field of neuropsychology does not
uniformly distinguish between these approaches to neuropsychological test
selection. Compare Stern, supra at 95 (explaining that the two schools of
thought regarding test selection are the fixed battery approach and a more
flexible approach, and then comparing the fixed battery approach to the flexible
battery approach), with L. Russ et al., supra §§ 23:17, :20, at 23-20 to -21, 23-
22 to -23 (explaining that the two major approaches to clinical
neuropsychological testing are the fixed battery approach and the flexible
battery approach, but noting that the BPA is another school of thought,
although not further describing the BPA), and Rabin et al., supra at 48
(presenting results of survey requesting that neuropsychologists self-identify as
using one of three approaches: a fixed battery approach, a flexible battery
approach, or a flexible approach). Thus, we question whether such a
distinction exists, and, if it does, the nature of that distinction. To the extent
that the defendants are correct that Dr. Shaheen or Dr. Bruno-Golden
admitted that Dr. Bruno-Golden used a “completely flexible approach,” we note
that defense counsel elicited this testimony in the context of an article drawing
a distinction between the two approaches. See Rabin et al., supra at 48.
Second, even assuming such a distinction exists, the defendants agree
that the BPA is a flexible battery approach. Further, as the trial court found,
“in administering the 2002 and the 2004 neuropsychological tests on the
plaintiff, Dr. Bruno-Golden employed the Boston Process Approach.” Indeed,
she used the same methodology that she normally uses when evaluating
children; that is, she administered a core set of tests in the morning, and then,
based upon those results, developed a hypothesis and selected satellite tests
for the afternoon session. Nothing in this procedure suggests that Dr. Bruno-
Golden, as the defendants assert, “self-select[ed] tests according to the
[plaintiff]’s presentation and age parameters without any standardization.”
(Emphasis added.) Rather, in line with the defendants’ definition of the flexible
battery approach, Dr. Bruno-Golden used the same set of core tests, which
tested the same cognitive and behavioral constructs, that she always uses
when testing for lead paint exposure. Accordingly, Dr. Bruno-Golden used the
BPA in a manner consistent with the flexible battery approach.
We now address whether, if used in a manner consistent with the flexible
battery approach, as Dr. Bruno-Golden did, the BPA is admissible under RSA
516:29-a. The defendants assert that for Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony to be
11
admissible, the comprehensive neuropsychological batteries that she used in
evaluating the plaintiff as a whole must have been tested, have been subject to
peer review, and have a known or potential error rate. The trial court accepted
this proposition as true in evaluating the admissibility of Dr. Bruno-Golden’s
testimony. Because the specific combination of tests Dr. Bruno-Golden used
arguably did not meet these three requirements, the defendants contend, and
the trial court found, that her testimony is inadmissible. Distilled to its
essence, the defendants’ position is that Dr. Bruno-Golden should have used a
fixed battery, such as the Halstead-Reitan battery, rather than devising her
own battery consistent with the BPA.
In support of this position, the defendants cite provisions 12.4 and 12.5
of the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, which the
American Psychological Association (APA) has approved, and language from a
section in those standards discussing “test interpretation.” See American
Educational Research Association et al., Standards for Educational and
Psychological Testing 117, 120-22 (1999) (APA Standards). The defendants
then argue: (1) “the APA Standards allow practitioners to combine tests only
when there is identifiable literature that assesses the validity of the
combination”; and (2) “[t]he Standards . . . expressly address the validity issues
that arise with the administration of non-standardized batteries.” Reviewing
these provisions in context, we find that the defendants have misapplied them
to this case.
Standard 12.4 states:
If a publisher suggests that tests are to be used in
combination with one another, the professional should
review the evidence on which the procedures for
combining tests is based and determine the rationale
for the specific combination of tests and the
justification of the interpretation based on the
combined scores.
Comment: For example, if measures of developed
abilities (e.g., achievement or specific or general
abilities) or personality are packaged with interest
measures to suggest a requisite combination of scores,
or a neuropsychological battery is being applied, then
supporting validity data for such combinations of
scores should be available.
Id. at 131.
12
This standard requires that, when Dr. Bruno-Golden administered tests
in combination with one another as suggested by the publisher of a particular
battery, she needed to have a rationale for the specific combination of tests,
and a justification for her interpretation of those tests based upon the
combined scores. As the example indicates, this standard would have applied
if Dr. Bruno-Golden had administered an entire published battery, such as the
NEPSY battery discussed below, since the publisher of that battery packages a
particular combination of measures for various domains and suggests that the
battery results in a requisite combination of scores. The standard, however,
does not mandate, as the defendants suggest, that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s specific
battery as a whole, that is, the combination of all the core and satellite tests, be
tested in order for it to be used to make a neuropsychological assessment.
Standard 12.5 provides:
The selection of a combination of tests to address a
complex diagnosis should be appropriate for the
purposes of the assessment as determined by available
evidence of validity. The professional’s educational
training and supervised experience also should be
commensurate with the test user qualifications
required to administer and interpret the selected tests.
Comment: For example, in a neuropsychological
assessment for evidence of an injury to a particular
area of the brain, it is necessary to select a
combination of tests of known diagnostic sensitivity
and specificity to impairments arising from trauma to
various regions of the cerebral hemispheres.
APA Standards, supra at 132.
Contrary to the defendants’ assertions, Dr. Bruno-Golden complied with
this standard. As the comment indicates, this standard requires that the
individual tests selected by a neuropsychologist in combination be valid and
appropriate for diagnosing the particular issue. The defendants’ expert, Dr.
Faust, agreed that it was proper for Dr. Bruno-Golden to administer each of the
individual tests she found to be critical to her conclusions for the purpose of
evaluating children with lead poisoning. He agreed that a valuable study of the
effects of lead in children used groupings of tests that examined various
domains of cognitive functioning, and used many of the same tests that Dr.
Bruno-Golden used in her assessment. See Ris et al., Early Exposure to Lead
and Neuropsychological Outcome in Adolescence, 10 J. Int’l
Neuropsychological Society 261, 264-66 (2004).
13
Dr. Faust also conceded that different neuropsychologists may
reasonably and justifiably select different groups of tests for evaluating lead
poisoning in children; there is no consensus in the field as to a particular
battery of tests that is proper for this evaluation; and no particular battery of
tests is more reliable than another for evaluating lead poisoning. When asked
what group of tests he would give to evaluate a child with elevated lead levels,
Dr. Faust testified that if he had to evaluate the child, and the circumstances
were proper, he would use the Halstead-Reitan battery, a fixed battery that
provides a broad-based definition of brain damage by yielding a brain damage
impairment index. As discussed above, this battery is limited in usage because
it does not sensitively examine specific domains of functioning such as
everyday functional capacity. See Faust et al., Challenging Neuropsychological
Evidence in Brain Damage Litigation, For the Defense, June 1994, at 8.
In fact, in a study he conducted of lead poisoning in children, Dr. Faust
developed his own battery of tests. See Faust & Brown, Moderately Elevated
Blood Lead Levels: Effects on Neuropsychologic Functioning in Children, 80
Pediatrics 623 (1987). In the study, Dr. Faust noted:
Neuropsychologic assessment methods are more
sensitive to cognitive deficit than standard intelligence
tests alone or limited cognitive batteries. Studies on
increased lead levels in which less sensitive techniques
were used and in which nonsignificant findings were
obtained may thus represent false-negative errors.
Although some investigators have used sections of
neuropsychologic test batteries, . . . none have
administered a comprehensive set of neuropsychologic
tests, such as the Halstead-Reitan battery.
Id. at 623-24. Rather than administer the Halstead-Reitan battery in his
study, Dr. Faust, like Dr. Bruno-Golden, adopted a battery from the work of a
prominent neuropsychologist, and used “standardized psychometric tests” as
well as “a number of clinical tests,” noting that “[e]xtensive normative data
[was] available on all of the tests and items.” Id. at 625. As Dr. Bruno-Golden
did, Dr. Faust tested general areas of functioning, including “psychomotor,
memory, visual-motor and spatial, language and associated functions . . . ,
attention and concentration, and reasoning.” Id.
Notably, since Dr. Faust administered the foregoing tests as part of a
research study, he standardized the results of his self-selected
neuropsychological battery by administering the tests to fifteen children with
moderately increased blood levels and fifteen “control” children. Id. at 624.
However, nothing in the record indicates that a neuropsychologist who is
clinically assessing whether a particular child’s exposure to lead has resulted
14
in any cognitive deficits, even in the context of a lawsuit, must “standardize”
the battery of tests he or she uses for the particular child. Nor does the record
demonstrate that a neuropsychologist must follow a fixed battery that has
never been proven to be suitable for sensitively detecting whether lead
exposure resulted in any cognitive and behavioral deficits. Indeed, Dr. Faust
conceded that the Halstead-Reitan battery was a compromised choice.
In light of the lack of a discrete combination of tests sensitive to lead
poisoning, and Dr. Bruno-Golden’s selection of tests that were individually
suitable for evaluating lead poisoning in children, Dr. Bruno-Golden did not
violate this standard. Underscoring this conclusion is the fact that the flexible
battery approach is the generally accepted approach for neuropsychological
testing, see, e.g., Sweet et al., The TCN/AACN 2005 “Salary Survey”:
Professional Practices, Beliefs, and Incomes of U.S. Neuropsychologists, 20 The
Clinical Neuropsychologist 325, 333 (2006) (providing results of a 2005 survey
of clinical neuropsychologists, and showing that seventy-six percent used a
“flexible battery approach” toward test selection, eighteen percent used a
“flexible” approach, and seven percent used a “standardized battery approach”);
Rabin et al., supra at 48 (providing results of a similar 2004 survey showing
that sixty-eight percent of clinical neuropsychologists favored a “flexible battery
approach,” twenty percent favored a “flexible approach,” and eleven percent
favored a “standardized battery”), and Dr. Bruno-Golden administered the BPA
to the plaintiff in a manner consistent with the flexible battery approach. By
definition, the flexible battery approach does not require the examiner to use a
required set of tests for evaluating a question. Instead, it provides the trained
examiner with some latitude to use her judgment and select tests that may
properly address the problem presented by evaluating the relevant domains of
functioning.
The concept of hypothesis testing itself requires the examiner to, based
upon the individual and the initial general testing, e.g., the IQ test, form a
hypothesis concerning which domains of behavior may be affected, and then
select tests to evaluate those domains. Furthermore, the APA Standards
encourage examiners to conduct individualized assessments. See APA
Standards, supra at 121. Accordingly, when Standard 12.5 is viewed in its
proper context, Dr. Bruno-Golden’s specific battery was not required to be
validated as a whole. Cf. Minner, 791 A.2d at 869 (Because the expert “based
her initial results on a sufficient battery of tests,” her “results are sufficiently
reliable for admissibility.”).
The defendants also rely upon certain language found in a section of the
APA Standards entitled “Test Interpretation” in support of their position. See
APA Standards, supra at 121-22. The paragraph cited begins: “For some
purposes, including career counseling and neuropsychological assessment, test
batteries are frequently used.” Id. at 122. These batteries examine various
15
cognitive domains and “often include tests of verbal ability, numerical ability,
nonverbal reasoning, mechanical reasoning, clerical speed and accuracy,
spatial ability, and language usage.” Id.
When psychological test batteries incorporate multiple
methods and scores, patterns of test results frequently
are interpreted to reflect a construct or even an
interaction among constructs underlying test
performances. Higher order interactions among the
constructs underlying configurations of test outcomes
may be postulated on the basis of test score patterns.
The literature reporting evidence of reliability and
validity that supports the proposed interpretations
should be identifiable. If the literature is incomplete,
the resulting inferences may be presented with the
qualification that they are hypotheses for future
verification rather than probabilistic statements that
imply some known validity evidence.
Id.
The defendants argue that this language demonstrates that “validity
issues . . . arise with the administration of non-standardized batteries.” The
language, however, does not distinguish between standardized and non-
standardized batteries. Further, this section addresses the interpretation of
test score patterns, and, if it applies at all, would likely be relevant to Dr.
Bruno-Golden’s conclusions, not her methodology.
Even so, if interpreted in the context of flexible batteries, the language
seemingly requires that evidence of reliability and validity support a proposed
interpretation of the interactions between the subtests of an individual test
battery, not the interaction between every test of a comprehensive
neuropsychological battery used for assessment. For example, Dr. Bruno-
Golden noticed a scatter or variation in the plaintiff’s scores on two subtests of
the verbal portion of the WISC III. The literature indicated that this variation
indicates a weakness in the plaintiff’s verbal performance that the WISC III did
not sensitively measure. Dr. Bruno-Golden therefore determined that she
needed further verbal testing to clearly understand how the plaintiff functions
in her left hemisphere. Pursuant to the above language in the APA Standards,
Dr. Bruno-Golden properly used literature to interpret the intertest scatter. In
the context of a clinical evaluation, as opposed perhaps to a research study,
Dr. Bruno-Golden did not need further literature to then validate her
interpretation of the interaction between the WISC and the individual test
examining the specific construct.
16
To conclude otherwise would require the field of neuropsychology to test,
peer review, and calculate error rates for an infinite number of test
combinations for the interpretations to be reliable. Each time a new validated
and reliable test or battery of tests, such as the NEPSY, is developed or even
updated, a clinical examiner could not use it as part of a comprehensive
battery since it would be unknown how it interacted with the other tests within
that battery. Since the flexible battery approach is the generally accepted
approach to conducting neuropsychological assessments, the APA Standards
could not logically mandate that a neuropsychologist always use a
comprehensive test battery that is validated as a whole.
The amicus curiae supports this conclusion. Drawing a comparison to
clinical medicine, the amicus curiae explains that “[t]here is no expectation
that the specific battery of neurological exam procedures and diagnostic tests
chosen by the neurologist be studied as a whole with regard to validity.”
Similarly, for neuropsychological testing, “test validity lies in individual tests,
not in ‘test batteries.’” “Either the individual tests selected for inclusion in a
flexible-battery are scientifically valid or they are not.” Citing a “hallmark
article” in an APA journal, the amicus curiae emphasizes that using large fixed
batteries is a questionable practice, and that “a flexible, multimethod
assessment battery using tests typically employed in practice and selected on
the basis of idiographic referral questions” is recommended. See Meyer et al.,
Psychological Testing and Psychological Assessment: A Review of Evidence and
Issues, 56 American Psychologist 128, 154 (2001). Accordingly, the
defendants’ position that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s battery as a whole was required
to have been tested, have been subject to peer review or publication, and have
a known or potential error rate contravenes the flexible battery approach and
the concept of hypothesis testing.
Moreover, under the defendants’ position, no psychologist who uses a
flexible battery would qualify as an expert, even though the flexible battery
approach is the prevalent and well-accepted methodology for
neuropsychological assessment. Further, while the approach proffered by the
defendants, the fixed battery approach, has been tested, has been peer
reviewed, and has known or potential error rates outside the context of lead
poisoning, it seems to no longer be the generally accepted methodology for
conducting neuropsychological assessments. See, e.g., Sweet et al., supra at
333; Rabin et al., supra at 48; Faust et al., supra at 8. Therefore, the
implication of the defendants’ position is that no neuropsychologist, or even
psychiatrist or psychologist since, in their view, all combinations of tests need
to be validated and reliable, could ever assist a trier of fact in a legal case.
However, “[t]he role of the Court when ruling on a Daubert motion is not
to resolve the scientific debate, but to determine whether [the] plaintiff[’s]
experts have a reliable basis for their testimony.” Palmer v. Asarco
17
Incorporated, 510 F. Supp. 2d 519, 527 (N.D. Okla. 2007). Regardless of
whether the fixed battery approach was a better approach to evaluating the
plaintiff, the relevant inquiry is whether Dr. Bruno-Golden used a reliable
methodology to conduct her neuropsychological assessments. See Minner, 791
A.2d at 869 (noting that, while the plaintiffs argued that the fixed battery
approach was the better approach, the “‘flexible’ approach appears to be an
acceptable method for the evaluation of patients”).
We agree with the trial court that the BPA is generally accepted in the
scientific literature as a reliable method for clinically assessing children for
cognitive and behavioral deficits. Cf. id. As Dr. Shaheen testified, “the battery
of tests that [Dr. Bruno-Golden] employed followed the general guidelines for
neuropsychological assessment for children and [her] qualitative analysis lends
information that is used clinically and . . . is a standard clinical approach.”
See also L. Russ et al., supra §§ 23:9, 23:26, at 23-13, 23-25 to -26; Mcconnel,
The Sevin Made Me Do It: Mental Non-Responsibility and the Neurotoxic
Damage Defense, 14 Va. Envtl. L.J. 151, 156-57 (1994). The defendants’ own
expert testified that qualitative indicators like those used in the BPA are
“potentially important,” and never refuted the notion that the BPA is a
generally accepted methodology for clinically evaluating children.
Further, although another neuropsychologist may reach different
conclusions, the evidence in the record indicates that the BPA as a flexible
battery approach can be tested. See RSA 516:29-a, II(a)(1). Another examiner
could conceivably administer the same core tests in the morning session,
noting both the quantitative scores and the qualitative indicators, evaluate the
results and form a hypothesis, and test that hypothesis in the afternoon
session by conducting standardized tests that would identify any problem
areas. Additionally, as Dr. Shaheen testified, the BPA has been subject to peer
review and publication. See RSA 516:29-a, II(a)(2).
While the BPA itself does not have a known or potential error rate, the
Daubert factors “do not constitute ‘a definitive checklist or test’” that must be
applied in all circumstances. Kumho Tire, 526 U.S. at 150 (quoting Daubert,
509 U.S. at 594); see also RSA 516:29-a, II. Rather, the factors must be
applied with flexibility and in light of the proffered testimony. Baker Valley,
148 N.H. at 616. Given the nature of the BPA, and particularly that it
inherently requires some level of flexibility, we find that the known or potential
error rate factor is not an “appropriate” consideration in examining its
reliability. See RSA 516:29-a, II(a).
However, we note that a critical component of our finding that the BPA
meets three of the four Daubert factors is the use of standardized tests. To
meet the threshold for reliability, a neuropsychologist applying the BPA must
demonstrate that the individual tests he or she administered as part of the
18
battery, not the battery as a whole, have been tested, have been subject to peer
review and publication, and have known or potential error rates. Cf. United
States v. Eff, 461 F. Supp. 2d 529, 531, 533 (E.D. Tex. 2006) (although
neuropsychologist’s opinion of insanity was not a reliable conclusion, the
battery of tests administered by the neuropsychologist to measure defendant’s
cognitive abilities, including the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III, ROCF,
Boston Naming Test, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, Wide Range Achievement
Test-4, and Finger Tapping, was reliable because the individual tests could be
repeated, had reasonable confidence levels, and had been widely administered).
The defendants do not dispute that each of the individual tests Dr.
Bruno-Golden used to evaluate the plaintiff met these requirements. Notably,
it might be a different case if Dr. Bruno-Golden had used the BPA in a manner
inconsistent with the flexible battery approach, such as by specifically
designing a set of tasks for the plaintiff that were not standardized, or by
creating a new test to measure a particular deficit area. See W.P. Milberg et
al., supra at 67; cf. Downs v. Perstorp Components, Inc., 126 F. Supp. 2d
1090, 1109-10, 1128 (E.D. Tenn. 1999) (excluding expert’s testimony as
unreliable partly because he developed and administered a completely self-
selected battery that had no basis or consistency, and compared the results to
norms that were based upon his own collective data, as opposed to
standardized test data). In those circumstances, the lack of validity evidence
for the individual tests administered by the neuropsychologist might affect the
reliability of the methodology itself. See Langill, ___ N.H. at ___.
Accordingly, we find that, when the BPA is administered in a manner
consistent with the flexible battery approach, as described above, it is generally
a reliable approach to neuropsychological assessment, and is thus a reliable
methodology for determining a person’s cognitive status. Cf. Palmer, 510 F.
Supp. 2d at 522, 524-25 (finding that, despite “the somewhat subjective nature
of plaintiffs’ neurocognitive injuries,” neuropsychologist had a reliable basis to
testify to test results of plaintiffs with lead exposure, and that plaintiffs
suffered from certain neurocognitive deficits, where neuropsychologist
administered a battery of tests to plaintiffs, including the WISC III “and
selected subsets of the . . . Children’s Memory Scale”).
The defendants argue, and the trial court found, that, even if the BPA is
reliable for clinical assessment, it is unreliable in the forensic context. The
defendants assert that “Dr. Bruno-Golden[’s] admi[ssion] that she combined
quantitative data with her subjective, qualitative observations when reaching
her conclusions,” and her “admi[ssion] that her methodology . . . would not be
appropriate or acceptable for a published research paper, . . . confirms the trial
court’s conclusion that the methodology was not sufficiently reliable for jury
consideration.”
19
The plaintiff, amicus curiae, Dr. Bruno-Golden, and Dr. Shaheen dispute
that any different standard exists for the forensic setting as opposed to the
clinical setting. According to the amicus curiae, “the clinical and ‘forensic’
neuropsychologist are not distinguishable by their testing approach, by the
scientific merits of their instruments, by balance of objectivity versus
subjectivity, by standards of logical proof, or by training.” Both “rely on
situation-specific test batteries, and both strive to be objective and accurate in
their characterization of an examinee’s cognitive status. . . . Both
neuropsychology roles . . . require scientific validation, but not fundamentally
different kinds of scientific validation.” We agree.
Besides Dr. Faust’s unsupported opinion that clinical neuropsychologists
are not objective examiners because their apparent goal is to advance the
patient’s interest, nothing in the record indicates that the field of
neuropsychology recognizes a relevant distinction between methodologies
based upon their use in the clinical setting versus the forensic setting.
Contrary to the defendants’ assertion, Dr. Bruno-Golden’s purpose was not to
publish a research paper, which arguably would have required her to conduct
a study similar to the one Dr. Faust has published, in which she standardized
results against a control group. Instead, her purpose in evaluating the plaintiff
was to determine the plaintiff’s cognitive status; specifically, to “assess her
current level of cognitive and behavioral functioning and serve as a basis from
which to make recommendations with respect to her overall care, clinical
management, and educational program.”
To this end, Dr. Bruno-Golden administered a flexible battery based
upon the plaintiff’s presentation and history that consisted of standardized
tests, scored those tests against published norms, and interpreted the results
to determine the plaintiff’s cognitive status. Although the BPA required Dr.
Bruno-Golden to use and interpret both qualitative and quantitative measures
to render her assessment, contrary to Dr. Faust’s assertion, nothing in the
record suggests that her goal as both a clinical and forensic neuropsychologist
was not to render an objective determination of the plaintiff’s cognitive status
based upon those measures and her extensive clinical experience as a
neuropsychologist. The subjectivity inherent in using the BPA to clinically
assess a patient does not in and of itself render that methodology unreliable for
determining whether a particular plaintiff in a legal proceeding suffers from or
is at risk for cognitive or behavioral deficiencies. Cf. S.V. v. R.V., 933 S.W.2d 1,
42 (Tex. 1996) (Cornyn, J. concurring).
To be sure,
[t]he ability of the clinician to supplement the actual
test scores with observation of the patient during the
test, as well as background qualitative information
20
obtained from the patient, and the patient’s records
and family, are generally believed to allow clinicians to
make more informed diagnoses than would be possible
by a simple mathematical calculation based on test
scores alone.
L. Russ et al., supra § 23:26, at 23-26. Thus, “[t]he clinical judgment of the
neuropsychologist is a critical part of the forensic evaluation and should be
used in conjunction with” quantitative test scores. Mcconnel, supra at 156-57;
see also L. Russ et al., supra § 23:9, at 23-13 (“when the purpose of the
examination goes beyond merely identifying and quantifying impairments,”
such as “[w]hen there is any question as to the cause of the identified
impairments, whether for purposes of treatment or litigation, or as to the
‘stability’ of the impairments (i.e., is the patient likely to get worse, and if so,
over what time frame?), the bare scores on the tests will not be sufficient to
answer the question”). If the BPA as used by Dr. Bruno-Golden, which
employs both quantitative and qualitative measures, is reliable to diagnose the
plaintiff with particular injuries, and to prescribe her future clinical and
educational care as a result of that diagnosis, we do not see how that same
methodology is unreliable for assisting a fact finder in understanding the
plaintiff’s cognitive and behavioral status. See, e.g., Benedi v. McNeil-P.P.C.,
Inc., 66 F.3d 1378, 1384 (4th Cir. 1995) (“We will not declare . . .
methodologies invalid and unreliable in light of the medical community’s daily
use of the same methodologies in diagnosing patients.”); State v. McMullen,
900 A.2d 103, 118-19 (Del. Super. Ct. 2006) (finding that if a particular
methodology “provides a sufficient basis on which to prescribe medical
treatment with potential life-or-death consequences, it should be considered
reliable enough to assist a fact finder in understanding certain evidence or
determining certain fact issues”); cf. Heller v. Shaw Industries, Inc., 167 F.3d
146, 155 (3d Cir. 1999).
Indeed, Daubert simply requires that an expert “employ[] in the
courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that characterizes the practice of
an expert in the relevant field.” Kumho Tire, 526 U.S. at 152. The record
reveals no evidence suggesting that Dr. Bruno-Golden used a different
methodology to evaluate the plaintiff from that which she normally uses in
clinically assessing patients with lead paint exposure. Moreover, because the
BPA as a flexible battery approach has a reliable basis in the knowledge and
experience of neuropsychology, see id. at 149, any alleged shortcomings in Dr.
Bruno-Golden’s interpretation of the quantitative and qualitative results affect
the weight to be given her conclusions, not the reliability of the methodology
itself. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___; Dahood, 148 N.H. at 723. Accordingly, we reject
the defendants’ assertion that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s methodology, the BPA as a
flexible battery approach, is not a sufficiently reliable methodology to assist a
fact finder in understanding the plaintiff’s neuropsychological status.
21
C. Reliability of Dr. Bruno-Golden’s Application of the BPA to This Case
We now review the trial court’s finding that Dr. Bruno-Golden did not
reliably apply the BPA to this case because she failed to follow the rules of
administration for certain tests she used during her assessments. See RSA
516:29-a, I(c). We review this finding for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___.
RSA 516:29-a, I(c) precludes expert testimony by a witness unless “[t]he
witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the
case.” In Langill, we adopted the following standard for determining when a
witness has met this requirement:
when the application of a scientific methodology is
challenged as unreliable under Daubert and the
methodology itself is otherwise sufficiently reliable,
outright exclusion of the evidence in question is
warranted only if the methodology was so altered by a
deficient application as to skew the methodology itself.
Where errors do not rise to the level of negating the
basis for the reliability of the principle itself, the
adversary process is available to highlight the errors
and permit the fact-finder to assess the weight and
credibility of the expert’s conclusions. . . . As long as
an expert’s scientific testimony rests upon good
grounds, . . . it should be tested by the adversary
process – competing expert testimony and active cross-
examination – rather than excluded from jurors’
scrutiny for fear that they will not grasp its
complexities or satisfactorily weigh its inadequacies.
Langill, ___ N.H. at ___ (quotations and citations omitted). Thus, for the
testimony to be inadmissible, the flaws in application must “so infect the
procedure as to make the results unreliable.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted).
In its order, the trial court specifically found that, in 2004, Dr. Bruno-
Golden erred in administering the Block Design subtest of the WISC. The court
also noted that the defendants had pointed to five other tests or subtests “in
which Dr. Bruno-Golden created her own rules of administration or
procedure,” and that “Dr. Bruno-Golden could only identify two tests in 2002
and two tests in 2004 in which she followed the rules of administration.” Thus,
because following test administration rules maintains the validity and
reliability of testing and Dr. Bruno-Golden did not abide by the rules for the
22
cited tests, the trial court found that “as administered in this case, Dr. Bruno-
Golden’s methodology was not reliable.”
We address each cited error in turn to determine whether the errors rise
to the level of negating the basis for the reliability of the methodology itself. Id.
1. WISC III and WISC IV
The WISC provides a global picture of the brain’s processing. It assesses
both the left and right hemispheres of the brain by incorporating subtests that
analyze various verbal and non-verbal constructs. The subtests are
individually scored in accordance with age norms contained in a manual. The
manual also contains standards for administration of the test.
In 2002, when administering the WISC III, Dr. Bruno-Golden deviated
from the manual’s standards of administration for two subtests: Block Design
and Object Assembly. In the Block Design subtest, a child is presented with a
picture with a design on it and cubes that have the same design on them. The
child is instructed to arrange the cubes so that they match the picture.
Similarly, the Object Assembly subtest requires the child to complete a puzzle.
Both subtests are timed tests in which the child is allotted more points for
completing the tasks early, and receives a zero if she does not finish within the
time limits.
On those occasions when the plaintiff did not complete the Block Design
or Object Assembly tasks within the allotted time, Dr. Bruno-Golden gave the
plaintiff a score of zero, but allowed her to continue trying to complete the
tasks past the time limits. Dr. Bruno-Golden gave the plaintiff more time
primarily because she did not want to disrupt her rapport with the plaintiff
since the plaintiff had asked to continue the tasks, and secondarily because
she wanted to observe whether, if given more time, the plaintiff would be able
to finish the tasks. On one occasion, Dr. Bruno-Golden gave the plaintiff more
time because the plaintiff was nearing completion of the task; on others, unless
the plaintiff wanted to stop, she allowed her to continue.
Similarly, in 2004, when administering the WISC IV, Dr. Bruno-Golden
deviated from the manual’s administration standards for the subtests Block
Design and Coding. The Coding subtest is administered after the Block Design
subtest. In the Coding subtest, the child is presented with a code where the
numbers one through nine are matched with specific geometric shapes. The
numbers are then listed in a random order, and the child must fill in the
corresponding geometric shapes. The child is first given a sample so that the
child understands the task, and then is provided two minutes in which to
complete the subtest. The Coding subtest is scored based upon what the child
completes in the two-minute time limit.
23
For the Block Design subtest of the WISC IV, Dr. Bruno-Golden gave the
plaintiff a score of zero, but again allowed the plaintiff to continue after the
time limits for the tasks had expired because the plaintiff was highly motivated
to complete the tasks. Further, in the WISC IV version of the Block Design
subtest, when a child obtains three consecutive scores of zero, the manual
instructs the examiner to discontinue the subtest. Dr. Bruno-Golden allowed
the plaintiff to continue with the fourth task, even though the plaintiff had
received three consecutive scores of zero, because the plaintiff impulsively
flipped the subtest over and insisted upon attempting the next problem. Dr.
Bruno-Golden, however, did not score the additional time that the plaintiff
spent on the subtest.
Similarly, for the Coding subtest of the WISC IV, Dr. Bruno-Golden
allowed the plaintiff to continue for three minutes after the two-minute time
limit. She scored, however, only the portion completed within the time limit.
The Coding subtest on the WISC IV was the same as the Coding subtest for the
WISC III.
The defendants argue that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s failure to follow the time
limits for the foregoing WISC subtests rendered her entire testimony unreliable.
Relying upon the APA Standards, the trial court found that “the plaintiff ha[d]
not shown that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s decision to provide her with additional time
to complete the [Block-Design] test was an approved change in test format, or
more importantly, what effect the changes that Dr. Bruno-Golden made in test
administration had upon the validity, reliability and appropriateness of norms.”
The APA Standards allow an examiner to make an approved change in
test format or mode of administration, but note that in these instances the
examiner “should have a sound rationale for concluding that validity,
reliability, and appropriateness of norms will not be compromised.” APA
Standards, supra at 117. The APA Standards comment:
In some instances, minor changes in format or mode of
administration may be reasonably expected, without
evidence, to have little or no effect on validity,
reliability, and appropriateness of norms. In other
instances, however, changes in format or
administrative procedures can be assumed a priori to
have significant effects. When a given modification
becomes widespread, consideration should be given to
validation and norming under the modified conditions.
Id. However, the APA Standards also explain:
24
When conducting psychological testing, standardized
test administration procedures should be followed.
When nonstandard administration procedures are
needed, they are to be described and justified. . . .
One advantage of individually administered
measures is the opportunity to observe and adjust
testing conditions as needed. In some circumstances,
test administration may provide the opportunity for
skilled examiners to carefully observe the performance
of persons under standardized conditions. For
example, their observations may allow them to more
accurately record behaviors being assessed, to
understand better the manner in which persons arrive
at their answers, to identify personal strengths and
weaknesses, and to make modifications in the testing
process. Thus, the observations of trained
professionals can be important to all aspects of test
use.
Id. at 120-21 (emphasis added).
Moreover, the WISC III manual states that if the child is nearing the
completion of an item when the time limit expires, the child should be allowed
to finish in the interest of maintaining rapport with the child. The
administrator scores, however, only that work that is completed within the
allotted time.
Finally, literature on the BPA indicates that in most cases, a patient is
allowed additional time to complete the problem at hand when she is near a
solution. W.P. Milberg et al., supra at 69. According to this literature,
“[r]esponse slowing often accompanies brain damage, and its effects on test
performance need to be examined separately from the actual loss of
information-processing ability.” Id. Thus, it is important to distinguish
between patients who work too slowly from those who cannot complete
problems no matter how much time is given. Id.
At the Daubert hearing, Dr. Shaheen, a qualified pediatric
neuropsychologist, testified that a neuropsychologist may allow a child to
continue past the time limits to observe the process the child uses to solve the
problem and to see whether the child is persistent. These observations allow
the clinician to determine whether the child is capable of succeeding on that
task. Dr. Shaheen also testified that it is unknown what effect disrupting the
rapport Dr. Bruno-Golden had with the plaintiff by not allowing her to complete
the tasks would have had on subsequent tests. She agreed, however, that she
25
also did not know what effect extending the time limit on these subtests had
upon the plaintiff’s performance on later subtests, but opined that the
additional time is unlikely to have affected the validity of the subsequent tests.
The foregoing evidence demonstrates that Dr. Bruno-Golden was
permitted to exceed the time limits of subtests when the plaintiff was nearing
completion of a test, so long as she scored the plaintiff within the time limits.
Dr. Bruno-Golden appears to have given the plaintiff more time to complete
some of the WISC subtests even in those instances where the plaintiff was not
nearing a solution. However, given that Dr. Bruno-Golden always scored the
plaintiff in accordance with the time limits, and that she gave the plaintiff more
time for the permissible purposes of maintaining her rapport with the plaintiff,
sustaining the plaintiff’s motivation, and observing the plaintiff’s behavior,
such a slight deviation from the rules of administration does not rise to the
level of negating the basis of reliability for the BPA itself. Langill, ___ N.H. at
___.
Indeed, both the WISC manual and the BPA literature emphasize the
importance of an examiner’s rapport with the child. In 2002 and 2004, Dr.
Bruno-Golden administered the WISC tests in the morning, and second only to
the human figure drawing. Thus, since Dr. Bruno-Golden had planned for a
full day of tests, it would have been particularly important for Dr. Bruno-
Golden to maintain her rapport with the plaintiff at this early stage.
Further, the BPA itself includes a qualitative component that requires
the examiner to observe a child’s behavior and draw conclusions from that
behavior based upon the examiner’s expertise and published literature. See,
e.g., W.P. Milberg et al., supra at 67-69. The APA Standards also note the
importance of an examiner’s observations for the accurate recording of the
patient’s behavior. APA Standards, supra at 121. Thus, in the context of the
BPA, Dr. Bruno-Golden’s failure to stop the plaintiff at the time limits for two of
the WISC III and two of the WISC IV subtests could not have so infected the
procedure as to skew the reliability of the BPA itself. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___.
Rather, it was for the jury to resolve the dispute in the testimony and
determine what effect, if any, the increased time on the subtests had on the
results of the subsequently administered subtests. Id. Accordingly, the trial
court erred in excluding Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony based upon her
deviation from the WISC time limits.
2. NEPSY
The NEPSY test is a battery of neuropsychological tests specifically
designed for children. Korkman et al., NEPSY, A Developmental
Neuropsychological Assessment: Manual 45 (The Psychological Corp. 1998). It
consists of numerous subtests that examine various cognitive domains,
26
including memory. Id. at 45-48. Each subtest has been individually
standardized and is independently scored.
In the 2002 afternoon session, Dr. Bruno-Golden selected and
administered certain NEPSY subtests designed to measure verbal working
memory. She did not administer all the core and expanded subtests for
memory as “recommended” by the manual. Id. at 46. Otherwise, Dr. Bruno-
Golden followed the manual’s instructions for administration. In the 2004
afternoon session, Dr. Bruno-Golden repeated the NEPSY subtests she had
administered in 2002, except for those subtests that were no longer age-
appropriate. In those instances, she selected other tests that examined the
same constructs.
The trial court based its decision in part upon Dr. Bruno-Golden’s failure
to “administer[] the entire NEPSY battery as recommended in the manual.” The
NEPSY manual states, in pertinent part:
The NEPSY can be used as an assessment tool
at a variety of levels. Subtests are selected on the
basis of age, the referral question, the needs of the
child, time constraints, and the setting in which the
assessment takes place. A Core Assessment, which is
composed of selected subtests from each domain,
provides an overview of a child’s neuropsychological
status. An Expanded or Selective Assessment allows a
more thorough analysis of specific cognitive disorders,
and consists of selected subtests—generally beyond
those in the Core. The following sections present
recommendations for subtest selection and levels of
assessment. A comprehensive neuropsychological
evaluation can be completed using the Full NEPSY,
which includes all subtests. There is no prescribed set
of subtests that must be administered to every child.
. . . .
When a Core Domain Score, a subtest or
Supplemental Score, the referral question, or a
previous diagnosis indicates the presence of a problem
in a certain domain, it is recommended that an
Expanded Assessment—the administration of all Core
and Expanded subtests in a domain—be administered
in order to investigate the problem in greater
depth. . . .
27
A Selective Assessment involves choosing
additional subtests across domains as part of an
evaluation. When the Core Assessment suggests the
presence of a disorder of a complex function that may
involve or affect components from several domains,
continuation of testing using the pertinent Expanded
subtests as well as additional subtests from other
domains is recommended. . . . In these cases, the
assessment involves the administration of subtests
that assess subcomponents of the capacity in
question.
Id. at 45-47 (emphases added). The NEPSY manual also delineates a
recommended order in which subtests should be administered if they are
individually selected for the particular child being tested. Id. at 50-51.
Dr. Bruno-Golden administered several NEPSY subtests, but did not
administer the Full NEPSY or the entire battery for each domain she tested.
However, Dr. Bruno-Golden explained that she selected the particular subtests
based upon the results of the morning tests. The NEPSY manual specifically
allows a neuropsychologist to select pertinent subtests examining the domain
in question when the core assessment suggests the presence of a particular
issue.
Dr. Bruno-Golden used the WISC III to obtain the plaintiff’s “core
assessment”; that is, an overview of the plaintiff’s neuropsychological status.
Based upon this core assessment, Dr. Bruno-Golden selected pertinent NEPSY
subtests that examined specific domains that required further analysis. For
example, Dr. Bruno-Golden selected the Sentence Repetition subtest to
measure verbal working memory for structured linguistic material because,
during the morning session, the plaintiff had frequently requested that Dr.
Bruno-Golden repeat herself and the directions. While Dr. Bruno-Golden did
not completely follow all the recommendations of the NEPSY manual, contrary
to the defendants’ assertion, she did not contravene the “manual
requirements.” Accordingly, her failure to administer the Full NEPSY was not
an administration error that could have altered the reliability of the
methodology. Instead, it was for the jury to assess the weight of Dr. Bruno-
Golden’s testimony in light of her failure to follow the NEPSY manual’s
recommendations. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___; Dahood, 148 N.H. at 723. Thus,
the trial court’s reliance upon this failure was misplaced.
3. Wide Range Assessment of Memory and Learning (WRAML)
The WRAML is a battery designed to examine memory and learning
functions. D. Sheslow & W. Adams, Wide Range Assessment of Memory and
28
Learning: Administration Manual 13 (1990). In addition to the complete
battery, a shorter form of the WRAML consisting of four subtests may also be
administered for screening purposes. Id. The WRAML manual instructs the
examiner to administer the standard battery in the order presented. Id. at 13-
14. It further states:
Preliminary investigations suggest that for many of the
subtests, the level of performance is not significantly
affected if taken out of sequence or if a specific subtest
is administered alone. However, until such
investigations are complete, the examiner is
encouraged to administer the test in the order
presented in this manual. If the examiner is using the
Screening Form of the battery, administer only the
first 4 WRAML subtests.
Id. at 14 (emphasis added).
In 2002, Dr. Bruno-Golden administered only the Story Memory subtest
of the WRAML. The Story Memory subtest consists of two stories and examines
the recall of narrative information. The trial court cited as an administration
error Dr. Bruno-Golden’s administration of only portions of the WRAML. It also
found that Dr. Bruno-Golden “did not record the time limits she used, with the
result that she could not say whether or not she had adhered to the time limits
in the WRAML manual.”
While the WRAML manual encourages an examiner to administer the
entire WRAML in the order presented, it does not require the examiner to
administer the entire WRAML or the screening version of the WRAML. Further,
the WRAML was not a critical test upon which Dr. Bruno-Golden based her
conclusions. Thus, even if Dr. Bruno-Golden erroneously administered only
one of the subtests instead of the entire battery or the screening portion, this
error could not have risen to the level of negating the basis for the reliability of
the BPA itself. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___. Again, as with the NEPSY, it was for
the jury to determine the weight of Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony given her
failure to follow the WRAML manual’s recommendations. Id.
Moreover, the record does not support the trial court’s finding that Dr.
Bruno-Golden may not have adhered to certain time limits in the WRAML
manual. The relevant portion of the WRAML manual provides:
Do observe these additional guidelines when using the
WRAML:
29
1. Use the directions exactly as written. Do not
paraphrase, adapt or add.
2. Adhere to the time limits associated with the 2 timed
subtests (Picture Memory and Design
Memory). . . . On no subtest is the child’s performance
timed, but the Picture Memory and Design Memory
subtests require the examiner to expose materials for a
specified amount of time. These time intervals should
be exact . . . .
Sheslow & Adams, supra at 14.
Dr. Bruno-Golden only administered the Story Memory subtest of the
WRAML, not the Picture Memory or Design Memory subtests. Thus, it is not
clear that the WRAML manual required her to adhere to certain time limits,
particularly since the manual specifically states that the child’s performance is
not timed on any subtest except the Picture Memory and Design Memory
subtests. The record reveals no evidence indicating that the Story Memory
subtest had precise time limits. Notably, Dr. Faust did not cite this alleged
failure as an administration error. Accordingly, since no evidence indicated
that the Story Memory subtest was subject to time limits, the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in finding that Dr. Bruno-Golden failed
to adhere to “the time limits in the WRAML manual.”
4. ROCF
In 2002 and 2004, pursuant to her usual practice, Dr. Bruno-Golden
administered the ROCF test to the plaintiff after the WISC. As stated earlier,
the ROCF test examines visual construction skills and non-verbal memory.
The ROCF manual instructs:
Administer verbal tasks to the respondent during the
interval between completion of the Immediate Recall
trial and the Delayed Recall trial. Tasks involving
visuospatial stimuli should not be administered
between the Copy trial and the Delayed Recall trial. It
is important that the respondent is engaged and
actively performing a verbal task during the delay
interval.
Meyers & Meyers, supra at 8. As examples of verbal tasks, the manual cites
“time estimation, controlled verbal fluency, temporal orientation, or . . . clinical
interview[s].” Id. Examples of tasks involving visuospatial stimuli include “the
30
Benton Judgment of Line Orientation” and “the Visual Reproduction subtest of
the WMS-R.” Id.
During the delay interval, Dr. Bruno-Golden first obtained a written
language sample from the plaintiff by handing her a complex standardized
picture from an aphasia screening exam, called the Cookie Theft Test, and
instructing her to write a story about the picture. Dr. Bruno-Golden testified
that she used the Cookie Theft Test picture as an academic screening measure
to observe whether the plaintiff’s written language arts and written language
expression were commensurate with her grade level and chronological age.
She did not administer or score the Cookie Theft Test itself. Dr. Bruno-Golden
also administered the CCPT during the interval. This test measures attention
and required the plaintiff to click a button on a computer when a letter other
than “X” flashed on the screen.
Dr. Bruno-Golden testified that neither test was “visuospatial.” She
explained that a visuospatial task would have involved giving the plaintiff “a
task where she had to do visual construction skills, or a psycho or a visual
spatials task.” She testified that the task must not disrupt the child’s visual
construction of spatial relationships.
Dr. Faust testified that Dr. Bruno-Golden violated the ROCF manual
when she used the Cookie Theft Test to obtain a written language sample and
administered the CCPT during the interval between the recall trials. He
disagreed with Dr. Bruno-Golden’s interpretation of the term “visuospatial,”
and opined that visuospatial “means basically visual stimuli.” Based upon Dr.
Faust’s testimony, the defendants assert that Dr. Bruno-Golden erred by
administering a “visuospatial” test during the thirty-minute interval.
In its order, the trial court summarized the defendants’ argument that
“Dr. Bruno-Golden administered inappropriate tests following first half of the
[ROCF] test,” and summarized some of Dr. Bruno-Golden’s testimony relating
to her administration of the ROCF. The trial court, however, never adopted the
defendants’ contention and resolved the conflicting testimony to actually find
that Dr. Bruno-Golden improperly administered the ROCF. Accordingly,
because the trial court did not find that Dr. Bruno-Golden erred in
administering the ROCF, we decline to consider this alleged error on appeal.
5. Finger Tapping and Grip Strength Tests
The Finger Tapping and Grip Strength tests are two subtests of the
Halstead-Reitan battery that measure pure motor function. In 2002 and 2004,
Dr. Bruno-Golden administered both the Finger Tapping and Grip Strength
tests as part of her hypothesis testing to rule out potential issues with pure
motor function.
31
The Finger Tapping test measures the number of times a child taps
certain fingers on each hand in ten seconds. The results are compared with
standardized rates of other individuals in the same age group. Although
neither party has provided the Finger Tapping test manual, the testimony
elicited at the Daubert hearing seems to indicate that the manual requires the
examiner to have the child do five consecutive “finger tap trials” that are within
“five points” of each other. Each “finger tap trial” consists of the examiner
counting the number of taps the child does in ten seconds. Consecutive “finger
tap trials” are within “five points” of each other when the number of taps in
each ten-second period differs by five or less. For example, if on the first finger
tap trial, the child taps his or her finger twenty-two times, on the second trial,
taps his or her finger twenty-eight times, and on the third trial, taps his or her
finger thirty times, the first two consecutive finger tap trials are not within five
points of each other, but the second two consecutive finger tap trials are within
five points of each other.
Either in 2002 or 2004, or in both years, Dr. Bruno-Golden asked the
plaintiff to perform only three finger tap trials on one of her hands because she
consistently went slower each time. Dr. Bruno-Golden also may not have
properly obtained five consecutive finger tap trials on the plaintiff’s left hand
that were within five points of each other.
The Grip Strength test measures a child’s strength, which in turn
provides information concerning the behavior of the left and right hemispheres
of the brain. For the Grip Strength test, the manual instructs the examiner to
perform the test two times unless the first is not properly performed. In either
2002 or 2004, or in both years, Dr. Bruno-Golden administered the test to the
plaintiff three times and then averaged the results.
In its order, the trial court noted that the defendants “contend[ed] that
Dr. Bruno-Golden failed to follow the instructions with regard” to these tests,
but never explicitly found that the tests were administered improperly. As with
the ROCF, because the trial court never found that Dr. Bruno-Golden
improperly administered either the Finger Tapping or the Grip Strength test, we
decline to rely upon these alleged errors on appeal.
Moreover, neither the Finger Tapping nor the Grip Strength tests were
critical to Dr. Bruno-Golden’s conclusions. Indeed, the plaintiff performed
within normal limits on both tests, and Dr. Bruno-Golden used the tests to rule
out potential issues. Accordingly, even if Dr. Bruno-Golden administered these
tests improperly, such errors did not skew the methodology itself. Langill, ___
N.H. at ___.
32
6. Collective Impact of Errors
The defendants assert in their brief, and the trial court ultimately found,
that “Dr. Bruno-Golden could only identify two tests in 2002 and two tests in
2004 in which she followed the rules of administration.” This finding is based
upon Dr. Bruno-Golden’s answer to a long, multi-part question posed by
defense counsel. The question was:
Can you identify for me any test that you administered
in 2002, 2004, that is current, that is up-to-date, that
was administered entirely, that is, administered all the
sub-tests as required by the test publisher, that were
administered according to the manual, without
deviation? That were recorded correctly and according
to the manual, and that is, we don’t have to rely upon
your word to tell us that the child completed the test
or didn’t complete the test? That were scored correctly
and that you applied the proper norms and
appropriate description to the performance of the
child?
Ultimately, after some clarification of the question and defense counsel
discounting certain tests for not meeting the question’s requirements, Dr.
Bruno-Golden answered: “Well, [in 2002,] there’s the Peabody picture
vocabulary test, which we haven’t discussed. . . . [and] the California verbal
learning test,” and, in 2004, the “Peabody picture book vocabulary test, . . .
[and] the Hooper [Visual Organization Test].”
Although defense counsel’s excellent cross-examination certainly
highlighted in a summary fashion weaknesses in Dr. Bruno-Golden’s
testimony, Dr. Bruno-Golden’s answer to this question, while perhaps
technically correct, is misleading. Her answer considers issues relating not
simply to the methodology, but also to her ultimate conclusions, such as errors
in score calculation, which the trial court properly did not consider as
administration errors. Such issues affecting the weight of the evidence are
better left to the determination of the fact finder. Langill, ___ N.H. at ___. Dr.
Bruno-Golden’s answer also includes reference to alleged errors that may in
reality not have been errors at all (e.g., the question presumes that Dr. Bruno-
Golden was required to administer all the subtests of a particular test battery),
and to tests that were not critical to her conclusions. Thus, the trial court
erred in relying upon this misleading answer to support its finding that Dr.
Bruno-Golden’s administration errors rendered her testimony unreliable.
Furthermore, even considering Dr. Bruno-Golden’s administration errors
as a whole, the evidence does not support a finding that these errors so altered
33
the BPA as to skew the methodology itself. Id. Notably, the evidence reveals
that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s only arguably true error was exceeding the time limits
for certain of the WISC subtests. As for the other errors cited by the
defendants, either: (1) the trial court did not explicitly find that they were
errors; (2) they occurred on tests that were not critical to Dr. Bruno-Golden’s
conclusions, i.e., tests that she used to eliminate certain hypotheses; or (3) the
evidence did not support a finding that they were in fact errors. Because we
have already found that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s errors on the WISC subtests did
not render the entire methodology unreliable, we reverse the trial court’s
finding that Dr. Bruno-Golden unreliably applied the methodology to the facts
of this case, see RSA 516:29-a, I(c), and its orders excluding her testimony and
dismissing the plaintiff’s writ.
IV. Conclusion
The trial court excluded Dr. Bithoney’s testimony because his testimony
was based almost entirely upon Dr. Bruno-Golden’s proposed testimony, which
it found to be unreliable. Given our conclusion that Dr. Bruno-Golden’s
testimony is reliable and admissible, we do not reach the plaintiff’s remaining
arguments concerning Dr. Bithoney’s testimony. We vacate the court’s ruling
excluding Dr. Bithoney’s testimony and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
Reversed in part; vacated
in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
34