THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2007-784
DOUGLAS R. GUY, JR.
v.
TOWN OF TEMPLE
Argued: June 18, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2008
Matthew W. Glavey, of New Ipswich, on the brief and orally for the
petitioner.
Drescher & Dokmo, P.A., of Milford (Dwight D. Sowerby on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Douglas R. Guy, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Hampsey, J.) upholding the Temple Zoning Board of
Adjustment’s (ZBA) denial of his application for a junkyard license. See
generally RSA 236:110-:129 (1993 & Supp. 2007). We reverse and remand.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts: Guy
owns property in Temple, upon which he operates an automotive repair, body
work, and junkyard business (the property). A commercial enterprise of the
same nature has existed on the property since before 1972 and possibly as
early as the 1960s. Guy has operated the junkyard for approximately the last
twenty years.
In 1972, the Town of Temple (Town) adopted a comprehensive zoning
ordinance, which mandated that all “[m]otor vehicle junkyards . . . abide by the
state laws on this subject . . . .” At that time, the state law on the subject, RSA
chapter 267-A (1966), required owners of established junkyards to, among
other things, submit an application containing various information regarding
the junkyard’s location to “the legislative body” of the town where the junkyard
was located. RSA 267-A:13 (1966). Upon receipt of that application, the
statute provided that “the legislative body shall issue [the junkyard] owner a
license valid” for one year. Id. The Town’s zoning ordinance also provided that
“[a]ny lawful use of land or buildings or parts thereof at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance may be continued indefinitely, although such use
does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance . . . .”
In 1999, Guy filed an application with the Temple Board of Selectmen
(Board), requesting both a license to conduct state automobile inspections and
certification that he was in compliance with local zoning laws. After the Board
denied his application, Guy appealed to the ZBA. On October 12, 1999, the
ZBA issued an order reversing the Board’s denial of “grandfathered/non-
conforming status to [Guy]’s automotive-related activities on” the property,
which included the following findings of fact:
1. A commercial enterprise including auto repair/junkyard/auto
body work/garage, public [sic] existed at [the property] prior to the
adoption of the Temple Zoning Ordinance in 1972.
2. Said activities have continued since then through the present.
. . . .
4. New testimony, documents, and photographs presented at the
rehearing reinforced the applicant’s original contention and
evidence that a grandfathered use existed at said premises.
5. The junkyard phase of the commercial enterprise is subject to
state licensing and regulation.
Based upon these findings, the ZBA concluded that Guy’s “commercial
enterprise is a grandfathered/non-conforming use and is therefore protected
under the Temple Zoning Ordinance and under New Hampshire RSA 674:19.”
Neither party appealed this order.
On August 2, 2001, the Board sent Guy a letter enclosing “an initial
application, per [his] request, for a motor vehicle junkyard permit,” as well as
“a copy of RSA 236:11 through 236:129 pertaining to junk yards.” In the
letter, the Board requested that he “complete the application and return it with
the $25.00 fee.” The Board also advised him that by signing the application he
2
would be “affirming that [he] me[t] all the provisions of the State of NH RSA’s.”
Guy asserts that he never received this correspondence.
There were no further communications between the parties regarding the
junkyard until 2006, when Guy applied for a vehicle dealer license. The Board
responded on March 8, 2006, informing him that his “request for dealer plates
constituted an expansion of [his] non-conforming use.” The same day, Guy
contested the Board’s determination and submitted a copy of the 1999 ZBA
decision in support of his position.
Shortly thereafter, Guy, for the first time, filed an application for a
junkyard license with the Board. The application form required Guy to “affirm
that [his] junkyard . . . is in compliance with all the requirements of RSA
236:123, and all other provisions of RSA 236 relative to junkyards.”
Furthermore, in filing the application, Guy was required to affirm that he had
“received confirmation of ‘Grandfathered’ status from the” ZBA and had “not
moved, expanded on, or enlarged [his junkyard] to occupy more area than [his]
original site plan.”
On April 19, 2006, the Board sent Guy a letter denying his requests for a
vehicle dealer license and a junkyard license. With respect to the vehicle dealer
license, the Board found that the selling of motor vehicles was an expansion of
his non-conforming use and, thus, Guy needed “to file for a special exception.”
As to the junkyard license, the Board stated:
The 1999 ZBA decision to “grandfather” your auto repair business
included a requirement that you bring your junkyard into
compliance with Temple’s Zoning ordinance and State statutes
(RSA 236). The Board . . . subsequently wrote to you reminding
you of this ZBA requirement and attached copies of the relevant
State statutes. To date you have not complied; you are therefore in
violation of both Temple’s Zoning ordinance and State of NH RSA’s.
We are now in receipt of your application for a junkyard
license which the [Board is] unable to approve because you are in
violation of the above referenced Temple Zoning ordinance and
State Statutes.
Please schedule an appointment to meet with the [Board] to
discuss your plan to comply with the State’s junkyard statutes and
thereby the requirement of the 1999 ZBA decision to “grandfather”
your auto repair business.
After receiving this letter, Guy appealed the Board’s “determination that his
application for motor vehicle dealer plates constituted an expansion of a non-
3
conforming use requiring a special exception” to the ZBA. The ZBA scheduled
a hearing on the matter for July 6, 2006.
On May 23, 2006, the Board issued a notice of violation, ordering Guy to
“cease and desist any and all activities on [his property] consisting of the
creation, establishment and/or maintenance of a junkyard.” (Emphasis
omitted.) In support thereof, the Board stated that Guy had failed to obtain a
license and demonstrate his compliance with the requirements for a junkyard
in RSA 236:111 through RSA 236:129, as required by both the 1999 ZBA
decision and New Hampshire law. Moreover, the Board asserted that Guy’s
junkyard “ha[d] been expanded, without benefit of permit or license,” since the
1999 ZBA decision. Therefore, the Board found that Guy had “not taken the
steps required under the applicable statute[s] to protect [his] vested right to
continue [his] junkyard operation” and, as provided by RSA 236:119 (Supp.
2007), the junkyard constituted a nuisance. Accordingly, the Board declared
that, in order to continue operation of his junkyard, Guy had to comply with
the application requirements for a new junkyard as provided in RSA 236:115
(Supp. 2007).
On June 23, 2006, the Board sent Guy another letter, stating that it was
“declin[ing] to entertain [his] permit request.” The Board explained that, as
already indicated in the notice of violation, it was of the opinion “that the
junkyard operation referred to in the 1999 ZBA decision is no longer a
permitted non-conforming use for reason of [Guy’s] failure to comply with the
applicable State Statutes in a timely fashion.” Because Guy had lost his non-
conforming status, and a junkyard is not a permitted use in the Town, the
Board concluded that Guy was required to obtain a special exception, subject
to any applicable historic district commission oversight, in order to continue
his junkyard operation. After the Board denied his motion for reconsideration,
Guy appealed the Board’s April 19, 2006 and May 23, 2006 decisions to the
ZBA.
The ZBA held a public hearing on the matter on October 5, 2006. At that
hearing, the Town contended, among other things, “that the junkyard, if it ever
enjoyed a grandfathered status, has now lost it . . . [because] the junkyard has
not complied with either state statute or the 1999 ZBA decision.” In addition,
the Town argued that the junkyard had been expanded since 1999 into an area
that was designated on the tax rolls as current use property. See generally
RSA 79-A:1 (2003). Guy, in contrast, asserted that he had actually contracted,
rather than expanded, the number and location of cars on the property since
1999. He further argued that the 1999 decision vested non-conforming status
upon his junkyard that could not be stripped away for failing to pay a license
fee and, even if it could, the Town did not have an application process in place
until 2001 at the earliest. At the same time, however, Guy’s counsel submitted
licensing records of the only other junkyard in Temple, which indicated that
4
that junkyard had submitted applications for the years 1993, 2000, 2003,
2004, 2005 and 2006.
After listening to the parties’ arguments, the ZBA entered closed session
to discuss the matter. As indicated in the ZBA’s minutes, during the ensuing
discussion the ZBA members “spent a lot of time talking about where cars are
located . . . and how many there are as well as where they were located in 1999
and how many there were then.” ZBA member Don Kraemer, who was on the
ZBA in 1999, also told the rest of the members that the only issue in 1999 was
whether Guy’s property could “be grandfathered so he could have an inspection
station.” He stated that the “the junkyard wasn’t an issue at that time” and
that it was his opinion that the ZBA members had “simply noted that [Guy]
needed to get the junkyard licensed” in the 1999 decision. Finally, the ZBA
“members noted that RSA 236:125 came into being in 1966, so if there was a
junkyard that was grandfathered in 1999, it was an illegal one because it
wasn’t licensed.” Ultimately, the ZBA affirmed the Board’s decision on the
following basis:
The applicant’s junkyard has, at least since 1999, been operated in
an unlawful fashion. Therefore, based on the language of the
Temple Zoning Ordinance that a non-conforming use refers to a
lawful use, the use is not grandfathered. The applicant does not
have an allowable non-conforming use by the definition in the
Temple Zoning Ordinance.
After the ZBA denied his motion for rehearing, Guy appealed to the
superior court. On October 10, 2007, the court ruled:
The 1999 decision did not “grandfather’’ [Guy]’s usage of the
property for a junkyard operation because the decision states that
the junkyard is subject to state law and licensing requirements.
State law requiring junkyard licensure has existed since 1965. . . .
There is no indication that any junkyard on the property has ever
been licensed. Even if the ZBA, in the 1999 decision, had
determined that [Guy]’s junkyard was a valid nonconforming use,
it would have been incorrect, given that nonconforming uses must
be lawful. Because [Guy]’s junkyard was not licensed under state
law in 1972, it could not be lawful. . . . Further, the record
indicates that on August 2, 2001, the Board sent [Guy] a letter
enclosing an application for a junkyard license, further suggesting
that the 1999 decision did not license [Guy]’s junkyard. . . .
The trial court then rejected the majority of Guy’s arguments based, in
substantial part, upon its interpretation of the 1999 decision. In addition, the
trial court ruled that Guy had failed to: (1) present any evidence to support his
claim that the Town did not have a formal junkyard licensing process; (2) show
5
that the Town’s alleged delay in enforcing the licensing requirements was
unreasonable, or that he suffered prejudice as a result, such as to make the
doctrine of laches applicable; and (3) articulate sufficient support for his claim
that the Board “violated his constitutional right of due process, resulting in an
unconstitutional taking of his property.”
On appeal, Guy asserts that the trial court committed reversible error by:
(1) “finding that the 1999 decision . . . did not determine [his] motor vehicle
junkyard to be a valid nonconforming use”; (2) “finding [his] junkyard unlawful
because it was not properly licensed”; (3) “rejecting [his] claim that the [T]own
. . . did not have a formal licensing process in effect in 1999, and to the extent
that the [T]own ever implemented a procedure thereafter, such process was
sporadically enforced up to the time enforcement action was taken”; (4) “failing
to apply the doctrines of collateral estoppel and laches”; (5) “rejecting [his]
contention that the provisions of RSA 236:125 and related case law required
the . . . [Board] to issue [him] a motor vehicle junkyard license in 2006”; and
(6) “rejecting [his] claim that the Board’s failure to issue [him] a junkyard
license in 2006, or afford [him] a hearing thereon, breached [its] obligation to
[him] under state law, unreasonably interfered with [his] occupation, [and]
violated [his] constitutional right of due process resulting in an
unconstitutional taking of [his] property.”
Our review of zoning board decisions is limited. Harrington v. Town of
Warner, 152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). We will uphold the trial court’s decision
unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Chester Rod
& Gun Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 580 (2005). For its part, the
trial court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie lawful and
reasonable. Id.; see RSA 677:6 (2008). It may set aside a ZBA decision if it
finds by the balance of probabilities, based upon the evidence before it, that the
ZBA’s decision was unreasonable. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. at 580.
However, the interpretation of a tribunal’s order presents a question of law,
which we review de novo. See In re Guardianship of Luong, 157 N.H. ____, ____
(decided July 2, 2008). With these principles in mind, we turn to Guy’s
arguments.
I
Guy argues first that, despite the trial court’s findings to the contrary,
the ZBA expressly found that his junkyard was a valid nonconforming use in
the 1999 decision. Because the Town failed to appeal the ZBA’s decision, Guy
contends that the trial court erred in questioning the validity of the ZBA’s
determinations therein. We agree.
In the 1999 decision, the ZBA broadly stated that it was reversing the
Board’s denial of “grandfathered/non-conforming status to [Guy]’s automotive-
related activities on” the property. Nowhere in the decision is this expansive
6
holding qualified in such a way as to exclude the junkyard. To the contrary,
the ZBA clarified that Guy’s “commercial enterprise includ[ed] auto
repair/junkyard/auto body work/garage” activities and that that “commercial
enterprise is a grandfathered/non-conforming use.” (Emphases added.)
Indeed, the very sentence relied upon by the trial court in concluding that “the
1999 decision did not ‘grandfather’ [Guy]’s usage of the property for a junkyard
operation,” again references the junkyard as a “phase of the commercial
enterprise” in question. (Emphasis added.) That the 1999 decision also noted
that “[t]he junkyard . . . is subject to state licensing and regulation,” in no way
alters the fact that the ZBA clearly envisioned the junkyard as a component of
the commercial enterprise that it found to be “a grandfathered/non-conforming
use.”
The Town argues that the ZBA was nevertheless precluded “from legally
ruling that the [junkyard] was grandfathered because” the junkyard was not
licensed and “[t]he law is well established that a nonconforming use is
permissible only where it legally exists at the date of the adoption of the zoning
ordinance.” Thus, the Town argues, any finding in the 1999 decision that the
junkyard was a valid nonconforming use is invalid and must be overturned.
Even assuming the Town is correct that the ZBA so erred, to entertain
such an assertion would invariably require us to revisit the substance of the
1999 decision. To do so here, where, as indicated above, the issue has already
been resolved and the order was not appealed, would run afoul of the doctrine
of collateral estoppel. See, e.g., Grossman v. Murray, 141 N.H. 265, 269 (1996)
(“In its most basic formulation, the doctrine of collateral estoppel bars a party
to a prior action, or a person in privity with such a party, from relitigating any
issue or fact actually litigated and determined in the prior action.” (quotation
omitted)). We therefore agree with Guy that the doctrine of collateral estoppel
bars consideration of this claim. Accordingly, we accept the findings in the
1999 decision and hold that Guy’s junkyard has been determined to be a valid
nonconforming use.
II
Having determined that the 1999 decision established that the junkyard
was a valid nonconforming use, we must now assess whether the junkyard was
subsequently divested of that status. As we have previously explained:
The right to maintain nonconforming uses is meant to protect
property owners from a retrospective application of zoning
ordinances, so that property owners may continue using and
enjoying their property when their uses were lawful prior to the
enactment of a zoning ordinance. RSA 674:19 protects that right
by providing that zoning ordinances shall not apply to existing
structures or uses, thereby creating a vested right to continue the
7
prior lawful use of land. Because the general policy of zoning law,
however, is to carefully limit the extension and enlargement of
nonconforming uses, we strictly construe provisions that permit
the continuance of such uses, and the party asserting that a
proposed use is not new or impermissible bears the burden of
proof. Therefore, an extension and enlargement that substantially
changes the nature and purpose of the nonconforming use is
impermissible.
Town of Salem v. Wickson, 146 N.H. 328, 330 (2001) (quotations omitted); see
also D. Mandelker, Land Use Law § 5.79, at 5-75 (5th ed. 2003) (explaining
that “[a]n ordinance prohibiting a change in a nonconforming use is not a
taking of property”).
In this case, the Town’s zoning ordinance bars “substantial[] expan[sion]
or enlarge[ment]” of a nonconforming use and states that a nonconforming use
can be lost if the use is “discontinued for two years” or “superseded by a
conforming use.” The Town argues first that the junkyard is no longer a valid
nonconforming use because Guy failed to comply with state law, including the
requirement that he “obtain a state license under RSA 236:114.” Guy concedes
that he has not obtained a license for his junkyard since the 1999 decision was
issued, but asserts that his junkyard nevertheless maintains its
nonconforming status because: (1) the Town did not have a formal licensing
procedure in place; and (2) the failure to obtain a license does not obviate
nonconforming use status because such failure “can be easily remedied by
payment of any back licensing fees.”
Resolution of Guy’s first argument requires little discussion. The only
evidence he has provided in support of his contention that the Town did not
have a formal licensing process indicates that the other junkyard in the Town
submitted license applications in, at least, 1993, 2000, 2003, 2004, 2005 and
2006. This evidence supports, rather than contradicts, a finding that the Town
had a licensing scheme in place during the pertinent years. It was, therefore,
not unreasonable for the ZBA and the trial court to conclude that Guy failed to
provide sufficient evidence to prove this claim. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. at
580; Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155 N.H. 102, 105 (2007)
(“The party seeking to set aside the ZBA decision bears the burden of proof
. . . .” (quotation omitted)).
Guy’s second argument raises a more complex question; namely,
whether a valid nonconforming use can be divested for an owner’s failure to
comply with a licensing statute. Although we have not before been faced with
this precise issue, the majority of courts that have considered the matter have
held that the failure to obtain a license does not terminate a valid
nonconforming use “because the power to license is distinct from the power to
zone.” D. Mandelker, supra § 5.81, at 5-81 to -82; see Carroll v. Hurst, 431
8
N.E.2d 1344, 1347-8 (Ill. App. Ct. 1982) (finding nonconforming use despite
property owner’s failure to obtain license to operate his junkyard where the
statute sought to prevent disposal of stolen vehicles); Trailer City, Inc. v. Board
of Adjustment, 218 N.W.2d 645, 648 (Iowa 1974) (explaining how a mobile
home park maintains its nonconforming status despite owner’s failure to renew
license); Dempsey v. Newport Bd. of Adjustments, 941 S.W.2d 483, 486 (Ky. Ct.
App. 1997) (holding that an automotive repair center did not lose its
nonconforming use because of failure of prior owner to renew occupation
license); Baltimore v. Dembo, 719 A.2d 1007, 1011 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1998)
(holding “that a property owner will not lose its nonconforming use status
accorded under zoning laws simply by its failure to comply with a licensing
law”); Board of Selectmen of Wrentham v. Monson, 247 N.E.2d 364, 365 (Mass.
1969) (holding that mobile home park’s nonconforming use status was “not
destroyed . . . by any failure to comply with local or State licensing provisions
where the defect . . . can be easily remedied”); Hooper v. City of St. Paul, 353
N.W.2d 138, 141 (Minn. 1984) (“Violations of ordinances unrelated to land use
planning do not render the type of use unlawful.”); Costa v. Callahan, 840
N.Y.S.2d 163, 166-67 (App. Div. 2007) (holding that a junkyard owner’s failure
to obtain a license to operate “did not disqualify the sites from nonconforming
use status as junkyards”); Stephentown Concerned Cit. v. Herrick, 676
N.Y.S.2d 246, 248 (App. Div. 1998) (gravel pit owner did not lose
nonconforming status by failing to maintain a valid mining permit), appeal
dismissed in part, denied in part, 756 N.E.2d 72 (N.Y. 2001); City of Franklin v.
Gerovac, 197 N.W.2d 772, 773-74 (Wis. 1972) (finding that property owner’s
failure to obtain license for his salvage yard did not invalidate his
nonconforming use).
Like these courts, we are cognizant of the fact that, unlike zoning law
which “is primarily concerned with uniformity of land use and stability of
community growth,” licensing regulations are generally “concerned with proper
operation or with limitation or distribution or outright suppression of
operation.” Primm v. City of Reno, 252 P.2d 835, 839 (Nev. 1953). In other
words, licensing laws typically “regulate[] establishments based on the type of
business they conduct, and zoning [laws] regulate[] them based on their
location.” Dembo, 719 A.2d at 1011 (quotations omitted). As a result, “the
failure to obtain a license does not render the use unlawful in the sense
intended by zoning ordinances which preserve existing lawful uses.” Costa,
840 N.Y.S.2d at 166 (quotation and emphasis omitted). For these reasons, we
agree with the majority of courts that the failure to obtain a license designed to
regulate an activity will not adversely affect the previously determined
nonconforming status of the land upon which such an activity is being
conducted.
Because the rule is founded upon the distinction between zoning and
licensing laws, however, the rationale supporting its application weakens when
the licensing scheme offended “so meaningfully curtail[s] the use to which land
9
may be employed . . . as to be deemed the equivalent of an ordinance which
regulates the utilization of land.” Town of Scituate v. O’Rourke, 239 A.2d 176,
180 (R.I. 1968); cf. In re Chamberlain, 360 A.2d 100, 101-02 (Vt. 1976). For
instance, in O’Rourke, a junkyard owner had failed to obtain a license
pursuant to an ordinance that required a licensed junkyard to be, among other
things, “a specific distance from a state highway or school” and “more than 300
feet from any park, bathing beach, school, church or cemetery.” O’Rourke, 239
A.2d at 180. After determining that the licensing regulation controlled the use
of land “to such an extent . . . that it could well be designated as a quasi-
zoning ordinance,” the court held that the junkyard owners’ “failure to comply
with the requirements of the [ordinance] . . . preclude[d] them from acquiring
the protective status of a valid nonconforming use.” Id.
Although O’Rourke is distinguishable to the extent that it involved a
junkyard that had not yet been deemed a nonconforming use, it is at least
conceivable that a licensing scheme could be so closely aligned with zoning
regulations that failure to comply with its terms might rise to the level of an
abandonment of a pre-existing nonconforming use. Cf. Pushnik v. Hempfield
Tp., 402 A.2d 318, 320 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1979). Determination of whether
Guy’s failure to obtain a license will affect the nonconforming use status of his
junkyard therefore requires analysis of the applicable licensing law. See RSA
236:111-:129.
When interpreting the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used and discern the legislative intent from the
statute as written. State v. Doyle, 156 N.H. 306, 308 (2007). We will not
consider what the legislature might have said, or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. When the language of a statute is
plain and unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for further indication of
legislative intent. Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 509 (2004).
However, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as it is expressed in
the words of a statute when considered as a whole. Doyle, 156 N.H. at 308.
In this case, the junkyard licensing statute was “adopted under the
police power of the state to conserve and safeguard the public safety, health,
morals, and welfare, and to further the economic growth and stability of the
people of the state through encouragement to the development of the tourist
industry within the state.” RSA 236:111 (Supp. 2007). To achieve this end,
the statute prohibits an individual from operating, establishing, or maintaining
a junkyard without first obtaining “a license to operate a junk yard business”
and “a certificate of approval for the location of the junk yard.” RSA 236:114
(1993). The statute provides two distinct processes for obtaining the required
license: one for junkyards established after the date of passage of the
subdivision (new junkyards), see RSA 236:114-:118, :120, :121 (1993 & Supp.
2007), and one for junkyards “already established” on that date (established
junkyards), see RSA 236:125 (1993). The trial court ruled that the date of
10
“passage of the subdivision” is April 20, 1981. Because neither party has
directly challenged this ruling in their briefs, we accept it for purposes of
resolving this case.
With regard to junkyards established after the date of “passage of the
subdivision,” the owner is required to apply “in writing to the local governing
body of the municipality where it is proposed to locate the junk yard” in order
to obtain a license. RSA 236:115 (Supp. 2007). In that application, the owner
must provide “[a] description of the land to be included within the junk yard”
and “[c]ertification of compliance with best management practices [as]
established by the department of environmental services.” Id. In determining
whether to grant or deny the application, the legislative body is required to
consider “the suitability of the applicant with reference to his ability to comply
with the fencing requirements [under RSA 236:123 (1993)] or other reasonable
regulations concerning the proposed junk yard . . ., to any record of convictions
for any type of larceny or receiving stolen goods . . . .” RSA 236:117 (1993).
In addition, as in O’Rourke, the licensing process for new junkyards
contains certain location requirements. See O’Rourke, 239 A.2d at 180. For
instance, prior to granting a license the legislative body is required to consider
whether there are “natural or artificial barriers protecting the junk yard . . .
from view.” RSA 236:120 (1993). Moreover, the statute also commands that:
In passing upon the application, . . . [the local governing body]
shall take into account the nature and development of
surrounding property, such as the proximity of churches, schools,
hospitals, public buildings or other places of public gatherings;
and whether or not the use of that proposed location can be
reasonably prevented from affecting the public health, safety, or
morals by reason of offensive or unhealthy odors or smoke, or of
other causes. In no case may a license be granted for a new junk
yard or automotive recycling yard located less than 660 feet from
the right-of-way lines of class I, class II, class III or class III-a
highways or located less than 300 feet from the right-of-way lines
of class IV, class V and class VI highways.
RSA 236:118 (1993).
The process for obtaining a license for an “established” junkyard, in
contrast, is less exacting. This is largely because, “[f]or the purposes of [the
junkyard licensing statute,] the location of junk yards . . . already established
are considered approved by the local governing body of the municipality where
located and the owner of the yard considered suitable for the issuance of a
license.” RSA 236:125. By deeming the location of established junkyards
“approved by the local governing body,” RSA 236:125 effectively renders the
location and aesthetic requirements that are imposed upon the approval of a
11
license for a new junkyard inapplicable to existing junkyards. With those
considerations out of the equation, all that the statute requires for approval of
a license for an established junkyard is: (1) the payment of a license fee, RSA
236:122 (Supp. 2007); (2) the submission to the local governing body of “the
information as to location which is required in an application,” RSA 236:125;
(3) compliance with certain fencing requirements, RSA 236:123, :125; (4)
“certification of compliance with best management practices [as] established by
the department of environmental services for the automobile salvage industry,”
RSA 236:121, II (Supp. 2007); (5) that the applicant has not been “convicted of
any type of larceny or of receiving stolen goods,” id.; and (6) that “the junkyard
[has] not become a public nuisance,” id. Unlike the regulation in O’Rourke,
each of these requirements is concerned with the “proper operation” of
junkyards, and not “uniformity of land use and stability of community growth.”
Primm, 252 P.2d at 839. As a result, the law governing the licensing of
established junkyards is a pure licensing scheme.
The Town does not dispute that Guy’s junkyard was already established
on the date of “passage of the subdivision.” See RSA 236:125. Nevertheless,
the Town argues that Guy is subject to the more stringent licensing procedure
for a new junkyard because he failed to “furnish the local governing body the
information as to location which is required in an application,” as mandated by
RSA 236:125. Moreover, the Town contends that the licensing process for new
junkyards is quasi-zoning and, thus, Guy’s failure to obtain a license pursuant
to that licensing scheme has divested him of his nonconforming use status.
We need not pass upon whether the licensing process for new junkyards
is a “quasi-zoning” statute, O’Rourke, 239 A.2d at 180, because we disagree
with the Town that the licensing process for established junkyards provided in
RSA 236:125 is inapplicable in this case. To be sure, as the Town notes, the
second sentence of RSA 236:125 states: “Within 60 days from the passage of
this subdivision, however, the owner shall furnish the local governing body the
information as to location which is required in an application, together with the
license fee . . . .” But nothing in that language suggests that the remedy for
failure to submit such an application is to subject established junkyards to the
licensing process for new junkyards. Instead, that sentence simply imposes
another restriction on established junkyards and, as with all other
requirements in the statute, the failure to comply opens the junkyard owner to
potential liability for a penalty, see RSA 236:127 (1999), and gives the Town the
right to “initiate proceedings” to, among other things, seek a “mandatory
injunction to end the violation,” RSA 236:128 (Supp. 2007). Accordingly,
because RSA 236:125 is applicable in this case, we hold that Guy’s failure to
obtain a license does not divest his junkyard of its status as a nonconforming
use. Cf. Carroll, 431 N.E.2d at 1348.
The Town also argues that Guy lost whatever right to a nonconforming
use he may have had by unlawfully expanding his use “onto a lot that was not
12
previously part of the operation.” As noted above, the Town’s zoning ordinance
bars “substantial[] expan[sion] or enlarge[ment]” of a nonconforming use. See
also RSA 236:124 (1993) (expressly permitting the adoption of local ordinances
for the control of junk yards and explaining that such “ordinances shall control
when in conflict with” the state law). However, while the minutes of the 2006
ZBA hearing mention that the ZBA members “spent a lot of time talking about
where cars are located . . . and how many there are” in the junkyard, as noted
by the trial court, “[t]he 2006 ZBA findings of fact make no mention of any
finding that [Guy] unlawfully expanded his junkyard operations.” (Emphasis
added.) We are therefore unable to ascertain whether the ZBA actually
determined that Guy had expanded his nonconforming use, see Kalil v. Town of
Dummer Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 310-11 (2007) (finding
remand to the ZBA appropriate where the superior court “intended to vacate
and remand the matter because it found the text of the [ZBA] decision
unclear”), let alone the character, nature, scope or effect on the surrounding
neighborhood of the purported expansion, see Wickson, 146 N.H. at 331; Town
of Hampton v. Brust, 122 N.H. 463, 469 (1982) (“where there is no substantial
change in the use’s effect on the neighborhood, the landowner will be allowed
to increase the volume, intensity or frequency of the nonconforming use”).
Accordingly, we must remand this issue for proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
III
Guy argues next that the trial court erred in “rejecting [his] contention
that the provisions of RSA 236:125 and related case law required the . . .
[Board] to issue [him] a motor vehicle junkyard license in 2006.” Although it is
unclear, there appear to be two separate components to Guy’s argument on
this issue. First, he argues that “the ZBA assumed the licensing authority
vested in the Board” when it held in 1999 that his junkyard was a
nonconforming use. Second, he asserts that the Town was required to issue
him a license because RSA 236:125 states that upon payment of “the license
fee . . . the local governing body shall issue a license” to all “already
established” junkyards. (Emphasis added.) We disagree with both arguments.
To the extent that Guy is arguing that he is entitled to a license by mere
virtue of the ZBA’s 1999 decision grandfathering his junkyard, he is in error.
See, e.g., Dembo, 719 A.2d at 1015 (holding that a landowner who has
obtained nonconforming use status is still required to obtain a license to
operate a business and comply with “later police power regulations governing
the manner or operation of use” of the property); Costa, 840 N.Y.S.2d at 167
(explaining that nonconforming uses “remain[] obligated to comply – in all
respects – with other applicable laws and ordinances”). Nonconforming use
status does not confer upon its holder an unfettered right to operate in
circumvention of licensing laws. As already discussed at length above, the
power to zone and to license are “distinct powers that do not conflict with each
13
other.” Willow Creek Ranch v. Town of Shelby, 611 N.W.2d 693, 700 (Wis.
2000). Therefore,
[a] zoning ordinance is not in its legal effect like a license or
legislative sanction to carry on in a district every kind of business
that may not be expressly excluded therefrom, and if there are
reasons apart from the zoning law why the business may not
legally be carried on in the district, the zoning law . . . furnishes no
protection to it.
Marshall v. Holbrook, 177 N.E. 504, 506 (Mass. 1931).
Nor do we agree that RSA 236:125 required the Town to issue Guy a
license. Guy’s argument on this point ignores the express language of the
statute. Although it states that upon payment of “the license fee . . . the local
governing body shall issue [the applicant] a license,” (emphasis added), RSA
236:125 also explicitly provides that the owner of an established junkyard
must “furnish the local governing body the information as to location which is
required in an application” and “comply with all other provisions of this
subdivision including the fencing requirements set forth in RSA 236:123.” Guy
must therefore comply with all of the requirements in the licensing statute in
order to obtain a license to operate his junkyard, as well as a renewal of such
license. See RSA 236:121, II (providing that “[l]icenses shall be renewed . . .
upon payment of the annual license fee without a hearing, if all provisions of
this subdivision are complied with during the license period”). The only case
cited by Guy in support of this argument, Greene v. Town of Deering, 151 N.H.
795 (2005), is inapposite and we decline to further address it.
IV
Guy’s remaining contention is that the trial court erred by “rejecting [his]
claim that the Board’s failure to issue [him] a junkyard license in 2006, or
afford [him] a hearing thereon, breached [its] obligation to [him] under state
law, unreasonably interfered with [his] occupation, [and] violated [his]
constitutional right of due process resulting in an unconstitutional taking of
[his] property.” Lingering within this sweeping assertion – and the mere
paragraph of argument that follows in his brief – are elements of a procedural
due process claim, a substantive due process claim, and a takings claim.
However, as stated by the trial court below, Guy has failed to “clarify whether
he is arguing that his substantive or procedural due process rights were
violated” and to sufficiently develop any of these arguments. As we have
repeatedly stated, “[j]udicial review is not warranted for complaints regarding
adverse rulings without developed legal argument, and neither passing
reference to constitutional claims nor off-hand invocations of constitutional
rights without support by legal argument or authority warrants extended
consideration.” Appeal of Omega Entm’t, 156 N.H. 282, 287 (2007); State v.
14
Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996) (explaining that a mere passing reference to a
constitutional claim renders the argument waived); Keenan v. Fearon, 130 N.H.
494, 499 (1988) (stating that “off-hand invocations” of constitutional rights
supported by neither argument nor authority warrant no extended
consideration). We therefore decline to address this argument further. The
remaining arguments presented in this appeal are without merit and do not
warrant further discussion. Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
15