THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2007-294
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF PHUONG PHI THI LUONG
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 2, 2008
John D. MacIntosh, P.C., of Concord (John D. MacIntosh on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (John C. Ransmeier on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioners, the guardians of Phuong Phi Thi Luong,
appeal orders of the Hillsborough County Probate Court (Patten, J.) rejecting
two estate plans they proposed for Phuong Phi Thi Luong pursuant to RSA
464-A:26-a (2004) and adopting an alternative estate plan drafted by a court-
appointed referee. We hold that the probate court was within its discretion to
reject the estate plans proposed by the petitioners, but find that the court went
beyond its authority in adopting the estate plan drafted by the court-appointed
referee. Accordingly, we affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I. Factual and Procedural Background
The record reveals the following facts: Phuong Phi Thi Luong (Phi) is a
forty-four year old woman who was born in Vietnam and immigrated to the
United States in 1994. In 2000, she married the respondent, William Walker,
and, approximately one year later, gave birth to her only child, Catherine. In
approximately 2002, Phi and Walker filed for divorce and Phi obtained
temporary custody of their daughter.
On February 17, 2003, while her divorce to Walker was still pending, Phi
suffered irreparable brain damage during the course of elective surgery. As a
result, she is now in a persistent vegetative state. Although she is able to
breathe on her own, she is unresponsive to stimuli and must be fed artificially.
Because she is unable to care for herself, she now resides at a facility where
she can receive daily life-sustaining care.
Following Phi’s incapacitation, her youngest brother, Tan Luong, was
appointed her sole guardian. As guardian, Tan Luong initiated a medical
malpractice action on Phi’s behalf and, on September 8, 2003, filed a petition
with the probate court requesting to have a will approved for Phi’s estate. See
RSA 464-A:26-a, III. Pursuant to Tan Luong’s proposed will, Phi’s residuary
estate would have been divided equally among Phi’s parents, a trust in
Catherine’s name, and Phi’s siblings, including Tan Luong. Walker, who had
obtained custody of Catherine through finalization of Phi and Walker’s divorce,
objected to Tan Luong’s proposed will in his capacity as Catherine’s natural
guardian. The probate court then appointed a guardian ad litem to represent
Catherine’s interests in the matter.
However, before the probate court could consider Tan Luong’s petition,
the attorney representing Phi in the civil suit, Mark A. Abramson, filed a
motion requesting that Tan Luong be removed as guardian and a disinterested
successor guardian be appointed. In that motion, Abramson asserted that he
had obtained a substantial settlement offer from the defendants in Phi’s suit,
and that, “in spite [of] the fact that he has no legal right to any of the proceeds
of the civil suit, . . . [Tan Luong] refuses to authorize settlement because he
wishes to obtain personal monetary benefits to which he is not entitled.” In
addition, Abramson stated that Tan Luong “refused to authorize settlement in
an effort to force [Phi’s] ex-husband to agree that he, his siblings, and his
parents are entitled to portions of the proceeds.”
The probate court never ruled upon Abramson’s motion. Instead, a
stipulation was submitted to the court that permitted Tan Luong to select an
attorney – to be approved later by the probate court – to serve as co-guardian.
In accordance with that stipulation, Tan Luong interviewed attorney Joseph E.
Mitchell for nearly two hours and, on June 23, 2004, filed a motion to have
him appointed as Phi’s co-guardian. The probate court approved the motion on
July 7, 2004. With the addition of Mitchell as co-guardian, the civil suit was
finally settled, resulting in a net realization of $4,964,823.31 to Phi’s estate.
2
On October 7, 2004, Phi’s guardians filed a new petition with the probate
court “request[ing] that the court accept and approve” a revised estate plan.
Unlike the estate plan submitted earlier by Tan Luong, the revised estate plan
provided that, upon Phi’s death, a cash bequest of $400,000 would
automatically be made to a trust in Catherine’s name. Tan Luong was named
the sole trustee of the trust and would have had discretion to use “any income
and principal [of the trust] for the support, education and care of Catherine.”
Catherine would be entitled to all of the trust assets once she reached the age
of twenty-five. However, if she passed away before reaching the age of twenty-
five without issue, all of the trust assets would go to Phi’s parents and siblings.
The residue of Phi’s estate was allocated as follows: (1) forty percent to Phi’s
parents; (2) twenty percent to Phi’s siblings, including Tan Luong; and (3) an
additional forty percent to Catherine’s trust.
Walker objected to the guardians’ revised estate plan and filed a notice of
appearance. Catherine’s guardian ad litem joined in Walker’s objection.
Accordingly, the probate court held a four-day hearing to consider evidence
concerning the guardians’ petition. During those proceedings, the guardians
submitted testimony from two Vietnamese attorneys in an attempt to
demonstrate that the distributions provided for in the revised estate plan were
“consistent with the cultural background, values and beliefs of citizens of
Vietnamese origin.” Moreover, they solicited testimony from two of Phi’s
acquaintances, and submitted evidence of prior gifts Phi had made to her
parents and siblings, in an attempt to demonstrate that Phi would have
adhered to those Vietnamese values in making her testamentary bequests.
On October 19, 2005, the probate court issued an order rejecting the
guardians’ revised estate plan. The court ruled, among other things, that the
preponderance of the evidence did not demonstrate that the revised will either
minimized taxation on Phi’s estate or provided for bequests that Phi would have
made had she not been incapacitated. See RSA 464-A:26-a, I (explaining that,
where a ward’s wishes cannot be ascertained, the probate court may authorize
the guardian to develop an estate plan to “minimize taxation or to facilitate
distribution of the ward’s estate to family, friends, or charities who would be
likely recipients of gifts from the ward”). More specifically, the court stated:
The ward never made a will and never discussed her intentions, if
she had formulated any before he[r] incapacity, regarding her
desire to benefit her daughter, her parents or her siblings upon her
death, and if so, in what proportions. As much as she was
culturally attuned to her ethnic heritage, so too, she was a citizen
of the U.S., living and working in the U.S. for many years, and part
of the cultural fabric of the United States . . . .
3
As to the testamentary distribution plan being proposed, it was
developed without any clear, specific understanding of the tax
impact on the ward, or the present and potential impact on the
beneficiaries of the ward under the plan, at present or potentially
in the future. Further, the propose[d] distribution plan was
apparently prepared without a determination of the present and
potential future support obligations of the ward to her daughter
being established and calculated, particularly in reference to the
ward’s unique circumstances and long term medical needs. . . .
On all this evidence, the preponderance is found to be against the
specific testamentary distribution plan for the ward reflected in the
terms of the will being offered for approval by the Court. This
evidence may well support some nature, amount and manner of
distribution to the parents and siblings of the ward, to generally
reflect cultural norms and traditions, as well as to the ward’s only
child, but the weight of and preponderance of that evidence
presented would be against the percentages and manner in which
the proposed distributions would be made in this case.
The court concluded its order by stating that, although it was rejecting
the guardians’ revised will, the parties were “invited to further consider all
important additional information to be obtained, as well as the many
alternatives available and perhaps agree to a restatement of all of these
considerations in a further proposed distribution plan for approval by the
court.”
Two months later, in an order resolving a matter unrelated to the present
dispute, the court acknowledged that it had been “advised that the guardians
ha[d] hired counsel to prepare a comprehensive estate plan for [Phi] in
response to the Court’s rejection of the previously proposed will,” and that
Walker had expressed concern that this new plan would also face opposition.
Therefore, presumably in anticipation of another dispute, the probate court
ordered the guardians to submit a copy of their final plan to the court and all
interested parties within sixty days; ordered all parties who opposed the
guardians’ final plan to submit an alternative plan to the court within forty-five
days after receipt of the guardians’ plan; and scheduled a status conference to
resolve the matter. In addition, the court explained that it intended to appoint
a referee to review the plans submitted by the parties and, if a consensus could
not be reached from the proposals presented, “to establish a specific estate
plan for [Phi] and submit the same to the [c]ourt for approval and
implementation.” On March 14, 2006, the court appointed attorney Sally
Mulhern to fill this referee role and “act as an arm of the court.”
4
On April 20, 2006, the guardians filed a petition requesting that the
probate court approve their final estate plan. That plan provided for up to
$1,000,000 in lifetime gifts out of Phi’s estate, of which 47.5% was to be
distributed to Catherine in trust, 47.5% to Phi’s parents outright, and 5%
outright to those of Phi’s siblings who reside in Vietnam. The plan also
included a will for Phi, which provided for bequests, upon her death, of her
residuary estate in the following manner: (1) 45% to Catherine in trust, if she
had not attained the age of thirty-five, and outright, if she had; (2) 45% to Phi’s
parents if they were still alive or, if they were not, then to Phi’s siblings, per
stirpes; and (3) the remaining 10% to Phi’s siblings, per stirpes.
The trust created for Catherine in this plan was different from the one
attached to the guardians’ revised estate plan in several respects. First, it
provided for disbursements when Catherine reached the ages of twenty-five,
thirty, and thirty-five. In addition, Catherine was to have a general
testamentary power of appointment over her trust once she reached the age of
twenty-five. However, if she passed away before reaching that age, or if she
died without having exercised her “power of appointment, the remaining
principal and undistributed income [of her trust] would be distributed to [her]
then living descendants by right of representation, or, if [she had none], . . .
then one-half in equal shares to Phi’s parents and one-half to the descendants
of Phi’s parents by right of representation.” Finally, unlike in the prior plans,
the guardians’ final estate plan explicitly provided that any portion of Phi’s
estate that would be distributable to Tan Luong “shall be distributed instead to
the Buddhist Temple in Manchester, or if that Temple is not in existence or
declines the gift, then to New Hampshire Legal Assistance.”
Both Walker and Catherine’s guardian ad litem opposed the guardians’
final estate plan. In his objection, Walker pointed out that the increase in
Catherine’s share under the guardians’ final will to 45%, from the 40%
proposed in the previously rejected revised estate plan, was de minimis and
“offset by the fact that the proposed $1 million gift secures for members of
[Phi’s] family an immediate gift of $525,000 that they would not have enjoyed
under the [revised estate plan] that the [probate c]ourt disapproved as being
too favorable to them.” Therefore, Walker argued, the probate court should
reject the guardians’ final estate plan because it “represent[ed] no material
change in the relative economic interests of Phi’s daughter and the other
members of [Phi’s] family” from the revised estate plan the court had already
rejected in its October 19, 2005 order.
On June 6, 2006, the probate court held a status conference and ordered
Mulhern to “review all relevant matters and develop an estate plan for the
ward.” The court further stated that it would schedule a hearing, after
receiving Mulhern’s plan, in order to consider “the plan developed by . . .
Mulhern, the guardians[’] proposed plan, and [any] plan offered by” Walker.
5
The probate court, however, did not hold another hearing. Instead, on
March 28, 2007, the court issued its final order and adopted the plan prepared
by Mulhern “as being consistent with all of the statutory requirements under
[RSA 464-A:26-a, V(a)-(d)], and consistent with the best interests of the ward.”
In summary, the plan submitted by Mulhern: (1) eliminates any gifts or
bequests to Phi’s siblings; (2) provides for the funding of a discretionary special
needs trust for Phi’s parents of up to $200,000, assuming that Phi’s estate
exceeds $2,000,000 at her death; and (3) bequeaths the remainder of Phi’s
estate in trust to Catherine and Catherine’s descendants. After adopting that
plan, the court instructed Mulhern to prepare a final draft and ordered the
parties to sign the same or else “the documents w[ould] be signed by the referee
under the authority conferred on her . . . by virtue of this order.”
On appeal, the guardians argue that the probate court erred by: (1)
adopting the estate plan prepared by the court-appointed referee; and (2)
ignoring the weight of the evidence, which they submit compels the conclusion
that both of their proposed estate plans were in compliance with RSA 464-
A:26-a. We address each of the guardians’ arguments in turn.
II. Adoption of the Referee’s Estate Plan
The guardians argue first that the probate court erred in adopting the
estate plan drafted by the referee. Specifically, they contend that, “[w]hatever
concerns the probate court may have had with the[ir] plan, it is clear from [RSA
464-A:26-a, I,] that [the court] did not have the authority to delegate th[e]
responsibility [of drafting an estate plan] to a third-party ‘referee’.” Instead,
they assert, the court’s authority under the statute “is limited to either
approving or disapproving the guardians’ plan.”
Resolution of the guardians’ argument requires interpretation of the
language of RSA 464-A:26-a. When interpreting the language of a statute, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used and discern the
legislative intent from the statute as written. State v. Doyle, 156 N.H. 306, 308
(2007). We will not consider what the legislature might have said, or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. When the language
of a statute is plain and unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for further
indication of legislative intent. Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 509
(2004). However, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as it is
expressed in the words of a statute when considered as a whole. Doyle, 156
N.H. at 308.
The legislative intent of RSA 464-A:26-a is clear on its face. Apart from
entitling the statute “Estate Planning by Guardian,” the legislature clearly
demonstrated that it is the guardian’s responsibility to draft the ward’s estate
6
plan by stating that “[t]he probate court may authorize the guardian of the
estate to plan for the testamentary distribution of the ward’s estate.” RSA 464-
A:26-a, I (emphasis added). Even in cases such as this one, where the ward’s
wishes cannot be ascertained, the legislature again chose to limit the probate
court to “authoriz[ing] the guardian” to draft a plan that will “minimize taxation
or . . . facilitate distribution of the ward’s estate to . . . [those] who would be
likely recipients of gifts from the ward.” Id. Although the probate court has the
ultimate discretion of approving or disapproving a submitted plan, see RSA
464-A:26-a, I, II, V, nothing in the statute permits the court to use a referee to
draft a plan. Therefore, we hold that RSA 464-A:26-a places the burden of
drafting the ward’s estate plan, if one is to be drafted, upon the guardian.
The respondent argues, relying exclusively upon RSA 547:3-b (2007),
that we must nevertheless affirm the probate court’s adoption of the referee’s
estate plan as a valid exercise of the court’s equity authority. He asserts that
the court was within its “equity jurisdiction to fashion a remedy . . . because
the otherwise available procedure for preparing a will for Phi had proved to be
plainly inadequate.”
Although RSA 547:3-b bestows upon the probate courts “the powers of a
court of equity in cases in which there is not a plain, adequate and complete
remedy at law,” we do not agree that that equity authority can be exercised in
circumvention of the express language of RSA 464-A:26-a, which places the
responsibility of drafting an estate plan upon the guardian. Moreover, we
disagree with the respondent’s implicit assertion that there was no other “plain,
adequate and complete remedy at law” than adoption of the referee’s plan. RSA
547:3-b; see also Thurston Enterprises, Inc. v. Baldi, 128 N.H. 760, 764 (1986)
(explaining that “equitable jurisdiction lies only when there is no plain and
complete remedy at law”). RSA 464-A:26-a does not require that an estate plan
be drafted for all incapacitated individuals and, assuming that one is not
adopted in this case, the legislature has already provided what it deems to be a
complete and adequate remedy for dealing with such a situation in the
intestacy statutes. See RSA 561:1, II(a) (2007) (providing that, in a case such
as this, “the entire intestate estate . . . passes . . . [t]o the issue of the
decedent”).
If the probate court believes that the guardians are not acting in the best
interests of the ward or have a conflict of interest, it may consider whether they
should continue to serve in that capacity. See RSA 547:3, I(e) (2007) (granting
probate judges exclusive jurisdiction to “appoint[] and remov[e] . . . guardians
of . . . mentally incompetent persons”); see also RSA 464-A:26-a, VI (explaining
that “[t]he probate court, prior to authorizing a lifetime gift, shall appoint a
guardian ad litem if the proposed gift benefits the guardian personally or
otherwise creates a potential conflict of interest between the ward’s interests
and the guardian’s personal interests”). But, the court cannot appoint a
7
referee to independently draft an estate plan when the express language of RSA
464-A:26-a clearly makes it the guardians’ responsibility. We, therefore, hold
that the probate court erred in adopting the estate plan drafted by Mulhern.
III. Rejection of the Guardians’ Proposed Estate Plans
The guardians argue next that the probate court erred in rejecting both
their revised and final estate plans. Before reaching this argument, however,
we must first address a preliminary matter. In his brief, Walker argues that
the probate court’s October 19, 2005 order rejecting the guardians’ revised
estate plan was a “decision on the merits,” subject to mandatory appeal under
Supreme Court Rule 7. Because the guardians failed to appeal that order,
Walker asserts that their current appeal is untimely insofar as it pertains to
the revised estate plan. The guardians, in contrast, argue that the October 19,
2005 order was not a decision on the merits because it rejected their revised
will only “in part” and further “directed the parties to meet and formulate
[another] will for [the] court[‘s] consideration.”
Pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 7(1), an appellant must file a notice of
appeal “within 30 days from the date on the clerk’s written notice of the
decision on the merits.” See also 4 Am. Jur. 2d Appellate Review § 81, at 709
(2007) (explaining that rules requiring a final decision on the merits prior to
appeal promote efficient judicial administration and serve to prevent piecemeal
appellate litigation). Failure to comply with this rule will result in a final
judgment being entered “on the thirty-first day from the date on the Register’s
written notice that the [Probate] Court has made such order, decree or
dismissal,” Prob. Ct. R. 74(a), thus making any appeal therefrom untimely, see,
e.g., In re Estate of Heald, 147 N.H. 280, 281-82 (2001) (holding that a probate
court’s removal of an executor was a decision on the merits and dismissing the
executor’s appeal of that order two years later as untimely). The guardians do
not contest that they failed to appeal the probate court’s October 19, 2005
order. Therefore, if that order constituted a decision on the merits, see Sup.
Ct. R. 3, 7(1)(C) (defining “decision on the merits”), the guardians’ appeal as to
the issues decided therein must be barred as untimely.
We confronted a situation similar to the present one in Germain v.
Germain, 137 N.H. 82 (1993). There, the trial court had bifurcated the
proceedings in a divorce case and issued an order “that awarded the parties a
decree of divorce and divided their property, but left the determination of
custody and permanent child support to a further hearing.” Id. at 83. When
one of the parties subsequently appealed, we had to determine whether the
trial court’s order was a decision on the merits, permitting an appeal under
Supreme Court Rule 7. Id. at 83-84. After recognizing that “[g]enerally, when
a trial court issues an order that does not conclude the proceedings before it,
. . . we consider any appeal from such an order to be interlocutory,” we held
8
that the court’s order constituted a decision on the merits because the
bifurcated issues remaining to be resolved were completely severable from
those determined in the order. Id. at 84; see Asmussen v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t
of Safety, 145 N.H. 578, 585 (2000) (distinguishing Germain on the basis that
the issues that remained following the court’s order in that case were not
severable from those in the court’s order).
The logic underlying our holding in Germain applies with equal force in
the present case. In their October 7, 2004 petition, the guardians sought to
have a particular estate plan adopted for Phi; they were not attempting to
initiate some general estate planning proceedings. This is clearly evidenced by
both the language of the guardians’ petition – which “request[ed] that the court
accept and approve” the will that was attached to the petition – and the express
language of RSA 464-A:26-a, III – which required the guardians to petition the
court and describe, among other things, “the proposed action” that they were
seeking to have approved. RSA 464-A:26-a, III(a) (emphasis added). Because
all that was before the probate court was the adoption or rejection of the
proposed plan, and that issue is entirely separate from those later considered
by the court, see Germain, 137 N.H. at 84, the court’s October 19, 2005 order
rejecting the guardians’ revised estate plan was a decision on the merits. See 4
Am. Jur. 2d, supra § 82, at 710 (2007) (explaining that “[a]s a general test,
where no issue is left for future consideration except the fact of compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of the decree, that decree is final”).
While we acknowledge that the probate court also “invited” the parties to
discuss the issues mentioned in its order and “perhaps” submit an alternative
estate plan, we do not agree with the guardians that that mere invitation in any
way compels a contrary holding. See 4 Am. Jur. 2d, supra § 83, at 711 (2007)
(“A question remaining to be decided after an order has been entered ending
litigation on the merits does not prevent finality if its resolution will not alter
the order or moot or revise decisions embodied in the order. Thus, the finality
of a judgment is not necessarily destroyed by reservation of another separable
and different cause for future adjudication.”). Nor do we agree that, under any
interpretation, the court’s order can be read as only rejecting the guardians’
revised estate plan “in part.” See State v. Parker, 155 N.H. 89, 91-92 (2007)
(explaining how the interpretation of a trial court order is a question of law
which we review de novo). Accordingly, we agree with Walker that the
guardians’ appeal is untimely insofar as it raises questions concerning the
probate court’s rejection of their revised estate plan.
Having determined that the guardians’ revised estate plan is not before
us, we turn now to the guardians’ assertion that the probate court erred in
rejecting their final plan. In essence, the guardians argue that the weight of
the evidence proffered at trial demonstrated that their final estate plan was
“consistent with [Phi’s] cultural background and beliefs, [consistent with Phi’s]
9
history of giving to her parents and siblings, and satisfied the fundamental
requirements of RSA 464-A:26-a.” Thus, they assert that the probate court
erred because the preponderance of the evidence indicates that their final
estate plan made distributions to family “who would be likely recipients of gifts
from” Phi. RSA 464-A:26-a, V(a). We disagree.
As noted above, in cases such as this where a “ward’s wishes cannot be
ascertained, the probate court may authorize the guardian of the estate to plan
for the testamentary distribution of the ward’s estate.” RSA 464-A:26-a, I.
Before authorizing the guardian to so act, the probate court must find, among
other things, that the preponderance of the evidence demonstrates that “[t]he
testamentary distribution of the ward’s estate [that is proposed] will . . .
facilitate distribution of the ward’s estate to family, friends, or charities who
would be likely recipients of gifts from the ward.” RSA 464-A:26-a, V(a).
We note at the outset that the probate court did not make any express
findings indicating upon what basis it was rejecting the guardians’ final will.
However, this deficiency is not fatal because neither party requested findings of
fact or rulings of law, see RSA 567-A:4 (2007); see also In re Jonathan T., 148
N.H. 296, 304 (2002), and, as we have previously stated, “in the absence of
specific findings, the trial court is presumed to have made all findings
necessary to support its decree,” Burns v. Bradley, 120 N.H. 542, 546 (1980)
(quotation omitted) (upholding a trial court’s grant of directed verdict even
though “the record d[id] not clearly reveal the precise legal grounds upon which
the court based its decision”); see also In re Lisa H., 134 N.H. 188, 195 (1991).
Here, the probate court found in its October 19, 2005 order that “evidence may
well support some nature, amount and manner of distribution to the parents
and siblings of the ward, to generally reflect cultural norms and traditions . . .
but the weight of and preponderance of th[e] evidence presented would be
against the percentages and manner in which the proposed distributions would
be made in” the revised estate plan. (Emphasis added.) At the same time, the
guardians have conceded in their brief that their final estate plan employed
distribution percentages that are substantially similar to those they used in the
revised plan. Accordingly, we review the court’s rejection of the final estate
plan on that basis.
In so doing, we must accept “[t]he findings of fact of the judge of probate
a[s] final unless they are so plainly erroneous that such findings could not be
reasonably made.” RSA 567-A:4 (2007). “Hence we must review the record of
the proceedings before the probate court to determine if the findings, as made
by the probate judge, could be reasonably made, given the testimony” and
evidence presented at trial. In re Buttrick, 134 N.H. 675, 676 (1991). When
engaging in this inquiry, we are guided by the rule that “[t]he trier of fact is in
the best position to measure the persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and
is not compelled to believe even uncontroverted evidence.” Restaurant
10
Operators, Inc. v. Jenney, 128 N.H. 708, 711 (1986); see also Cook v. Sullivan,
149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (explaining that the trial court is in the best position
to “resolv[e] conflicts in the testimony, measur[e] the credibility of witnesses,
and determin[e] the weight to be given evidence”).
After reviewing the record, we hold that the probate court’s finding that
the preponderance of the evidence does not support the distribution
percentages employed by the guardians is reasonable, based upon the evidence
presented at trial. Admittedly, the guardians submitted testimony from two
Vietnamese attorneys that they contend supported their distribution formula
as being in accord with the Vietnamese culture and traditions. Even assuming
the reliability and sufficiency of that evidence – which became more
questionable upon cross-examination – we note that what is ultimately at issue
is not the general testamentary practices of an entire society, but rather the
testamentary wishes of Phi. See RSA 464-A:26-a, V(a). While evidence of
religious or cultural traditions and customs may well be probative of an
incapacitated ward’s testamentary wishes, it is not dispositive. What must
ultimately be shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, is that Phi would
have abided by those customs and traditions in choosing her beneficiaries.
In an effort to demonstrate this connection, the guardians first submitted
evidence that Phi had consistently made gifts of money to her parents and that
“usually on New Year’s” she would also make gifts of money to all of her
siblings. The guardians also called one of Phi’s co-workers, Barbara Roberge,
and one of Phi’s acquaintances, Bao Chau Kelley. Both of these witnesses
similarly testified that Phi had, on several occasions, given money to both her
parents and her siblings back in Vietnam. In addition, Kelley testified that she
perceived Phi to be “a traditional Vietnamese woman.” Finally, the guardians
asserted, and the probate court found, that Phi “was proud of and shared her
Vietnamese heritage with her daughter, . . . continued to cook in the
Vietnamese tradition and continued her active participation in her religious
heritage as a Buddhist.”
However, Roberge stated that, while she believed that Phi considered
herself Vietnamese and didn’t “want[] to give up her culture,” she also thought
that Phi “was trying to be an American . . . [and] be married to an American.”
Moreover, Roberge testified that Phi loved Catherine “more than anything” and
that, following her separation from Walker, Catherine was “her primary
concern.” This testimony comports with that of all the witnesses who knew
Phi, who unanimously agreed that Catherine was the most important person in
Phi’s life.
That Catherine was Phi’s utmost concern is also consistent with the
evidence submitted by Walker in support of his argument that Phi would not
have elected to give such substantial sums to her parents and siblings over her
11
only daughter. For instance, Walker submitted evidence that, following their
separation, Phi had designated Catherine as the sole beneficiary of her $20,000
life insurance policy, which was her only substantial asset at the time. Walker
also called the attorney who had represented Phi in her divorce proceeding,
Barbara Griffin. Griffin explained that Phi had designated Catherine as her
beneficiary in that policy because her “repeated statement and desire was that
she wanted everything she had for [C]atherine.” Finally, Griffin concluded that,
through her representation, Phi had become a friend of “the office” and Griffin
believed that she “would want her estate to go for the benefit of her daughter.”
In light of all of the foregoing evidence, we cannot hold that the probate
court’s finding that the record does not support the “percentages and manner”
in which the guardians are attempting to dispose of Phi’s estate is “so plainly
erroneous . . . [that it] could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-A:4; see also
Restaurant Operators, Inc., 128 N.H. at 711 (explaining that it is within the
purview of the trial court to weigh the evidence). Therefore, we affirm the
probate court’s rejection of the guardians’ final estate plan.
Affirmed in part; reversed
in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred.
12