THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hooksett District Court
No. 2007-822
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
EVELYN BERNARD
Argued: September 11, 2008
Opinion Issued: November 6, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Peter J. Leahy, of Concord, by memorandum of law and orally, for the
defendant.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. Pursuant to RSA 606:10 (2001), the State appeals an order
of the Hooksett District Court (LaPointe, J.) dismissing a complaint against the
defendant, Evelyn Bernard, for failure to obey a command at the scene of an
emergency. See RSA 154:9 (2002). We reverse and remand.
The following allegations are undisputed on appeal. On April 16, 2007,
at approximately 2:41 p.m., Chief Everett Chaput of the Allenstown Fire
Department declared a state of emergency in portions of Allenstown that had
become flooded. Chief Chaput instructed his officers to enforce a mandatory
evacuation of the area, including the residential area in which the defendant
lived. At around 7:15 p.m., the fire department called Allenstown Police Officer
Joseph DeFeudis to assist them in evacuating the defendant and her husband.
When Officer DeFeudis arrived, Fire Officers Vincent Lembo and Ryan
Fortin informed him that the defendant and her husband had indicated that
they would not leave their residence. Officer DeFeudis then instructed the
defendant to leave her home by boat. She became confrontational and
indicated that she did not want to leave. When Officer DeFeudis informed the
defendant that she would be arrested if she refused to cooperate, she told him
to arrest her.
On September 11, 2007, the State filed a complaint, pursuant to RSA
154:9, alleging that the defendant had failed to obey a fire official’s command
at the scene of an emergency. Before trial, the State filed a motion in limine
requesting that the trial court find that a flood constitutes an emergency under
the applicable statutes. The defendant moved to dismiss the complaint on the
ground that a flood is not an emergency. The trial court dismissed the
complaint, and denied reconsideration.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. State v.
Brown, 155 N.H. 590, 591 (2007). In matters of statutory interpretation, we
are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. State v. Langill, 157 N.H. 77, 84 (2008). When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. Further, we
interpret a statute in the context of the overall scheme and not in isolation. Id.
We do not consider legislative history to construe a statute that is clear on its
face. State v. Njogu, 156 N.H. 551, 552 (2007).
RSA 154:7, II(b) (2002) provides:
While any duly constituted fire department recognized by the
state fire marshal is responding to . . . a fire, service call, or other
emergency, the fire officer in charge shall have . . . the authority
. . . [t]o order any persons to leave any building or place in the
vicinity of such scene for the purpose of protecting such persons
from injury or remove persons interfering with duties.
“Refusing or neglecting to obey the commands of . . . the fire department” at
the scene of “a fire, emergency, or service call” is a violation. RSA 154:9.
2
The legislature defines “other emergency” to include “any other real
emergency which does not directly involve the extinguishment of an actual
fire.” RSA 154:7, I(c) (emphasis added). The only exception involves propelled
vehicle accidents. Id.
The plain meaning of the phrase “other emergency” includes floods. An
emergency is “an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action,” “a pressing need” or “a usu[ally]
distressing event or condition that can often be anticipated or prepared for but
seldom exactly foreseen.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 741
(unabridged ed. 2002). A flood meets this definition.
The defendant points out that, under RSA 644:2, IV, V(a)(3) (2007), a
peace officer may not lawfully order a person to leave his or her own home
during a flood. The defendant asks us to read the same language into RSA
chapter 154 (2002 & Supp. 2008). However, RSA 154:7, II(b) specifically grants
authority to a fire officer “[t]o order any persons to leave any building.”
(Emphasis added.) Had the legislature intended to limit the authority of fire
departments as it did with peace officers in RSA 644:2, it could have done so.
Instead, the legislature chose to use broad language, and we will not read an
exception into a statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. See
Langill, 157 N.H. at 84.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3