THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2007-692
CHARLES H. SMITH
v.
LILLIAN V. DONAHUE TRUST
Argued: June 18, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 15, 2008
Sager Law, P.L.L.C., of Ossipee (Richard D. Sager on the brief and orally),
for the petitioner.
Krasner Law Office, of Farmington (Emmanuel Krasner on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, the Lillian V. Donahue Trust (Trust),
appeals the order of the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.), granting the petition for
specific performance filed by the petitioner, Charles H. Smith. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The Trust was created in 1991
by Lillian V. Donahue. It was a revocable trust that named Lillian as grantor,
beneficiary and trustee. It named her son, Patrick J. Donahue (Donahue), as
successor trustee and contingent beneficiary. Under the trust document, upon
Lillian’s death, all of the remaining “principal, real, personal or mixed and any
accumulated net income” was to be paid to Donahue, and the Trust would
terminate. The property in trust included approximately 200 acres of land on
Horn’s Pond in Wakefield.
In June 1993, Lillian resigned as trustee and named her attorney, Elmer
E. Runyon, as a successor trustee to serve with her son as co-trustee. At that
time, the Trust was further amended to require that, upon Lillian’s death,
seventy-five percent of the remaining “principal, real, personal or mixed and
any accumulated net income” was to be paid to Donahue, and the Trust would
terminate as to the portion distributed to him. The remaining twenty-five
percent was to be held in trust for his daughter and distributed to her when
she turned twenty-five. During Lillian’s lifetime, however, all of the net income
from the trust property was to be paid to her, and the successor trustees were
permitted to use as much of the principal as they, in their sole discretion,
deemed necessary for her support and maintenance.
In September 1993, Donahue and Runyon, as successor trustees, filed a
trustee certificate at the Carroll County Registry of Deeds, which stated, in
pertinent part:
The undersigned Trustees as Trustees under the LILLIAN V.
DONAHUE TRUST . . . have full and absolute power in said
Declaration of Trust to convey any interest in real estate and
improvements thereon held in said Trust and no purchaser or
third party shall be bound to inquire whether the trustees have
said power or are properly exercising said power or to see to the
application of any Trust asset paid to the Trustees for a
conveyance thereof.
See RSA 564-A:7, II-III (Supp. 1994) (amended 1995).
The trust document gave “any successor Trustee” the power to, inter alia:
(1) “collect, hold, and retain Trust assets . . . until, in the judgment of the
Trustee, disposition of the assets should be made”; (2) “acquire an undivided
interest in a Trust asset”; (3) “invest and reinvest Trust assets”; (4) “deposit
Trust funds in a bank”; (5) “acquire or dispose of an asset, for cash or credit, at
public or private sale”; (6) “manage, develop, improve, exchange, partition,
change the character of, or abandon a Trust asset or any interest therein”; (7)
“encumber, mortgage, or pledge a Trust asset for a term within or extending
beyond the term of the Trust, in connection with the exercise of any power
vested in the Trustee”; and (8) “borrow money to be repaid from Trust assets.”
See RSA 564-A:3 (1974) (amended 1996, 1998).
On June 30, 1996, Donahue entered into an agreement with Smith to
sell him a house located on five acres of the Wakefield land held in trust, with
approximately 550 feet of lake frontage. The agreement provided that although
the property was not yet subdivided, it would be subdivided upon request. The
2
agreement also provided that Smith would pay the $50,000 purchase price in
installments, and that Donahue would hold the deed in escrow until Smith
paid the final installment. The agreement did not identify the property as being
held in trust. Nor did it identify Donahue as trustee. Donahue and Smith
were the only signatories.
Runyon resigned as trustee on June 19, 2000. Three months later, on
September 20, 2000, Donahue and Smith entered into another agreement,
which they termed an “allonge” to their original purchase agreement. The
allonge, unlike the original purchase agreement, identified Donahue as the
trustee of the Trust. Pursuant to the allonge, Donahue, as trustee, agreed to
sell Smith an additional approximately three acres of the Wakefield land held in
trust, with 200 feet of lake frontage.
Like the original agreement, the allonge provided that Smith would pay
the purchase price in installments. The purchase price for the additional
property was $50,000. Donahue signed the allonge twice: once “personally,”
and once as “Trustee.” Smith was the only other signator.
In August 2002, Smith brought this petition for specific performance,
alleging, among other things, that although he had already paid Donahue
$70,000, Donahue had not conveyed any property to him, nor had he
subdivided the Wakefield land as requested so that the conveyance could take
place. Instead, he had placed the entire Wakefield lot for sale for $700,000.
After a bench trial, the trial court ruled that the 1996 agreement between
Donahue and Smith was invalid because Donahue’s co-trustee at the time,
Runyon, had not authorized it. The court found, however, that the 2000
allonge ratified the 1996 agreement and made it binding upon the Trust.
Impliedly finding that it was equitable to do so, the court granted Smith’s
petition for specific performance. Because Smith had not yet paid the entire
$100,000 purchase price, however, the court ordered him to do so, and ordered
the Trust to deed the disputed property to him provided that it was possible to
subdivide Smith’s parcel from the larger parcel. If this was impossible, the
court ruled that Smith was entitled to be reimbursed for his payments.
We will not disturb the findings of the trial court unless they lack
evidentiary support or are erroneous as a matter of law. N.H. Dep’t of Envtl.
Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709, 717 (2007). We review legal conclusions, as
well as the application of law to fact, independently for error. Id. Our inquiry
is to determine whether the evidence presented to the trial court reasonably
supports its findings, and then whether the court’s decision is consonant with
applicable law. Id.
3
I
On appeal, the Trust first argues that the contracts between Donahue
and Smith are void because Smith had actual or constructive knowledge that
Donahue acted outside of the scope of his authority, without authorization,
and not to the benefit of the Trust. The Trust alleges that Donahue committed
a breach of trust first, by entering into the 1996 agreement without his co-
trustee’s authorization or consent, and second, by using the money he received
from Smith for his own purposes. The Trust argues that Smith’s constructive
knowledge of the first breach and/or his actual knowledge of the second
deprives him of the remedy of specific performance.
A
We first address whether Smith’s constructive knowledge of any alleged
breach of trust by Donahue suffices to void the contracts at issue. We hold
that constructive knowledge is legally insufficient.
To support its assertion that constructive knowledge of Donahue’s
breach of trust suffices to void a contract, the Trust relies upon the
Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 288 (1959). This reliance is misplaced. The
Restatement (Second) of Trusts is a compilation of the common law. While at
common law, constructive knowledge of a trustee’s breach of trust could void a
contract with a third party, the New Hampshire statute governing such
transactions at the time required actual knowledge. See RSA 564-A:7, I (1997)
(repealed 2004).
At common law, if a trustee in breach of trust transferred trust property
to a person who took “with notice of the breach of trust,” the conveyance was
void. Restatement (Second) of Trusts, supra § 288; see Steves v. United
Services Automobile Association, 459 S.W.2d 930, 934-35 (Tex. Ct. Civ. App.
1970). Such a third party could also be liable to the trust beneficiaries for
damages for breach of trust. See G.G. Bogert & G.T. Bogert, The Law of Trusts
and Trustees § 901, at 304 (2d ed. rev. 1995); see also Restatement (Second) of
Trusts, supra § 321 (1959). At common law, a third party, who knew or should
have known that he was dealing with a trustee, had a duty to inquire into
whether the trustee had the power to engage in the transaction in question and
was charged with knowledge of the proper construction of the trust terms. See
Wendel, The Evolution of the Law of Trustee’s Powers and Third Party Liability
for Participating in a Breach of Trust: An Economic Analysis, 35 Seton Hall L.
Rev. 971, 977 n. 49 (2005); Restatement (Second) of Trusts, supra § 297.
New Hampshire departed from the common law in 1969 when it adopted
the Uniform Trustees’ Powers Act (UTPA). See Laws 1969, 312:1. Unlike the
common law, the UTPA protected a third party dealing with a trustee unless
the third party possessed actual knowledge that the trustee was exceeding or
4
improperly exercising the trustee’s powers. See Wendel, supra at 973, 987.
The UTPA “abolish[ed]” the “common law broad duty of inquiry,” id. at 973, and
granted “a third party who deal[t] with a trustee complete protection from
liability unless the third party ha[d] actual knowledge, at the time of the
transaction, that the proposed transaction constitute[d] a breach of trust,” id.
at 987. While the common law “placed third party purchasers of trust property
on constructive or inquiry notice of possible breaches of trust,” the UTPA gave
“such purchasers protected bona fide status except where they [had] actual
knowledge of a breach.” Adler v. Manor Healthcare Corp., 9 Cal. Rptr. 2d 732,
735 (Ct. App. 1992).
“The actual knowledge standard of liability allocate[d] virtually all of the
risk of harm associated with a breach of trust to the settlor and trust
beneficiaries, thereby creating an incentive for them to take precautions to
minimize the risk of a breach.” Wendel, supra at 973. “The official reporter for
the UTPA acknowledged the broad protection the UTPA accorded third parties
who dealt with a trustee.” Id. at 987. According to the official reporter, under
the UTPA:
mere suspicion that limitations exist[ed] or knowledge of facts
which, if pursued, would show that limitations exist[ed] [did] not
deprive a person of this protection. The remedy for breach [was]
limited to the trustee and a third party with actual knowledge that
the trustee [was] exceeding his powers or improperly exercising
them.
Id. (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
The New Hampshire statute expressing this part of the UTPA was RSA
564-A:7, I, which provided:
With respect to a third person dealing with a trustee or
assisting a trustee in the conduct of a transaction, the existence of
trust powers and their exercise by the trustee may be assumed
without inquiry. The third person is not bound to inquire whether
the trustee has power to act or is properly exercising the power,
and a third person, without actual knowledge that the trustee is
exceeding his powers or improperly exercising them, is fully
protected in dealing with the trustee as if the trustee possessed
and properly exercised the powers he purports to exercise. A third
person is not bound to assure the proper application of trust
assets paid or delivered to the trustee.
RSA 564-A:7, I, was in effect during the relevant times in this appeal
and, therefore, governs. Thus, to the extent that the Trust argues that Smith’s
constructive knowledge of Donahue’s breach of trust was sufficient to void the
5
contracts, we disagree. Pursuant to RSA 564-A:7, I, Smith’s actual knowledge
was required.
B
We next examine whether there is evidentiary support for the trial court’s
implicit finding that Smith lacked the requisite actual knowledge to void his
contracts with Donahue. See Frost v. Stevens, 88 N.H. 164, 165-66 (1936)
(whether party has actual knowledge is question of fact); Clark v. Railroad, 87
N.H. 36, 40 (1934). Although the trial court did not expressly make this
finding, we assume it made all subsidiary findings necessary to support its
decision. See Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 586
(2004). Also, for the purposes of this discussion, we assume, without deciding,
that Donahue breached the trust either by entering into the 1996 agreement
without Runyon’s authorization or by using the money for his own purposes.
Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that it supports the trial
court’s implied finding that Smith lacked the requisite actual knowledge.
With respect to whether Smith actually knew that Donahue breached the
trust by entering into the 1996 agreement without his co-trustee’s
authorization, there is scant evidence that Smith even knew then that Runyon
was a co-trustee. Although Donahue testified that he believed that Smith knew
this, he clarified that this was only his assumption. Smith testified that, in
fact, he did not learn until the 2000 allonge that Runyon had previously been
Donahue’s co-trustee.
Moreover, while the evidence supports a finding that Smith knew that
Donahue used some of Smith’s money for his own purposes, it does not compel
a finding that Smith knew that, by so doing, Donahue violated the terms of the
Trust. Smith testified that he knew in 1996 that Donahue was a trustee and
that the property at issue was owned by the Trust. When he entered into the
2000 allonge, he also knew that the property at issue was held in trust for the
benefit of Donahue’s mother, Lillian. Smith did not know, however, whether
Donahue allocated any of his own resources to the Trust, how much money, if
any, he gave to the Trust, and how much money he spent for his own
purposes.
According to Smith and other witnesses, he paid the money due under
the 1996 agreement and 2000 allonge through his then-girlfriend and
bookkeeper, Judith Mason. The payments were not made according to the
schedules in the agreements, but were made whenever Donahue told Smith
that he needed money. For some of these transactions, Mason kept notations
indicating the purpose for which Donahue said he needed money. These
notations showed that Donahue asked for money to travel to New Zealand and
Montana, among other things. Smith acknowledged that Donahue sometimes
told him of the purpose for the money. Specifically, Smith testified that
6
Donahue told him at one time that he was using some of the money to pay his
daughter’s tuition to attend a private school.
This evidence, however, does not compel a finding that Smith actually
knew that Donahue violated the terms of the Trust by spending the money for
his own purposes, rather than to benefit his mother, Lillian. There is no
evidence that Smith actually knew the terms of the Trust documents. See
Farmers State Bank of Yuma v. Harmon, 778 F.2d 543, 546-47 (10th Cir.
1985) (third party could not claim that it lacked “actual knowledge” that
trustee exceeded powers where third party saw copy of trust instrument). Nor
is there any evidence that Smith actually knew that Lillian was the only
beneficiary during her lifetime. For all Smith knew, Donahue was also a trust
beneficiary, and/or the trust document expressly allowed trustees to engage in
self-dealing. We hold, therefore, that the evidence before the trial court did not
compel a finding that Smith actually knew that Donahue committed a breach
of trust either by entering into the 1996 agreement without his co-trustee’s
consent or by spending the money for his own purposes.
We acknowledge that the evidence may have supported a finding that
Smith had constructive knowledge that Donahue breached the trust because
he knew that Donahue was using at least some of the money for his own
purposes. See Restatement (Second) of Trusts, supra § 297 cmt. m (“[I]n a
transaction known to the transferee to be for the benefit of the transferor
personally, the transferee is chargeable with notice that the transfer is in
breach of trust.”). As previously discussed, however, constructive knowledge
was insufficient under RSA 564-A:7, I. Actual knowledge was required, and
the evidence does not mandate a finding that Smith had the necessary actual
knowledge.
II
Alternatively, the Trust argues that notwithstanding Smith’s lack of
actual knowledge, he is not entitled to specific performance under Restatement
(Second) of Trusts, supra § 310, which provides: “[I]f the trustee in breach of
trust makes a contract to sell, mortgage or otherwise dispose of trust property
to a third person, the third person cannot compel specific performance of the
contract, even though he had no notice of the trust at the time when the
contract was made and paid value before receiving such