THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-042
JENNIFER PHILBRICK & a.
v.
LIBERTY MUTUAL FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
Submitted: September 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 31, 2007
McGrath Law Firm, P.A., of Concord (Daniel J. Corley on the
memorandum of law), for the plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Andrew D. Dunn and
Holly J. Kilibarda on the brief), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. In this declaratory judgment action, the respondent,
Liberty Mutual Fire Insurance Company (Liberty Mutual), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
petitioners, J.P. and C.P., by their mother and natural guardian, Jennifer
Philbrick; Jennifer Philbrick and Shawn Philbrick, individually (the Philbricks);
and the intervenors, Donald and Cynthia Carrier (the Carriers). We reverse.
The record supports the following. According to the petition, in May
2004, the Carriers’ minor son sexually molested the Philbricks’ children while
he was babysitting them. The Philbricks subsequently brought a civil action
against the Carriers, alleging negligent supervision and negligent entrustment.
The Philbricks also brought claims against the Carriers’ son for loss of
consortium and assault and battery.
At the time of the molestation, the Carriers were insured under a
homeowner’s policy issued by Liberty Mutual. In response to the Philbricks’
action, the Carriers filed a claim with Liberty Mutual seeking coverage under
their policy. Liberty Mutual denied coverage on three grounds: (1) the events
that gave rise to the claim for coverage did not constitute an “occurrence” as
defined in the policy; (2) the policy excluded coverage for bodily injury
“expected or intended by one or more ‘insureds’”; and (3) the policy excluded
coverage for bodily injury “[a]rising out of sexual molestation.”
In response to Liberty Mutual’s denial, the Philbricks and Carriers jointly
filed a declaratory judgment action to determine the extent to which Liberty
Mutual was obligated to provide coverage. After the parties filed cross-motions
for summary judgment, the trial court granted summary judgment for the
Philbricks and Carriers, finding that the insurance policy covered the
negligence claims. The court concluded that the alleged negligent supervision
and negligent entrustment were “occurrences,” and that the intentional act and
sexual molestation exclusionary clauses were ambiguous and did not preclude
coverage.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party. Marikar v. Peerless Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 395,
397 (2004). If there is no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary
judgment is proper. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
Resolution of this dispute requires us to interpret the insurance policy.
Interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law. Peerless Ins. v. Vt.
Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 71, 72 (2004). We construe the language of an
insurance policy as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured
based upon a more than casual reading of the policy as a whole. Wilson v.
Progressive N. Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 782, 788 (2005). Where the terms of the
policy are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its natural and
ordinary meaning. Id. However, if the policy is reasonably susceptible to more
than one interpretation and one interpretation favors coverage, the policy will
be construed in favor of the insured and against the insurer. Id. Absent a
statutory provision or public policy to the contrary, an insurance company is
free to limit its liability through an exclusion written in clear and unambiguous
policy language. Trombley v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 148 N.H. 748, 751 (2002).
For exclusionary language to be considered clear and unambiguous, two
parties cannot reasonably disagree about its meaning. Id. Pursuant to RSA
2
491:22-a (1997), “the burden of proving lack of insurance coverage is on the
insurer.” Maville v. Peerless Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 317, 320 (1996).
On appeal, Liberty Mutual argues, inter alia, that the sexual molestation
exclusion unambiguously precludes coverage of the negligence claims asserted
against the Carriers. The Philbricks counter that the language of the exclusion
is ambiguous and, thus, should be construed in their favor. Additionally, the
Philbricks argue that it was the Carriers’ negligence that caused the children’s
injuries, rather than the sexual molestation, and thus the exclusionary clause
is inapplicable.
The sexual molestation exclusion bars coverage for “‘bodily injury’ or
‘property damage’ . . . [a]rising out of sexual molestation, corporal punishment
or physical or mental abuse . . . .” The Philbricks contend that this exclusion
is ambiguous as applied to the facts of this case. They assert, and the trial
court found, that a reasonable person could interpret the exclusion to preclude
coverage only where the insured is the perpetrator. As a result, the Philbricks
argue, their negligence claims against the Carriers remain covered under the
policy because the Carriers did not perpetrate the sexual molestation. We
disagree.
We have consistently interpreted the phrase “arising out of” as a “very
broad, general and comprehensive term, which . . . mean[s] ‘originating from or
growing out of or flowing from.’” Allstate Ins. Co. v. Crouch, 140 N.H. 329, 332
(1995) (quoting Merrimack School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140 N.H. 9,
13 (1995)). This means that “the causal connection between the [bodily injury
and the tort alleged] must be more than tenuous.” Pro Con Constr. v. Acadia
Ins. Co., 147 N.H. 470, 472 (2003). More specifically, we interpreted similar
exclusionary language in Preferred National Insurance Co. v. Docusearch, Inc.,
149 N.H. 759 (2003), contrary to the Philbricks’ arguments.
In Docusearch, the administratrix of the estate of a homicide victim sued
Docusearch for, among other things, causing the victim’s death by negligently
disseminating the victim’s social security number and place of employment to a
third party. Id. at 761. Docusearch’s insurance company sought a declaratory
judgment, arguing that it was under no obligation to defend or indemnify
Docusearch against the negligence claim because of a policy provision that
excluded coverage for “[a]ctions and proceedings to recover damages for bodily
injuries . . . arising from . . . assault and battery . . . .” Id. at 761-62. We
rejected the respondents’ assertion that, under this language, the insurance
company’s obligations were determined solely by the actions of the insured. Id.
at 763. Instead, we held that because damages are an essential part of a
negligence claim, “where the damages arise entirely out of an act that would
not be covered under an insurance policy, the negligence claim is not one that
would be covered under the policy.” Id. Because the respondents failed to
3
allege any damages other than those suffered by the victim as a result of the
assault and battery, we concluded that the assault and battery exclusion
precluded coverage. Id. at 764.
The Philbricks point out that other courts have reached different
conclusions in interpreting similar exclusions. One view holds that such an
exclusion does not bar coverage for a claim of negligent supervision because
such a claim “arises” not from sexual molestation, but from an insured’s
negligence. Not surprisingly, the Philbricks rely upon one such case, St. Paul
Fire & Marine Insurance Co. v. Schrum, 149 F.3d 878 (8th Cir. 1998). In
Schrum, after the Schrums’ houseguest sexually molested two minor children,
the children’s parents sued the Schrums for negligent supervision. Id. at 879.
The court held an exclusion in the Schrums’ insurance policy for “bodily injury
or property damage . . . arising out of any sexual act, including but not limited
to molestation, incest or rape” did not apply because the perpetrator’s alleged
conduct was “merely incidental” to the parents’ negligence claim, and the
allegations included “separate and non-excluded causes” of the children’s
injuries. Id. at 880-81.
Other courts have interpreted the phrase “arising out of” more broadly to
exclude claims having “some causal connection” to sexual molestation. See
American Commerce Ins. Co. v. Porto, 811 A.2d 1185, 1196 (R.I. 2002) (“if the
alleged sexual molestation is a cause of the claimed bodily injuries, then the
existence of other alleged negligence claims and proximate causes is of no
moment — the bodily injuries alleged are causally connected to or ‘arise out of’
the sexual molestation, and are thereby excluded from coverage”); Allstate Ins.
Co. v. Bates, 185 F. Supp. 2d 607, 613 (E.D.N.C. 2000) (explicitly rejecting the
conclusion reached in Schrum, reasoning that “[w]ithout the molestation there
would be no injury and thus, no basis for the negligence claim”); Hingham Mut.
Fire Ins. Co. v. Smith, 865 N.E.2d 1168, 1171-72 (Mass. App. Ct. 2007);
Northwest G.F. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Norgard, 518 N.W.2d 179, 184 (N.D. 1994).
The latter view is consistent with our holding in Docusearch. In
Docusearch, we rejected the argument that the assault and battery exclusion
did not apply to the negligence claim because the damages arose from the
insured’s negligence rather than the assault and battery. Docusearch, 149
N.H. at 763. Although we note that the language of the insurance policy in
Docusearch is slightly different from that in the instant case, the reasoning in
Docusearch fully applies. The language of the exclusion in Docusearch places
emphasis on whether the “actions and proceedings to recover damages” arose
from the assault and battery, whereas here, the language precludes coverage
for “‘bodily injury’ . . . [a]rising out of sexual molestation.” Particularly where,
as here, the language of the policy explicitly ties the exclusion to the nature of
the injury, the analysis should be directed toward the injuries suffered, rather
than the causes of action in the complaint. See Norgard, 518 N.W.2d at 184.
4
In both instances, however, the focus is upon whether the alleged harm arose
from an act excluded under the policy. Docusearch, 149 N.H. at 763. Here,
the damages alleged are the “bodily injury to the Philbrick children and
emotional distress for all plaintiffs.” There can be no doubt that these injuries
“originat[ed] from or gr[e]w[ ] out of or flow[ed] from” the sexual molestation.
See Crouch, 140 N.H. at 332. Although it can be argued that these injuries
may, in a sense, have been caused by the Carriers’ negligent acts, it does not
follow that these injuries did not “arise out of” sexual molestation. Indeed,
there would be no injuries and, therefore, no damages under the negligence
claims absent the sexual molestation. Thus, the alleged bodily injuries did
“arise out of” the excluded act of sexual molestation and, therefore, the
exclusion applies to preclude coverage. See also Winnacunnet v. National
Union, 84 F.3d 32, 36 (1st Cir. 1996) (“if underlying plaintiffs cannot prevail on
their negligence claims without showing how the murder . . . affected them,
then their claims must “arise out of” the excluded acts of assault, battery,
bodily injury and death”).
Given our conclusion, we need not consider whether the policy’s
intentional act exclusion applies. Accordingly, we find the trial court erred in
granting summary judgment to the Philbricks and Carriers and in denying
summary judgment to Liberty Mutual.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, J., concurred.
5