THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2007-072
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ANGEL COSME
Argued: January 17, 2008
Opinion Issued: March 20, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Angel Cosme, appeals his two
convictions for misdemeanor sexual assault, RSA 632-A:4 (2007), arguing that
the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) erred in denying his motion to strike the jury
panel. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the record. In April 2006, the defendant
was charged with one count of aggravated felonious sexual assault and two
counts of misdemeanor sexual assault. In August, he filed a motion to record
and to be present at the pretrial jury orientation because, he alleged, the trial
court had a practice of verbally instructing prospective jurors on legal concepts
and responding to questions of individual prospective jurors. Defense counsel
averred that he had been present at prior orientations during which the
presiding justice gave an instruction on reasonable doubt which deviated from
the Wentworth model, see State v. Wentworth, 118 N.H. 832 (1978), and
referenced the type of evidence that may be presented at trial. No action was
taken on the defendant’s motion until after the pool of prospective jurors had
already received orientation prior to jury selection.
During jury selection, the defendant moved to strike the jury panel based
upon Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, arguing that the
trial court’s practice of discussing legal concepts with prospective jurors during
orientation deprived him of both his right to be present for a critical stage of
the criminal process and the ability to raise and preserve substantive issues for
appellate review. The trial court denied the motion to strike. The trial
proceeded, and at the close of the evidence, the jury was instructed on the
applicable law. The jury returned guilty verdicts on the two misdemeanor
sexual assault charges and acquitted the defendant of the felony charge. This
appeal followed.
The defendant challenges our state’s practice for jury orientation; that is,
the process prior to criminal, civil or equitable proceedings when individuals
reporting for jury duty are first assembled in the courthouse but not yet
selected to potentially sit as a juror on any specific case. Jury orientation has
been a common practice among courts in the United States for some time. See,
e.g., State v. Vance, 250 S.E.2d 146, 151-52 (W. Va. 1978); State v. Delgado,
513 A.2d 701, 704 (Conn. App. Ct. 1986); Brown v. State, 349 A.2d 359, 362-
63 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1975), overruled on other grounds by Sims v. State, 573
A.2d 1317, 1322 (Md. 1990); Mele v. Becker, 134 N.W.2d 846, 847 (Mich. Ct.
App. 1965). When newly called jurors are first assembled to begin their term of
service, the trial court provides them with information and instructions about
the legal process, the system of advocacy and, at times, the meaning of certain
legal concepts they will confront should they be selected to sit on a case. See
Vance, 250 S.E.2d at 152. This practice is acknowledged as a means of
educating prospective jurors about their role and responsibilities in the
American legal system, as well as removing the shroud of mystery and relieving
any anxiety about their involvement in the process. See id.; Delgado, 513 A.2d
at 704. See generally ABA Standards Relating to Juror Use and Management
139-53 (Part D and Standard 16) (1993). Our state’s practice for jury
orientation includes a video presentation and an informal oral address by the
presiding judge followed by questions from the prospective jurors.
The defendant does not object to educating and orienting prospective
jurors. Rather, he contends that the trial court’s unrehearsed and unrecorded
interaction with the pool of prospective jurors outside the presence of the
2
defendant and his counsel, which may have included instructions of law,
violated his constitutional rights. He specifically relies upon Part I, Article 15
of the State Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to
the United States Constitution. We review questions of constitutional law de
novo. State v. Dupont, 155 N.H. 644, 645 (2007). We first address state
constitutional claims, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal
cases for guidance only, id. at 232-33.
“The defendant’s right under the State Constitution to be present at trial
derives from the specific guarantees set forth in part I, article 15 to produce all
favorable proofs, confront witnesses, and be fully heard in one’s defense, as
well as the right to due process.” State v. Hannan, 137 N.H. 612, 614 (1993)
(quotation omitted). This right attaches to any proceeding that constitutes a
critical stage of the criminal process set against the defendant. See Rushen v.
Spain, 464 U.S. 114, 117 (1983). Even when the defendant is not confronting
a witness or evidence, due process as guaranteed by Part I, Article 15 of the
State Constitution protects his right to be present “whenever the defendant’s
presence has a relation, reasonably substantial, to the fulness of his
opportunity to defend against the charge.” State v. Castle, 128 N.H. 649, 651
(1986) (quotation and brackets omitted); see United States v. Gagnon, 470 U.S.
522, 526 (1985). “The presence of a defendant is a condition of due process to
the extent that a fair and just hearing would be thwarted by his absence.”
Castle, 128 N.H. at 651 (quotation, brackets, and ellipsis omitted); Gagnon,
470 U.S. at 526.
The right to be present also encompasses the right to a record of ex parte
judicial communications with a juror made in the course of criminal
proceedings. See Castle, 128 N.H. at 651-52 (analysis of whether ex parte
discussion required to be recorded stemmed from defendant’s right to be
present during such discussion); Hannan, 137 N.H. at 614 (same). Preserving
a record and providing it to a defendant serves two purposes: “First, it grants
the defendant an opportunity to be heard and protects his right to trial by an
impartial jury by enabling him to respond to issues raised during discussions
conducted outside the presence of trial counsel.” Hannan, 137 N.H. at 614.
Second, the record permits appellate review of the discussion if the defendant
later challenges the trial court’s action, such as rejecting the defendant’s
request to excuse a juror. Id.
We have had occasion to review the right to be present, and the corollary
right to a record, in the context of ex parte judicial contact with jurors during
voir dire and after the commencement of trial. For example, we have held
constitutional the trial court’s practice, in cases other than first degree and
capital murder, of holding discussions on the record with individual venire
panelists that are outside of the hearing of counsel but are followed by a
recitation to counsel on the record of the substance of the discussion. Id.;
3
State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 416, 421 (1985). We have emphasized the
requirement for a record in such circumstances, stating that “we cannot think
of any statement made in the course of criminal proceedings before the court
that should not be subject to counsel’s absolute right to a record upon
request.” Bailey, 127 N.H. at 421. Thus, we have held that the refusal to
provide a record in such circumstance requires reversal unless it appears
beyond a reasonable doubt that the error was harmless. Id.; State v.
Brodowski, 135 N.H. 197, 202 (1991) (trial court must preserve record of ex
parte discussions with venire panelist even if such a record is not requested).
This standard applies if the trial court fails to notify counsel of an ex parte
communication with an empaneled juror or fails to record such discussion in
the first instance. Hannan, 137 N.H. at 614-15; see also Castle, 128 N.H. at
652-53 (ex parte communication with empaneled juror after trial concluded
and before deliberations began required reversal because court failed to record
the conversation and refused counsel’s request for voir dire).
The “mere occurrence of an ex parte conversation between a trial judge
and a juror does not constitute a deprivation of any constitutional right. The
defense has no constitutional right to be present at every interaction between a
judge and a juror, nor is there a constitutional right to have a court reporter
transcribe every such communication.” Gagnon, 470 U.S. at 526 (quotation
omitted; emphases added). Because neither the State nor the Federal
Constitution contains “any black letter requirements to conduct colloquies with
[jury] panelists [or prospective jurors] in the presence of counsel or on the
record[,] [t]hese issues . . . call for judgments about the procedures that are
reasonably necessary to promote the objective of ensuring fairness and
impartiality among jurors.” Bailey, 127 N.H. at 421.
Jury orientation is not the type of proceeding that triggers a criminal
defendant’s right to be present or right to a record under Part I, Article 15 of
our State Constitution. Judicial commentary during orientation is not the
same as communication during jury selection, while a trial is in progress, or at
some point prior to the rendering of a verdict because such commentary is not
made in the course of criminal proceedings against any specific defendant. Cf.
id. at 421 (judicial statement made to jurors “in the course of criminal
proceedings,” such as jury voir dire, is subject to defendant’s right to a record);
see Delgado, 513 A.2d at 704 (distinguishing ex parte judicial remarks made
during orientation from those made to empaneled juror). No specific case,
whether civil or criminal, nor any specific defendant, is presented to the pool of
prospective jurors. The jury pool is not informed of any specific facts or
witnesses, nor asked to assess any specific personal prejudice they may have
against a witness, a party, or specific type of factual scenario, civil claim or
criminal charge.
4
Likewise, a defendant’s presence at orientation, either personally or
through legal counsel, would not provide him with any meaningful opportunity
to defend against the charges pending against him because during orientation
no specific case is ever discussed. Cf. Snyder v. Massachusetts, 291 U.S. 97,
106 (1934) (right to be present implicated when proceeding involves confronting
accuser, cross-examining witnesses, examining jurors, and heeding factual
summation of counsel). A defendant has no constitutional right to be present
when his presence would otherwise “be useless, or the benefit but a shadow.”
Id. at 106-07.
Jury orientation simply provides an opportunity for prospective jurors to
be informed about the legal process and generally educated about legal
concepts they will later face should they be chosen to sit on a case. Therefore,
we conclude that orientation of prospective jurors is not a critical stage of
criminal proceedings instituted against a defendant, and does not bear the
hallmarks of a proceeding in which his presence is necessary to preserve his
ability to defend against pending criminal charges. See Vance, 250 S.E.2d at
151; Delgado, 513 A.2d at 704-05; Brown, 349 A.2d at 363. Accordingly, the
defendant had no right to be present. Because the right to require a record is
derived from the right to be present in this case, see Castle, 128 N.H. at 651-
52, we conclude that failure to record the orientation proceeding also caused
no constitutional infringement.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Hannan, 137 N.H.
at 614; Castle, 128 N.H. at 651; Rushen, 464 U.S. at 117; Gagnon, 470 U.S. at
526. Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as
we do under the State Constitution.
We acknowledge, nevertheless, that a defendant’s right to a fair and
impartial jury may be potentially threatened, to some degree, whenever a trial
judge engages in ex parte communications with prospective jurors. See Vance,
250 S.E.2d at 151-52 (though pretrial orientation meeting not a critical stage,
court acknowledged possible threat to defendant’s constitutional right to fair
and impartial jury); Delgado, 513 A.2d at 705 n.4 (acknowledging that
instances may arise in which a grossly erroneous statement compromises right
to fair trial). “That a trial judge might commit a slip of the tongue or make an
erroneous statement of law is not disputable.” Vance, 250 S.E.2d at 152. Ex
parte judicial commentary during orientation warrants reversal, however, only
if the fairness of the proceeding or the impartiality of the jury is compromised
to the extent that the defendant suffers actual prejudice. See Mele, 134
N.W.2d at 848-49 (while certain orientation remarks would have been better
left unsaid, no prejudice to defendant’s case shown); State v. Aikins, 932 P.2d
408, 428 (Kan. 1997) (while judicial remark on reasonable doubt during jury
orientation was questionable, record did not show that defendant suffered
5
actual prejudice); see also State v. Mussey, 153 N.H. 272, 280 (2006) (whether
impermissible remark by prosecutor justifies reversal of verdict depends in part
upon whether it likely could have affected outcome of case). We emphasize,
however, that the “mere possibility of prejudice from a remark of the judge is
not sufficient to overturn a verdict or judgment.” Aikins, 932 P.2d at 428
(quotation omitted).
Obviously, because the orientation at issue in this appeal was not
recorded, we cannot review the propriety of the actual statements made by the
trial judge. However, the trial court in this case informed counsel of its regular
practice; namely, that:
in addition to the video . . . it is the practice of this Court,
and I believe just about every court in the state, every trial
court in the state or jury court in the state, that we go in
after and answer questions, and we make - - we sort of make
you feel better, we supplement somewhat the - - what’s on
the video and we answer questions. I did that in this case,
and that’s just for the record.
See Delgado, 513 A.2d at 703 (reviewing trial court’s reconstructed remarks
made during jury orientation). Notably, the defendant did not inquire about
the particular substance of the court’s communication with the jury pool, and
there is no indication from the court’s recitation that it made any statements
about the law, flawed or otherwise, when supplementing the video or
responding to questions.
Moreover, based upon the record before us, the defendant has failed to
meet his burden of establishing that he suffered any actual prejudice. Indeed,
the possibility of the survival of any prejudice is so slight as to give it no
constitutional significance. See id. at 704. Orientation occurred sometime
between one and two weeks prior to trial, the trial was conducted over the
course of two days, and the trial court instructed the jury on the law applicable
to the case just prior to deliberations, without objection. In its instructions,
the court explained the nature of direct and circumstantial evidence, including
the standard of proof required concerning both, and also defined the concept of
reasonable doubt, all without objection. Further, the trial court directed that,
“You will decide the case by applying the law that I give to you to the facts as
you find them to be,” and also provided the jury with a written copy of the
instructions to rely upon during deliberations. Jurors are presumed to follow
the court’s instructions, see State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 513 (2006), cert.
denied, 128 S. Ct. 63 (2007), and we conclude that average jurors are able to
understand that they are bound to follow the law as instructed to them at the
close of the case and provided in written form. To the extent the jury could
have been confused by any chance discrepancy between statements made
6
during orientation and the jury instructions, they had a means of seeking
clarification. Namely, the trial court instructed them on how to pose any
questions that may have arisen during deliberations. Accordingly, we conclude
that the record reveals no meaningful likelihood that the trial court made any
statement during orientation that compromised the fairness of the trial and the
impartiality of the jury, causing the defendant to suffer actual prejudice.
On a prospective basis, in order to curtail the possibility of compromising
the fairness of trial proceedings and jury impartiality, specific procedures
governing the interaction between the trial court and prospective jurors during
jury orientation should be accomplished through rulemaking. See Sup. Ct. R.
51(A)(1)(b); State v. Abram, 153 N.H. 619, 627-28 (2006).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7