THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2007-423
CLARK & LAVEY BENEFITS SOLUTIONS, INC.
v.
EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT CENTER, INC.
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 2, 2008
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R.
Schulman and Dona Feeney on the brief, and Mr. Shulman orally), for the
plaintiff.
Michael J. Sheehan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC),
appeals, and the plaintiff, Clark & Lavey Benefits Solutions, Inc. (C&L), cross-
appeals, from rulings of the Trial Court (Groff, J.). We affirm.
The record discloses the following facts. C&L was formed in 1997 to
broker group insurance policies for companies that sponsor employee benefit
plans. EDC is a not-for-profit corporation dedicated primarily to “applied
research in education and public health awareness.” In 1997, EDC hired C&L
as its insurance broker. Pursuant to the parties’ contract, C&L was paid solely
from commissions built into the premiums paid by EDC to the insurance
carriers it selected with C&L’s help.
In 2004, EDC’s benefits manager began reviewing the commissions paid
to C&L, and compared the rates to the “standard” brokerage commission rates
paid by its health and dental carriers. He determined that because the rates
paid to C&L were higher than the “standard” rates, he would negotiate with
C&L to recover the difference. Despite the parties’ negotiations, and EDC’s
continuing use of C&L’s services throughout 2004, EDC terminated C&L as its
broker in 2005.
In April 2005, C&L sued EDC and EDC counterclaimed against C&L.
Following trial, a jury found C&L liable to EDC for breach of a fiduciary duty
and for intentional misrepresentations and awarded EDC $70,000 in damages.
However, the jury also found EDC liable to C&L for breach of contract and
negligent and intentional misrepresentations, and awarded C&L $112,000 in
damages. After the trial ended, EDC filed a motion seeking forfeiture of all
commissions C&L had earned since 1998, which the trial court denied.
EDC appeals, arguing that certain jury instructions were erroneous and
that the trial court erred in denying its forfeiture motion. C&L cross-appeals
from the trial court’s denial of its motion for a directed verdict on EDC’s claims
for breach of contract and misrepresentation. We address each argument in
turn.
When EDC counterclaimed, it alleged, in part, that C&L had breached
the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93A,
by failing to disclose the “standard” brokerage commission rates paid by the
carriers it selected. According to EDC, had C&L disclosed those rates, that
information would have influenced EDC’s decision to use C&L’s services. EDC
contends that the trial court erroneously instructed the jury on the elements of
this claim.
“The purpose of jury instructions is to identify issues of material fact,
and to inform the jury of the appropriate standards of law by which it is to
resolve them.” Transmedia Restaurant Co. v. Devereaux, 149 N.H. 454, 457
(2003) (quotation omitted). We review jury instructions in context and will not
reverse unless the charge, taken in its entirety, fails to adequately explain the
law applicable to the case in such a way that the jury is misled. Id.
Relative to the MCPA claim, the trial court instructed the jury that:
In order to recover under a claim for violation of the Consumer
Protection Act, EDC must prove, one, that Clark and Lavey
committed an unfair and deceptive trade practice by failing to
disclose to EDC the established broker commission rates for the
sale of the insurance carrier’s policies; two, that disclosure of these
2
standard commission rates may have influenced EDC not to enter
into the transaction of designating Clark and Lavey as its broker
for the purchase of these policies; and, three, that as a result of
this conduct by Clark and Lavey EDC suffered pecuniary loss.
In order to constitute an unfair and deceptive trade practice
under the act, Clark and Lavey’s conduct must obtain a level of
rascality that would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to the
rough and tumble world of commerce or be at least within the
penumbra of some established concept of unfairness or whether it
is immoral, unethical, oppressive, or unscrupulous.
According to EDC, under the MCPA, the failure to disclose, in itself, is a
violation and reference to the “rascality” standard was unnecessary and
erroneous. Alternatively, EDC argues that if some reference to a subjective
standard was proper, the “rascality” standard is not the correct standard. C&L
counters that the issue has not been preserved for appeal, or, if it has, the
instruction was not erroneous.
We address first whether the argument has been preserved. “A
contemporaneous objection is necessary to preserve a jury instruction issue for
appellate review.” Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H. 393, 402 (2003) (quotation
omitted). Without a contemporaneous objection, the trial court is not afforded
the opportunity to correct an error it may have made. Id. “This long-standing
requirement is grounded in common sense and judicial economy, and applies
equally to civil and criminal matters.” Devereaux, 149 N.H. at 457. EDC did
not make, and does not contend that it made, any objection at the time the
instruction was given to the jury, despite having the opportunity to do so.
Instead, EDC argues that during an on-the-record conference with the trial
court to discuss the instructions proposed by the trial court, it objected to the
use of the “rascality” language.
During the conference, C&L raised objections to the wording of the
proposed instruction, and, after some discussion, the parties agreed to work
out an instruction to submit to the court. The parties, however, could not
agree on an instruction and further discussed the matter with the trial court.
The following discussion ensued between the trial judge and EDC’s counsel:
[EDC]: As it’s been presented, Your Honor, I think the difference is
whether we’re going to go from the definition from the CMR [Code
of Massachusetts Regulations] to the information about rascality
and then the application to the facts. What I’ve suggested is that
we go the CMR definition and then say EDC must prove, and use
the language that you’ve already given us, and then say in addition
you must find that this behavior reached a level of – to use the
word – rascality from the thing such that would shock the
3
conscience, and then you can find that – what worries me is that
we insert that term which EDC doesn’t agree is applicable in the
failure to disclose context before we’ve applied the CMR regulation
to the facts.
THE COURT: I guess I’ll come up with something then.
(Emphasis added.) The issue was revisited later in the discussion during the
following interaction:
THE COURT: And what – what you want is this rascality stuff
down back where it belongs; right?
[EDC]: Yes, Your Honor. And I was proposing as – you know, just
as an alternative that you say in addition to finding the above – I
think that CMR thing is a gating question, and then you also have
to find something. I don’t think we –
THE COURT: All right.
[EDC]: – we agree that that’s the appropriate language, but at
least we’re willing to live with it.
THE COURT: Well, I’ll write something up, and everybody will live
with it, I guess.
[EDC]: Yes, we will. Thank you.
EDC contends that these statements were sufficient to record its objections to
the instruction, and does not point to any place in the record where any other
objection was made. We do not agree that EDC raised an objection sufficient to
preserve the issue for our review.
First, to the extent EDC could be said to have raised an objection, such
objection appears to be to the order in which the portions of the instruction
would be given, and not to the inclusion of the “rascality” language. Indeed, it
appears the trial court so understood the objection as evidenced by the judge
attempting to clarify that EDC wanted “this rascality stuff down back where it
belongs.” Thus, it was the placement of the language in the instruction upon
which the trial court based its decision, and not the language itself. See id. at
458 (trial judge ruled upon what it understood the objection to be, and it was
clear from the record that the objection claimed on appeal was not the one
upon which the trial court ruled).
Additionally, the trial court concluded by stating that it would craft an
instruction to be delivered later. As such, any objections arguably raised by
EDC were to the proposed instructions, which the trial court made clear were
not final. EDC did not object to the instruction the trial court ultimately
delivered. For these reasons, we conclude that EDC did not make an objection
sufficient to preserve the matter for appeal.
4
EDC contends that even if it did not preserve the issue, we may still
consider it under our plain error analysis. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. C&L
contends, relying upon federal law, that plain error review of the jury
instruction is not available because EDC made a “true waiver” by intentionally
relinquishing a known right. See, e.g., Chestnut v. City of Lowell, 305 F.3d 18,
20 (1st Cir. 2002); United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993). In the
plain error context, however, we have not adopted the “true waiver” analysis,
and C&L does not argue that we ought to do so here. Accordingly, we express
no opinion on whether EDC made a “true waiver” of the plain error argument,
and we will consider whether the trial court’s instruction constituted plain
error.
The plain error rule allows us to consider errors not brought to the
attention of the trial court. Cloutier v. City of Berlin, 154 N.H. 13, 25 (2006).
However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to those
circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id.
“For us to find error under the rule: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error
must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error
must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Id. (quotation omitted). Here, even assuming the trial court’s
instruction was in error, we do not find the error plain.
We have recently stated that in the context of our plain error analysis,
“plain” is synonymous with “clear” or, equivalently, “obvious.” State v. Lopez,
156 N.H. 416, 424 (2007). An error is plain if it was or should have been
“obvious” in the sense that the governing law was clearly settled to the
contrary. Id. “Generally, when the law is not clear at the time of trial, and
remains unsettled at the time of appeal, a decision by the trial court cannot be
plain error.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Citing Massachusetts Employers Insurance Exchange v. Propac-Mass,
Inc., 648 N.E.2d 435, 438 (Mass. 1995), EDC contends that the trial court’s
instruction was plainly erroneous because the Massachusetts Supreme
Judicial Court abandoned the use of the “rascality” analysis in MCPA cases in
1995. Although in Propac-Mass the Supreme Judicial Court stated that it
found phrases such as “level of rascality” to be “uninstructive,” id., it stopped
short of abandoning the term. As a result, federal courts applying
Massachusetts law have continued to use the “rascality” analysis. See J.E.
Pierce Apothecary v. Harvard Pilgrim Health, 365 F. Supp. 2d 119, 143 n.13
(D. Mass. 2005); see also Boyle v. Douglas Dynamics, LLC, 292 F. Supp. 2d
198, 218 (D. Mass. 2003). Moreover, as pointed out by C&L, some
Massachusetts trial courts, despite the opinion of the Supreme Judicial Court,
have continued to rely upon the “rascality” standard. See, e.g., AAA Climbers,
Inc. v. Above Grade Dev. Corp., No. Civ. 04-483, 2007 WL 2935412, at *3
(Mass. Super. Ct. 2007); Winlake II, Inc. v. Mercier, No. MICV20050043C, 2006
5
WL 1360855, at *9 (Mass. Super. Ct. 2006). While EDC contends that such
reliance is “misguided” because those courts “erroneously include[d] the
rascality language,” it suffices to demonstrate that the law in Massachusetts is
not clearly settled. As the law is not clearly settled, we cannot say that
including the language in the jury instruction amounted to plain error.
The parties’ remaining claims on appeal relate to the contention that
C&L breached a fiduciary duty owed to EDC. C&L argues that it did not owe a
fiduciary duty to EDC, and, therefore, the trial court erred in denying its
motion for a directed verdict. EDC argues that following the jury’s
determination that C&L breached its fiduciary duty, the trial court erred in
denying its motion for forfeiture.
Prior to closing arguments, C&L moved for a directed verdict arguing, in
part, that the evidence showed the parties to have an ordinary commercial
relationship. Therefore, C&L contended, it did not owe EDC a fiduciary duty.
The trial court denied the motion because it concluded that a reasonable jury
could find that such a duty existed.
“A trial court may grant a motion for a directed verdict only if it
determines, after considering the evidence and construing all inferences
therefrom most favorably to the non-moving party, that no rational juror could
conclude that the non-moving party is entitled to any relief.” Ward v.
Inishmaan Assocs. Ltd. P’ship, 156 N.H. 22, 24 (2007) (quotation omitted). The
trial court may not weigh the evidence or judge the credibility of witnesses and
should deny the motion for a directed verdict unless it can affirmatively
determine that the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief on the evidence
presented. Emerson v. Bentwood, 146 N.H. 251, 253 (2001). “We will uphold a
trial court’s ruling on a motion for a directed verdict when the record supports
the conclusion that the trial court did not commit an unsustainable exercise of
discretion.” Ward, 156 N.H. at 24 (quotation omitted).
In this state, “fiduciary relationship” has been defined comprehensively,
and exists wherever influence has been acquired and abused or confidence has
been reposed and betrayed. Brzica v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, 147 N.H.
443, 447 (2002). A fiduciary relationship exists between two persons when one
has gained the confidence of the other and purports to act or advise with the
other’s interest in mind. Id. at 447-48. “Once a person becomes a fiduciary,
the law places him in the role of a moral person and pressures him to behave
in a selfless fashion while contract law does not go beyond the morals of the
market place where self-interest is the norm.” Id. at 448.
C&L argues that insurance brokers do not, generally, owe a fiduciary
duty to their clients. More specifically, C&L contends that the parties’
relationship was that of an ordinary broker and client, bound by the norms of
6
contract law, and not a fiduciary relationship requiring it to act in the interests
of EDC. According to C&L, there is no evidence that it performed differently
than any other insurance broker or that by its actions it created a fiduciary
relationship. C&L argues that any representations it made were mere
advertising puffery that cannot, as a matter of law, create a fiduciary
relationship.
EDC does not argue that insurance brokers, as a general matter, owe
fiduciary duties to their clients; nor does it argue that such a relationship
would exist in all cases. EDC contends only that in this case, there was
sufficient evidence of a fiduciary relationship that the trial court did not err in
denying C&L’s motion for a directed verdict.
We observe first that during discussions about the jury instructions prior
to the close of the evidence, C&L’s counsel conceded that when C&L advertised
that it owed a “fiduciary responsibility” to its clients, such advertising “might
create a question of fact for the jury.” He further stated that “the jury would
need to determine whether they’re just an insurance broker or an insurance
broker plus.” Thus, prior to moving for a directed verdict, C&L acknowledged
that its advertising materials could create a question for the jury about the
existence of a fiduciary relationship.
Furthermore, while C&L’s advertising, in itself, might not be enough to
demonstrate the existence of a fiduciary relationship, C&L’s president, Paul
Clark, testified that he understood the use of the term “fiduciary” in his
company’s advertising materials to mean that C&L would put its clients’
interests first. He then testified to several instances when C&L placed the
welfare of EDC before its own interests. Further, EDC’s former director of
human resources, Christine Connors, testified that at the time C&L was hired,
she understood it was supposed to work for EDC’s best interests, and that
EDC relied upon C&L to disclose everything it needed to know about its
insurance needs. We believe this evidence and the inferences therefrom,
considered most favorably to EDC, would be sufficient for a rational juror to
conclude that C&L had a fiduciary relationship with EDC. Accordingly, the
trial court’s denial of C&L’s motion for a directed verdict was not an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, EDC argues that the trial court erroneously denied its post-trial
motion for forfeiture. In that motion, EDC argued that since C&L was
determined to have breached a fiduciary duty, it was not entitled to any of the
commissions it had earned from EDC’s contracts since 1998.
In its pleadings, EDC did not raise a specific claim for forfeiture of all
commissions earned by C&L. Further, during trial EDC maintained that the
damages it sought from C&L were for the difference between the commissions
7
paid to C&L, and those which would have been paid pursuant to the
“standard” rates. In fact, in its closing arguments to the jury, EDC argued that
it was seeking only the difference between the “standard” commissions and
those actually paid to C&L. EDC did not request an instruction on the issue of
forfeiture, and did not object to the lack of such an instruction. Only after the
trial had ended did EDC claim that it was entitled to recover such damages.
Accordingly, C&L was never put on notice that it had to defend against such a
claim. In these circumstances, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
denying EDC’s post-trial forfeiture motion. See Thompson v. C&C Research &
Dev., 153 N.H. 446, 451-52 (2006).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8