THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack County Probate Court
No. 2007-387
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF G.S.
Argued: May 22, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 11, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (John C. Vinson, attorney, on the
memorandum of law, and Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant attorney
general, orally), for the New Hampshire Department of Corrections.
Mosca Law Office, of Manchester (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the appellant.
HICKS, J. The appellant, G.S., appeals from the order of the Merrimack
County Probate Court (Hampe, J.) appointing a guardian over his person. We
affirm.
The record supports the following. G.S. was serving a sentence at the
Northern Correctional Facility (NCF) when he began to display delusional
behavior. He was transferred to the Secure Psychiatric Unit (SPU) on or
around December 21, 2005, because of his increasingly “paranoid, irritable
[and] uncooperative” behavior and his refusal to comply with “treatment and
attempts to work through prescriptions or treatment for discharge.”
At the SPU, his delusional behavior intensified. G.S. refused medical
testing, including testing for contagious diseases, out of fear that the tests
might be poisoned or tampered with in some way by the prison staff. When
prison meals were delivered to his cell, he expressed similar fears of tampering
and often stored food in his cell until it spoiled and was discovered by prison
staff. Additionally, G.S. expressed a fear that certain correctional officers
intended to harm him. He refused to leave his cell when those staff members
were on duty, resisted their efforts to maintain control over him and threatened
to assault them.
G.S. was diagnosed with delusional disorder. He does not agree with his
diagnosis, however, and refuses to participate in mental health treatment
because he is adamant that he does not have a “mental condition that requires
treatment.” Because the SPU staff feared that G.S.’s continued refusal to
acknowledge his mental illness and cooperate with the treatment team’s
recommended treatment plan was likely to result in harm to his health and
safety, the New Hampshire Department of Corrections (DOC) filed a petition for
guardian of incapacitated person on May 12, 2006.
At the hearing on the petition, the probate court heard testimony from
G.S.’s treatment team. The director of the SPU, James Knoll, M.D.; G.S.’s
treating psychiatrist at the SPU, Marcosa Santiago, M.D.; and a court-
appointed psychologist, Eric Mart, Ph.D., testified that G.S. suffers from
delusional disorder and does not believe that he has a mental illness.
Furthermore, these mental health professionals agreed that G.S.’s delusional
disorder impairs his ability to make informed decisions about his mental health
care. Additionally, the court heard testimony about G.S.’s mental health and
behavior at the SPU from Louise Coulombe, R.N, a nurse at the SPU; Nancy
Denu, Senior Psychiatric Social Worker at the SPU; Heidi Guinen, Senior
Psychiatric Social Worker at the NCF; and G.S.
On May 4, 2007, the probate court found, pursuant to RSA 464-A:9, III
(2004) that G.S. was incapacitated and appointed the office of public guardian
as guardian over his person. In the guardianship order, the court rendered the
four findings required by RSA 464-A:9, III (a)-(d); namely:
(a) The person for whom a guardian is to be appointed
is incapacitated; and
(b) The guardianship is necessary as a means of
providing continuing care, supervision, and
rehabilitation of the individual, or the management of
the property and financial affairs of the incapacitated
person; and
(c) There are no available alternative resources which
are suitable with respect to the incapacitated person’s
welfare, safety, and rehabilitation or the prudent
2
management of his or her property and financial
affairs; and
(d) The guardianship is appropriate as the least
restrictive form of intervention consistent with the
preservation of the civil rights and liberties of the
proposed ward.
Additionally, the court determined that:
[N]otwithstanding [G.S.’s] obvious intelligence, he is
suffering from a mental illness, Delusional Disorder,
which prevents him from making informed decisions
regarding his health care decisions and makes him
unable to provide for his health care.
He has suffered and will continue to suffer substantial
harm because his incapacity has resulted and will
continue to result in his incarceration in the most
restricted unit of the secure psychiatric unit.
On appeal, G.S. contends that the probate court’s finding of incapacity is
erroneous because the court equated “substantial harm” in RSA 464-A:2, XI
(2004) with his continued assignment “in the most restricted unit of the secure
psychiatric unit,” as opposed to assignment to a less restrictive level.
Additionally, G.S. argues that the probate court erred in finding that the
evidence demonstrates beyond a reasonable doubt that he is incapacitated and
that no less restrictive alternative to guardianship exists.
We begin by considering the probate court’s interpretation of the phrase
“substantial harm” and its subsequent finding of incapacity. “Incapacity” is
defined as a
legal, not a medical, disability and [is] measured by
functional limitations. It shall be construed to mean
or refer to any person who has suffered, is suffering or
is likely to suffer substantial harm due to an inability
to provide for his personal needs for food, clothing,
shelter, health care or safety.
RSA 464-A:2, XI.
G.S. maintains that the “substantial harm” contemplated by RSA 464-
A:2, XI is limited to harm resulting from an inability to provide for one’s
“personal needs for food, clothing, shelter, health care or safety.” RSA 464-A:2,
3
XI. G.S. contends that since the court’s finding of incapacity was not based
upon one of the defined categories of harm outlined in the statute and was
instead rooted in his continued incarceration in the most restrictive unit of the
SPU, it was erroneous.
We disagree, however, with G.S.’s characterization of the probate court’s
decision. The court specifically found that G.S.’s mental illness “prevents him
from making informed decisions regarding his health care decisions and makes
him unable to provide for his health care.” This express finding demonstrates
that the probate court considered the factors delineated in RSA 464-A:2, XI
and made a determination of incapacity based, in part, upon the harm that
would likely result from G.S.’s inability to make informed health care decisions.
Additionally, “[n]othing in the plain language of the statute requires that
the probate court provide written illumination of all facts used in making its
ultimate findings with regard to paragraph III (a) through (d).” In re
Guardianship of Kapitula, 153 N.H. 492, 495 (2006). In the instant case, the
fact that the probate court explicitly mentioned G.S.’s confinement in the most
restrictive unit of the SPU and the detrimental effect that his mental illness has
on his health care decisions does not mean that it “implicitly rejected” all other
evidence of incapacity, as G.S. contends. Accordingly, we are not persuaded
that the probate court erroneously interpreted the guardianship statute.
We next consider whether the evidence supports the probate court’s
findings beyond a reasonable doubt that G.S. is incapacitated and that no less
restrictive alternative to guardianship exists. “Because [G.S.] challenges the
sufficiency of the evidence,” “[o]ur task is to review the record to determine
whether it supports the probate court’s finding that the guardian proved these
statutory components beyond a reasonable doubt.” In re Guardianship of E.L.,
154 N.H. 292, 296 (2006). During this assessment, “we examine whether the
probate court’s actual or implicit factual findings on the statutory components
required for guardianship are reasonably supported by competent evidence.”
Id. However, we “defer to a trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving
conflicts in testimony, measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining
the weight to be given to testimony.” In re Guardianship of Kapitula, 153 N.H.
at 497. “The findings of fact of the judge of probate are final unless they are so
plainly erroneous that such findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-
A:4 (2007). Therefore, “we do not reweigh the evidence to determine whether
we would have ruled differently.” In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 296.
We first turn to whether the evidence supports the probate court’s
finding beyond a reasonable doubt that G.S. is incapacitated. The record
contains competent evidence to support the conclusion that G.S. is likely to
suffer “substantial harm due to [his] inability to provide for his personal needs
for . . . health care [and] safety.” RSA 464-A:2, XI.
4
Knoll, Santiago and Mart all testified that G.S. suffers from a psychiatric
illness known as delusional disorder. They agreed that he is unable to weigh
the competing risks involved with accepting or rejecting treatment for this
condition because “he’s proceeding from a false premise,” as he does not
believe that he suffers from this mental disease. Knoll testified that when he
initiates conversations with G.S. about his mental health treatment, G.S.
“becomes extremely irate and the conversation . . . deteriorates.”
Although G.S. refuses to acknowledge his diagnosis, he complained to
his treatment team of stress and anxiety and was prescribed Vistaril for these
symptoms. Mart explained, however, that G.S. stopped taking the medication
because of a delusional belief that it was being tampered with by prison staff.
Although G.S. was told that different shapes and sizes of the same medication
might be delivered to him because the prison bought different lots of generic
medications, his paranoia impeded his ability to believe this rational
explanation and he now refuses to take this medication.
Santiago testified that in her professional opinion, G.S.’s delusional
disorder would benefit from medication. She explained that antipsychotic
medication, in low doses, would effectively treat G.S.’s paranoia. Despite the
availability of treatments for this mental illness, Coulombe indicated that prior
to the filing of the guardianship petition, G.S.’s condition had deteriorated
because of his refusal to work with the SPU treatment team. Knoll and
Santiago both testified that G.S. is likely to suffer substantial harm due to his
inability to make informed health care decisions. Knoll explained that this
harm is likely to occur in the absence of a medical guardian because G.S. is
undergoing “a slow, gradual progression of worsening paranoid symptoms and
refusal of medical care.”
In addition to the deterioration of his mental health, evidence in the
record permits a reasonable person to conclude that G.S.’s physical health is
likely to suffer substantial harm. G.S. refuses to take a tuberculosis test
despite his elevated risk of contracting this disease by living in a prison setting
and the prison requirement that he take the test in order to leave the SPU and
move up in levels of privilege in the prison. Additionally, G.S. refuses to be
tested for hepatitis A, B or C, or allow the treatment team to perform lab work
for fear that the blood extracted might be used in some malevolent way.
Santiago testified that G.S.’s continued refusal to take lab tests might
negatively affect his medical health because blood tests uncover dangerous
cholesterol or blood sugar levels.
Furthermore, G.S. suffers from chronic back pain and has been taking
ibuprofen “consistently for quite some time.” Coulombe testified that G.S. used
the drug “every day, two, three times a day.” Since ibuprofen can be toxic to
5
one’s liver and cause kidney damage, Santiago was concerned about these
potential side effects. His doctor requested that G.S. submit to lab work before
renewing the prescription. As G.S. refused to comply with the request for lab
work, he is no longer entitled to receive this pain medication. Moreover, the
effect that his prolonged use of this drug has had on his liver and kidneys is
currently unknown.
The record also demonstrates that G.S.’s paranoid delusions endanger
his safety. When asked about the effect that G.S.’s illness has had on his
safety, Knoll testified that “it’s abundantly clear that his paranoia increases
[the] risk” to his safety. Santiago testified that G.S. “acts in . . . a defensive way
because of his paranoid ideation.” Santiago and Coulombe both explained
that the defensive behavior that G.S. exhibits as a result of his delusions puts
his personal safety in jeopardy because he misperceives the intentions of
correctional officers and becomes “very resistive and . . . pull[s] away from the
officers.” When G.S. pulls away from the officers, “[h]e’s usually handcuffed in
the back.” Pulling away in this manner affects the tension in the handcuffs
and “cause[s] him pain.”
Finally, G.S.’s refusal to submit to a tuberculosis test forces the staff to
keep him confined in the most secure unit in the SPU. He is restricted to his
cell for approximately 23 hours a day, isolated from the general population and
is prohibited from moving up in levels of privilege within the prison. By
continuing to reject treatment, G.S. is negatively affecting his eligibility for
parole and may serve the maximum for his sentence. The probate court found
that G.S. “has suffered and will continue to suffer substantial harm because
his incapacity has resulted and will continue to result in his incarceration in
the most restricted unit of the secure psychiatric unit.” We need not decide
whether, in isolation, this level of restriction could support the imposition of a
guardianship; in this case, it is relevant evidence of the substantial harm that
G.S. is suffering and lends support to the probate court’s ultimate holding.
The record contains evidence of the deterioration of G.S.’s mental health,
the negative effect that his mental illness has on his health care decisions, and
the risk to his safety that results from his paranoid delusions. We conclude
that the record, considered in its entirety, supports the probate court’s finding
of incapacity beyond a reasonable doubt.
Lastly, we consider whether the DOC sustained its burden of proving
beyond a reasonable doubt that no less restrictive alternative to guardianship
exists. In addition to establishing G.S.’s incapacity, in order for a guardianship
to be imposed, the record must support beyond a reasonable doubt that “no
available alternative resources exist that are suitable to [G.S.’s] needs, and
[that] guardianship is the least restrictive form of intervention.” In re
Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 302 (citation omitted).
6
“Available alternative resource” is defined to mean “alternatives to
guardianship including, but not limited to, services such as visiting nurses,
homemakers, home health aides, adult day care and multipurpose senior
citizen centers; powers of attorney, representative and protective payees; and
board and care residential care facilities.” RSA 464-A:2, II (2004). “Least
restrictive form of intervention” is defined to mean “that the guardianship
imposed on the ward represents only those limitations necessary to provide
him or her with needed care and rehabilitative services, and that the ward shall
enjoy the greatest amount of personal freedom and civil liberties consistent
with his or her mental and physical limitations.” RSA 464-A:2, XIV (2004). We
conclude that there is sufficient evidence to support the probate court’s
rejection of the alternatives to guardianship.
When Santiago was asked whether there are any less restrictive
alternatives to guardianship in her opinion, she responded that there is
“[n]othing less restrictive than a guardianship.” This testimony was
uncontroverted. Moreover, in light of G.S.’s confinement in the SPU at the New
Hampshire State Prison, many alternatives listed in RSA 464-A:2, II are not
viable options. Furthermore, when an individual has limited insight into his
mental illness and has impaired judgment regarding his need for medication,
we have held that the individual “is not an appropriate candidate for a
springing guardianship or a health care power of attorney.” In re Guardianship
of E.L., 154 N.H. at 303.
In sum, taking the evidence as a whole, we conclude that it was not
unreasonable for the probate court to find beyond a reasonable doubt that no
less restrictive alternative to guardianship exists. Accordingly, we hold that the
evidence in the record supports the probate court’s guardianship order.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
7