THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2007-225
PAUL MCNAMARA & a.
v.
BARRY R. HERSH & a.
Argued: January 31, 2008
Opinion Issued: April 4, 2008
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Robert H. Miller on
the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Rath, Young and Pignatelli, P.C., of Concord (Andrew W. Serell on the
brief and orally), and Donahue, Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC, of Portsmouth
(Christopher L. Boldt on the brief and orally), for the respondents.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioners, Paul and Barbara McNamara, appeal a
decision of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) dismissing their declaratory
judgment petition against the respondents, Barry and Terry Hersh and the
Town of Sanbornton (Town). We affirm.
The McNamaras allege the following. The Hershes own a lot on
Broadview Drive in Sanbornton. The McNamaras own an abutting lot. On
January 12, 2005, the Town Board of Selectmen issued a building permit to
the Hershes’ predecessors in title to construct a new residence. The Town
Board of Selectmen later transferred the building permit to the Hershes. On
June 15, 2005, the McNamaras purchased their home, not knowing that a
building permit had been issued on the abutting lot. The Hershes began to
construct their residence in mid-October 2005. The McNamaras never
appealed the decision to issue the building permit to the local zoning board of
adjustment. See RSA 674:33, I-III (1996); RSA 676:5 (1996).
On August 21, 2006, the McNamaras sought a declaratory judgment that
the building permit was unlawfully issued and thus void. Their primary
argument was that the local ordinance only permitted building on ten percent
of the land, but the permit allowed building on thirteen percent of the land.
The Town moved to dismiss, arguing that the McNamaras had failed to exhaust
their administrative remedies. The trial court ruled in the Town’s favor, and
this appeal followed.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss, “our standard of review is whether the
allegations in the [petitioners’] pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery.” K & B Rock Crushing v. Town of
Auburn, 153 N.H. 566, 568 (2006) (quotation omitted). We assume the
McNamaras’ pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the
light most favorable to them. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that
tests the facts in their petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations
constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant
the motion to dismiss. Konefal v. Hollis/Brookline Coop. School District, 143
N.H. 256, 258 (1998).
The central issue in this case is whether the McNamaras’ declaratory
judgment action was barred because they failed to exhaust their administrative
remedies. Ordinarily, challenges to decisions regarding building permits must
first be made to the zoning board of adjustment. See RSA 674:33; RSA 676:5;
RSA 677:3 (1996). Should a party be dissatisfied with the result from the local
zoning board, the party may then appeal to the superior court. See RSA 677:4
(Supp. 2007). The legislature enacted this scheme to give the local zoning
board the “first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its decisions so
that the court may have the benefit of the board’s judgment in hearing the
appeal.” Robinson v. Town of Hudson, 154 N.H. 563, 567 (2006) (citation
omitted). Here, the McNamaras did not follow this statutory procedure. They
argue, however, that they need not have done so because their challenge to the
building permit raises a pure question of law. We disagree.
Generally, parties must exhaust their administrative remedies before
appealing to the courts. See Metzger v. Brentwood, 115 N.H. 287, 290 (1975).
This rule is “based on the reasonable policies of encouraging the exercise of
administrative expertise, preserving agency autonomy and promoting judicial
efficiency.” Bradley v. City of Manchester, 141 N.H. 329, 331-32 (1996)
2
(quotation omitted). However, this rule, as applied, is flexible, and recognizes
that exhaustion is not required under some circumstances. Metzger, 115 N.H.
at 290. In limited situations, it is unnecessary to “burden local legislative
bodies and [zoning boards] with the responsibility for rulings on subjects that
are beyond their ordinary competence.” Blue Jay Realty Trust v. City of
Franklin, 132 N.H. 502, 509 (1989). Thus, a petitioner need not exhaust
administrative remedies and may bring a declaratory judgment action to
challenge the decisions of municipal officers and boards when the action raises
a question that is “peculiarly suited to judicial rather than administrative
treatment and no other adequate remedy is available.” Olson v. Town of
Litchfield, 112 N.H. 261, 262 (1972). Judicial treatment may be particularly
suitable when the constitutionality or validity of an ordinance is in question or
when the agency at issue lacks the authority to act. Metzger, 115 N.H. at 290.
These are the types of legal issues “as to which specialized administrative
understanding plays little role.” Ashland School Dist. v. N.H. Div. for Children,
141 N.H. 45, 47-48 (1996).
For example, in Pheasant Lane Realty Trust v. City of Nashua, 143 N.H.
140, 141 (1998), the City of Nashua sought to issue a supplemental tax bill on
the subject property. Pheasant Lane Realty Trust argued that the city lacked
the authority to do so. Pheasant Lane Realty Trust, 143 N.H. at 141. On
appeal, we held that whether the City had the authority to issue a
supplemental assessment presented a question of statutory interpretation
better suited for judicial review. Id. at 142. Accordingly, we ruled that
Pheasant Lane Realty Trust was not required to exhaust administrative
remedies. Id. Similarly, we held in Porter v. Town of Sandwich, 153 N.H. 175,
176 (2006), that questions regarding whether the city’s assessment violated an
agreement and/or a statute were better suited for judicial review, and thus
exhaustion was not required. Id. at 175-76.
In Blue Jay Realty Trust, the petitioners challenged the validity of
amendments to the city’s zoning ordinance by filing a declaratory judgment
petition. Blue Jay Realty Trust, 132 N.H. at 503. On appeal, we held that the
petitioners need not exhaust their administrative remedies because “the
charges of invalidity raised by th[e] petition require[d] determinations of
statutory and constitutional law, not customarily passed upon by city
councils.” Id. at 509; see also Ashland School Dist., 141 N.H. at 47-48 (holding
that statutory provisions setting forth financial obligations of local school
districts did not require administrative appeal); Metzger, 115 N.H. at 291
(holding that whether closed town road was “public right of way” was narrow
legal question that did not require an application for a rehearing before appeal
to superior court).
By contrast, in Property Portfolio Group, LLC v. Town of Derry, 154 N.H.
610, 616-17 (2006), we held that an abutter’s challenge to the procedural
3
irregularities of the planning board’s decision did not raise a question of law,
but rather contested the planning board’s exercise of administrative discretion,
and thus exhaustion was required. The issues raised by the abutter were
better suited for administrative treatment, as the administrative authority had
the ability to consider and weigh all the facts presented. See id. at 617; see
also Konefal, 143 N.H. at 259 (holding that because the petitioner’s claims
required resolution of disputed fact, they were questions of administrative
discretion and required her to exhaust her administrative remedies).
We also note that in some limited circumstances even constitutional
challenges to zoning ordinances may require a party to exhaust its
administrative remedies before bringing a declaratory judgment petition. See
Town of Auburn v. McEvoy, 131 N.H. 383, 384 (1988). For example, in
McEvoy, the defendant McEvoy conveyed a subdivision lot to the Town in 1979
in compliance with a zoning ordinance later held to be unconstitutional in
J.E.D. Associates, Inc. v. Town of Atkinson, 121 N.H. 581 (1981). McEvoy, 131
N.H. at 384. After being made aware of this decision, the defendants sought to
apply it to their subdivisions. Id. The Town refused. Id. We held that the
failure of the defendant to appeal the 1979 planning board order within thirty
days precluded relief. Id. at 385. We noted that although the constitutionality
of a zoning ordinance is an issue peculiarly suited for judicial review, “the
legislature obviously expressed an intent to endue such an order with finality.”
Id. The Town had a great interest in the finality of the order out of fairness to
the third parties who later purchased the lots. Id. Because the constitutional
challenge was not raised in an appeal to the planning board in 1979, the
defendant was not then entitled to raise the issue five years later. Id. at 388.
The only question raised in the McNamaras’ declaratory judgment
petition, whether a building permit complies with the ordinance, is not a
question that is peculiarly suited to judicial treatment or resolution. Olson,
112 N.H. at 262. This is a question that is routinely resolved by the local
zoning board. The McNamaras are not challenging the validity or
constitutionality of the Town’s zoning ordinance, nor do they argue that the
Town lacked statutory authority to issue a permit. Rather, the alleged error is
that the permit violates the ordinance, an error that is within the power of the
zoning board to correct. The McNamaras’ proper remedy, therefore, was to
appeal to the zoning board. Here, “exact compliance” with the statutory
procedure would have allowed the board “to reassess the facts and to use its
expertise to reach a different conclusion,” which may have obviated the need
for judicial review. Metzger, 115 N.H. at 291. Even if the issue the McNamaras
wished to raise was peculiarly suited to judicial resolution, they still would not
be allowed to bring a declaratory judgment petition after the appeal period
expired, as that would undermine the finality of the Town Board’s decision and
leave the Hershes subject to uncertainty as to their rights. See McEvoy, 131
N.H. at 385.
4
The trial court specifically found that “[t]he McNamaras could have
appealed the issuance of this building permit within a reasonable time after
they discovered that the building permit had been issued. They failed to do
so.” On appeal the McNamaras do not challenge this ruling. Thus, to allow the
McNamaras to bring their declaratory judgment petition directly to superior
court “would serve neither the purpose of the statute[s] nor the policies behind
the exhaustion rule.” Metzger, 115 N.H. at 290. Accordingly, we hold that the
trial court did not err in dismissing the McNamaras’ declaratory judgment
petition.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5