THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-569
DERRY SENIOR DEVELOPMENT, LLC
v.
TOWN OF DERRY
Argued: April 30, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 2, 2008
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R.
Schulman on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Boutin & Altieri, P.L.L.C., of Londonderry (Steven A. Clark on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Derry Senior Development, LLC, appeals an
order of the Trial Court (Coffey, J.) upholding the denial of its application for
site plan approval of an independent adult community development in the
Town of Derry (town) by the Town of Derry Planning Board (board). We hold
that, because the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES)
approved the plaintiff’s proposed sewage disposal system, the town has enacted
no standards more stringent than the DES standards, see N.H. Admin. Rules,
Env-Ws 1000-1025 (1999) (amended and readopted as Env-Wq 1000-1025
(2008)), and the record reveals no evidence suggesting that the plaintiff’s
proposed system would not adequately protect all water supplies, the board
unreasonably and unlawfully denied the plaintiff’s application for site plan
approval. Accordingly, we reverse and remand.
The plaintiff owns a sixty-acre parcel of land on Drew Road in Derry,
located in the town’s Low Density Residential District and its Independent
Adult Community Overlay District. Under the town’s zoning ordinance, an
independent adult community is defined as “[a] residential development . . .
with . . . dwellings limited to occupancy by households that each include at
least one person age 55 or older . . . and [not including] any person age 18
years or younger for more than ninety days in any calendar year.” Derry, N.H.,
Zoning Ordinance art. XIX, § 165-146(2) (2005). In permitting the development
of such communities, the town recognized, among other things, “that
developments housing older persons typically generate lower average rates of
vehicular traffic, water usage and sewer usage than other types of residential
developments, and have less impact upon the public school system and a lower
average number of residents per dwelling.” Id. § 165-145(3). The ordinance
mandates that any proposal for an independent adult community must
“conform to the requirements of the Town of Derry Site Plan Regulations,” id. §
165-151, and any applicant seeking to develop such a community must obtain
approval from the board, id. §§ 165-145, 165-147.
On August 8, 2006, the plaintiff applied for final site plan approval to
construct an independent adult community development on its property. The
proposed project consisted of, among other things: (1) thirty-six two-bedroom
single family detached residences, with “35 units to be located on a new private
way to be called Kimball’s Lane, [and] one additional unit to be accessed from
Drew Road”; (2) six community septic systems, each with four-inch sewage
collection pipes; (3) thirty-six individual water wells; and (4) approximately forty
acres of open space.
Before submitting the application to the board, the plaintiff obtained
approval for its project from, among other entities, the DES. See generally RSA
ch. 485-A (2001 & Supp. 2007). The Town of Derry Department of Public
Works (DPW), however, opposed the proposed development. It requested that:
(1) Kimball Lane “be constructed to essentially subdivision standard (24 [feet]
wide pavement, 4 [inch] pavement thickness),” not twenty feet wide and three
inch thick pavement as proposed by the plaintiff; and (2) “all sewer collection
system components upstream of the septic tank(s) . . . be built according to
[the higher standards found in the] Town of Derry Sewer Division Regulations”;
that is, “the collection system . . . be comprised of 8 [inch] sewer mains, 6
[inch] sewer services and precast concrete manholes at intersecting pipes or at
the end of a sewer main,” not, as the plaintiff proposed, “4 [inch] pipes with
cleanouts.”
2
The town’s engineer also reviewed the application, and recommended,
among other things, that: (1) Kimball Lane have a minimum width of twenty-
four feet; and (2) “[a]lthough the content of the [septic system design] plans
[wa]s statutorily within the purview of the NHDES, . . . all ‘common’ sewage
collection lines be constructed of SDR 35 PVC, having a minimum diameter of
six (6) inches for improved serviceability and performance.”
On September 6, 2006, the board held a public hearing on the plaintiff’s
application for site plan review. At the hearing, several abutters testified that
their wells already provided an insufficient supply of water, and that they were
concerned that the proposed development would further reduce their water
supply. In response, the board requested an independent hydrogeology study
to examine the potential impact of the proposed development upon the water
supply. Additionally, the board expressed concerns with, among other things,
the width of Kimball Road and the community septic systems. Ultimately, the
board accepted jurisdiction of the plaintiff’s application because “it was a
completed application,” scheduled a site visit, and tabled consideration of the
plan to a later date.
At a public hearing held on October 30, 2006, the plaintiff requested a
continuance to December 6, 2006. After approving this request, the board
discussed whether the plaintiff’s application was subject to the town’s site plan
or subdivision regulations, and concluded that the site plan regulations
applied.
Prior to the December 6, 2006 hearing, the plaintiff revised its plans to
address various concerns of the town’s engineer. It did not, however, submit
revised plans to the board until the day before the hearing, and, at that time,
submitted only one copy of the revised plans. Thus, at the December 6, 2006
hearing, the board considered the plaintiff’s original application, not its revised
plans.
At the hearing, the DPW reiterated that it required, among other things,
that Kimball Lane be twenty-four feet wide, and that the sewer collection
system be “buil[t] to town standards as required of the Indian Hill Estates,”
another independent adult community previously approved by the board. One
board member, Tom Carrier, who is also the assistant director of the DPW,
expressed support for the DPW’s position. He stated:
I think that to be clear here that the standards that we
have been requiring, at least as my understanding, is
not standards for the sake of standards. There is
some thought and there is some logic behind them - -
you know, addressed in particular, the sewer
construction standards, that for your understanding,
3
we have had historically a number of problems with
community septic systems. And, I would submit to
you that just about every single community septic
system constructed in the Town of Derry, particularly
during the 1980’s, failed. And, one of the primary
reasons why they failed was due to the construction of
the collection system. So, absent an existing
regulation with regard to the Town, you’re correct, the
DES did, but DES is not specific when it comes to
collection systems, they are dealing more with sub
surface disposal system, that we apply the existing
Town of Derry standards which we feel are well
thought and defensible. With the road standards also
that, again we believe that they’re well thought and
defensible, so they’re not just standards for the sake of
standards. I intend on not supporting approval of this
development because it does not meet the design and
construction standards of the Land Development
Control Regulations specifically with regard to internal
access drives. There’s one particular unit that has no
access via the internal drive [Kimball Lane] as
required, and it does not meet the 24 foot wide paving
requirement.
Additionally, several abutters opposed the proposed development,
expressing concerns that, among other things, the development would
adversely affect their wells and water supply, and that the proposed septic
system would be located up-gradient of their wells. As to the former concern,
the board noted that the experts agreed that the proposed development, which
would consist of thirty-six individual wells, would not have a measurable
adverse impact upon the water supply yields in the area.
Following discussion, a board member moved to approve the plaintiff’s
original application, subject to several conditions. One condition required the
plaintiff to comply with the recommendation by the town’s engineer that the
plaintiff use six-inch collection pipes for the sewage system. Ultimately, the
board denied the motion to approve the application, even with the stated
conditions. Specifically, after acknowledging that the plan met DES
requirements, the board voted to disapprove the application partly because the
proposed sewage system did not have “larger piping to eliminate the failure that
[the town previously] experienced” with community septic systems. In its
certificate of disapproval, the board cited the following reasons for denial: (1)
the plan did not comply with the town’s regulation requiring internal drives to
have a minimum width of twenty-four feet; (2) “[r]evised plans were not
4
available for review”; and (3) “[t]here were 4 homes with wells that are down-
gradient of a 12 unit septic system.”
The plaintiff appealed to the superior court. See RSA 677:15 (Supp.
2007). The superior court affirmed, finding that the board’s disapproval of the
plaintiff’s application was “supported by [the board’s] determination that the
sewage pipe design [wa]s inadequate to protect the health and safety of
residents, particularly the four abutters whose wells are located down gradient
of the septic site.” The superior court, therefore, did not address the board’s
remaining reasons for denying the application.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the town has enacted “no site plan
regulations that specifically address septic systems or septic set back
requirements,” and, “[t]herefore, DES approval should be prima facie proof that
an applicant’s design and setbacks are safe and sufficient.” Because “there
was no expert evidence which rebutted the presumption of safety and adequacy
which should have been inferred from [its] certificate of DES approval,” and
because the board “effectively imposed a new rule which had never been
proposed or adopted by the appropriate rule-making process,” the plaintiff
contends that “both the . . . [b]oard and the trial court committed an error of
law by affording the DES approval less than presumptive weight, and acted
unreasonably in denying plaintiff’s application on the grounds that it included
a community septic system up-gradient from four homes.”
The town counters that, consistent with the purpose of the town’s site
plan regulations to “guard against such conditions as would involve danger or
injury to health, safety, or prosperity,” Derry, N.H., Land Development Control
Regulations, part 3, art. VII, § 170-47(A)(1) (2005) (LDCR), the board properly
relied upon “the testimony and comments of . . . two individuals who are
qualified in th[e] area” of septic systems in requiring larger piping. The town
maintains that the “board’s concerns were not ad hoc but were legitimate in
light of the proposal and its experience with community septic systems,” and
that the board “had persuasive evidence before it that supported its denial of
. . . the septic plan as designed.” Thus, the town contends that the trial court
properly upheld the board’s denial of the application.
Our review of the trial court’s decision is deferential. Summa Humma
Enters. v. Town of Tilton, 151 N.H. 75, 79 (2004). We will uphold the decision
on appeal unless it is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id.
Superior court review of planning board decisions is equally limited. Id.
The superior court is obligated to treat the factual findings of the planning
board as prima facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its decision
absent unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id. The appealing party
bears the burden of demonstrating that, by the balance of the probabilities, the
5
board’s decision was unreasonable. Id. The review by the superior court is not
to determine whether it agrees with the planning board’s findings, but to
determine whether there is evidence upon which they could have been
reasonably based. Id.
“Site plan review is designed to insure that uses permitted by a zoning
ordinance are constructed on a site in such a way that they fit into the area in
which they are being constructed without causing drainage, traffic, or lighting
problems.” Id. at 78 (quotation omitted). It is “also designed to assure that
sites will be developed in a safe and attractive manner and in a way that will
not involve danger or injury to the health, safety, or prosperity of abutting
property owners or the general public.” Id. (quotation omitted). To accomplish
these purposes, a plan is “subject[ed] . . . to the very expertise expected of a
planning board in cases where it would not be feasible to set forth in the
ordinance a set of specific requirements upon which a building inspector could
readily grant or refuse a permit.” Id. (quotation omitted). The planning board
“review[s] site plans to determine if they properly address such issues as
surface and sanitary drainage, the effect on ground water, and the creation of
pollution sources,” 15 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice, Land Use
Planning and Zoning § 30.02, at 427 (2000), and, thus, has the authority “to
impose requirements and conditions that are reasonably related to land use
goals and considerations within its purview,” Summa Humma Enters., 151
N.H. at 78 (citations omitted).
Although “[s]ite review can be an extremely useful and powerful tool for
municipalities . . . , there are definite limits to its use.” 15 P. Loughlin, supra
§ 30.09, at 436; see also Summa Humma Enters., 151 N.H. at 78. “For
example, site plans may only be reviewed after the local legislative body has
specifically authorized the planning board to exercise site plan control and only
communities which have adopted valid zoning ordinances may grant site review
control to their planning boards.” 15 P. Loughlin, supra § 30.09, at 436-37;
see RSA 674:43, I (Supp. 2007). Further, “[s]ite review statutes are not self-
executing, but rather, the local planning board must adopt specific site review
regulations before exercising authority.” 15 P. Loughlin, supra § 30.09, at 437;
see RSA 674:44, I (Supp. 2007); RSA 675:6 (1996) (setting forth method of
adoption of site plan regulations). These regulations must, among other
things, “[d]efine the purposes of site plan review” and “[s]pecify the general
standards and requirements with which the proposed development shall
comply, including appropriate reference to accepted codes and standards for
construction.” RSA 674:44, III(b), (c). The regulations that the planning board
adopts may, among other things, “stipulate, as a condition precedent to the
approval of the plat, the extent . . . to which water, sewer, and other utility
mains, piping, connections, or other facilities shall be installed.” RSA 674:44,
IV.
6
Here, the board adopted site plan regulations pursuant to RSA 674:44, I.
The stated purpose of these site plan regulations is to:
[u]phold the purposes set forth in RSA 674:44,
including to . . . guard against such conditions as
would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or
prosperity by reason of . . . inadequate protection for
the quality of groundwater . . . [or] undesirable and
preventable elements of pollution such as . . .
particulates, or any other discharge into the
environment which might prove harmful to persons,
structures, or adjacent properties . . . ; and [i]nclude
such provisions as will tend to create conditions
favorable for health, safety, convenience, and
prosperity.
LDCR §§ 170-47(A)(1), (8).
To achieve this purpose, the board enacted site plan regulations that set
forth various design and construction standards, including standards for site
access, parking, storm water management, and sewer construction. See LDCR
§§ 170-62 to -65. The board, however, also reserved the right to “set higher
requirements with regard to any standards in the[] regulations if, in the opinion
of the Board, it is necessary to protect the health, safety or welfare of the
community.” Id. § 170-50(B).
Relevant to this case is a regulation governing “[s]anitary sewer
construction,” which provides, in pertinent part:
In areas where municipal sewer is not available, an
on-site subsurface sewage disposal system may be
designed and constructed as long as said design and
construction fully complies with all applicable
requirements of the New Hampshire Code of
Administrative Rules; and the applicant has secured
appropriate permits for the same from the [DES].
Id. § 170-66(A)(1) (emphasis added).
The New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules sets forth
comprehensive rules for the design of sewage disposal systems. See N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 1000-1025. The purpose of these rules is “to prevent
pollution of all public or private water supplies, whether underground or
surface sources,” id. 1001.01, and “to prevent nuisances and potential health
hazards,” RSA 485-A:1 (2001).
7
In this case, the DES’ approval states that the plaintiff’s proposed
development meets these rules, which include requirements concerning pipe
size and the distance of the system from wells and property lines. See, e.g.,
N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 1003, 1008, 1009, 1010, 1017. Relying upon this
approval and Smith v. Town of Wolfeboro, 136 N.H. 337 (1992), the plaintiff
argues that, because the board has not enacted more stringent standards for
septic systems than those set forth in the administrative rules, the “DES
permit creates a presumption that [the proposed] septic plan is safe and
adequate.”
In Smith, the planning board declined to remove certain restrictions
preventing the owners from developing their lot because “the board felt the
proposed septic systems were inadequate,” despite prior approval of the
systems by the New Hampshire Water Supply and Pollution Control Division
(WSPCD). Smith, 136 N.H. at 339, 341. In addressing the propriety of the
board’s action, we noted that “a planning board is entitled to rely in part on its
own judgment and experience in acting upon applications for subdivision
approval[,] . . . is not bound by a determination of another agency, such as the
WSPCD, and is free to enact more exacting or protective standards.” Id. at 343
(quotation omitted). “In th[at] case, however, there [we]re no local standards to
guide applicants as to what, beyond WSPCD approval, [wa]s required for septic
system approval.” Id.
Instead, the regulations “authorize[d] the board to disapprove a plan for
‘land of such character as cannot be safely used for building purposes because
of exceptional danger to health.’” Id. As to sewage disposal systems, the
regulation stated:
That in areas not currently served by public sewer
systems it is the responsibility of the subdivider to
provide adequate information to prove that the area of
each lot is adequate to permit the installation and
operation of an individual sewage disposal system . . . .
Such information may consist of the report of the . . .
[WSPCD].
Id. Based upon this regulation, we held that, “although the developer ha[d] the
initial burden of proving adequate sewage disposal, there [wa]s a presumption
under this regulation that WSPCD approval of an on-site sewage system [wa]s
adequate proof of a safe septic system.” Id. at 344. Thus, “[o]nce the owners
produced the WSPCD’s report, the lots should have been approved, in the
absence of other evidence that the septic systems still posed an ‘exceptional
danger to health.’” Id.
8
Reviewing the evidence in Smith, we noted that “[t]he board’s concerns
about . . . pollution [we]re legitimate,” and that “the town [wa]s free to pass
ordinances setting higher septic system standards than WSPCD . . . require[d].”
Id. (citation omitted). We emphasized, however, that “the board [could] not
deny subdivision approval on an ad hoc basis because of vague concerns.” Id.
(citation omitted). Because the record was devoid of “testimony that the
proposed system posed an ‘exceptional danger to health,’” id. at 344, we held
that the board erred in failing to remove the restrictions on the owners’ lot. Id.
at 344-45.
We agree with the plaintiff that the present case is strikingly similar to
Smith. The trial court distinguished Smith on the grounds that the regulation
at issue in that case specifically stated that WSPCD’s approval constituted
proof of the adequacy of a sewage system, while, in its view, the site plan
regulations here do not contain a similar provision. In so doing, the trial court
overlooked that the town’s site plan regulation instructed: “an on-site
subsurface sewage disposal system may be designed and constructed as long
as said design and construction fully complies with all applicable requirements
of the New Hampshire Code of Administrative Rules; and the applicant has
secured appropriate permits for the same from the [DES].” LDCR § 170-
66(A)(1) (emphasis added).
As in Smith, the board here has enacted no other septic system
standards guiding applicants as to what, beyond DES approval, is required to
ensure the safety and adequacy of the proposed sewage disposal system.
Although the board could have enacted more stringent standards, see RSA
485-A:32, I (2001); RSA 674:44, II, IV, the site plan regulations it chose to
enact direct that an applicant is permitted to design and construct a sewage
disposal system “as long as” the proposed system fully complies with DES
regulations. These regulations provide the sole guidance for an applicant
concerning the town’s requirements for sewage disposal systems. Moreover,
consistent with the stated intent of the board’s site plan regulations, the
purpose of the DES rules is to prevent the pollution of all water supplies. N.H.
Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 1000.01. Thus, given our ruling in Smith that the
Wolfeboro regulation created a presumption that WSPCD approval constituted
adequate proof of a safe septic system, in this case, where the regulation goes
further to specifically incorporate the DES’ rules as the sewage disposal system
requirements, we must conclude that this regulation creates a similar
presumption. See Smith, 136 N.H. at 344.
As noted above, however, the purpose of site plan review is to allow the
board to “properly address such issues as surface and sanitary drainage, the
effect on ground water, and the creation of pollution sources.” 15 P. Loughlin,
supra § 30.02, at 427. Thus, the presumption created by the regulation and
DES’ approval was rebuttable. Smith, 136 N.H. at 343. If other evidence
9
demonstrated that, notwithstanding DES’ approval, the proposed system would
“involve danger or injury to health, safety, or prosperity” because, for example,
it would “inadequate[ly] protect[] . . . the quality of groundwater,” or result in
“pollution . . . which might prove harmful to persons, structures, or adjacent
properties,” LDCR § 170-47(A)(1), the board had the authority to deny site plan
approval. See Smith, 136 N.H. at 343-44.
Here, the town asserts, and the trial court found, that Carrier's
testimony that community septic systems had failed in the past, combined with
the location of four abutters' wells down-gradient of the proposed sewage
disposal system, constitutes legitimate and persuasive evidence supporting the
board's decision to deny the plaintiff's application. We disagree.
The proposed system approved by the DES was comprised of four-inch
piping. The town’s engineer recommended that all common sewage collection
lines be six inches in diameter. The board denied the plaintiff’s application
subject to the condition that all such lines have a minimum diameter of six
inches. The plaintiff characterizes the issue on appeal as “whether the [board]
acted lawfully when it rejected the development with six inch pipe.” (Emphasis
added.) Thus, we are limited to determining whether the trial court erred in
affirming the board’s failure to approve the proposed development with six-inch
piping, even though the DES had approved the development with four-inch
piping.
The board denied approval because it presumably agreed with the DPW
that the eight-inch sewer mains that are required for municipal sewers were
also necessary for the proposed community septic system. In so doing, the
board reasoned that, because community septic systems had failed twenty
years before as a result of poor construction, the larger piping was required to
prevent the possible future failure of the proposed community septic systems.
Although the board is entitled to rely upon its own judgment and
experience in acting upon applications for site plan review, the board may not
deny approval on an ad hoc basis because of vague concerns. Smith, 136 N.H.
343, 344. Further, the board’s decision must be based upon more than the
mere personal opinion of its members. Condos East Corp. v. Town of Conway,
132 N.H. 431, 438 (1989). Where, as here, another agency’s approval creates a
presumption that the proposal protects the public interest, the record must
show specific facts justifying rejection of the agency’s determination; that is,
concrete evidence indicating that following the agency’s determination in the
particular circumstances would pose a real threat to the public interest.
In this case, although a board member, who was also the assistant
director of the DPW, informed the board that, based upon his and the DPW’s
experience, community septic systems had failed in the past, no evidence in
10
the record explains why the plaintiff’s proposed system, upgraded with six-inch
piping, did not adequately protect against such failure. For example, the
record reveals no evidence suggesting that the community septic systems that
had failed twenty years before were constructed using six-inch piping, and that
a reason those systems failed related to the size of the collection pipes. Such
evidence could have justified the board’s determination that the proposed
system required larger piping to protect the public from groundwater pollution.
Nor does the record indicate that six-inch piping, as recommended by the
town’s engineer and rejected by the board, was insufficient to prevent the
system from collapsing. Indeed, nothing in the record supports the position of
the board and DPW that the proposed system with six-inch piping would fail to
prevent pollution of water supplies. Accordingly, the board arbitrarily and
unreasonably denied site plan approval on the grounds that the proposed
system did not provide sufficient piping.
The board denied site plan approval also because four abutters’ wells are
located down-gradient of the proposed twelve-unit septic system. However, the
mere fact that the wells are located down-gradient of the proposed system does
not necessarily imply that the proposed system poses a real danger to the
abutters’ water supplies. To protect against contamination of both public and
private water supplies, the DES regulations specify setback requirements for
septic systems, which include directing that systems be located at certain
minimum distances from property lines and wells, taking into account the
slope of the land. See, e.g., N.H. Admin. Rules, Env-Ws 1001.01, 1008.04-
1008.11. Again, the town has enacted no other standards relating to septic
system design. Thus, the DES’ approval of the plaintiff’s system created a
presumption that wells surrounding the system are protected.
Despite this presumption, the board denied the plaintiff’s application in
part upon this basis. However, nothing in the record suggests that the
proposed system created an identifiable danger to the four down-gradient wells.
Cf. Smith, 136 N.H. at 344 (“The board apparently based its decision on its
belief that there existed a septic system superior to the one the owners
proposed, despite the absence of testimony that the proposed system posed an
‘exceptional danger to health.’”). For example, no evidence indicates that the
wells are located at such a severe slope or short distance from the system that,
although the DES’ minimum setback requirements are met, these individual
wells are particularly vulnerable to contamination. In the absence of any
specific facts suggesting that the plaintiff’s system was constructed or located
in such a fashion as to pose a safety risk to the four down-gradient wells, the
board could not reasonably deny site plan approval based upon its vague
concern that the down-gradient wells might be in danger. See id. To conclude
otherwise would allow the board to deny approval of any proposed plan simply
because a well is located down-gradient from a septic system, regardless of
11
whether the well at issue is so far removed from the system that there is no
danger of contamination.
Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s ruling upholding the board’s
decision to deny site plan approval because the sewage pipe design was
inadequate to protect the health and safety of the residents and because four
abutters’ wells are located down-gradient of the septic site. We remand to the
trial court for review of the board’s remaining reasons for denying the plaintiff’s
application for site plan approval.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12