THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham County Probate Court
No. 2007-435
IN RE ESTATE OF DAVID J. BOURASSA
Argued: March 20, 2008
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2008
Chubrich & Harrigan, P.A., of Portsmouth (Michael E. Chubrich on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth
(Francis X. Quinn, Jr. and Amy C. Mackin on the brief, and Mr. Quinn orally),
for the Estate of David J. Bourassa.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Deborah Beck, appeals a decree of the
Rockingham County Probate Court (O’Neill, J.), which found that she is not
entitled to a spousal share of the estate of David J. Bourassa. Beck argues
that the trial court erred in failing to find that she was Bourassa’s common law
spouse pursuant to RSA 457:39 (2004). Because the probate court reasonably
held that Beck and Bourassa failed to acknowledge one another as husband
and wife, as is required by RSA 457:39, we affirm.
The probate court found the following: Beck and Bourassa began a
romantic relationship at some point during the mid to late 1990s. Soon
thereafter, Bourassa moved into Beck’s home, where he continued to reside
until his untimely death in August 2006. During those years, the couple
shared domestic responsibilities, worked together on Beck’s family farm, and,
in 2002, gave birth to a child. However, despite their lengthy cohabitation, the
couple never married.
Following Bourassa’s death, his most recent will was submitted for
probate. That will, which was duly executed several years after the couple
began cohabiting, made no provision for Beck. Instead, it provided that the
entirety of Bourassa’s estate was to be divided equally among his four
daughters from a previous marriage. Believing that she was nevertheless
entitled to a spousal share of Bourassa’s estate, see RSA 561:1 (2007), Beck
filed a petition in the probate court requesting to be declared Bourassa’s
common law spouse.
“New Hampshire is a jurisdiction which does not recognize the validity of
common-law marriages except to the limited extent provided by RSA 457:39.”
Joan S. v. John S., 121 N.H. 96, 98 (1981) (quotation omitted); see In re
Buttrick, 134 N.H. 675, 677 (1991). Pursuant to that statute, which has been
in substantially the same form since 1842, “[p]ersons cohabiting and
acknowledging each other as husband and wife, and generally reputed to be
such, for the period of 3 years, and until the decease of one of them, shall
thereafter be deemed to have been legally married.” RSA 457:39. Accordingly,
to be entitled to a spousal share, Beck was required to demonstrate that, for
the period of three years preceding his death, she and Bourassa: (1) cohabited;
(2) acknowledged each other as husband and wife; and (3) were generally
reputed to be husband and wife in their community. See Delisle v. Smalley, 96
N.H. 58, 59 (1949).
Following two days of hearings, the probate court issued its final order
and ruled that Beck had presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate that she
and Bourassa had cohabited for the three years preceding his death. However,
the court determined that Beck had failed to sustain her burden of establishing
that she and Bourassa acknowledged one another as husband and wife, and
were generally reputed as such in the community. Accordingly, the probate
court refused to rule that Beck was entitled to a spousal share of Bourassa’s
estate.
Beck appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in finding both that she
and Bourassa did not acknowledge each other as husband and wife, and that
she and Bourassa were not generally reputed to be husband and wife in their
community. In addressing Beck’s claim, we must accept “[t]he findings of fact
of the judge of probate a[s] final unless they are so plainly erroneous that such
findings could not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-A:4 (2007). “Hence we must
review the record of the proceedings before the probate court to determine if
the findings, as made by the probate judge, could be reasonably made, given
the testimony” presented at trial. In re Buttrick, 134 N.H. at 676. When
engaging in this inquiry, we are guided by the rule that “[t]he trier of fact is in
2
the best position to measure the persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and
is not compelled to believe even uncontroverted evidence.” Restaurant
Operators, Inc. v. Jenney, 128 N.H. 708, 711 (1986); see also Cook v. Sullivan,
149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003) (explaining that the trial court is in the best position
to “resolv[e] conflicts in the testimony, measur[e] the credibility of witnesses,
and determin[e] the weight to be given evidence”).
After reviewing the record, we hold that the probate court’s finding that
Beck and Bourassa did not acknowledge each other as husband and wife is
reasonable, based upon the evidence presented at trial. As we have previously
explained, “[a]cknowledgement of another as one’s spouse [under RSA 457:39]
involves declaration or avowal of the relationship.” Delisle, 96 N.H. at 59; see
also Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 151 (unabridged ed. 2002)
(defining “avowal” as “an open declaration or frank acknowledgement”). In
other words, “[t]he conduct of cohabitation assumes at death the aspect of
legality or illegality, according [to whether] the declarations of the parties which
accompanied that conduct have avowed or disavowed the existence of a legal
relationship.” Delisle, 96 N.H. at 59-60 (emphasis added).
Here, as the probate court noted, the majority of witnesses testified that
Bourassa did not acknowledge Beck as his wife. For example, one of
Bourassa’s former employers, Michael Iafolla, testified that he saw Bourassa
with the couple’s child, asked him if he had gotten married, and Bourassa
responded firmly, “hell, no.” Bourassa’s brother, Gary Bourassa, testified that
Bourassa never held Beck out as his wife and, in fact, had made a point to tell
him that “they were not married.” Bourassa’s sister, Gail Jablonski, believed
that Beck was just “the woman [her] brother lived with” and testified that her
brother would “always say anybody was crazy that got married.” Finally, five of
Bourassa’s former employees, as well as one of his former business associates,
similarly testified that he never held Beck out as his spouse.
The record also supports the trial court’s conclusion that Beck did not
acknowledge Bourassa as her husband. Indeed, two of Bourassa’s daughters,
Dayna and Devin Bourassa, testified that Beck had sternly told them that she
was not, and never would be “anybody’s common law.” Moreover, the executor
of Bourassa’s estate, Richard Sullivan, testified that he spoke with Beck
regarding her petition to obtain a spousal share, at which time she stated that
“she was never David’s wife and she would never be anybody’s wife.” According
to Sullivan, Beck went on to explain that she associated the word “wife” with
“servant” and refused to “be anybody’s servant . . . [or] anybody’s wife.”
Despite the couple’s express disavowal of their relationship as husband
and wife, Beck argues that we must reverse because the probate court “erred
by ignoring an entire category of evidence: the actions of [Bourassa] and
3
[Beck], which [she contends] consistently acknowledged [her] as his wife, and
he as her husband.” We disagree.
Although, in rare cases, the conduct of the parties could conceivably rise
to the level of an avowal of “the existence of a legal relationship,” Delisle, 96
N.H. at 60, this is not such a case. To be sure, many of Beck’s witnesses
testified that the couple shared domestic and child care responsibilities.
However, as the probate court stated in its order, Beck also “identified herself
on her will . . . as a single person,” maintained separate bank accounts from
Bourassa, and described Bourassa as her “significant other” in answering
interrogatories propounded in unrelated litigation. Moreover, when a
newspaper article written about her family farm referenced Bourassa as her
spouse, Beck testified that she “spoke to [the author] . . . [and] told her that
[Bourassa] and [she] weren’t legally married.”
Beyond that acknowledged in the probate court’s order, the record also
reveals that Beck and Bourassa held their real estate separately, titled their
vehicles separately, and had separate health insurance. Further, three months
prior to his death, Bourassa completed an intake form while visiting a
chiropractor and, although he responded to every other question, left the box
for spouse blank. In light of all of the foregoing conduct, we cannot hold that
the probate court’s finding that the couple did not acknowledge one another as
husband and wife is “so plainly erroneous . . . [that it] could not be reasonably
made.” RSA 567-A:4; see also Restaurant Operators, Inc., 128 N.H. at 711
(explaining that it is within the purview of the trial court to weigh the evidence).
Beck also argues that the trial court erred “by relying upon [Tapley v.
Tapley, 122 N.H. 727, 730 (1982),] to deny . . . her [a] spous[al] share of
[Bourassa]’s [e]state.” Specifically, Beck contends that Tapley did not arise
under RSA 457:39 and, thus, the probate judge “improperly and incorrectly
equated the lifetime dissolution of the Tapley’s ‘unstructured domestic
relationship,’ with the termination of [Bourassa]’s and [Beck]’s loving
relationship by [Bourassa]’s untimely death.” Beck overstates the trial court’s
dependence upon Tapley.
As noted by the Estate, the court’s “reliance” upon Tapley is limited to a
single citation in the conclusion section of its order. Preceding that section are
several pages of factual findings that independently support the probate court’s
ultimate determination that Beck failed to meet her burden. Even more to the
point, the probate court cited Tapley with the signal “cf.” Meaning literally
“compare” or “see, by way of comparison,” The Chicago Manual of Style §
16.58, at 607 (Univ. of Chi. Press, 15th ed. 2003), the “cf.” signal is used to
show that a “[c]ited authority supports a proposition different from the main
proposition but sufficiently analogous to lend support,” The Bluebook: A
Uniform System of Citation § 1.2 (Columbia Law Review Ass’n et al. eds., 17th
4
ed. 2000) (emphases added). For these reasons, even assuming without
deciding that it was error for the court to cite Tapley in this context, contrary to
Beck’s suggestion, it is apparent that that citation did not affect the court’s
analysis. See McIntire v. Lee, 149 N.H. 160, 167 (2003) (explaining that “[a]n
error is considered harmless if it is trivial, or formal, or merely academic, and
was not prejudicial to the substantial rights of the party asserting it”).
Having determined that the probate court correctly ruled that Beck and
Bourassa did not acknowledge each other as husband and wife, we need not
address the court’s further finding regarding the couple’s reputation in the
community. See Delisle, 96 N.H. at 59. Because the majority of Beck’s
remaining arguments are either concerned with that finding, or amount to little
more than a request that we reweigh the evidence, see Restaurant Operators,
Inc., 128 N.H. at 711, we decline to address them.
Beck’s counsel has made one further charge, however, the severity of
which compels discussion. In his brief and at oral argument, counsel accused
the probate judge of inattentiveness, bias and confusion. We have thoroughly
reviewed the record and have found no evidence to support this assertion.
Instead, the record reveals a judge who was attentive and engaged in the trial
proceedings; on numerous occasions posed questions to the witnesses; and, at
least twice, was required to remind the petitioner’s counsel of the questions he
had previously asked. That the probate judge was acutely aware of both the
facts and law is further evidenced by her comprehensive, well reasoned order.
While it is inherent in our appellate function to review and evaluate such
claims against trial judges, when, as here, the claims are utterly baseless, they
are inconsistent with the professionalism we expect from practitioners before
this court. See New Hampshire Bar Association, The New Hampshire Lawyer
Professionalism Creed (April 4, 2001), available at http://www.nhbar.org/legal-
links/nh-professionalism-creed.asp (explaining that a New Hampshire lawyer
“displays respect for clients, judges, court staff, opposing counsel and all
participants in the process” and “understands differing viewpoints”).
Practitioners would be wise to raise such accusations in the future only when
they are warranted, and not merely where they result from dissatisfaction with
the trial court’s decision.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5