THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2007-023
L. HAMLIN GREENE
v.
ROBERT J. MCLEOD & a.
Argued: November 8, 2007
Opinion Issued: February 15, 2008
Greene Law Group, P.L.L.C., of Bedford (Arthur G. Greene on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Patrick Wood Law Office, PLLC, of Laconia (Patrick H. Wood on the brief
and orally), for the respondents.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, L. Hamlin Greene, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his petition to quiet title to certain land in
Alton. We reverse.
The trial court found the following facts. In 1956, the petitioner took title
to certain property with Robert W. McLeod (the father of the respondents,
Robert J. McLeod and Ann McLeod Harvey) and James Nelson as tenants in
common. The tenants in common subdivided the land and sold various lots
within the subdivision until September 30, 1959, when Nelson requested that
the petitioner and McLeod buy out his share of the remaining land. The
petitioner and McLeod agreed and took title to the remaining parcels as tenants
in common. Sales continued until only two lots remained unsold.
In 1975, McLeod moved to Florida. The trial court found that, at that
time, McLeod asked the petitioner to buy out his interest in the two remaining
tracts of land, which were the only parcels left from the larger tract originally
purchased by the petitioner, McLeod and Nelson. The petitioner agreed and
paid McLeod $5,000 for his share; however, the petitioner and McLeod never
signed a written contract memorializing their agreement. A few years later,
McLeod delivered two blank warranty deeds to the petitioner, which McLeod
signed with the intent to convey his share of the remaining land to the
petitioner. The petitioner, however, neither completed nor recorded the deeds.
Since 1975, the petitioner has paid all of the property taxes on the land that is
the subject of this dispute.
McLeod died in 1988 and his wife, Mary, died in 1997. The McLeods are
survived by their children, the respondents. In their brief, the respondents
note that McLeod’s will was filed in the circuit court in Pasco County, Florida.
The respondents also acknowledge that Mary McLeod’s estate was probated in
Pasco County, Florida, and that neither her will, nor the probate records for
her estate, contain any reference to property located in New Hampshire.
In 2004, the petitioner contacted the respondents in an effort to obtain a
quitclaim deed confirming the sale of McLeod’s share of the remaining land to
the petitioner. The respondents declined the request, and the petitioner
brought this petition to quiet title. The trial court denied the petition, and this
appeal followed.
In an effort to clarify ambiguities in the record, we remanded the case to
the trial court on December 18, 2007, to make findings on the following two
questions: (1) whether there were any agreements between the petitioner and
McLeod with respect to the payment of property taxes assessed on the property
prior to the oral transfer of McLeod's interest in 1975; and (2) whether there
are any avenues of restitution available to the petitioner. The trial court
responded on January 10, 2008, finding that: (1) the petitioner “and Robert W.
McLeod agreed to split equally the cost of property taxes assessed on the
property before Mr. McLeod moved to Florida in 1975”; and (2) “there is no
record evidence supporting the availability of any type of ‘restitution’ because
the petitioner has made no such request.”
On appeal, the petitioner does not challenge the trial court’s factual
findings. Rather, he asserts that the trial court misapplied the law to the
relevant facts when it ruled that: (1) the conveyance of McLeod’s undivided
one-half share of the property to the petitioner was barred by the statute of
2
frauds; (2) equitable considerations do not favor overriding the statute of
frauds; and (3) a constructive trust is not warranted.
In an action to quiet title, the burden “is on each party to prove good title
as against all other parties whose rights may be affected by the court’s decree.”
Sorenson v. Wilson, 124 N.H. 751, 758 (1984). A trial court may not render
judgment quieting title to disputed property “in the absence of parties with a
duly recorded interest in the property, unless those parties claimed no interest
and the petition so alleged.” Id. We will uphold the trial court’s determination
unless it is erroneous as a matter of law or unsupported by the evidence.
Riverwood Commercial Prop’s v. Cole, 134 N.H. 487, 490 (1991). Moreover, we
will not overturn the trial court’s ruling on a mixed question of fact and law
unless it is clearly erroneous. Cadle Co. v. Bourgeois, 149 N.H. 410, 415
(2003). If, however, the court misapplies the law to its factual findings, we
review the matter independently. Id.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that the
statute of frauds barred the conveyance of McLeod’s undivided one-half share
of the property to him. He asserts that the statute of frauds was, in fact,
satisfied.
The statute of frauds provides: “No action shall be maintained upon a
contract for the sale of land unless the agreement upon which it is brought, or
some memorandum thereof, is in writing and signed by the party to be
charged, or by some person authorized by him in writing.” RSA 506:1 (1997).
Its purpose is to “promote certainty and to protect frauds and perjuries in land
transactions.” Weale v. Massachusetts Gen. Housing Corp., 117 N.H. 428, 431
(1977). To satisfy the statute of frauds, “the writing must express the essential
terms of the contract.” Lapierre v. Cabral, 122 N.H. 301, 305 (1982). These
terms include: the purchase price, the identity of the parties, and a description
of the real estate in question. Id.; see Cunningham v. Singer, 111 N.H. 159,
160 (1971).
Here, the only “writings” were two blank deeds, signed by McLeod. These
blank deeds were insufficient as a matter of law to satisfy the statute of frauds.
They did not indicate the purchase price, the identities of both parties to the
transaction or describe the real estate in question. The trial court’s ruling on
this issue was, therefore, correct.
To the extent that the petitioner asserts that parol evidence was
admissible to supply the missing terms of the contract, he is mistaken. Where,
as here, the only writings fail to contain any of the essential terms of the real
estate contract, to allow parol evidence to supply these essential terms “would
circumvent the purpose of the Statute of Frauds.” Badr Export and Import,
Inc. v. Groveton, 122 N.H. 101, 103 (1982).
3
The petitioner’s reliance upon Cunningham, 111 N.H. at 160, and
Jesseman v. Aurelio, 106 N.H. 529, 532 (1965), is misplaced. In both cases,
the writings contained at least some of the essential terms of the agreement. In
Cunningham, the writing identified the parties to the transaction and the sale
price. Cunningham, 111 N.H. at 159-60. It also described the property to be
sold as “house with contents and one acre of land . . . first house on the left
belonging to Mrs. Anna Singer . . . on Lewis Hill Bethlehem, N.H.” Id. at 160.
We held that, to the extent that this description was insufficient, the trial court
did not err by relying upon extrinsic evidence to specify the property to which
the writing referred. Id. at 160-61.
Similarly, in Jesseman, both parties to the transaction signed a writing
that identified the parties and the sale price and described the land to be sold
as:
[the] property at the intersection of Route 11 and 11B, Gilford,
N. H. . . . a parcel of land on the Harris Shore Road approximately
300 feet from the Westerly point near the beach to an open sand
pit; then in a Northerly direction and at right angle, for about 500
feet to the brook; and then in a Southwesterly direction to point of
beginning.
Jesseman, 106 N.H. at 530. We ruled that this description was sufficient and
that the trial court erred when it ruled that the agreement was unenforceable
under the statute of frauds. Id. at 533-34.
By contrast, in the instant case, the warranty deeds were completely
blank. Each deed fails to identify either party, does not specify any property to
be delivered and does not specify the purchase price. They are simply
insufficient indicia of the agreement between the parties to satisfy the statute.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court erred by failing to find that
equitable considerations militate against application of the statute of frauds.
See Weale, 117 N.H. at 431. Because “strict enforcement of the statute can
produce frustration on the one hand, and unethical conduct on the other[,] . . .
the law seeks to alleviate the harshness of the statute when some operating
facts, such as fraud, part performance or other equitable considerations, are
present.” Id. (citation omitted). The petitioner contends that “enforc[ing] the
statute [here] would result in unjust enrichment to the seller or fraud[,]” id.,
because he has paid both consideration for the conveyance and all of the taxes
on the property for over thirty years. He asserts that, inter alia, the doctrine of
part performance therefore applies. See id. We agree.
“[T]he ‘part performance’ doctrine is a judicial device [intended] to
prevent the terms of a formal statute from doing grave injustice.” 4 C. Brown,
Corbin on Contracts § 18.6, at 512 (rev. ed. 1997). It effectively withdraws
4
“contract[s] from the operation of the statute of frauds,” 73 Am. Jur. 2d Statute
of Frauds § 311 (2001), when application of the statute would result in “fraud
or irreparable injury on the purchaser who has performed his part of the
agreement,” Warren v. Dodge, 83 N.H. 47, 51 (1927). The doctrine “is
frequently applied to oral contracts for the sale of real estate,” 73 Am. Jur. 2d
supra § 311, where the purchaser “has proceeded, either in performance or
pursuance of the contract, so far to alter his or her position as to incur an
unjust injury and loss,” id. § 319; see Weale, 117 N.H. at 431.
To determine whether the part performance doctrine applies, we must
consider three factors in analyzing the sufficiency of the acts performed by the
purchaser. Specifically, we must look to whether the acts are: (1) “in
pursuance of the contract and in reasonable reliance thereon, without notice
that the defendant has already repudiated the contract”; (2) “such that the
remedy of restitution is not reasonably adequate, making it very unjust for the
defendant to hide behind the statute”; and (3) “one that is in some degree
evidential of the existence of a contract and not readily explainable on any
other ground.” 4 C. Brown, supra § 18.6, at 512. Whether or not “particular
acts suffice to constitute part performance is a question of law,” Richard v.
Richard, 900 A.2d 1170, 1174 (R.I. 2006); see also Simons v. Simons, 134 P.3d
20, 23 (Idaho 2000), and is therefore subject to de novo review. In re Juvenile
2004-789, 153 N.H. 332, 334 (2006).
In this case, the trial court found that the petitioner paid the $5,000
purchase price in 1975, and thereafter took it upon himself to pay all of the
taxes on the property. While payment of monetary amounts in consideration of
an oral contract may be insufficient in-and-of-itself to invoke part performance,
see Lemire v. Haley, 91 N.H. 357, 358-59 (1941), such payment can become
sufficient where additional factors make it equitable to enforce the contract,
such as where the purchaser makes improvements to the disputed property,
see Sawin v. Carr, 114 N.H. 462, 466-67 (1974), pays the property taxes, cf.
Jolley v. Clay, 646 P.2d 413, 419 (Idaho 1982), or takes possession of the
disputed property, see id.; McKenzie v. Rumph, 286 S.W. 1022, 1023 (Ark.
1926); Bradley v. Loveday, 119 A. 147, 149 (Conn. 1922). Ultimately, what
must be considered is “the sum total of factors, as they are found to exist, and
the weakness or absence of some one factor on which emphasis is often placed
may be compensated by the unusual strength and character of the other
existing factors.” 4 C. Brown, supra § 18.6, at 512.
After considering the equities involved in this case, we hold that the
payment of the purchase price, in conjunction with the payment of over thirty
years of taxes, is sufficient for part performance. The petitioner paid both the
purchase price and the taxes pursuant to, and in reliance upon, the McLeod
contract. Id.
5
With regard to restitution of the petitioner's expenditures, the trial court
on remand found “there is no record evidence supporting the availability of any
type of restitution.” Cf. Weale, 117 N.H. at 431 (explaining how the doctrine of
part performance applies when “enforc[ing] the statute would result in unjust
enrichment to the seller”). Notwithstanding that finding, the respondent at oral
argument acknowledged that, taking the facts as found by the trial court, the
petitioner would be entitled to recover the purchase price of the property.
Moreover, when questioned on this issue at oral argument, neither party could
offer a legal ground upon which the petitioner could actually recover. Because
the availability of restitution is a question of law, see 12 C. Brown, Corbin on
Contracts § 1102, at 3 (rev. ed. 2002) (explaining that the rules governing
restitution “are rules of substantive law, not rules of court procedure”), and the
parties have had an opportunity to address it, we proceed to decide the issue.
McLeod died in 1988, a resident of the state of Florida. Florida’s probate
code contains a non-claim statute that provides: “Notwithstanding any other
provision of the code, [two] years after the death of a person, neither the
decedent’s estate, the personal representative, if any, nor the beneficiaries shall
be liable for any claim or cause of action against the decedent, whether or not
letters of administration have been issued . . . .” Fla. Stat. Ann. § 733.710(1)
(West 2006). The petitioner is therefore unable to recover any of his
expenditures from McLeod’s estate, or the beneficiaries of that estate, because
more than two years have elapsed since McLeod’s death. See Dobal v. Perez,
809 So. 2d 78, 80 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2002) (barring a claim against a decedent
for an interest in land); Gilpen v. Bower, 12 So. 2d 884, 884 (Fla. 1943)
(explaining how section 733.710 “bar[s] all liens not mortgages or not held by
those in possession of personalty”); see also May v. Illinois Nat. Ins. Co., 771
So. 2d 1143, 1156 (Fla. 2000) (explaining how a “claimant cannot avoid
[section 733.710] by showing . . . fraud or estoppel or insufficiency of notice”
(citation omitted)). Because the record does not demonstrate that the
petitioner has any adequate avenues of restitution, this factor supports
application of the part performance doctrine.
The petitioner’s multiple tax payments are “in some degree evidential of
the existence of a contract and not readily explainable on any other ground.” 4
C. Brown, supra § 18.6, at 512. We disagree with the trial court’s implicit
holding that because the petitioner “already owned a one-half interest in the
property[,]” his payment of all of the taxes was readily explainable on that
ground. See id. Admittedly, each tenant in common is obligated for the entire
tax bill on any commonly-owned property. But a tenant in common who pays
the entirety of a tax bill has an automatic claim for contribution from his co-
tenants for their proportionate share of the burden, absent an agreement to the
contrary. Howland v. Stowe, 194 N.E. 888, 891 (Mass. 1935) (“One tenant in
common may recover from another his proportionate share of money expended
in paying . . . taxes . . . .”); see also Gage v. Gage, 66 N.H. 282, 296 (1890).
What is relevant, therefore, is not just that the petitioner paid all of the taxes,
6
but rather that he did so for thirty years without exercising his right to
contribution. This forbearance, considered in light of the trial court's finding
that the petitioner and McLeod shared the tax burden equally prior to the 1975
oral agreement, is unexplainable on other grounds.
Application of the part performance doctrine in this case is also in accord
with our prior cases. For instance, in Tsiatsios v. Tsiatsios, a decedent made
an oral promise to bequeath a farm and motel to his four children in return for
the children’s agreement to work, unpaid, on the same property. Tsiatsios v.
Tsiatsios, 140 N.H. 173, 174 (1995). Subsequent to the agreement, the
decedent devised his title and interest in the motel to himself and his new wife
as joint tenants with the right of survivorship. Id. at 175. After the decedent’s
death, his children sought to enforce the oral contract, and the decedent’s wife
objected. Id. On appeal, we held that the children’s years of unpaid work in
reliance upon the agreement was sufficient to withdraw the oral contract from
the statute of frauds and granted specific performance to the children, despite
the widow’s assertion that the children could have been adequately
compensated in quantum meruit. Id. at 176-77.
Similarly, in Sawin, the petitioners had entered into an oral agreement to
occupy, repair and, ultimately, purchase a dilapidated house. Sawin, 114 N.H.
at 464. After the petitioners took possession, made payments for three years,
and expended $4,200 in labor and materials repairing the house, the owner
arranged to sell the property to another. Id. On appeal, we upheld a master’s
finding that it would be inequitable to apply the statute of frauds because “the
substantial improvements made [by the petitioners] were sufficient part
performance to remove th[e] case from the [s]tatute[.]” Id. at 467.
Where, as here, the trial court finds that there was in fact an oral
agreement, that the petitioner paid the purchase price agreed to by that
agreement, and that the petitioner accepted responsibility for all of the property
taxes on the property for over thirty years, equity compels taking the oral
contract outside the statute of frauds. The statute of frauds is intended to
prevent fraud and injustice, not to promote it. Weale, 117 N.H. at 431.
Because a refusal to enforce the oral contract in this case would result in
injustice for the petitioner, we conclude that the doctrine of part performance
withdraws this oral contract from the statute of frauds. Having so determined
that the trial court erred, we need not address the remainder of the petitioner’s
arguments.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7