THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hooksett District Court
No. 2007-675
LIAM HOOKSETT, LLC
v.
ROBERT BOYNTON & a
Submitted: May 22, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 20, 2008
Liam Hooksett, LLC, filed no brief.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Wilbur A.
Glahn, III and Adam M. Hamel on the brief), for the defendants.
DUGGAN, J. The defendants, Robert Boynton and Tina LaRochelle
(tenants), appeal a decision of the Hooksett District Court (LaPointe, J.) ruling
against them in an action by the plaintiff, Liam Hooksett, LLC, for unpaid rent
and possession of certain property based upon nonpayment of rent. See RSA
540:13 (2007). We hold that the plaintiff failed to establish that it is the owner
or lessor of the property at issue. See RSA 540:12 (2007). We further hold
that, because the plaintiff filed an action to recover both possession and
unpaid rent against the tenants, the tenants were statutorily entitled to raise
any defense, claim, or counterclaim in response to the plaintiff’s action. See
RSA 540:13, III (2007). Accordingly, we reverse.
The record supports the following facts. Since at least December 2005,
the tenants have rented an apartment at 1373 Hooksett Road in Hooksett (the
property) without a lease on a month-to-month basis. On June 4, 2007,
Lindsay Bernard, the plaintiff’s manager, hand-delivered a demand for rent to
the tenants. On July 10, 2007, Bernard again served the tenants with a
demand for rent. Bernard then sent an eviction notice to the tenants on July
25, 2007, ordering them to vacate the premises by August 3, 2007.
On August 6, 2007, Bernard filed a writ on behalf of the plaintiff against
the tenants, seeking possession of the apartment and unpaid rent in the
amount of $2,350. That same day, Bernard also signed and filed an “Affidavit
of Ownership/Tenancy” (affidavit), which certified that the plaintiff was the
owner of the property. The affidavit also stated that the person signing the
affidavit “understand[s] that if th[e] certificate is incorrect, th[e] case may be
summarily dismissed by the court.” (Emphasis omitted.) The tenants filed pro
se appearances on August 21, 2007, and, in their appearance forms, asserted
counterclaims under RSA chapter 540-A (2007).
The trial court held a merits hearing on September 4, 2007, at which
Bernard appeared on behalf of the plaintiff, and the tenants appeared pro se.
At the beginning of the hearing, the trial court noted that the plaintiff was
seeking both unpaid rent and possession of the property based upon
nonpayment of rent. It further explained:
[T]he Plaintiff has to meet the burden of proof and try,
they have to establish that the named owner, Liam
Hooksett, LLC actually owns this property. And I
assume the representative, to the extent she’s qualified
to testify about that, will establish that by deed or
testimony or however she chooses to do it.
And then she has to establish that the notices are
in proper form. . . . So the way we’ll proceed is I’ll
swear in the Plaintiff’s representative. She’ll first
address the issue of her authority to appear on behalf
of Liam Hooksett, LLC. And then beyond that, she’ll, if
she gets past that, she’ll start telling me about
ownership and the notices that were given.
Bernard then testified that she was the plaintiff’s manager, the plaintiff had
three members, “those members [had] authorized [her] appearance on behalf of
Liam Hooksett, LLC at [the] hearing,” and she had personal knowledge of the
matters at issue. Based upon this testimony, the trial court found that
Bernard could represent the plaintiff in the action.
2
Subsequently, the trial court heard testimony from Bernard and both
tenants concerning the factual circumstances giving rise to the action. The
essence of Bernard’s testimony was that the tenants had failed to pay rent for
June and July 2007. The tenants raised two issues in defense. First, they
claimed that an individual named Kevin McCarthy, not the plaintiff, was the
actual owner of the property. Although Bernard had not previously
demonstrated, by evidence or testimony, that the plaintiff was the actual owner
of the property, the trial court did not address this issue.
Second, the tenants attempted to testify that they had withheld rent
because their apartment violated the standards of fitness for health and safety
and was therefore uninhabitable. See RSA 540:13-d (2007). They also
attempted to testify to facts underlying their counterclaims under RSA chapter
540-A. The trial court, however, prevented the tenants from raising either the
defense or counterclaims. It ruled: (1) the tenants could not assert
counterclaims arising under RSA chapter 540-A against a possessory action
based upon nonpayment of rent; and (2) the tenants had “failed to comply with
the statutory prerequisites of RSA 540:13-d” by not paying rent “in escrow . . .
as it bec[ame] due,” and, therefore, could not assert a defense for breach of the
warranty of habitability under that statute. Accordingly, the trial court ruled
in favor of the plaintiff.
On appeal, the tenants argue that the trial court’s decision should be
reversed because: (1) the plaintiff failed to establish that it was the actual
owner of the property; (2) the trial court erroneously prevented them from
raising their counterclaims; (3) to the extent that RSA 540:13-d applied, the
trial court erroneously construed it as requiring them to have previously paid
rent into escrow; and (4) Bernard failed to comply with District Court Rule
1.3(D).
Resolution of this case requires us to construe several statutory
provisions. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of
the legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. In the Matter of Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. 498, 503-04 (2007). When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. at 504. We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We also
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id. We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo.
Hutchins v. Peabody, 151 N.H. 82, 84 (2004).
The tenants first argue that the plaintiff failed to meet its burden of
proving that it was the actual owner of the property. RSA 540:12, entitled
“Possessory Action,” provides that “[t]he owner, lessor, or purchaser at a
3
mortgage foreclosure sale of any tenement or real estate may recover
possession thereof from a lessee, occupant, mortgagor, or other person in
possession, holding it without right, after notice in writing to quit the same as
herein prescribed.” The plaintiff filed a writ seeking possession of the property.
Thus, to prevail in this action, the plaintiff was required to prove that it was the
“owner, lessor, or purchaser at a mortgage foreclosure sale” of the property.
RSA 540:12.
The record, however, contains no evidence demonstrating that the
plaintiff met any of these requirements. Bernard never testified that the
plaintiff was the actual owner of the property. Although Bernard attached an
affidavit to the writ in which she certified that the plaintiff was the owner of the
property, that affidavit was not admitted as evidence at the hearing. Indeed,
the trial court neither referenced the affidavit nor made a finding that the
plaintiff owned the property based upon this affidavit. Rather, the trial court
appears to have proceeded with the hearing on the assumption that the
plaintiff was the property’s owner.
To the extent the trial court may have relied upon this affidavit to find
that the plaintiff was the owner of the property, it erred. The so-called affidavit
merely states that Bernard was “certify[ing]” that the plaintiff was the owner of
the property, but does not indicate that it was notarized or otherwise signed
under oath. Further, the affidavit’s assertion that the plaintiff is the owner of
the property is unsupported by any other evidence in the record, including
testimony by Bernard. Accordingly, because the plaintiff failed to meet its
burden of establishing that it was the owner of the property, as required under
RSA 540:12, we reverse.
The tenants next argue that the trial court erroneously prevented them
from raising their counterclaims, and misconstrued RSA 540:13-d as requiring
them to have paid rent into escrow before they could assert the statutory
defense for violations of the standards of fitness. Our holding that the plaintiff
failed to meet its burden of proving ownership of the property would normally
make it unnecessary for us to address these questions. These issues, however,
may arise again, not only in other unrelated landlord-tenant actions, but also
with respect to another action concerning these tenants, this property, and the
actual owner of the property. See Appeal of Seacoast Anti-Pollution League,
125 N.H. 708, 719 (1985). Thus, in the interest of judicial economy, we will
address these questions. Id.
Several statutory provisions “provide the landlord with a summary
process for obtaining a writ of possession in the district courts,” and “provide[]
tenants with defenses based on landlord violations of their obligations.” 17 C.
Szypszak, New Hampshire Practice, Real Estate § 9.07, at 233 (2003); see RSA
ch. 540 (2007). After the landlord provides the tenant with proper notice, see
4
RSA 540:2-:5, :12, the landlord may commence a possessory action based
upon nonpayment of rent by filing a writ in district court. See RSA 540:13. In
addition to seeking possession of the property, the landlord has the option to
make a claim for unpaid rent. See RSA 540:13, III; see also Matte v. Shippee
Auto, 152 N.H. 216, 218-19 (2005).
When a “landlord elects to make a claim for unpaid rent, the court shall
consider any defense, claim, or counterclaim by the tenant which offsets or
reduces the amount owed to the [landlord].” RSA 540:13, III (emphases added).
In these circumstances, “[i]f the court finds that the landlord is entitled to
possession on the ground of nonpayment of rent, it shall also award the
landlord a money judgment.” Id. If, however,
the court determines that the amount owed by the
landlord to the tenant, as a result of set-off or
counterclaim exceeds or equals the amount of rent
and other lawful charges owed by the tenant to the
landlord, judgment in the possessory action shall be
granted in favor of the tenant. If the court finds that
the tenant’s counterclaim exceeds the amount of the
nonpayment, a money judgment shall issue in favor of
the tenant.
Id.
In this case, the trial court prevented the tenants from asserting a
defense under RSA 540:13-d and counterclaims under RSA chapter 540-A.
First, the trial court ruled that the tenants could not assert counterclaims
arising under RSA chapter 540-A to a possession action based upon
nonpayment of rent. In so doing, the trial court appears to have overlooked
RSA 540:13, III, which expressly permitted the tenants to raise any claim or
counterclaim that offsets or reduces the amount owed to the landlord. RSA
540-A:2 and RSA 540-A:3 prohibit landlords from engaging in certain actions,
including violating a tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment of his tenancy, see RSA
540-A:2, and willfully causing the interruption of utility services, see RSA 540-
A:3, I. RSA 540-A:4, II gives the tenant a right to seek relief for such violations.
Therefore, because the plaintiff sought unpaid rent, the court was statutorily
required to consider any claim or counterclaim by the tenants, including one
under RSA chapter 540-A, that offset or reduced the amount owed to the
plaintiff. See RSA 540:13, III.
Second, the trial court prevented the tenants from raising a defense
under RSA 540:13-d. Under that statute, “when a premises leased or rented
for residential purposes is in substantial violation of the standards of fitness
for health and safety, and the violation materially affects the habitability of the
5
premises, the tenant has an affirmative defense to an action for possession
based on non-payment of rent.” Hutchins, 151 N.H. at 84-85. “This defense
precludes the landlord from maintaining an action for non-payment of rent so
long as the four factors set forth in [RSA 540:13-d, I(a)] have been satisfied.”
Id. at 85. When a tenant raises this affirmative defense,
the court may order the [possessory] action continued
for a reasonable time not to exceed one month to
enable the [landlord] to remedy the violation. At the
time such continuance is ordered, the court shall
require the [tenant] . . . to pay into court any rent
withheld or becoming due thereafter as it becomes
due.
RSA 540:13-d, II (emphasis added).
The trial court prevented the tenants from raising this statutory defense
in part because, in its view, the tenants had “failed to comply with the
statutory prerequisites of RSA 540:13-d” by not paying rent “in escrow . . . as it
bec[ame] due.” The plain language of RSA 540:13-d, II, however, requires a
tenant to pay into court any rent withheld or becoming due only in those
circumstances where a court continues an action to give the landlord an
opportunity to remedy the violation. Contrary to the trial court’s ruling,
nothing in RSA 540:13-d suggests that a tenant is required to pay rent into
escrow at any time before such a continuance. The trial court thus erred in its
interpretation of RSA 540:13-d, II.
The plaintiff in this case elected to seek unpaid rent under RSA 540:13,
III. Therefore, the tenants were entitled to raise any defenses, claims, or
counterclaims in response to the plaintiff’s action. To the extent the tenants
raised an affirmative defense under RSA 540:13-d, I, they needed to meet the
four factors in that statute, which, among other things, required the tenants to
“prove[] by clear and convincing evidence that, while not in arrears in rent,
[they] provided notice of the violation to [the plaintiff].” RSA 540:13-d, I(a). The
tenants, however, were not obligated to have paid rent into escrow before they
asserted such a defense. Further, because nothing in the record suggests that
the trial court ordered a continuance to allow the plaintiff to remedy the alleged
violation of the standards of fitness for health and safety, the tenants were not
required to have paid to the court rent withheld or becoming due. Accordingly,
the trial court erred in preventing the tenants from raising any defenses or
counterclaims to the plaintiff’s action.
The tenants argue that, in addition to raising a defense under RSA
540:13-d, they also asserted a breach of the common law implied warranty of
habitability. See Kline v. Burns, 111 N.H. 87, 92-93 (1971) (recognizing
6
implied warranty of habitability in residential leases; explaining that a tenant
may obtain basic contract remedies of damages, reformation, and rescission by
instituting an action for breach of warranty or by offsetting his damages
against a claim made against him by the landlord; and setting forth factors to
be considered in deciding whether there has been a breach of warranty). The
tenants contend, therefore, that the trial court erred in applying the
requirements of RSA 540:13-d to their counterclaim for breach of the common
law implied warranty of habitability. The record, however, fails to demonstrate
that the tenants raised a distinct counterclaim for breach of the common law
implied warranty of habitability at the trial court.
At the hearing, the tenants generally stated that they were raising
violations of fitness. The trial court treated the tenants’ counterclaim as a
statutory defense under RSA 540:13-d. The tenants never disputed this
characterization either at the hearing or in a motion for reconsideration. Thus,
the trial court had no opportunity to consider the interplay between the
common law implied warranty of habitability and the statutory defense under
RSA 540:13-d. While we acknowledge that the tenants were self-represented in
the trial court, our longstanding rule is that we do not review matters not
raised at the earliest possible time. See Mortgage Specialists v. Davey, 153
N.H. 764, 786 (2006). Therefore, because the tenants failed to preserve this
issue for appellate review, we need not reach it. See Tiberghein v. B.R. Jones
Roofing Co., 151 N.H. 391, 394 (2004).
Finally, the tenants argue that the trial court erred in not dismissing the
case based upon Bernard’s failure to comply with District Court Rule 1.3(D)(1)
before appearing on behalf of the plaintiff. This question is unlikely to arise
again, as we assume that the parties will abide by the rule in future actions.
See Dist. Ct. R. 1.3(D)(1) (setting forth requirements for non-lawyers who seek
to appear, plead, prosecute or defend any action for any party, including filing
with the clerk of court (1) a notarized power of attorney signed by the party for
whom the non-lawyer seeks to appear, and (2) an affidavit under oath in which
the non-lawyer discloses certain information). Accordingly, we need not
address this issue. See Hoebee v. Howe, 98 N.H. 168, 174 (1953).
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7