THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2007-039
MICHELLE ALONZI,
ADMINISTRATRIX OF THE ESTATE OF GLENN HOPKINS
v.
NORTHEAST GENERATION SERVICES COMPANY & a.
Argued: September 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: January 15, 2008
Burns, Bryant, Cox, Rockefeller & Durkin, of Dover (Paul R. Cox & a. on
the brief, and Sarah E. Cox orally), for the plaintiff.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Timothy A. Gudas & a. on the
brief, and James E. Owers orally), for defendant Northeast Generation Services
Company.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Patrick H.
Taylor on the brief), for the New Hampshire Trial Lawyers Association, as
amicus curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. This case comes before us on interlocutory appeal
from a ruling by the Superior Court (Mohl, J.), see Sup. Ct. R. 8, declining to
dismiss negligence and wrongful death actions filed by the plaintiff, Michelle
Alonzi, as administratrix of the estate of Glenn Hopkins, against defendant
Northeast Generation Services Company (NGS). Because we overrule Park v.
Rockwell International Corp., 121 N.H. 894 (1981), the touchstone case relied
upon by the trial court, and uphold the constitutionality of the challenged
death benefit provision of the Workers’ Compensation Law, see RSA 281-A:26,
IV (1999), we reverse and remand.
I
We draw upon the interlocutory appeal statement for the facts. The
decedent, Glenn Hopkins, was employed by NGS in June 2003. While acting
within the scope of his employment, Hopkins accidentally died from
electrocution. He left no dependents. The plaintiff brought an action on behalf
of his estate, asserting negligence and wrongful death claims against three
defendants: Waste Management of NH, Inc. T.R.E.E.; Transformer Services,
Inc.; and NGS. NGS moved to dismiss the claims against it, asserting
immunity from tort liability under the workers’ compensation exclusivity
provision, RSA 281-A:8 (Supp. 2007), and death benefit provision, RSA 281-
A:26, IV. The plaintiff objected, and the trial court denied the motion, relying
upon our holding in Park. Subsequently, the trial court approved the following
question for interlocutory appeal:
Did the Superior Court err in denying NGS’ Motion to
Dismiss, and in ruling that the estate of an employee who
died without dependents may maintain a wrongful death
action against the employer, on the basis that the provisions
of RSA 281-A:8 and RSA 281-A:26, IV are unconstitutional
according to Park v. Rockwell?
The plaintiff argues that the trial court properly followed the Park
decision, which held that the exclusive nature of the death benefit available
under the Workers’ Compensation Law for employees who die without
dependents in the course of their employment violated equal protection
afforded under our State Constitution. Park, 121 N.H. at 900. NGS, however,
contends that because the rationale of Park has been eroded in subsequent
cases, we should overrule it and uphold as constitutional the exclusivity of the
death benefit available to the plaintiff under the Workers’ Compensation Law.
In Park, we considered facts similar to those before us, and addressed
the difference in the statutory remedies afforded to estates of dependentless
decedents who are killed at work as compared to the estates of dependentless
decedents who are killed outside of work. Under the former version of the
2
Workers’ Compensation Law, the estate of a dependentless decedent killed at
work could recover no more than $1,200 in burial expenses. See id. at 897.
The statute remains the same, except that the maximum cap for burial
expenses is now $5,000. See RSA 281-A:26, IV. The estate of a dependentless
decedent who was killed outside of work, however, could pursue a wrongful
death claim and recover up to $50,000 in damages. See RSA 556:13 (2007).
Using middle-tier scrutiny, we held that the different treatment of these
two classes of estates violated equal protection under Part I, Article 12 of our
State Constitution. Park, 121 N.H. at 899-900. We declared the exclusivity of
the death benefit provision under the Workers’ Compensation Law to be
unconstitutional
to the extent it applies to employees without dependents who
are killed in the course of their employment . . . and the
plaintiff in this case is entitled to proceed with an action for
wrongful death against his decedent’s employer if he elects to
forego the benefits otherwise provided under RSA ch. 281.
Id. at 900. While noting that “[o]bviously, in cases involving wrongful death,
dependentless employees may be treated differently than other deceased
persons who die without dependents . . . [due to] the employer-employee
status,” id. at 898 (citations omitted), we struck down the exclusive nature of
the death benefit provision, id. at 900. In so doing, we focused solely upon the
disparity between the potential $50,000 recovery under the wrongful death
statute and the limited burial expense benefit under the Workers’
Compensation Law and reasoned:
In order to hold that [the challenged] provisions of our
workmen’s compensation law are constitutional, we would
have to determine that the lives of the deceased employees,
leaving no one dependent upon them at the time of their
work-related deaths, are essentially “worthless.” This we
cannot do.
. . . It would not be just, under the pretext of qualifying the
decedent for workmen’s compensation benefits which under the
terms of that statute he will never receive and which are nominal
in nature, to foreclose the right of his estate, where the facts
otherwise warrant it, to maintain a wrongful death action against
the employer.
Id. at 899-900.
3
NGS contends that a subsequent line of New Hampshire cases discredits
our analysis in Park. See Estabrook v. American Hoist & Derrick, Inc., 127
N.H. 162 (1985), overruled by Young v. Prevue Products, Inc., 130 N.H. 84
(1987); Thone v. Liberty Mutual Ins. Co., 130 N.H. 702 (1988); Thompson v.
Forest, 136 N.H. 215 (1992). It argues that these cases, as well as foreign
cases, establish that the proper constitutional framework requires review of the
death benefit provision in light of the comprehensive scheme of benefits
provided by the Workers’ Compensation Law. Thus, it contends, the Park
analysis in which we compared the recovery available under the death benefit
provision in isolation to that available under the wrongful death statute is
outmoded and no longer viable.
II
We do not lightly overrule a case that has been precedent for over
twenty-five years. “The doctrine of stare decisis demands respect in a society
governed by the rule of law, for when governing legal standards are open to
revision in every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of judicial will
with arbitrary and unpredictable results.” Jacobs v. Director, N.H. Div. of
Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 504 (2003) (quotations omitted). When asked to
overrule a prior holding, we do not look at the issues de novo; rather, we review
“whether the ruling has come to be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement
was for that very reason doomed.” Id. at 504-05 (quotation omitted).
Several factors inform our judgment, including: (1) whether
the rule has proven to be intolerable simply in defying
practical workability; (2) whether the rule is subject to a kind
of reliance that would lend a special hardship to the
consequences of overruling; (3) whether related principles of
law have so far developed as to have left the old rule no more
than a remnant of abandoned doctrine; and (4) whether facts
have so changed, or come to be seen so differently, as to
have robbed the old rule of significant application or
justification.
Id. at 505 (quotations and citations omitted). We have considered the status of
the law in other jurisdictions to examine whether the challenged holding is
unworkable or outside the development of the law. See id. After considering
these various factors, we conclude that the legal landscape has changed to
such a degree as to require us to overrule Park.
Four years after Park, we reviewed the constitutionality of a 1978
amendment to the Workers’ Compensation Law that barred an injured
employee’s right to maintain non-intentional tort actions against a co-
employee. Estabrook, 127 N.H. at 166. While the provisions were challenged
4
on both due process and equal protection grounds, we did not analyze these
grounds separately. Rather, we examined whether the 1978 amendment
provided a quid pro quo, or an adequate substitute remedy, for the rights of
action it otherwise extinguished. Id. at 172. Relying upon our narrow
analytical framework in Park, we struck down the challenged provisions
because the amendment itself provided no substitute remedy. Id. at 178.
Justice Souter dissented. Id. at 181-87 (Souter, J., dissenting). He read the
majority’s opinion as deciding the matter on equal protection grounds, and for
the reasons he stated in his dissent, we agree. Id. at 181 (Souter, J.,
dissenting). Justice Souter opined that the correct equal protection analysis of
a limitation imposed by the Workers’ Compensation Law requires review of the
entire spectrum of benefits provided to employees under that law. See id. at
186 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Just two years later, we overruled Estabrook “[t]o the extent that [its]
holding . . . may be interpreted as requiring that a restrictive amendment to the
workers’ compensation law must be supported by a contemporaneously
enacted provision for a new benefit.” Young, 130 N.H. at 88. The following
year, we further clarified that when conducting a quid pro quo analysis to
ensure that a particular workers’ compensation provision does not infringe
upon due process rights under Part I, Article 14 of our State Constitution, “the
appropriate analysis . . . is to look at the workers’ compensation law in its
entirety.” Thone, 130 N.H. at 705 (emphasis added); see also Thompson, 136
N.H. at 218-19. While Thone and Young were grounded upon due process, not
equal protection, the cases are instructive because, in them, we rejected the
narrow approach we used in Estabrook and Park. This subsequent history
undermines the continued viability of the narrow analytical framework we used
in Park.
Significantly, the Park case has been expressly rejected in at least two
other states. See Taylor v. Southeast-Harrison Western Corp., 694 P.2d 1160,
1161-62 (Alaska 1985); Nosser Dependents v. Natchez Jitney Jungle, 511 So.
2d 141, 142, 143-44 (Miss. 1987). Indeed, the Taylor and Nosser courts noted
that Park stood alone in the face of the majority of jurisdictions. Taylor, 694
P.2d at 1162 (“The overwhelming weight of authority, however, is to the
contrary. Every other jurisdiction that has addressed this constitutional issue
has upheld the exclusive remedy provision as it relates to non-dependents.”);
Nosser, 511 So. 2d at 142 (after reviewing status of law in other jurisdictions,
court noted, “Appellants cite only one case[, Park,] wherein a like provision was
found to be unconstitutional.”). While Taylor and Nosser were decided about
twenty years ago, NGS cites them in its brief and the plaintiff identifies no
foreign case that follows Park. Moreover, in circumstances nearly identical to
those before us, numerous jurisdictions have rejected an equal protection
challenge to the restrictive death benefits available under a workers’
compensation law when an employee is fatally injured on the job and leaves no
5
eligible dependents. See, e.g., Yarchak v. Munford, Inc., 570 So. 2d 648, 650-
51 (Ala. 1990), cert. denied, 500 U.S. 942 (1991); Mullarkey v. Florida Feed
Mills, Inc., 268 So. 2d 363, 364-66 (Fla. 1972), appeal dismissed, 411 U.S. 944
(1973); Estate of Coates v. Pacific Engineering, 791 P.2d 1257, 1260-61 (Haw.
1990); Sanchez v. M.M. Sundt Const. Co., 706 P.2d 158, 160-61 (N.M. Ct. App.
1985). Courts in these jurisdictions did not review the death benefit provision
in isolation, but rather in the context of the other benefits provided by the
workers’ compensation statute at issue. That these courts used rational basis,
rather than intermediate scrutiny, is of no moment. When reviewing the
constitutionality of a workers’ compensation provision, a myopic versus a
comprehensive lens is either proper or not regardless of the level of scrutiny
applied. Review of these other jurisdictions further amplifies that Park is
outside the development of the law.
We conclude that the legal landscape demonstrates that the piecemeal
approach we used in Park to analyze the constitutionality of the death benefit
provision is a remnant of abandoned doctrine and otherwise is out of step with
the development of the law. See Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 504, 505. Accordingly,
we overrule Park and turn next to assess anew whether treating differently the
estates of dependentless decedents who are killed at work and the estates of
dependentless decedents who are killed outside of work violates equal
protection under Part I, Article 12 of our State Constitution. We note that a
challenge under the Equal Protection Clause of the Federal Constitution was
not raised in this case.
III
“The constitutionality of a statute involves a question of law, which we
review de novo.” Gonya v. Comm’r, N.H. Ins. Dep’t, 153 N.H. 521, 524 (2006)
(quotation omitted). Further, we presume statutes “to be constitutional and we
will not declare [one] invalid except upon inescapable grounds.” Id. The
particular inquiry before us is whether the exclusivity of the death benefit
available to the estates of dependentless decedents killed at work under the
Workers’ Compensation Law violates equal protection afforded by Part I, Article
12 of our State Constitution.
“[T]he equal protection guarantee is essentially a direction that all
persons similarly situated should be treated alike.” In re Sandra H., 150 N.H.
634, 637 (2004) (quotation omitted). A classification cannot be arbitrary, “but
must reasonably promote some proper object of public welfare or interest.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “In considering an equal protection challenge under our
State Constitution, we must first determine the appropriate standard of review
by examining the purpose and scope of the State-created classification and the
individual rights affected.” Id. (quotation omitted). The various possible review
standards are commonly known as strict scrutiny, intermediate or middle tier
6
scrutiny, and the rational basis test. See id. at 637, 638; Cmty. Res. for
Justice v. City of Manchester, 154 N.H. 748, 762 (2007).
The parties dispute whether intermediate scrutiny or the rational basis
test is the correct standard of review in this case. The plaintiff argues that
because the death benefit provision limits the right to recover, which is an
important substantive right, the provision must pass intermediate scrutiny to
satisfy equal protection. NGS contends, however, that we apply the rational
basis test when reviewing the constitutionality of Workers’ Compensation Law
provisions.
Our decision in Trovato v. DeVeau, 143 N.H. 523 (1999), dictates that we
apply intermediate scrutiny to assess the disparate treatment between the
classes of estates. In Trovato, we applied middle tier scrutiny to assess the
constitutionality of different treatment of certain classifications within and
outside of the wrongful death statute. Trovato, 143 N.H. at 524-25, 526. We
rejected the argument that rational basis should apply to assess the
constitutionality of the classifications because the legislature merely limited
recovery for a statutorily created action. Id. at 526. We noted that we had
“previously . . . elected to apply a middle tier standard to an estate’s right to
recover under the wrongful death statute.” Id.; see Gould v. Concord Hospital,
126 N.H. 405, 408-09 (1985). Because the present dispute involves precluding
certain estates from bringing claims under the wrongful death statute, Trovato
dictates that we apply middle tier scrutiny.
NGS relies upon Petition of Abbott, 139 N.H. 412 (1985), and Arsenault
v. Abbott Furniture Corp., 122 N.H. 521 (1982), to contend that we should
apply the rational basis test. Petition of Abbott and Arsenault are
distinguishable, however, as neither involved abolishing a right to recover.
Petition of Abbott concerned an equal protection challenge to a provision that
granted additional benefits only to workers who suffered certain spinal injuries.
Petition of Abbott, 139 N.H. at 417. Arsenault involved whether allowing
workers who injured two or more fingers to recover for the loss of function of
their entire hand and disallowing such recovery to workers who injured only
their thumbs violated equal protection. Arsenault, 122 N.H. at 522. The equal
protection challenges to these Workers’ Compensation Law provisions,
however, only implicated the legislative balance of economic burdens and
benefits and did not involve the abolition of the right to recover for one’s
personal injuries. See Abbott, 139 N.H. at 418. By contrast, the equal
protection challenge before us directly implicates the plaintiff’s right to recover
under the wrongful death statute. Because we have previously decided that
the deprivation of such a right requires middle tier scrutiny, we reject the
defendant’s entreaty to apply the rational basis test. Accordingly, we turn our
attention to the constitutionality of the disparate treatment between the classes
of estates.
7
We have recently clarified our middle tier standard. See Cmty. Res. for
Justice, 154 N.H. at 760-63. “[I]ntermediate scrutiny under the State
Constitution requires that the challenged legislation be substantially related to
an important government objective.” Id. at 762. “The burden to demonstrate
that the challenged legislation meets this test rests with the government [or the
party seeking to uphold the statute].” Id. Reliance upon “justifications that are
hypothesized[,] . . . invented post hoc in response to litigation,” or “overbroad
generalizations” are insufficient to uphold challenged legislation. Id.
(quotations omitted).
We first consider whether the exclusivity of the death benefit provision is
based upon an “important” government interest. The death benefit provision is
part of the comprehensive system of benefits afforded to employees under the
Workers’ Compensation Law. This law, as a whole, treats employees as a class
differently from other tort victims. Thus, the “importance” of the government’s
interest in enacting the death benefit provision, which consequently
distinguishes between the estates of dependentless decedents who are killed at
work and the estates of dependentless decedents who are killed outside of
work, must be considered in light of the overall purpose of the law as a whole.
The Workers’ Compensation Law was a radical legislative response to the
evils underlying the common law tort recovery system particular to the
employer-employee relationship. See Mulhall v. Company, 80 N.H. 194, 199
(1921). The industrial revolution created, as a byproduct, a surplus of
personal injury lawsuits filed by employees against their employers. See id. at
196. The courts were “filled with litigation; [which] became the fruitful source
of perjury; . . . engendered bitterness between employer and employee; . . .
resulted in great economic waste, and . . . turned out an army of maimed and
helpless people as dependents upon the charity of friends or the public.” Id.
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). Employers also incurred the particular burden
of falling victim to unjust or excessive claims. Id. at 197.
The Workers’ Compensation Law was designed to supplant this
unsatisfactory system of common law recovery and place the risk of injury
more properly upon whom it belonged. Id. Namely, the risk would “be borne
in the first instance by [the] employer[,] and . . . the employer [could] protect
himself by adding the premium paid for insurance, and the cost of
administering the law, to the over-head charges of his business as a basis for
determining the cost and the price of his product, thus transferring the burden
to the consumer.” Id. Indeed, “[o]ne of the more important aims of the act was
to secure to the injured employee compensation by direct payments under
certain fixed rules without a law-suit and without friction by a procedure at
once simple and inexpensive.” McKay v. N.H. Compensation Appeals Bd., 143
N.H. 722, 725 (1999) (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted). The primary
8
focus was, and is, to address the employee’s loss of earning power regardless of
legal fault, thereby protecting the employee and any dependents who actually
relied upon the now lost wages. See id.; Tarr v. Republic Corp., 116 N.H. 99,
101-02 (1976). Thus,
[i]n place of the common law remedies, the workers’
compensation law creates a balance of benefits and
limitations between the employer and employee. In return
for limited compensation, the employee or the estate of the
employee no longer bears the cost of litigation, delays and
uncertainty. While the employer must assume the risk of
employees’ injuries without the benefit of common law
defenses, the workers’ compensation law limits the extent of
liability.
Thone, 130 N.H. at 706; see also RSA 281-A:8.
The government’s interest in creating the workers’ compensation system
is well-documented in our case law. We have no doubt that this is an
important government interest. Limiting the benefits provided to decedent
employees who leave no dependents is simply an extension of the government’s
important interest in providing benefits when an employee’s earning power is
diminished or lost due to a workplace injury. Therefore, we conclude that the
death benefit provision, within the rubric of the entire workers’ compensation
scheme, is based upon an important government interest.
We next consider whether the means employed by the legislature to
achieve this interest is “substantially related” to it. In making this inquiry, we
do not solely compare the limited nature of the death benefit to the recovery
available under the wrongful death statute. Rather, we review the relationship
between the death benefit provision and the important government interest in
the context of the comprehensive rubric of benefits created by the Workers’
Compensation Law.
Employees have a full panoply of benefits available under the Workers’
Compensation Law, whether the employee is temporarily or permanently
injured, partially or completely disabled, or even killed as a result of a
workplace incident. The act, however, was not designed or intended to provide
tort-like damages or compensation for a legal wrong. See McKay, 143 N.H. at
727. “Unlike tort actions, no damages or compensation are awarded under the
act for pain and suffering, disfigurement as such, loss of consortium, and other
elements of common law damages.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
Rather, the act
9
essentially provides two types of benefits, disability benefits
and permanent impairment awards. Disability benefits
compensate an injured worker for medical care and lost
wages, while permanent impairment awards, otherwise
known as scheduled awards, compensate an injured worker
for the permanent impairment or loss of use of one or more
body parts listed [in the statute.]
Abbott, 139 N.H. at 414. The expansive range of benefits includes in part:
vocational rehabilitation services, see RSA 281-A:25 (Supp. 2007); job
reinstatement, see RSA 281-A:25-a (1999); entitlement to civil penalties for
delayed compensation, see RSA 281-A:42, :43 (Supp. 2007); mandatory award
of attorney’s fees, see RSA 281-A:44 (Supp. 2007); wage benefits, see RSA 281-
A:28 - :31 (1999); and medical care, see RSA 281-A:23 (Supp. 2007). In the
event of death, the act provides compensation for the decedent’s dependents
until certain disqualifying events occur, such as the surviving spouse
remarrying or children reaching the age of majority, see RSA 281-A:26, II, VI
(1999).
By contrast, an estate in a wrongful death action seeks to recover tort-
like damages. Under RSA 556:12, I (2007):
If the administrator of the deceased party is plaintiff, and
the death of such party was caused by the injury complained
of in the action, the mental and physical pain suffered by the
deceased in consequence of the injury, the reasonable
expenses occasioned to the estate by the injury, the probable
duration of life but for the injury, and the capacity to earn
money during the deceased party's probable working life,
may be considered as elements of damage in connection with
other elements allowed by law, in the same manner as if the
deceased had survived.
(Emphasis added.) Wrongful death damages address the injury to the person
and to the estate of the deceased. Tarr, 116 N.H. at 103; see also Marcotte v.
Timberlane/Hampstead School Dist., 143 N.H. 331, 345 (1999) (damages for
loss of life recoverable in wrongful death action). Damages available in such an
action are similar to compensatory damages in which the underlying purpose is
“to make the plaintiff whole again,” Bennett v. Lembo, 145 N.H. 276, 280
(2000), restoring the person wronged “as nearly as possible to the position he
would have been in if the wrong had not been committed,” Smith v. Cote, 128
N.H. 231, 243 (1986). Though we do not decide whether wrongful death and
common law compensatory damages are identical for all purposes, the analogy
is sufficiently apt to distinguish the design and scope of damages available in a
wrongful death action from compensation available to injured employees.
10
By enacting the Workers’ Compensation Law, the legislature sought to
balance the competing needs of employers and employees, address the injured
employee’s lost earning power and protect those who depended upon the
employee’s lost wages. This balance necessarily required the legislature to
make choices which, when isolated in particular situations, burden some while
benefiting others. A decedent employee who leaves no dependents can no more
except himself from the consequences of this legislative balance than can an
employee who is permanently disabled by a work-related incident. Necessarily,
the recovery available to each under the Workers’ Compensation Law is limited
when compared to the recovery available at common law or under statutes like
the wrongful death statute. This was part of the balance struck by the
legislature when it enacted the Workers’ Compensation Law. The Workers’
Compensation Law’s failure to provide benefits to the estate of a dependentless
decedent for the decedent’s lost wages is in keeping with the purpose of the
comprehensive scheme to protect those who were dependent upon an
employee’s wages, which were diminished or lost due to a workplace injury.
We conclude that to the extent that the exclusivity of the death benefit
provision under the Workers’ Compensation Law treats the estates of
dependentless decedents who are killed at work differently from the estates of
dependentless decedents who are killed outside of work, this different
treatment is substantially related to an important government objective.
Therefore, the death benefit provision does not violate the equal protection
guarantee of our State Constitution.
In summary, we overrule our holding in Park, 121 N.H. 894, and declare
that the exclusivity of the death benefit provision of the Workers’ Compensation
Law does not offend the equal protection guarantee of our State Constitution.
Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s denial of NGS’ motion to dismiss and
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11