THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2007-173
JOHN MALONEY, ADMINISTRATOR OF THE ESTATE OF HELENE MALONEY
v.
DENNIS S. BADMAN, M.D. & a.
Argued: November 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 20, 2007
Burns, Bryant, Cox, Rockefeller & Durkin, P.A., of Dover (John E. Durkin
on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (W. Kirk Abbott, Jr. and Sarah S.
Murdough on the brief, and Mr. Abbott orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, John Maloney, administrator of the estate of
Helene Maloney, appeals the order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) granting
summary judgment to defendant Dennis S. Badman, M.D. on the plaintiff’s
negligence action for wrongful death. The defendants, Badman and his
business, Wakefield Family Medicine, cross-appeal from the trial court’s finding
that Badman rendered substandard care and its ruling that he is judicially
estopped by statements in his settlement agreement with the New Hampshire
Board of Medicine (board). We affirm.
I. Background
The trial court’s orders recited the following: The decedent, Helene
Maloney, was the plaintiff’s wife. She committed suicide on July 18, 2001.
She died from an intentional overdose of Percocet. The day before she died, the
decedent checked into a motel using an alias. On July 18, 2001, in response
to a call from the motel’s owner, the police found the decedent in her hotel
room. They also found a suicide note, a check from the decedent to the
plaintiff, and five prescription pill bottles, three of which were empty, two of
which were partially full.
Throughout the decedent’s life, she suffered from Crohn’s disease, which
is a chronic intestinal illness, as well as depression and suicidal ideation. She
treated the major aspects of her Crohn’s disease with a specialist in Boston.
The decedent also saw several local doctors, including Badman, for treatment
of her Crohn’s disease and as primary care physicians.
The decedent saw Badman twice in the spring of 1999 and seven times in
2001. In the course of treating her, he prescribed Percocet and Valium.
Badman never saw or treated the decedent in a hospital, nor did he prescribe
any medications to her in 2000. Pharmacy records show that the decedent
received prescriptions from Dr. John Patten for Percocet in June and October
2000. The prescription of one of the empty bottles found in her hotel room was
filled in October 2000.
Additionally, the decedent received treatment from a psychiatrist.
Badman was informed about the decedent’s visits with her psychiatrist;
specifically, he was notified that she had become severely depressed after her
ileostomy and bowel resection nine years earlier, had lost weight, was house-
bound for two years, was in pain, exhausted, and malnourished, and felt
deformed and hopeless. He was also notified that the decedent was struggling
with mood regulation and that she considered suicide a possibility in the future
should she again become racked with pain due to her Crohn’s disease.
Following the decedent’s death, the board investigated Badman.
Ultimately, the board and Badman entered into a settlement agreement
pursuant to which the board reprimanded him and, among other things,
restricted his license to prescribe certain drugs. In this agreement, Badman
admitted to prescribing medications to the decedent without office visits. He
also admitted that, in treating the decedent, he failed to: perform proper
physical examinations, conduct an objective assessment of her need for drugs,
and document his clinical decisions adequately.
The plaintiff’s expert testified at his deposition that he believed that the
decedent had accelerated depression and that, because of this, Badman erred
2
when he prescribed Valium to her, as this drug worsens depression. The
expert concluded that Badman provided the decedent with substandard care
for her chronic pain, which contributed to her depression, and led to her
suicide.
After the decedent died, the plaintiff brought the instant wrongful death
action against the defendants, alleging that Badman’s negligence had
proximately caused the decedent’s suicide. Badman moved for summary
judgment on the ground that he was not liable for the decedent’s suicide
because he had no pre-existing duty to prevent it. The trial court ruled in his
favor, and this appeal followed.
II. Analysis
A. Standard of Review
We will affirm a trial court’s grant of summary judgment if, considering
the evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the light most
favorable to the non-movant, our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter
of law. Stewart v. Bader, 154 N.H. 75, 87 (2006). We review the trial court’s
application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
B. General Legal Principles
To prevail upon his negligence claim, the plaintiff must demonstrate that
Badman owed the decedent a duty, breached that duty and that the breach
proximately caused the decedent’s suicide. See Dupont v. Aavid Thermal
Technologies, 147 N.H. 706, 709 (2002). Whether a defendant owes a duty is a
question of law. Sintros v. Hamon, 148 N.H. 478, 480 (2002). “Absent a duty,
there is no negligence.” Walls v. Oxford Management Co., 137 N.H. 653, 656
(1993).
Generally, “negligence actions seeking damages for the suicide of another
will not lie because the act of suicide is considered a deliberate, intentional and
intervening act which precludes a finding that a given defendant, in fact, is
responsible for the harm.” McLaughlin v. Sullivan, 123 N.H. 335, 337 (1983);
see Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2286 (unabridged ed. 2002)
(suicide is “the act . . . of taking one’s own life voluntarily and intentionally”);
cf. Cole v. Combined Ins. Co. of America, 125 N.H. 395, 396 (1984) (definition
of suicide as deliberate and intentional “implies that one who commits suicide
. . . must understand the natural physical consequences of his act to produce
death and must have the capacity to choose effectively to do or not to do the
act”). “This is because the act of suicide breaks the causal connection between
3
the wrongful or negligent act and the death.” Bruzga v. PMR Architects, 141
N.H. 756, 757-58 (1997) (quotation omitted).
Other jurisdictions have recognized two exceptions to this general rule.
Id. at 758. Under one exception, liability exists because the defendant actually
caused the suicide; under the other, liability exists because the defendant had
a duty to prevent it. McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at 337.
In McLaughlin, we explained the first exception as follows:
The first exception involves cases where a tortious act is
found to have caused a mental condition in the decedent that
proximately resulted in an uncontrollable impulse to commit
suicide, or prevented the decedent from realizing the nature of his
act. Such cases typically involve the infliction of severe physical
injury, or, in rare cases, the intentional infliction of severe mental
or emotional injury through wrongful accusation, false arrest or
torture.
This exception also encompasses cases in which a statute
prohibiting the sale of certain drugs or liquor was violated by the
defendant. In these cases, liability arises both by virtue of direct
causation (the drugs or alcohol foreseeably caused a frenzy or
uncontrollable impulse to commit suicide), and also out of a
breach of what is described as a duty to refrain from knowingly
making available the actual means of an individual’s self-
destruction.
Id. at 337-38 (citations omitted); see Restatement (Second) of Torts § 455, at
493 (1965) (if actor’s negligent conduct brings about delirium or insanity of
another, actor is liable for harm done by other to himself while delirious or
insane if delirium or insanity prevent him from realizing nature of act or makes
it impossible for him to resist impulse caused by insanity). We adopted part of
this exception in Mayer v. Town of Hampton, 127 N.H. 81, 87 (1985), holding
that:
in order for a cause of action for wrongful death by suicide to lie for
intentional torts, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the
tortfeasor, by extreme and outrageous conduct, intentionally
wronged a victim and that this intentional conduct caused severe
emotional distress in his victim which was a substantial factor in
bringing about the suicide of the victim.
4
We described the second exception in McLaughlin as follows:
The second exception focuses on the existence of a specific
duty of care to prevent suicide. This duty has been imposed as a
matter of law, on essentially two classes of defendants, both of
whom are held to have a special relationship with the suicidal
individual. The typical defendant in such cases is someone who
has a duty of custodial care, is in a position to know about suicide
potential, and fails to take measures to prevent suicide from
occurring. Specifically, this duty has been imposed on: (1)
institutions such as jails, hospitals and reform schools, having
actual physical custody of and control over persons; and (2)
persons or institutions such as mental hospitals, psychiatrists and
other mental-health trained professionals, deemed to have a
special training and expertise enabling them to detect mental
illness and/or the potential for suicide, and which have the power
or control necessary to prevent that suicide.
McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at 338 (quotation and citations omitted); see
Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra § 314A at 118 (“One who is required by
law to take or who voluntarily takes the custody of another under
circumstances such as to deprive the other of his normal opportunities for
protection is under a similar duty to the other.”); see also Restatement (Second)
of Torts, supra comment d at 119 (“The duty to protect the other against
unreasonable risk of harm extends to risks arising out of the actor’s own
conduct.”). We adopted this exception as it pertains to jailers in Murdock v.
City of Keene, 137 N.H. 70, 72-73 (1993), where we held that a jailer could not
be liable under a negligence theory, but could be liable if his or her reckless
conduct proximately caused the prisoner’s injuries from an attempted suicide.
Although we have not yet adopted the other parts of the first exception or
the second exception as it pertains to physicians, at oral argument, the parties
informed the court that they did not want the court to depart from its dicta in
McLaughlin. Therefore, because the parties have not asked us to do otherwise,
we will assume, without deciding, that New Hampshire law recognizes the other
parts of the first exception and the second exception as it pertains to
physicians, and that our dicta in McLaughlin controls.
C. Plaintiff’s Arguments
1. First Exception
The plaintiff first argues that Badman’s conduct falls within the first
exception to the general rule that there is no tort liability for the suicide of
another. Relying upon our observation in McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at 338, that
5
this exception “encompasses cases in which a statute prohibiting the sale of
certain drugs or liquor was violated by the defendant,” he contends that it
applies because Badman’s May 2001 Percocet prescriptions to the decedent
allegedly violated RSA 318-B:9, V (2004) and that with these prescriptions,
Badman knowingly made available the means of the decedent’s self-
destruction. According to Badman’s affidavit, on May 10, 2001, he prescribed
“Percocet 7.5-500 mg, 100 pills” to the decedent and prescribed “Percocet 7.5-
500 mg, 540 pills” to be filled by a mail-in prescription service. Although the
plaintiff asserts that these prescriptions also violated federal law, the federal
statutes he cites pertain to pharmacists, not physicians.
As a preliminary matter, although the defendants contend that the
plaintiff did not preserve this argument for our review, we disagree. This
argument appears in the plaintiff’s objection to the defendants’ motion for
summary judgment. See In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275,
290-91 (2006). We also disagree with the defendants that the plaintiff failed to
develop his argument sufficiently for the trial court’s review. See id. at 291-92.
Although the trial court did not discuss the first exception in its order, we
assume that it made all subsidiary findings necessary to support its ruling.
See Nordic Inn Condo. Owners’ Assoc. v. Ventullo, 151 N.H. 571, 586 (2004).
With respect to the merits of the plaintiff’s argument, even if we assume
that our dicta in McLaughlin about the first exception survived our decision in
Mayer, our review of the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff
discloses no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the first exception
applies to Badman.
In McLaughlin, we stated that liability where a defendant sells certain
drugs or liquor “arises both by virtue of direct causation (the drugs or alcohol
foreseeably caused a frenzy or uncontrollable impulse to commit suicide), and
also out of a breach of what is described as a duty to refrain from knowingly
making available the actual means of an individual’s self-destruction.”
McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at 338. We mentioned dram shop acts and acts
regulating the sale of narcotics by pharmacists as examples of statutes under
which liability is imposed. Id.
With respect to pharmacist liability, “[m]ost of the courts considering the
. . . question have found no liability, reasoning that the act of the decedent in
voluntarily ingesting the poison, with knowledge of its effect, amounts to a new
and intervening proximate cause, insulating the effect of any negligence on the
druggist’s part.” Annotation, Druggist’s Civil Liability for Suicide
Consummated with Drugs Furnished by Him, 58 A.L.R.3d 828, 828 (1974); see
Runyon v. Reid, 510 P.2d 943, 949-50 (Okla. 1973). Liability may be imposed,
if at all, only when the pharmacist (or seller of the instrumentality used by the
decedent to commit suicide) had reason to expect that the drugs (or
6
instrumentality) would be used to commit suicide. See Drake v. Wal-Mart,
Inc., 876 P.2d 738, 740-42 (Okla. Ct. App.), cert. denied (Okla. 1994); Rains v.
Bend of the River, 124 S.W.3d 580, 594-96 (Tenn. Ct. App. 2003) (defendant
who sold ammunition to decedent was not liable for decedent’s suicide absent
evidence that it knew or should have known that decedent intended to use
ammunition to commit suicide). Similarly, liability for suicide under dram
shop laws is also predicated upon foreseeability. See Kirman Rd. Sports Pub &
Rest. v. Dempsey, 723 So. 2d 384 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1998).
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we
conclude that it does not raise a genuine issue of material fact as to whether
Badman knew or should have had reason to expect that the decedent would
use Percocet to commit suicide. Put another way, the evidence, viewed in the
light most favorable to the plaintiff, fails to raise a genuine issue of material
fact as to whether the decedent’s suicide was or should have been foreseeable
to Badman.
It is undisputed that the decedent and Badman had no contact after May
2001, two months before she committed suicide. There is no evidence that the
decedent expressed suicidal ideation to Badman when they had contact in May
2001. Although Badman was told that the decedent became depressed eight
years before she first saw him and that she held open the possibility of suicide
if she became racked with pain, he was also told that she had no current
suicidal ideation or plan. It is also undisputed that the decedent failed to tell
Badman that she attempted suicide in 1987. Further, there is no evidence that
the decedent’s family ever expressed the view to Badman that the decedent was
suicidal. Moreover, the plaintiff’s expert testified at his deposition that,
according to records he reviewed, the decedent saw a mental health provider on
four occasions during the week before she died and was not assessed to be
suicidal. The provider noted that the decedent neither intended nor planned to
commit suicide. Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff, we hold that it is insufficient to raise a triable issue of fact as to
whether it was or should have been foreseeable to Badman that the decedent
would commit suicide. See Lawlor v. Orlando, 795 So. 2d 147, 148 (Fla. Dist.
Ct. App. 2001) (suicide not foreseeable where decedent “showed no indication
of suicidal tendencies; there is no evidence of suicide attempts, threats of
suicide, nor any mention of suicide; and a suicide screening done in connection
with [his] brief incarceration only a few months prior to his suicide revealed no
risk of suicide”).
The plaintiff mistakenly relies upon Edwards v. Tardif, 692 A.2d 1266
(Conn. 1997), which is distinguishable on its facts. The defendant in Edwards
treated the decedent for “recurring clinical depression.” Edwards, 692 A.2d at
1268. Here, Badman treated the decedent for Crohn’s disease. In Edwards,
the decedent took her own life only eight days after her last contact with the
7
defendant’s office. Id. Here, the decedent committed suicide two months after
her last contact with Badman.
For the above reasons, we hold that the trial court did not err when it
granted summary judgment to Badman with respect to the first exception to
the general rule of no tort liability for the suicide of another. To the extent that
the plaintiff asserts that Badman’s May 2001 prescriptions constituted
negligence per se, the record shows that the plaintiff moved to amend his writ
to add such a claim, which the trial court appears to have denied, and that he
has not appealed that denial. Thus, we do not address any negligence per se
claim that the plaintiff purports to argue on appeal.
2. Second Exception
The plaintiff next contends that Badman’s conduct falls within the
second exception to the general rule of no tort liability for the suicide of
another. Specifically, he asserts that Badman had a duty to prevent the
decedent’s suicide because he had a special relationship to her. This
relationship, the plaintiff contends, arose because Badman, as the decedent’s
primary care physician, had a “precise duty to care for her overall health and
well-being,” which included her mental health, and the “precise control” over
medications prescribed to her.
Our review of the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff fails
to reveal a disputed issue of material fact as to whether Badman had the
control necessary to prevent the decedent from committing suicide. “Even in
the case of individual psychiatrists, commentators have suggested that
imposing liability . . . is only appropriate if [the] patient is hospitalized at the
time of the suicide, because a psychiatrist does not have sufficient control over
the non-hospitalized patient to prevent his suicide.” McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at
340 (quotation and brackets omitted). Courts in other jurisdictions have so
held. See King v. Smith, 539 So. 2d 262, 264 (Ala. 1989) (given minimum
personal contacts between psychiatrist and patient and, particularly, fact that
psychiatrist treated patient on out-patient basis, psychiatrist and patient
lacked special relationship necessary to make psychiatrist liable for patient’s
subsequent suicide); Nally v. Grace Com. Church of the Valley, 763 P.2d 948,
956 (Cal. 1988) (recognizing that California Supreme Court has imposed a
special relationship giving rise to a duty to exercise due care in order to prevent
suicide only “in the limited context of hospital-patient relationships where the
suicidal person died while under the care and custody of hospital physicians
who were aware of the patient’s unstable mental condition”), cert. denied, 490
U.S. 1007 (1989); Winger v. Franciscan Medical Center, 701 N.E.2d 813, 820
(Ill. App. Ct. 1998) (mental healthcare professional may be liable for patient’s
suicide where professional “has assumed the custody or control of an
individual, be it for a voluntary or involuntary admission, so that it is treating
8
the individual and has knowledge of his suicidal tendencies”), appeal denied,
712 N.E.2d 825 (Ill. 1999); Runyon, 510 P.2d at 947, 950 (physicians treating
decedent in out-patient clinic lacked degree of control required to impose duty
to prevent suicide). Here, it is undisputed that Badman treated the decedent
on an out-patient basis and that his last contact with her was in May 2001,
two months before she committed suicide. This evidence is insufficient, viewed
in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, to create a genuine issue of material
fact as to whether Badman had the degree of control necessary to create a duty
to prevent the decedent’s suicide.
Because we are assuming that our dicta in McLaughlin controls, we need
not resolve in this appeal whether in another case we might hold that
foreseeability alone creates a special relationship between a physician and
patient sufficient to make the physician liable for the patient’s suicide. We
observe that courts in other jurisdictions are split on this issue. Compare
Edwards, 692 A.2d at 1270, with Nally, 763 P.2d at 959 (“Mere foreseeability of
the harm or knowledge of the danger, is insufficient to create a legally
cognizable special relationship giving rise to a legal duty to prevent harm.”); Lee
v. Corregedore, 925 P.2d 324, 337 (Haw. 1996) (foreseeability alone is
insufficient to create a duty on the part of counselors at a state veterans’
service office to prevent the suicide of their noncustodial clients).
Accordingly, for all of the above reasons, we hold that the trial court did
not err when it granted Badman summary judgment with respect to the second
exception to the general rule of no tort liability for the suicide of another. In
light of our decision, we need not address the parties’ arguments with respect
to the defendants’ cross-appeal.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9