THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2007-649
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
NATHANIEL GIBBS
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 25, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Theodore Lothstein, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Nathaniel Gibbs, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Burling, J.) imposing his suspended sentence for violating its
condition of good behavior. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In September 2004, the
defendant pled guilty to a misdemeanor count of possession of a controlled
drug, and was sentenced to twelve months in the house of correction, all
suspended upon the condition that he be of good behavior for two years, with
one year of probation. In 2006, the defendant was charged with simple assault
on a police officer, resisting arrest, disobeying a police officer, simple assault,
and driving while intoxicated, all arising out of an incident that occurred in
May of that year. The State moved to impose the suspended sentence on the
2004 drug conviction based upon these allegations, asserting that the May
2006 incident violated its condition of good behavior. The defendant moved to
continue the hearing on the State’s motion to impose until the conclusion of
trial on the May 2006 charges, which the trial court granted.
The resisting arrest, disobeying a police officer, and two assault charges
were tried to a jury before Judge Burling. The jury acquitted the defendant of
all four charges, and the State nol prossed the driving while intoxicated charge.
Judge Burling subsequently held a hearing on the State’s motion to
impose the defendant’s suspended sentence. The trial court ultimately
imposed six months of the suspended sentence, stating:
[T]he Court finds that the Court has authority to
order a suspended sentence to be imposed under
the facts of this case in which the defendant was
tried before a jury, found not guilty of four
charges, that the Court acts as a fact finder on a
motion to bring forward, and that I find that by a
preponderance of the evidence the defendant . . .
was not of good behavior . . . .
The trial court further noted that it made “an independent decision based on
the facts that were presented at trial,” and was “not influenced by the jury
verdict, because this is a separate proceeding.”
On appeal, the defendant challenges the trial court’s use of the evidence
presented at trial that resulted in his acquittals as the sole basis for imposing
his suspended sentence. He argues that, pursuant to State v. Cote, 129 N.H.
358 (1987), the trial court is not permitted to rely upon such conduct. He
further argues that if Cote does not serve as an absolute bar to such
consideration, the trial court must be required to articulate what additional
evidence, not presented to the jury, justifies its determination. In the
alternative, the defendant asserts that, even if the trial court correctly relied
upon the evidence that resulted in his acquittal, the ruling must be reversed
because it violated his right to due process.
A suspended sentence may be revoked “upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence of a violation of the condition upon which the sentence was
suspended.” State v. Weeks, 141 N.H. 248, 251 (1996). When, as here, the
condition was to be of good behavior, the State’s burden of proof is satisfied
“either by establishing the fact of a criminal conviction for the acts which
constitute the violation or by proof of the commission of the underlying acts.”
Id. (quotation omitted) We review a trial court’s decision to impose a
2
suspended sentence for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v.
Cooper, 146 N.H. 140, 141 (2001); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
In Cote, we determined that a trial court may not consider criminal
conduct for which the defendant was acquitted for purposes of sentencing.
Cote, 129 N.H. at 376. In that case, the defendant was convicted of three
sexual assault charges arising from a single incident, and acquitted of five
other sexual assault charges arising from a different incident. Id. at 362, 364.
In sentencing the defendant, however, the trial court apparently considered the
acquitted conduct, noting that the charges of which the defendant was
convicted “did not represent an isolated incident.” Id. at 364. In vacating the
sentence, we concluded that it is “disingenuous at best to uphold the
presumption of innocence until proven guilty . . . while at the same time
punishing a defendant based upon charges in which that presumption has not
been overcome.” Id. at 375.
The defendant asserts that Cote applies equally to the imposition of a
suspended sentence based upon the “meaning and effect of an acquittal” as
defined in that case. He further argues that consideration of acquitted conduct
under these circumstances diminishes the underlying jury verdict, as a
conflicting determination by the trial court necessarily implies the jury’s verdict
was inaccurate. We disagree.
Cote involved the enhancement of a sentence based upon acquitted
conduct. Cote, 129 N.H. at 376. The act of sentencing is, in part, punitive.
See State v. Tufts, 136 N.H. 517, 520 (1992). Thus, by relying upon the
acquitted charges in sentencing, the court improperly punished that defendant
for the acquitted conduct. However, the imposition of an existing suspended
sentence for failing to meet a condition of its suspension merely implements a
sentence under its original terms. Thus, unlike in Cote, the trial court here did
not consider the defendant’s acquitted conduct for a punitive purpose, but,
rather, to make an independent judgment regarding the defendant’s
compliance with the conditions of his suspended sentence. In that sense, the
imposition of a suspended sentence is the remedy for a defendant’s
noncompliance, not a punishment for the underlying acts. Cf. Weeks, 141
N.H. at 251 (defendant imprisoned for violating conditions of suspension, not
underlying acts). We conclude this process is fundamentally different from
that of an initial sentence, and, consequently, that Cote is inapplicable here.
The Supreme Court of Virginia has held that the imposition of a
suspended sentence is remedial. See Peyton v. Com., 604 S.E.2d 17, 19 (Va.
2004). Further, several jurisdictions have determined in analogous contexts
that a revocation of this type is remedial, rather than punitive. As one court
noted in the context of parole revocation:
3
It is well established that parole revocation is not
part of a criminal prosecution. Revocation of
parole is remedial rather than punitive, since it
seeks to protect the welfare of parolees and the
safety of society. The termination of parole
results in a deprivation of liberty and thus is a
grievous loss to the parolee. But the harshness of
parole revocation does not alter its remedial
nature.
Standlee v. Rhay, 557 F.2d 1303, 1306 (9th Cir. 1977) (citations omitted); see
also United States v. Brown, 59 F.3d 102,104-05 (9th Cir. 1995); United States
ex rel. Carrasquillo v. Thomas, 527 F. Supp. 1105, 1110 (S.D.N.Y. 1981), aff’d,
677 F.2d 225 (2d Cir. 1982). Although decided in the context of parole or
probation revocation, we conclude these cases are sufficiently similar to the
imposition of a suspended sentence as to be instructive here. See, e.g., People
v. Scura, 72 P.3d 431, 434 (Colo. Ct. App. 2003) (holding revocation of a
suspended sentence analogous to revocation of probation); Brennan v.
Cunningham, 126 N.H. 600, 604 (1985) (noting the similar conditional liberty
associated with suspension of sentence, parole, and probation).
Additionally, other jurisdictions have recognized that the liberty
associated with probation and parole is in the nature of a privilege afforded to
the defendant, rather than a right to which he is entitled. See, e.g., People v.
Moses, 64 P.3d 904, 906-07 (Colo. Ct. App. 2002), cert. denied, 64 P.3d 904
(Colo. 2003); Townsend v. State, 509 S.W.2d 311, 312-13 (Ark. 1974). This
proposition is consistent with New Hampshire law, and further supports our
determination that the imposition of a suspended sentence is remedial rather
than punitive. See State v. LeCouffe, 152 N.H. 148, 152-53 (2005) (no right to
suspension of sentence); Baker v. Cunningham, 128 N.H. 374, 380 (1986) (no
right to parole); State v. Drewry, 141 N.H. 514, 516 (1996) (revocation of a
privilege is a traditional attribute of a remedial action).
The defendant correctly notes that Cote provides greater protection than
that provided to a defendant in United States v. Watts, 519 U.S. 148, 156-57
(1997), where the United States Supreme Court held that a sentencing court
may consider acquitted conduct in determining a proper sentence. However,
Watts is inapposite to our consideration here because Watts, like Cote, involved
an initial sentencing proceeding: a punitive act separate and distinct from the
remedial act of imposing a suspended sentence.
4
The defendant further argues that a decision allowing consideration of
acquitted conduct under these circumstances diminishes the deference
afforded to jury verdicts in that the trial court’s contradictory finding
“necessarily implied that the jury’s verdicts were inaccurate.” We disagree.
Contrary to the defendant’s assertion, the trial court’s determination did not
imply the jury’s verdict was inaccurate. As the trial court correctly noted, the
motion to impose is a separate proceeding, with a different, lesser, burden of
proof. See Weeks, 141 N.H. at 251. Thus, the trial court independently
evaluated the evidence before it to determine whether the State proved, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that a violation of the suspension conditions
had occurred. This in no way reflects upon the jury’s separate task of
determining whether, beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant committed the
alleged crimes.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court’s consideration of the
evidence presented at trial regarding the acquitted conduct was proper for
purposes of imposing his suspended sentence. Furthermore, that
determination was properly premised solely upon the evidence adduced at trial.
Finally, the defendant asserts that the trial court’s ruling violated his
right to due process because we have held that sentencing hearings create
settled expectations. The defendant contends that, based upon Cote, he had a
reasonable expectation that conduct of which he had been acquitted could not
be used to impose his suspended sentence. However, the defendant
misconstrues the meaning of Cote. As we articulated above, there is a
significant distinction between the original sentence at issue in Cote and the
imposition of a suspended sentence. Therefore, the defendant’s reliance upon
Cote is misplaced, and the trial court’s consideration of his acquitted conduct
did not violate due process.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5