THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford County Probate Court
No. 2007-084
IN RE JUVENILE 2007-084
Argued: June 20, 2007
Opinion Issued: September 20, 2007
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the New Hampshire
Division for Children, Youth and Families.
Nancy K. Quinlan, of Dover, on the brief and orally, for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The respondent father appeals an order of the Strafford
County Probate Court (Cassavechia, J.) terminating his parental rights over his
son, the juvenile in this case, pursuant to RSA 170-C:5, III (2002). We vacate
and remand.
The probate court found the following facts, which the parties do not
dispute. On November 27, 2003, the New Hampshire Division for Children,
Youth and Families (DCYF) filed a petition with the Rochester District Court
alleging that the juvenile’s mother had neglected him. At the time, the
respondent resided in Florida. The same day, DCYF filed a second petition
against the juvenile’s mother alleging abuse and neglect of the juvenile’s half-
brother. The father of the juvenile’s half-brother has voluntarily relinquished
his parental rights and is not a party to this matter.
On December 23, 2003, the mother signed a consent agreement in which
she stipulated to a finding of neglect relative to both children. Following the
entry of this consent agreement, the district court held a dispositional hearing
on February 5, 2004, during which it adopted the proposed case plan
submitted by DCYF outlining the requirements for the mother to correct the
conditions leading to the finding of neglect. One requirement was that the
mother have no contact with the respondent. Some time between the
dispositional hearing and a case review hearing in May 2004, the respondent
returned from Florida. Also, at some point between May 2004 and July 26,
2004, the respondent moved into his parents’ home, where the mother and
children were already residing.
On July 9, 2004, an incident of domestic violence between the mother
and the respondent occurred in the presence of the children and was reported
to DCYF. Based upon the domestic violence incident and the mother’s
violation of the no-contact order, DCYF requested that the children be removed
from the home. On July 26, 2004, the district court granted DCYF’s request
and the children were removed and placed in foster care.
On July 29, 2004, DCYF filed a neglect petition against the respondent.
An adjudicatory hearing was held on September 23, 2004, at which the
respondent stipulated to a finding of neglect resulting from domestic violence
perpetrated in the children’s home. On October 25, 2004, a dispositional
hearing was held at which the district court adopted a case plan outlining
various requirements for the respondent to fulfill. From that point until July
21, 2005, various hearings were held in the district court relating to one or
both of the parents to assess their compliance with the requirements set out
for the correction of the conditions leading to the neglect findings.
On July 21, 2005, DCYF filed a motion to change the case plans of both
the mother and the respondent from reunification to termination because, it
alleged, neither parent had meaningfully corrected the conditions leading to the
findings of neglect. On August 18, 2005, the district court held a permanency
hearing, and on August 29 and September 2, 2005, issued orders ending the
reunification efforts, ending DCYF’s obligation to aid in reunification, and
ordering DCYF to file petitions in the probate court for the termination of
parental rights.
DCYF filed termination petitions against both parents in Strafford
County Probate Court, which held a hearing on September 11, 12, and 13,
2006. The probate court issued an order dated November 7, 2006, terminating
the parental rights of the mother over both children, and the parental rights of
the respondent over the juvenile. Both parents appealed. Following briefing,
we affirmed the probate court’s decision relative to the mother by an order
dated May 29, 2007.
2
On appeal, the respondent contends that he was not given the statutorily
required twelve months to correct the conditions leading to the finding of
neglect. Additionally, he contends that the probate court’s determinations that
he failed to correct the conditions leading to the finding of neglect, that DCYF
made reasonable efforts to reunify him with his child, and that terminating his
parental rights was in the best interest of the child, were unsupported by the
evidence.
Regarding the respondent’s statutory argument, he argues that RSA 170-
C:5, III requires that he have a minimum of twelve months to correct the
conditions leading to the finding of neglect. Because he did not have twelve
months, he contends it was error for the probate court to terminate his
parental rights. DCYF responds that either the respondent had the required
amount of time or, if not, the full twelve months was not required in this case.
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of
legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole.” In re Juvenile 2005-212, 154 N.H. 763, 765 (2007) (quotation omitted).
When construing a statute, we first examine its language and, where possible,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. RSA 170-
C:5, III provides that a petition to terminate parental rights may be granted if:
“The parents, subsequent to a finding of child neglect or abuse under RSA 169-
C, have failed to correct the conditions leading to such a finding within 12
months of the finding despite reasonable efforts under the direction of the
district court to rectify the conditions.” Because the statute requires that the
conditions be corrected within twelve months, it cannot be determined whether
the conditions have been corrected until twelve months have elapsed.
Therefore, under the language of the statute, before a petition to terminate may
be granted, the probate court must determine whether the parents have failed,
over the span of twelve months, to correct the conditions leading to the finding
of abuse or neglect.
Upon initial evaluation, the probate court’s order was unclear as to
which dates it considered when deciding whether to terminate the respondent’s
parental rights. Following a request for clarification from this court, the
probate court confirmed that “[t]he statement at page 8 [of the probate court
order] to the effect that the father’s case ‘was approximately three weeks shy of
the twelve-month point’ is correct (adjudication date September 23, 2004 to
permanency hearing August 18, 2005 . . .).” Thus, the probate court admits
that it considered only the approximately eleven months between the
respondent’s adjudication of neglect and his permanency hearing. Because the
statute requires that the probate court review the respondent’s behavior over a
period of at least twelve months, and because it did not do so, the probate
court erred.
3
Despite our holding that the probate court erred by failing to review the
respondent’s behavior over twelve months as required by RSA 170-C:5, III,
DCYF argues that the probate court’s order should be upheld. First, while RSA
170-C:5, III states that the time period for calculating the twelve months begins
“subsequent to a finding of child neglect or abuse under RSA 169-C,” DCYF
contends, relying upon In re Tricia H., 126 N.H. 418 (1985), that the probate
court could have reviewed the respondent’s behavior from the time the
respondent was made aware of the finding of neglect against the mother.
Because, however, the probate court confirmed that it reviewed the
respondent’s behavior beginning with his stipulation to a finding of neglect in
September 2004, it is irrelevant whether the probate court could have reviewed
the respondent’s behavior from some other point, and we express no opinion as
to the applicability of Tricia H. to this case.
DCYF also contends, citing In re Melissa M., 127 N.H. 710 (1986), that it
was not necessary for the probate court to review the respondent’s behavior
over the full twelve months. However, Melissa M. is distinguishable. The
statute at issue in Melissa M. concerned the reunification requirements of a
final order of the district court. Here, the statute is concerned with the proper
timeframe for the probate court to consider in making its determination about
terminating parental rights. The relevant statutory issues are sufficiently
distinct that Melissa M. has no bearing on our decision here. As we have held,
RSA 170-C:5, III requires the probate court to review a parent’s conduct over
twelve months, and neither this court nor the probate court is in the position
to deny any parent, including the respondent, that which is granted by the
legislature.
For the reasons stated, we vacate the order of the probate court
terminating the respondent’s parental rights and remand the matter for
proceedings consistent with this opinion. Because we have vacated the order
of the probate court on the ground stated, we do not address the other
arguments raised by the respondent.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J.,
concurred specially.
BRODERICK, C.J., concurring specially. I concur with the majority that
RSA 170-C:5, III (2002) requires that, before the probate court may grant a
petition to terminate parental rights based upon a finding of child neglect or
abuse under RSA chapter 169-C, the parents must have failed to correct the
conditions leading to such a finding within twelve months of the finding,
despite reasonable efforts under the direction of the district court to rectify the
4
conditions. I also concur with the majority’s statement that “[b]ecause the
statute requires that the conditions be corrected within twelve months, it
cannot be determined whether the conditions have been corrected until twelve
months have elapsed.” I write separately, first, because I remain uncertain as
to which dates the probate court considered when it terminated the father’s
parental rights.
As noted by the majority, we requested clarification from the probate
court as to which dates it considered in making its determination. It is clear to
me that the probate court began with the date of September 23, 2004, the date
on which the Rochester District Court held an adjudicatory hearing and the
father stipulated to a finding of neglect. What remains unclear to me, however,
is the date on which the probate court ended its review of the father’s efforts to
correct the conditions leading to the finding of neglect. Based upon the
probate court’s clarification of an inconsistency in the wording of its order, the
majority states that “the probate court admits that it considered” only the
period between September 23, 2004, and August 18, 2005, the date of the
permanency hearing. I am not so certain of that.
The probate court’s response to our request for clarification also noted
that the district court order subsequent to the permanency hearing was issued
on August 29, 2005, and was supplemented with a second order issued on
September 2, 2005. In addition, this court’s request for clarification noted that
the probate court’s order granting the petition for termination was issued
November 7, 2006, “approximately 26 months after the father signed a consent
agreement.” Absent a definitive statement from the probate court regarding the
end date of its review, I am uncertain if the probate court review ended on
August 18, August 29, or September 2, 2005, all of which were before the
statutorily required twelve-month period, or on November 7, 2006, or some
other date subsequent to September 23, 2005, which was after the statutory
requirement. Consequently, I concur with the majority’s decision to remand
this case to the probate court to decide whether the father failed over a period
of at least twelve months to correct the conditions leading to the finding of
neglect. Because I am not certain that the probate court has not already done
that, however, I am not prepared at this point to say that the probate court
erred.
In addition, I write separately because I disagree with the majority that In
re Melissa M., 127 N.H. 710 (1986), has no bearing on a decision in this case.
The majority states that “DCYF also contends, citing [Melissa M.], that it was
not necessary for the probate court to review the [father’s] behavior over the full
twelve months.” I do not believe that is an accurate portrayal of DCYF’s
argument. DCYF’s memorandum of law states:
5
The Probate Court reasoned that even if the District Court
were deemed not to have provided a full 12 months for [the father]
to correct the conditions of neglect, under [Melissa M.], it is not
required to do so in every case, and therefore termination may be
ordered in any event. While Melissa M. was not decided in the
context of a termination proceeding under RSA 170-C, the Probate
Court’s interpretation is nevertheless sound.
Contrary to the majority, I believe that DCYF has argued that if the twelve-
month period for probate court review (required by RSA 170-C:5, III) is met, it
is not dispositive if the district court efforts did not continue for a co-terminus
twelve-month period.
In Melissa M., subsequent to the division of welfare’s investigation
revealing that the father had sexually abused his daughter, the district court,
pursuant to RSA chapter 169-C, entered a finding that Melissa had been
abused. On de novo appeal, the superior court found that Melissa was an
“abused child” within the meaning of RSA 169-C:3, II, awarded permanent
custody of Melissa to the division, and directed the division to file a petition for
termination of parental rights in the probate court. Melissa M., 127 N.H. at
711. On appeal to this court, the father contended that the trial court had
erred in failing to establish a plan of conditions for him to meet in order to
regain custody of the child, as required by RSA 169-C:21, II. Id. at 712.
Notwithstanding the language of RSA 169-C:21, II, we disagreed, and held that
the statute “does not require a court to attempt to specify conditions under
which a parent and child may be reunited when no conditions exist under
which reunification could safely occur.” Id. at 714.
In the instant case, the probate court recognized that Melissa M. related
to a neglect case under RSA chapter 169-C, and not a termination of parental
rights case under RSA chapter 170-C. The probate court continued:
[T]he court cannot conceive of any logical reason why the [Melissa
M.] ruling would not have equal application to a failure to correct
case brought under RSA 170-C:5, III, as here, since there can be
no failure to correct grounds proved unless there is a predicate
neglect case. To conclude otherwise would lead to the anomalous
result that where the district court properly ruled no effort toward
reunification was necessary under any conditions no termination
could be ordered in furtherance of the child’s permanency
interests via adoption.
I find the reasoning of the probate court to be persuasive. While I agree with
the majority that Melissa M. is “distinguishable” as the “statute at issue in
Melissa M. concerned the reunification requirements of a final order of the
6
district court,” that statute is referenced in RSA 170-C:5, III, and a finding by
the district court under the statute serves as the prerequisite for every petition
for termination under RSA 170-C:5, III. Further, Melissa M. forms much of the
foundation for both the probate court’s order and DCYF’s argument. Given our
remand of this case, the specific applicability of Melissa M. need not be decided
here, yet the issue may well arise in the probate court. Unlike the majority, I
am not prepared at this point to decide that Melissa M. has no bearing here.
7