THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough County Probate Court
No. 2007-031
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF ROBERT D. DORSON
Argued: September 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 31, 2007
Nicholas R. Aeschliman, of Portsmouth, by brief and orally, for the
petitioners.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (James E. Owers and Kelly Ovitt
Puc on the brief, and Mr. Owers orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Peerless Insurance Company/Liberty
Mutual Surety (Peerless), appeals an order of the Hillsborough County Probate
Court (Cassavechia, J.) requiring Peerless to reimburse the estate of Robert D.
Dorson $25,988.48, which represents the surcharge the court imposed upon
the ward’s prior guardian, Nelson Dorson. We affirm.
The record supports the following: The probate court appointed Nelson
guardian over Robert’s person and estate; Nelson obtained a surety bond from
Peerless. In June 2004, Nelson sought permission from the court to relocate
Robert to American Samoa and to borrow $90,000 from the estate; both
requests were denied. Thereafter the court terminated Nelson’s authority as
guardian, ordered him to relinquish the estate assets to a successor guardian
and directed him to file a final account within thirty days. Nelson failed to file
a final account and was found in default. He departed the United States after
misappropriating $137,206.11 from Robert’s estate. This amount included
$112,906.11 that Nelson unlawfully withdrew from one of the funds in which
Robert’s Hartford Life Annuity was invested. In January 2005, the court
appointed the petitioners, Gertrude Edmunds and Nicholas R. Aeschliman,
successor guardians over the estate.
In December 2005, the petitioners asked the probate court to surcharge
Nelson “for all amounts he . . . improperly withdr[ew] from guardianship
accounts, plus all damages resulting from said withdrawals,” including “lost
income from the amounts improperly withdrawn.”
In October 2006, the parties entered into a partial settlement, which the
probate court approved, pursuant to which Peerless paid the estate
$137,206.11. The parties submitted a single question for the probate court’s
review: What is the correct amount of interest and/or lost appreciation that
Peerless should pay on the funds Nelson misappropriated from the Hartford
Life Annuity? While the petitioners argued that Peerless should pay the
appreciation lost on the misappropriated funds between the date Nelson took
them and the date they were repaid, Peerless contended that the estate was
entitled only to interest at the statutory rate. See RSA 336:1, II (Supp. 2007).
The probate court ruled in favor of the petitioners, surcharging Nelson and
requiring Peerless to pay $25,988.48, which represented the difference in the
value of the annuity units when Nelson unlawfully liquidated them
($112,906.11) and when the probate court approved the partial settlement
($138,894.59). This appeal followed.
Our standard of review is statutory: “The findings of fact of the judge of
probate are final unless they are so plainly erroneous that such findings could
not be reasonably made.” RSA 567-A:4 (2007). “Consequently, we will not
disturb the probate court’s decree unless it is unsupported by the evidence or
plainly erroneous as a matter of law.” In re Estate of Treloar, 151 N.H. 460,
462 (2004) (quotation omitted).
Peerless first argues that RSA 524:1-b (2007) required the trial court to
award interest at the legal rate between December 2005, when the petitioners
filed their petition, and October 2006, when the court approved the partial
settlement. RSA 524:1-b provides:
In all other civil proceedings at law or in equity in which a
verdict is rendered or a finding is made for pecuniary damages to
any party . . . there shall be added . . . to the amount of damages
interest thereon from the date of the writ or the filing of the
petition to the date of judgment . . . .
2
Peerless asserts that RSA 524:1-b applies because the probate court, in
this equity proceeding, made a finding of pecuniary damages to a party.
Peerless contends that “[u]nder RSA 524:1-b and [RSA] 336:1, application of
the statutory rate of interest to the post-writ, prejudgment loss of the use of
money is mandatory.” To the contrary, any surcharge imposed by the probate
court, regardless of whether it took the form of interest or lost appreciation,
was part of the debt or loss to the estate and did not constitute prejudgment
interest governed by RSA 524:1-a (2007) (pertaining to actions on debt) or RSA
524:1-b. In re Estate of Ward, 129 N.H. 4, 12-13 (1986).
Our decision in In re Estate of Ward is instructive. In that case, the
executor of an estate took $116,820 from the decedent’s bank accounts and
converted the funds to his own use. In re Estate of Ward, 129 N.H. at 6-7. The
executor first argued that the probate court lacked jurisdiction because the
money he took did not constitute a debt to the estate and, thus, was not
subject to probate court jurisdiction. Id. at 7-8. We held, to the contrary, that
the executor’s unexplained withdrawals from the estate constituted a debt of
the executor to the estate. Id. at 9.
The executor also asserted that the interest on the funds he
misappropriated constituted prejudgment interest and, therefore, the probate
court erred when it calculated interest from the date the funds were
misappropriated instead of from the date upon which demand was first made
for their repayment. Id. at 12. We disagreed:
The question, however, is whether the charge of interest on
misappropriated funds can properly be considered pre-judgment
interest added onto a claim, or as part of the debt itself. We favor
the latter construction. In situations involving tort claims, for
example, interest accrues from the date of the suit in order to
compensate the plaintiff for loss of the use of damage money while
a lawsuit is pending. The dispositive factor is that the pre-
judgment sum represents the initial loss that constitutes the
claim. In the context of the instant case, we are presented with a
different situation. Here, the misappropriated funds were already
in [the decedent’s] bank accounts and earning interest. When [the
executor] withdrew those funds he also withdrew the ability of the
money to earn interest. By misappropriating the $116,820, [the
executor] also misappropriated the interest thereon. Thus, the lost
interest was just as much a debt as the actual funds.
Id. (citation omitted). Thus, we held that the probate court did not err by
calculating interest from the date of the misappropriation. Id. at 6, 12-13.
3
Similarly, here, the funds that Nelson unlawfully withdrew from the
Hartford Life Annuity were debts that he owed the estate and any surcharge
that the probate court decided to impose upon Nelson, whether it took the form
of interest or lost appreciation, was part of this debt, and not an award of
prejudgment interest. Accordingly, Peerless’ reliance upon RSA 524:1-b is
mistaken.
Peerless next asserts that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by assessing a surcharge that represented the difference in the value
of the units of the annuity from the date upon which they were liquidated to
the date the court approved the partial settlement. We disagree.
“A surcharge is the equitable penalty imposed when a trustee fails to
exercise the requisite standard of care and the trust suffers thereby.” In re
Scheidmantel, 868 A.2d 464, 492-93 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2005). It “is the penalty
for failure to exercise common prudence, common skill and common caution in
the performance of the fiduciary’s duty and is imposed to compensate
beneficiaries for loss caused by the fiduciary’s want of due care.” In re Estate
of McCool, 131 N.H. 340, 346 (1988) (quotation omitted) (adopting
Pennsylvania law). Equitable remedies are particularly within the sound
discretion of the trial court. See LaMontagne Builders v. Bowman Brook
Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 274 (2003). We assume, without deciding,
that, as Peerless contends, we review the probate court’s imposition of a
surcharge under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Cf.
Mooney v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 149 N.H. 355, 357 (2003) (reviewing trial
court decision to impose equitable remedy of recission and restitution under
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). We hold that the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion.
Contrary to Peerless’ assertions, when crafting a remedy for a trustee’s
breach of trust and breach of loyalty, “[t]he court is not confined to a limited
list of remedies but rather will mold the relief to protect the rights of the
beneficiary according to the situation involved.” G. G. Bogert & G. T. Bogert,
The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 861, at 4 (2d ed. rev. 1995). “Equity is
primarily responsible for the protection of rights arising under trusts, and will
provide the beneficiary with whatever remedy is necessary to protect him and
recompense him for loss, in so far as this can be done without injustice to the
trustee or third parties.” Id. at 3-4. In addition to direct damages, courts may
order consequential damages and punitive damages where malice or fraud is
involved. Id. at 48-51. The court may “adapt[ ] its decree[ ] to fit the nature
and gravity of the breach and the consequences to the beneficiaries and
trustee.” G. G. Bogert & G. T. Bogert, The Law of Trusts and Trustees § 543(V),
at 441 (2d. ed. rev. 1993). Equity “does not always grant the same kind of
relief for the same kind of wrongdoing; its object is not merely to prevent loss to
4
the trust estate or wrongful gain by the trustee.” Id. Rather, one of the
purposes of relief may be to deter other trustees from acting similarly in the
future. Id. at 441-42.
In this case, the court imposed a surcharge that was designed to put the
estate in the same position it would have been had Nelson not misappropriated
the funds. That remedy is one of many that a beneficiary may pursue. See
Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 205 (1959). “When a breach of trust occurs,
the beneficiary of the trust is entitled to be put in the position he would have
been if no breach of fiduciary duty had been committed.” Berish v. Bornstein,
770 N.E.2d 961, 977 (Mass. 2002) (quotation omitted); see Matter of Wills of
Jacobs, 370 S.E.2d 860, 865 (N.C. Ct. App.) (“damages for breach of trust are
designed to restore the trust to the same position it would have been had no
breach occurred”), review denied, 373 S.E.2d 863 (N.C. 1988). Other remedies
include holding the trustee liable for “any loss or depreciation in the value of
the trust estate resulting from the breach of trust” or requiring the trustee to
disgorge any profit that the trustee made through the breach of trust.
Restatement (Second) of Trusts, supra § 205; see Restatement (Second) of
Trusts, supra § 206 (remedies available under section 205 also apply where
trustee breaches duty of loyalty).
Where, as in this case, “the beneficiary should seek damages on the
theory of conversion, the court may award him ‘appreciation damages’,
representing the appreciated value of the property at the time of the
beneficiary’s suit or judgment thereon rather than its value at the time of
misappropriation.” Bogert & Bogert, supra § 543(V), at 446; see also
Restatement (Second) of Trusts, supra § 208; Restatement (Third) of Trusts
Prudent Investor Rule § 208 (1992).
For instance, in Flagship Bank v. Reinman, Harrell, Silberhorn, Moule &
Graham, P.A., et al., 503 So. 2d 913, 913, 916 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1987), where
the trustee of a land trust had negligently failed to protect the trust property
from loss by tax sale, the court ruled that “[t]he beneficial interest holders are
entitled to damages equaling the fair market value of the retained and lost
property at the time of trial.” As the court explained, “By applying the fair
market value of the retained and lost property at the time of trial, the trial
judge awarded damages to the beneficial interest holders which placed them in
a position very similar to that which they would have been in had the
promoters not fraudulently retained the property.” Flagship Bank, 503 So. 2d
at 916.
The court in Matter of Estate of Rothko, 372 N.E.2d 291, 298-99 (N.Y.
1977), also awarded appreciation damages. The case concerned paintings in
the estate of painter Mark Rothko. Estate of Rothko, 372 N.E.2d at 293. The
estate beneficiaries sought surcharge of the executors and restitution to the
5
estate of certain paintings. See id. at 293. Because the paintings could not be
returned to the estate, the court ruled that “the estate [was] therefore entitled
to their value at the time of the decree, i. e., appreciation damages.” Id. at 298.
The purpose of such a surcharge was to “make the estate whole.” Id.
Courts have also awarded appreciation damages in cases involving
monetary investments. For example, in In re Estate of Scharlach, 809 A.2d
376, 386 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2002), the court approved imposing a surcharge upon
the trustee that constituted the gain that the trust’s principal would have
realized had the trustee adhered to the investment plan. Such a remedy, the
court explained, placed the beneficiary in the position he would have been had
the trustee followed the investment plan. In re Estate of Scharlach, 889 A.2d
at 386; see In re Scheidmantel, 868 A.2d at 493 (court may grant a surcharge
“for the purpose of providing the beneficiaries with the unrealized gain to the
value of principal assets of a trust that was lost because of a trustee’s failure to
fulfill its duty of care”).
In this case, we hold that the trial court did not engage in an
unsustainable exercise of discretion by awarding the difference in value of the
units of the Hartford Life Annuity from the date they were misappropriated to
the date that the probate court approved the partial settlement. The trial court
reasonably could have concluded that such a surcharge was equitable under
the circumstances of this case.
Peerless next asserts that the evidence before the probate court failed to
support the surcharge it imposed. The record submitted on appeal reveals,
however, that the probate court based its decision upon the testimony of the
petitioners’ expert. As there is evidence in the record to support the surcharge
imposed by the probate court, we uphold it.
Peerless also contends that the surcharge imposed by the probate court
would have been inequitable had the fund from which Nelson took the units
depreciated in value. Presumably, had the fund from which the money was
taken depreciated in value, the probate court would have imposed a different
remedy than that which it imposed here. We need not speculate in this case,
however, as to what remedy a probate court might deem equitable in such a
case.
Finally, Peerless contends, for the first time on appeal and without citing
any authority, that because the petitioners introduced no evidence of the rate
of return that a prudent investor would have realized, “the statutory
prejudgment rate established under RSA 336:1 appropriately measures the
Estate’s loss of use of funds.” We decline to address this argument because
6
Peerless has failed to demonstrate that it preserved it for our review. See Bean
v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004). The record submitted on
appeal reveals that Peerless failed to raise this argument to the probate court.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7