THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2007-074
RALPH R. JOYCE
V.
TOWN OF WEARE
Argued: October 18, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2007
Prunier & Prolman, P.A., of Nashua (Andrew A. Prolman on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Drescher & Dokmo, P.A., of Milford (William R. Drescher on the brief and
orally), and Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Brian J.S. Cullen
on the brief), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Ralph R. Joyce, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Barry, J.) dismissing his petition for review of a decision of the
Town of Weare Planning Board for lack of standing. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On May 13, 2003, Joyce entered
into a purchase and sale agreement with Michael Durgin for a parcel of land
located in the Town of Weare (Town). They intended to subdivide the property
into residential lots. To achieve this end, Joyce obtained a power of attorney
from Durgin and his wife, Diane, granting him authority to “petition and
appear in front of the . . . Planning Board . . . to garner subdivision approval
and building permits” for the property. Under the terms of the purchase and
sale agreement, Joyce was also required to “negotiate[] and contract[] for
services necessary for the study and analysis of the subject parcel” so that an
application for subdivision could be filed “on or about September 15, 2003.”
For various reasons, Joyce failed to submit the subdivision application to
the planning board until March 5, 2004. On March 9, 2004, however, the
Town adopted an interim growth management ordinance (IGMO), which for a
one-year period prohibited the planning board from formally accepting or
acting upon “any site plan applications for single family housing, multi-family
housing, mobile home parks or condominiums . . . or any other major
subdivision applications creating a total of more than 3 lots.” Weare Land Use
Assoc. v. Town of Weare, 153 N.H. 510, 510 (2006). Accordingly, because
Joyce’s subdivision application called for more than three lots, the planning
board tabled the proposal until after the expiration of the one-year IGMO.
On July 7, 2004, Joyce and Durgin responded by jointly filing a petition
challenging the constitutionality of the IGMO’s one-year moratorium on
subdivision applications. On June 10, 2005, the parties amended the petition
to also challenge the constitutionality of several of the permanent growth
management ordinances enacted by the Town following expiration of the IGMO.
The purchase and sale agreement between Joyce and Durgin lapsed in
January 2006 and, because their relationship had deteriorated, was not
extended. As a result, the Durgins revoked the power of attorney and Durgin
moved for voluntary nonsuit of his claims. On September 18, 2006, the trial
court granted the motion, thus ending Durgin’s involvement in this case.
Durgin has since retained a new engineering company and, without Joyce’s
involvement, submitted a separate subdivision application for the property to
the planning board.
On September 12, 2006, the Town filed a motion to dismiss, arguing,
among other things, that Joyce now lacks standing to continue with his
petition because he no longer has any interest in the property. On that same
day, Joyce filed a civil suit against Durgin, challenging the termination of the
purchase and sale agreement and asserting claims for conversion, unjust
enrichment, reformation, breach of contract, and specific performance. See
Joyce v. Durgin, Hills. Cty. Super. Ct., Northern District, No. 06-E-0425. In
his objection to the Town’s motion to dismiss, Joyce contended that he has
standing in this case because he could ultimately obtain an interest in the
property through successful prosecution of Joyce v. Durgin. Joyce also argued
that he has standing because he made significant investments in the creation
of his subdivision application.
2
On December 12, 2006, the trial court granted the Town’s motion to
dismiss, ruling that Joyce lacks a direct, definite, and personal interest in the
outcome of this case. The trial court noted that Joyce “no longer holds any
interest in the actual property,” “no longer has any right to pursue a
subdivision of the property,” and, thus, is “in essence, pursuing an appeal on a
subdivision application that no longer exists.” Moreover, the court determined
that Joyce’s “mere assertion of certain expenditures is insufficient to
demonstrate that he possesses a direct and definite interest in” the outcome of
this case. Finally, the court explained that, if Durgin improperly terminated
the purchase and sale agreement, the civil suit against Durgin was the proper
avenue through which to recover damages, not a planning board appeal.
Joyce moved to reconsider, arguing that he has standing because
dismissal of his planning board appeal would “completely undermine[]” his
ability to obtain the remedies potentially available to him in Joyce v. Durgin;
namely, specific performance and equitable reformation. In addition, Joyce
argued, for the first time, that the trial court should stay his petition pending
resolution of Joyce v. Durgin. The trial court denied the motion. Joyce now
appeals.
I
Pursuant to RSA 677:15, I, “persons aggrieved” by a planning board
decision have standing to file a petition for review of that decision in the
superior court. RSA 677:15, I (Supp. 2007); Nautilus of Exeter v. Town of
Exeter, 139 N.H. 450, 452 (1995). To be considered a person aggrieved, a
litigant must have a “direct definite interest in the outcome of the proceedings.”
Goldstein v. Town of Bedford, 154 N.H. 393, 395 (2006).
To determine whether a party’s interest in the outcome of a planning
board proceeding is sufficiently direct and definite to bestow standing, the trial
court must conduct a factual inquiry. Nautilus of Exeter, 139 N.H. at 452. In
so doing, “the trial court may consider factors such as the proximity of the
plaintiff’s property to the site for which approval is sought, the type of change
proposed, the immediacy of the injury claimed, and the plaintiff’s participation
in the administrative hearings.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted).
Ultimately, when a party’s motion to dismiss “challenges the plaintiff’s standing
to sue, the trial court must look beyond the plaintiff’s unsubstantiated
allegations and determine, based on the facts, whether the plaintiff has
sufficiently demonstrated his right to claim relief.” Ossipee Auto Parts v.
Ossipee Planning Board, 134 N.H. 401, 403-04 (1991) (citation omitted).
However, when the underlying facts are not in dispute, we review the trial
court’s determination de novo. ACG Credit Co. v. Gill, 152 N.H. 260, 261
(2005).
3
In his petition, Joyce is challenging the constitutionality of ordinances
that govern and affect land located in the town of Weare. As a general rule,
such constitutional arguments cannot be raised by a party unless “the party’s
own rights have been or will be directly affected.” Hughes v. N.H. Div. of
Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 35 (2005) (citation omitted). However, the record
does not indicate that Joyce owns any property affected by the challenged
ordinances. See Nautilus of Exeter, 139 N.H. at 452. The only interest that
Joyce has ever had in challenging the constitutionality of the town ordinances
arose from his contractual arrangement with Durgin. Thus, his standing has
up to this point relied upon his status as a contract vendee.
Contract vendees can have standing to appeal planning board decisions
because, theoretically, “it is the vendor’s rights which are being determined and
the vendee [is] considered [to be] acting as agent for his vendor and with the
latter’s consent.” Romeskie v. Chapin, 262 N.Y.S.2d 756, 757 (Sup. Ct. 1965).
In this case, however, it is undisputed that all the contracts Joyce has relied
upon for standing are no longer in effect. Both the power of attorney and the
purchase and sale agreement have been terminated. In addition, the contract
vendor, Durgin, has withdrawn as a party to the petition. It can therefore no
longer be said that Joyce is operating as an “agent for his vendor,” id., or, more
to the point, that Joyce has standing as a contract vendee. See Goldfeld v.
Planning & Zoning Com’n., 486 A.2d 646, 649 (Conn. App. Ct. 1985)
(dismissing a zoning commission appeal for lack of standing where the
appellant’s option to purchase the subject parcel ceased six weeks prior to the
trial court’s judgment in the appellant’s favor); Romeskie, 262 N.Y.S.2d at 757-
58 (holding that a contract vendee lacked standing to appeal a zoning board
decision where the contract vendor alleged that the agreement between the
parties was, by its terms, null and void).
Because he can no longer maintain standing as a contract vendee, Joyce
must demonstrate he has some other sufficient interest in the outcome of this
case. See Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395. To meet this burden, Joyce asserts that
he has standing because: (1) he could potentially obtain an interest in the
property at some later point through his prosecution of Joyce v. Durgin; (2) he
has made substantial investments in the actual subdivision application; and
(3) dismissal of this case would undermine his ability to recover certain
remedies he is seeking in Joyce v. Durgin. Joyce also argues, in the
alternative, that the trial court erred by failing to stay this case until the
conclusion of Joyce v. Durgin. We address each argument in turn.
First, Joyce’s assertion that he has standing in this appeal simply
because, at some later point, he could potentially obtain an interest in the
property through his prosecution of Joyce v. Durgin is without merit.
Admittedly, Joyce is seeking certain equitable remedies against Durgin which,
if obtained, might give him a sufficient interest in the property to have standing
4
in this case. But, at this time, Joyce v. Durgin remains pending and it is
uncertain whether Joyce will ultimately be successful in obtaining those
remedies. Such a speculative interest in the property does not give rise to a
“definite” interest in the outcome of this appeal. See Nautilus of Exeter, 139
N.H. at 452; see also Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 592
(unabridged ed. 2002) (defining “definite” as that which is “identified or
immediately identifiable”). We thus reject Joyce’s argument that he can have
standing today merely because he could obtain a sufficient interest in the
outcome of this case at some point in the future. See 15 P. Loughlin, New
Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and Zoning § 33.01, at 468 (2000)
(explaining how our standing doctrine requires the litigant to have a “concrete
adverseness”). Moreover, because the pendency of Joyce v. Durgin is not
relevant here, we reject the contention raised throughout Joyce’s brief that the
trial court erred by failing to consider the validity of his claims in that case.
Second, we do not agree with Joyce that he has standing in this appeal
by mere virtue of the “investment made to date into his subdivision
application.” Joyce does not argue in his brief that he is attempting to recover
damages from the Town itself. Indeed, he admits that he will “not have any
claim to pursue the subdivision or the constitutional issues presented with
respect to the Weare zoning ordinances” if he is unsuccessful in his claims
against Durgin. Instead, Joyce argues that he has standing to maintain his
petition because he made investments in the subdivision application and, thus,
has a direct interest in the determination of whether the ordinances legally
applied to that subdivision. However, as noted above, the contracts which gave
Joyce authority to pursue the subdivision are no longer in effect and Durgin
has filed a separate subdivision application for the property. Therefore, even if
we were to permit this case to proceed and the ordinances were ruled
unconstitutional, there would be no direct effect on the subdivision application
and, thus, no direct benefit to Joyce. See Nautilus of Exeter, 139 N.H. at 452.
While we have extended our standing doctrine in planning board appeals, see
Weeks Rest. Corp. v. City of Dover Sambo’s Rest., 119 N.H. 541, 545 (1979)
(interpreting the predecessor to RSA 677:15); Price v. Planning Board, 120 N.H.
481, 484 (1980), we have never gone so far as to allow standing where litigants
have no direct interest in the outcome of their appeals. Accordingly, Joyce’s
investment in the actual subdivision application is insufficient to give him
standing to bring this planning board appeal. Price, 120 N.H. at 484.
Third, Joyce argues that he has standing because dismissal of this action
will somehow “completely undermine” his ability to obtain certain equitable
remedies in Joyce v. Durgin. We fail to see how our holding today will so
hinder Joyce in pursuing relief in Joyce v. Durgin. Moreover, we have not
found, and Joyce has not provided, any authority that supports the proposition
that such considerations should factor into our standing analysis. We
therefore conclude that Joyce does not have standing on these grounds.
5
Finally, we reject Joyce’s argument that the trial court erred by failing to
stay this case until resolution of Joyce v. Durgin. Because the trial court
determined that Joyce did not have standing, it did not err by failing to grant
Joyce’s motion to stay.
II
While Joyce previously had standing to bring the planning board appeal
as a contract vendee, the contract upon which his standing relied has been
terminated. That Joyce is currently challenging that termination in a separate
civil proceeding is of no consequence because, even if he will ultimately be
successful, he has failed to “sustain his interest in the property involved
throughout the course of [this] appeal.” Goldfeld, 486 A.2d at 649; see also 1A
C.J.S. Actions § 76, at 290 (2005) (“the requisite personal interest, or standing,
that existed at the commencement of the litigation must continue throughout
its existence in order for the litigation not to become moot”). Because he has
failed to demonstrate that he has other grounds for standing beyond his
defunct interest as a contract vendee, Joyce does not possess the type of
“concrete adverseness that is essential to proper judicial resolution of the
issues.” Loughlin, supra, § 33.01, at 468. Accordingly, we affirm the trial
court’s order dismissing his petition.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6