THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-537
FOUNDATION FOR SEACOAST HEALTH
v.
HCA HEALTH SERVICES OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, INC. & a.
Argued: May 22, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 15, 2008
Devine, Millimet & Branch P.A., of Manchester (George R. Moore and
Daniel E. Will on the brief, and Mr. Moore orally), and McDermott, Will &
Emery LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Emily E. Smith-Lee on the brief), for the
plaintiff.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton P.A., of Manchester (Wilbur A.
Glahn, III on the brief), and Latham & Watkins LLP, of Washington, D.C.
(Everett C. Johnson, Jr. & a. on the brief and Mr. Johnson orally), for the
defendants.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Foundation for Seacoast Health (Foundation),
appeals decisions of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) granting the defendants’,
Hospital Corporation of America (HCA) and its successors and HCA Health
Services of New Hampshire, Inc. (HCA-NH), motion for summary judgment and
motion to dismiss, and denying the Foundation’s motion for partial summary
judgment. We affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
I. Background
The trial court found or the record supports the following. In 1895, the
New Hampshire legislature created the Portsmouth Regional Hospital (hospital)
as a public trust. In 1983, the trustees of the hospital decided to sell the
hospital and entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (APA) with HCA and
HCA-NH. When the parties entered into the APA, HCA was a publicly traded
national corporation that owned all of the common stock of HCA-NH. Upon
closing, HCA-NH became the owner of the hospital’s assets and operator of the
hospital.
The proceeds of the sale went to the creation of the Foundation, a non-
profit entity charged with, among other things, ensuring that the hospital
continued to meet the healthcare needs of the community. The APA affords the
Foundation a right of first refusal (ROFR) to repurchase the hospital’s tangible
assets under certain circumstances.
We note here that HCA has undergone numerous transactions since
1983 and is currently survived by a successor. For ease of reference, we adopt
the defendants’ use of the term “HCA3” to refer to the 1983 iteration of HCA
and all its successors. We also note that the defendants acknowledge that
HCA3 took HCA’s place under the APA.
The ROFR provision reads as follows:
5.2.11. Right to Repurchase Hospital.
(a) Right of First Refusal. Neither [HCA3] nor
HCA-NH will directly or indirectly by merger or
transfer of stock or otherwise sell, transfer, assign, or
otherwise dispose of all or any substantial part of the
assets of the Hospital (a “Transfer”) unless (i) [HCA3]
shall have received a bona fide arm’s length written
offer with respect to the Transfer of such assets of the
Hospital (a “Bona Fide Offer”), and (ii) prior to the
making of any such Transfer, [HCA3] shall have given
written notice to the Foundation stating its desire to
dispose of such assets and enclosing a copy of the
Bona Fide Offer. Thereafter, the Foundation shall
have an assignable option to purchase all (but not less
than all) of the tangible assets specified in such notice,
2
said option to be exercised by the giving, by the
Foundation or its assignee (the “Purchaser”), as
appropriate, within 120 days after delivery of such
notice, of a counter-notice stating that the sender of
such counter-notice desires to purchase all of such
assets. . . . Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
Section 5.2.11(a) shall not apply to a Transfer by
[HCA3] or HCA-NH to a wholly-owned subsidiary of
[HCA3] (“Transferee”) if, from and after such Transfer,
the Transferee shall perform and assume all
obligations of [HCA3] and HCA-NH under this
Agreement and prior to such Transfer shall agree to
such performance and assumption of obligations in a
writing satisfactory to the Seller; provided, however,
that no such Transfer shall relieve [HCA3] from any of
its obligations hereunder.
APA § 5.2.11(a).
HCA-NH continued to own and operate the hospital since the parties
entered into the APA in 1983. However, numerous transactions and corporate
restructurings occurred after 1983 significantly altering the corporate structure
above HCA-NH. We need not recite every transaction here. Because the issues
on appeal center around a 2006 leveraged buy-out (2006 LBO) and a
transaction in 1999 (1999 transaction), we recite only those facts pertinent to
these transactions.
By 1999, HCA3, now a limited liability company by merger, was held by a
company called Healthtrust, Inc. – The Hospital Company (Healthtrust), which
in turn was held by a company called Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation
(Columbia). HCA3, in turn, owned 100% membership interest in Hospital
Corp., LLC. Hospital Corp., LLC had previously been inserted, through a series
of transactions, into the corporate chain between HCA3 and HCA-NH, and in
1999, it owned 100% of the common stock of HCA-NH, which continued to own
the hospital’s assets.
In the 1999 transaction, HCA3 transferred 100% of its membership
interest in Hospital Corp., LLC to HCA3’s parent, Healthtrust. This resulted in
the removal of HCA3 from the hospital’s corporate chain. HCA3 did not send
the Foundation written notice of this transaction. After the 1999 transaction,
Columbia was the parent corporation to Healthtrust, which held Hospital
Corp., LLC, which was the parent company to HCA-NH, which owned the
hospital’s assets.
3
Over the next two years, Columbia’s name was changed twice and by
2001, it was known as HCA Inc. In 2006, HCA Inc. was the subject of the 2006
LBO, through which a group of private investors acquired all of HCA Inc.’s
stock. HCA Inc. did not send the Foundation written notice of this transaction.
In response to inquiries from the Foundation, HCA Inc. sent a letter explaining
its position that the ROFR was not triggered by the 2006 LBO.
In October 2006, before the 2006 LBO transaction was finalized, the
Foundation filed suit against HCA3 and HCA-NH seeking: (1) a declaratory
judgment that the proposed 2006 LBO triggered the ROFR; (2) injunctive relief
to prohibit the LBO; (3) specific performance under the terms of the ROFR; and
(4) damages for a breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
The Foundation subsequently withdrew its motion for injunctive relief and the
HCA Inc. shareholders completed the 2006 LBO.
In March 2007, both the Foundation and the defendants filed motions for
summary judgment. The defendants sought summary judgment on all counts;
the Foundation sought partial summary judgment on its petition for
declaratory judgment “that the recent sale of the Defendants’ corporate parent
triggered an unambiguous contractual right of first refusal belonging to the
Foundation.”
In April, before the hearing on the summary judgment motions, the
Foundation filed an amended petition adding a claim for breach of contract for
the refusal to give the Foundation “an opportunity to exercise its right of first
refusal” during the 2006 LBO. The amended petition also added claims for
breach of contract and breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing against the defendants for the 1999 transaction, which the Foundation
asserted it had learned of “only recently.”
In May 2007, the trial court issued an order denying the Foundation’s
motion for partial summary judgment and granting the defendants’ motion for
summary judgment, resulting in the dismissal of the Foundation’s challenge to
the 2006 LBO. Finding the language of the ROFR unambiguous, the trial court
ruled:
[A]bsent a “change of control” provision in a ROFR
clause, a stock sale does not generally amount to a
transfer of corporate assets that will trigger the
ROFR. . . .
[T]he plain terms of the ROFR at issue here do
not guarantee the Foundation a right-of-first-refusal
triggered by a change in HCA [Inc.]’s shareholders.
HCA-NH is still the direct owner of the assets of
4
Portsmouth Regional Hospital; until such time as
those assets have been legally transferred to another
entity, the ROFR lies dormant.
The defendants subsequently filed a motion to dismiss the Foundation’s
remaining claims regarding the 1999 transaction for failure to state a claim for
which relief can be granted. The defendants argued that the court’s summary
judgment order compelled dismissal of the Foundation’s remaining claims. The
court agreed, ruling: “[The] prior order [of] the court found as a matter of law
that the Foundation’s ROFR is only triggered by an actual transfer of the
assets[,]” and “[d]espite the corporate reformations . . . in 1999, actual
ownership of the assets of the Hospital has remained constant.” The
Foundation argues that the trial court erred in finding “that only a transfer of
the Hospital assets from their immediate owner triggers the right of first
refusal.”
II. The Right of First Refusal Provision
“The interpretation of a contract, including whether a contract term is
ambiguous, is ultimately a question of law for this court to decide.
Accordingly, we review a trial court’s interpretation of a contract de novo.”
Behrens v. S.P. Constr. Co., 153 N.H. 498, 500 (2006) (citation omitted).
When interpreting a contract, “our inquiry focuses on the intent of the
contracting parties at the time of the agreement.” R. Zoppo Co. v. City of
Dover, 124 N.H. 666, 671 (1984).
In the absence of ambiguity, the parties’ intent will be
determined from the plain meaning of the language
used. The words and phrases used by the parties will
be assigned their common meaning, and we will
ascertain the intended purpose of the contract based
upon the meaning that would be given to it by a
reasonable person.
Greenhalgh v. Presstek, 152 N.H. 695, 698 (2005) (citation omitted).
The Foundation argues that the trial court erred in denying its motion for
partial summary judgment because: (1) the plain language of the ROFR
provision demonstrates an intent to reach parent-level stock transactions; (2)
the ROFR provision and the APA as a whole demonstrate an intent to bind the
entire corporate structure; (3) reading the APA as a whole reflects the broad
reach of the ROFR provision intended by the parties; and (4) the inclusion of
5
“change of control” language in the ROFR provision is not required for the
ROFR to apply to a change in ownership of a parent company’s stock.
The Foundation first argues that under the plain language of the ROFR
provision, stock transactions involving parents or other upstream entities of
HCA3 may trigger the ROFR. We disagree. The ROFR provision states:
“Neither [HCA3] nor HCA-NH will . . . .” We find this phrase to be
unambiguous. It specifies only two actors that can trigger the ROFR: HCA3
and HCA-NH. This language does not demonstrate an intent that actions, such
as a stock transfer, by a parent or other upstream entity of HCA3 trigger the
ROFR.
The Foundation, however, cites H-B-S Partnership v. Aircoa Hospitality,
114 P.3d 306 (N.M. Ct. App.), cert. denied, 113 P.3d 345 (N.M. 2005), In re
Asian Yard Partners, Nos. 95-333-PJW, 95-334-PJW, 1995 WL 1781675
(Bankr. D. Del. Sept. 18, 1995) and Continental Cablevision v. United
Broadcasting, 873 F.2d 717 (4th Cir. 1989), and argues that these courts have
“conclude[d] that parent-level stock transactions trigger similar rights of first
refusal” where the language “directly or indirectly” was included in the right of
first refusal.
In H-B-S Partnership, the El Dorado Partnership (EDP) was formed by
Aircoa Hospitality Services, Inc. (AHS), NZ EDP, Ltd. Company (NZ) and H-B-S
Partnership (HBS), for the purpose of acquiring an interest in the El Dorado
Hotel. H-B-S Partnership, 114 P.3d at 308. The partnership agreement
contained the following right of first refusal (HBS ROFR):
[I]f at any time a Partner proposes to sell, assign, or
otherwise dispose of all or any part of his interest in
the Partnership, such Partner (“Offeror”) shall first
make a written offer to sell such Partnership interest
to the other Partners on the same terms and
conditions on which the Offeror proposes to transfer
the Partnership interest. Such offer shall state the
name of the proposed transferee and all the terms and
conditions of the proposed transfer, including the price
to the proposed transferee . . . .
. . . .
For purposes of this agreement, restrictions upon the
sale, assignment or disposition of a Partner’s interest
shall extend to any direct or indirect transfer
including, without limitation: (a) an involuntary
transfer such as a transfer pursuant to a foreclosure
6
sale; (b) a transfer resulting by operation of law, or as
a result of any merger, consolidation or similar action;
and (c) the transfer of an equity interest in a Partner
which is a corporation, partnership or other entity if
the transfer of the equity interest results in a change
in control of such corporation, partnership or other
entity.
Id. at 308-09 (quotation omitted).
Subsequently, notice of a proposed sale of Richfield Holding Corporation
(RHC), the great-great-grandparent of AHS (one of the partners) was sent to
HBS and NZ. Id. at 310. Under the terms of the proposed sale, the seller
offered a one hundred percent equity interest in RHC, which included all of
RHC’s interests in assets. Id. Among the assets listed was AHS’s equity
interest in EDP. Id. HBS sought to enforce the HBS ROFR against AHS and
demanded that it be provided with an identical written offer. Id. AHS refused,
denying that the HBS ROFR was triggered. Id. The sale of RHC went through
and HBS brought suit against AHS. Id. at 310-11.
The court held that the sale of RHC “constitute[d] an indirect transfer of
an ‘equity interest in a Partner.’” Id. at 314 (emphasis omitted). The court
emphasized that “‘Transfer’ is itself broadly defined by [the HBS ROFR
provision] to encompass ‘any direct or indirect transfer’ of an equity interest by
or in a partner ‘without limitation[]’” and that, therefore, “the [HBS] ROFR is
triggered regardless of whether the transaction is two or even five tiers
removed, so long as it results in a change of that control of AHS.” Id.
Recognizing “the general rule that a sale of a subsidiary by a parent
corporation is not a sale of the subsidiary’s assets, unless the assets are
actually transferred,” id., the court held that the HBS ROFR provision was
worded broadly so as to include such indirect transfers and that while “[t]he
general rule will hold true in most cases, . . . [it] can be trumped by contract
language,” id. at 315.
While we recognize that H-B-S Partnership stands for the principle that a
right of first refusal can be triggered by stock transactions of entities far up the
corporate chain from the parties to the right of first refusal, it stands equally
for the principle that the plain language of the right of first refusal controls over
general principles of law. Id. at 314-15; see also Glick v. Chocorua
Forestlands, L.P., 157 N.H. __, __ (decided May 16, 2008). As recognized by the
H-B-S Partnership court, the HBS ROFR provision was worded broadly, as
evidenced by the language: “without limitation” and “including . . . the transfer
of an equity interest in a Partner . . . if [such] transfer . . . results in a change
in control.” H-B-S Partnership, 114 P.3d at 309 (quotations omitted).
7
The ROFR provision before us, however, is narrower than the one in H-B-
S Partnership. While both ROFR provisions contain the term “indirectly,” the
ROFR provision before us does not contain language such as “without
limitation” and “result[ing] in a change in control,” – language that the H-B-S
Partnership court relied upon in its interpretation. Id. at 313. Accordingly, we
find H-B-S Partnership distinguishable on this point.
In addition, we find that Asian Yard and Continental do not support the
Foundation’s argument that the language “directly or indirectly” binds
corporate entities that are not parties to a right of first refusal. These cases,
while involving a right of first refusal provision and an anti-assignment clause
that contained “directly or indirectly” language, also involved transfers by a
party to the agreement. Asian Yard, 1995 WL 1781675, at *5; Continental, 873
F.2d at 719. The courts in these cases, therefore, never addressed whether the
term “indirectly” bound other entities that were not parties to the agreements.
Accordingly, we find the cases relied upon by the Foundation on this
point to be unpersuasive. We rely instead upon the plain and unambiguous
language of the ROFR provision, which unequivocally specifies the two actors
that may trigger it, HCA3 or HCA-NH. If neither party acts, the ROFR is not
triggered.
The Foundation next argues that the parties to the ROFR provision
intended that it bind the entire corporate structure. The Foundation claims:
(1) “the parties agreed to the terms ‘directly or indirectly’ and ‘by merger or
transfer of stock or otherwise,’ language which has previously been held to
evidence an intent to bind the entire corporate structure”; (2) the APA contains
language “applicable to all of the post-closing covenants, that clearly places the
obligation to comply with those commitments on any member of the . . .
corporate family in a position to effect compliance or noncompliance”; and (3)
“the parties included language that restricted [HCA3] from transferring direct
or indirect ownership of the Hospital assets within its corporate structure in a
way that might defeat or impair the intended operation of the ROFR.” We
address each argument in turn.
The Foundation’s first argument on this point is merely a reiteration of
its previous argument, as noted in its brief. Therefore, we rely upon our
analysis above regarding the “directly or indirectly” language.
The Foundation next argues that language found elsewhere in the APA
establishes that actions by any member of the corporate family may trigger the
ROFR. Specifically, the Foundation cites the following provision:
5.2. Covenants Surviving the Closing. In
addition to their other undertakings herein, each of
8
[HCA3] and HCA-NH hereby covenants and agrees that
it will comply (and, to the extent applicable, will cause
. . . [the] subsidiaries of [HCA3] to comply) from and
after the date hereof with the provisions set forth in
this Section 5.2.
We fail to see how this language establishes that actions by any member
of the corporate family may trigger the ROFR. Its primary function is to bind
HCA3 and HCA-NH to the terms set forth in Section 5.2. The Foundation,
however, emphasizes the parenthetical language: “will cause . . . [the]
subsidiaries of [HCA3] to comply.” We read this unambiguous language of this
provision to promise, and only “to the extent applicable,” that HCA3 and HCA-
NH “will cause . . . [the] subsidiaries of [HCA3] to comply[] . . . with the
provisions set forth in . . . Section 5.2.” (Emphasis added). This provision,
therefore, only addresses subsidiaries of HCA3. It does not evince an intent to
include each member of the corporate family as an actor capable of triggering
the ROFR contained in Section 5.2.11(a).
Finally on this issue, the Foundation argues that the ROFR provision
contains language which prevents the defendants from engaging in intra-
corporate transactions that would defeat the “intended operation of the ROFR.”
The Foundation specifically points to a clause in the ROFR which allows “a
Transfer by [HCA3] or HCA-NH to a wholly-owned subsidiary of [HCA3]”
provided the subsidiary agrees in writing to the terms of the APA. APA §
5.2.11(a). This provision, however, specifically addresses only wholly-owned
subsidiaries of HCA3.
Next, the Foundation argues that the APA, when read as a whole, reflects
the parties’ intent that the ROFR can be triggered by other actors in the
hospital’s corporate chain other than HCA3 and HCA-NH. It argues that “this
Court has emphasized that rights of first refusal must be construed in the
context of the entire agreement between the parties, and in view of both the
situation of the parties at the time of contracting and the objects to be served
by the contract provisions.”
The Foundation argues that HCA3 was carefully selected due to the
trustees’ “concern about selling the Hospital to a for-profit entity and [that the
trustees] negotiated an agreement designed to provide maximum protection to
the community.” This does not, however, change our reading of the
unambiguous terms of the ROFR provision, which specify the constrained
actors, HCA3 and HCA-NH. We do not agree with the Foundation’s assessment
that our interpretation fails to reflect the parties’ intent, given the express
terms of the ROFR provision.
9
Finally, on this point, the Foundation argues that inclusion of “change of
control” language is not “required for [the] ROFR to apply to a change in
ownership of a parent company’s stock.” This argument, however, misses the
point. Even assuming, arguendo, that this is correct, it does not change the
fact that the ROFR provision at issue is not triggered by transfers of stock by
an upstream entity of HCA3. As we stated above, if neither HCA3 nor HCA-NH
is the entity making the transfer, the ROFR is not triggered.
Accordingly, we hold that, under the plain language of the ROFR
provision, only the actions of HCA3 or HCA-NH can trigger the ROFR.
III. The 2006 Leveraged Buyout
The trial court found that the 2006 LBO did not trigger the ROFR
because “a transfer of the hospital’s assets simply did not occur – either
directly or indirectly – during the . . . LBO in 2006. HCA-NH owns the assets of
Portsmouth Regional Hospital today, just as it has since 1983.” Because we
conclude that neither HCA3 nor HCA-NH acted, however, we need not decide
whether the trial court properly found that the hospital’s assets were not
transferred, either directly or indirectly, during the 2006 LBO. See
EnergyNorth Natural Gas v. Continental Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 156, 165 (2001)
(“We will not overrule the trial court’s grant of summary judgment where it
reached the right result, albeit on mistaken grounds.” (quotation omitted)).
In the 2006 LBO, the public shareholders of HCA Inc. approved a
leveraged buy-out whereby all public shares in HCA Inc. were sold to private
investors. HCA Inc. is the corporate great-grandparent of HCA-NH and an
entirely distinct entity from HCA3. See Maryville Hotel Assocs. I, LLC v.
IHC/Maryville Hotel Corp., No. 4:05 CV 1493 DDN, 2006 WL 1237264, at *5
(E.D. Mo. May 5, 2006) (refusing to find “that the corporate defendant . . . acted
to sell[] or transfer[] property interests because its corporate grandparent did
so”). Moreover, HCA Inc. itself did not act; it was HCA Inc.’s shareholders who
acted in the leveraged buy-out. These facts are not disputed. Thus, neither
HCA3 nor HCA-NH acted in the 2006 LBO, and, as explained above, the ROFR
was not triggered. See White Wave, Inc. v. Dean Foods Company, No. CIV.A.
01-M-1073, 2001 WL 1833980 (D.Colo. Dec. 5, 2001); Maryville Hotel, 2006
WL 1237264, at *5-*6.
Accordingly, the defendants are entitled to summary judgment on all
counts involving the 2006 LBO and the Foundation’s motion for partial
summary judgment was properly denied.
10
IV. The 1999 Transaction
Next, we address the trial court’s order dismissing the Foundation’s
remaining counts for breach of contract and breach of the covenant of good
faith and fair dealing regarding the 1999 transaction.
The standard this court applies in reviewing a
motion to dismiss is whether or not the plaintiff’s
allegations are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery. We take as
true all facts well pleaded, and construe all reasonable
inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party.
Bio Energy v. Town of Hopkinton, 153 N.H. 145, 151 (2005) (citation,
quotations and brackets omitted).
First, we note that the Foundation’s petition alleges that “[HCA3], the
successor in interest to the original purchaser of the Hospital,” made a
transfer. Therefore, the first requirement under the ROFR provision is met,
since HCA3 acted. The question before us, therefore, is whether the
Foundation’s petition sufficiently alleges that a “Transfer” occurred either
“directly or indirectly by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise” that disposed
of the assets of the hospital. APA § 5.2.11(a).
In support of its claims for breach of contract and breach of the covenant
of good faith and fair dealing, the Foundation alleges:
[The following] transaction[ ] involved a direct
breach of the Foundation’s right of first refusal. . . .
[I]n 1999, [HCA3], the successor in interest to the
original purchaser of the Hospital, conveyed or
otherwise transferred both HCA-NH and the Hospital
to its own corporate parent [Healthtrust], without
providing notice to the Foundation.
. . . .
35. Healthtrust was the corporate parent of
[HCA3], and was not a wholly owned subsidiary of
[HCA3].
. . . .
37. At no time did the Defendants notify the
Foundation of the 1999 Transaction nor did they give
11
the Foundation an opportunity to purchase the
Hospital pursuant to Section 5.2.11(a).
. . . .
70. As set forth above, the actions of the
Defendants constitute a breach of the Foundation’s
rights under Section 5.2.11(a) of the Agreement . . . .
71. As a result of Defendant[s’] actions, the
Foundation was denied the opportunity to purchase
the Hospital’s assets and/or pursue its available
remedies under the APA. Defendants’ breach has
caused and continues to cause the Foundation to
suffer damages.
. . . .
88. Defendants, without justification and in
bad faith, have interfered with the Foundation’s ability
to exercise its rights under the Agreement by
concealing and failing to provide notice of numerous
transactions within the HCA corporate family between
1983 and the present, including the 1999 Transaction,
and by conducting their affairs with the Foundation in
a manner which indicated that these changes had not
occurred.
Accordingly, the Foundation alleged that in 1999, HCA3 “transferred
both HCA-NH and the Hospital to its own corporate parent,” that no notice was
given and that this transfer constituted a breach of its ROFR. The Foundation
argues that these allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery under the ROFR provision which provides that the
ROFR is triggered when either HCA3 or HCA-NH disposes of the hospital’s
assets “indirectly by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise.” The defendants
argue that this provision does not apply to the 1999 transaction.
The trial court did not reach this issue because it granted the motion to
dismiss based upon its finding that “actual ownership of the assets of the
Hospital has remained constant. . . . [T]he Foundation’s ROFR is only triggered
by an actual transfer of the assets of the Hospital [and] . . . the Foundation has
failed to allege facts showing an actual asset transfer.”
12
The Foundation argues that the trial court did not address the actual
dispute between the parties, but instead “adopted its own, narrower
construction of the APA.” It asserts:
Prior to the Superior Court’s Order on summary
judgment, neither party had ever taken the position
that only a conveyance of the Hospital assets could
trigger the right of first refusal. Instead, the parties
agreed that some stock transactions triggered the
right, but disputed how far up the corporate chain the
provision was intended to reach.
Indeed, the defendants acknowledged in the trial court and on appeal that the
language “indirectly by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise” has meaning
and assert that a transfer of HCA-NH’s stock or a merger of HCA-NH would
trigger the ROFR. They argue, however, that this language was only meant to
reach transactions at HCA-NH’s level, and not meant to reach parents or other
upstream entities of HCA-NH, such as when, in the 1999 transaction, HCA-
NH’s parent (i.e., Hospital Corp., LLC) was transferred by HCA3 to HCA3’s
parent (i.e., Healthtrust).
We agree with the parties that, the phrase “indirectly by merger or
transfer of stock or otherwise” demonstrates the contracting parties’ intent to
reach transactions in addition to a direct conveyance of the hospital’s assets.
The trial court correctly ruled that, generally, a right of first refusal
restricting the transfer of a company’s assets is not triggered by transactions
such as the company’s parent undergoing a merger, or all of the parent’s stock
being transferred to another entity. “A corporate parent which owns the shares
of a subsidiary does not, for that reason alone, own or have legal title to the
assets of the subsidiary; and, it follows with even greater force, the parent does
not own or have legal title to the subsidiaries of the subsidiary.” Dole Food Co.
v. Patrickson, 538 U.S. 468, 475 (2003); see also 19 C.J.S. Corporations § 909,
at 423 (2007) (“A merger does not affect the status of the assets of a subsidiary
of one of the parties to the merger, if the subsidiary’s own corporate existence
was not affected.”).
However, where the language of the right of first refusal expressly
provides that a merger or transfer of stock may constitute an indirect transfer
of assets, we adhere to the express terms of the contract language. Cf. Glick,
157 N.H. at __ (focusing upon the “intent of the parties, as manifested in the
language of the entire contract” to determine scope of ROFR, rather than broad
principles of law (emphasis omitted)); see also H-B-S Partnership, 114 P.3d at
315 (“The general rule will hold true in most cases, but can be trumped by
contract language.”). Here, the language of the ROFR provision provides, in
13
relevant part: “Neither [HCA3] nor HCA-NH will directly or indirectly by merger
or transfer of stock or otherwise . . . dispose of all or any substantial part of the
assets of the Hospital . . . .” APA § 5.2.11(a) (emphasis added).
We find the cases previously cited by the Foundation germane to this
issue. For example, in H-B-S Partnership, the court ruled that under the
terms of the HBS ROFR provision, the right of first refusal was triggered by the
stock sale of a great-grandparent to one of the parties of the HBS ROFR
provision. H-B-S Partnership, 114 P.3d at 315. As we stated above, we do not
find the ROFR provision before us to be as broad as that in H-B-S Partnership
such that we would find the ROFR is triggered by a stock sale involving the
actions of any entity other than HCA3 or HCA-NH. Where, however, either
HCA3 or HCA-NH is the entity making the transfer (as is the case in the 1999
transaction), we find that H-B-S Partnership supports our interpretation of the
phrase “indirectly by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise.” The H-B-S
Partnership court held that “[i]n light of the broad language of [the HBS ROFR],
expressly restricting both indirect and direct transfers of equity interests . . .
we conclude that the parties bargained for a broader ROFR than parties to
whom the general rule has been applied.” Id. (emphasis added). We apply the
same principle here. The language of the ROFR restricts transfers occurring
both “directly or indirectly by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise,” thereby
demonstrating the parties’ intent to reach transactions other than a direct
conveyance of the hospital’s assets. See also Asian Yard, 1995 WL 1781675, at
*7; Continental, 873 F.2d at 719.
We find these cases to be persuasive authority that the phrase “indirectly
by merger or transfer of stock or otherwise” in the ROFR provision
demonstrates an intent to reach transactions beyond an actual conveyance of
the hospital’s assets. By including this phrase, HCA3, HCA-NH and the
hospital trustees demonstrated their intent that “a [party] could not do
indirectly that which it was prohibited from doing directly.” Asian Yard, 1995
WL 1781675, at *7.
Accordingly, we hold that under the terms of the ROFR provision, so long
as either HCA3 or HCA-NH is the entity acting, a transfer of the hospital’s
assets may occur “indirectly” through a merger, transfer of stock, or other
similar transaction sufficient to trigger the ROFR.
The remaining question on appeal, therefore, is to whom this phrase
applies. The defendants argue that the parties only intended that a “merger or
transfer of stock” of HCA-NH would trigger the ROFR. The Foundation
counters that the phrase is not so limited and that such transactions by other
members of the HCA corporate family could trigger the ROFR. We note here
that given our above analysis regarding the triggering actors of the ROFR, the
Foundation’s argument on this point is necessarily limited only to those actions
14
by HCA3 and HCA-NH. Thus, the issue in dispute on appeal is whether a
transfer by HCA3 of its interest in HCA-NH’s parent company may trigger the
ROFR.
Both parties argue that we can deem the phrase “indirectly by merger or
transfer of stock or otherwise” unambiguous and hold in favor of their
respective interpretations. We disagree with both parties. The ROFR provision
does not define whose “merger or transfer of stock or otherwise” triggers the
ROFR and we find both parties’ interpretations to be reasonable. Thus, the
language is ambiguous. See N.A.P.P. Realty Trust v. CC Enterprises, 147 N.H.
137, 139 (2001) (“The language of a contract is ambiguous if the parties to the
contract could reasonably disagree as to the meaning of that language.”
(quotation omitted)).
Where the “agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be determined
what the parties, under an objective standard, mutually understood the
ambiguous language to mean.” Gen. Linen Servs. v. Franconia Inv. Assocs.,
150 N.H. 595, 597 (2004). In applying the objective standard, a court should
examine the contract as a whole, the circumstances surrounding execution
and the object intended by the agreement, while keeping in mind the goal of
giving effect to the intention of the parties. N.A.P.P. Realty Trust, 147 N.H. at
141. This “necessarily involves factual findings.” Id. Given the trial court’s
grant of the defendants’ motion to dismiss on other, mistaken, grounds
however, no factual findings were made by the court on this issue.
Accordingly, we vacate the order granting the defendants’ motion to dismiss
and remand to the trial court.
The parties also dispute whether Healthtrust qualifies as a “wholly-
owned subsidiary” pursuant to Section 5.2.11(a) of the APA, thereby possibly
exempting the 1999 transaction from the ROFR provision. We will address the
issue, which deals with contract interpretation, as it is likely to arise on
remand.
The subsidiary exemption provides, in pertinent part:
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section 5.2.11(a)
shall not apply to a Transfer by [HCA3] or HCA-NH to
a wholly-owned subsidiary of [HCA3] (“Transferee”) if,
from and after such Transfer, the Transferee shall
perform and assume all obligations of [HCA3] and
HCA-NH under this Agreement and prior to such
Transfer shall agree to such performance and
assumption of obligations in a writing satisfactory to
the Seller [Portsmouth Hospital] . . . .
15
APA § 5.2.11(a). Based upon the unambiguous language of this provision,
Healthtrust does not qualify as a “wholly-owned subsidiary of [HCA3].” Id. At
the time of the 1999 transaction, when HCA3 transferred its membership
interest in Hospital Corp. to Healthtrust, Healthtrust was the parent of HCA3,
not a wholly-owned subsidiary. Accordingly, the ROFR exemption for wholly-
owned subsidiaries does not apply to the 1999 transaction because it was not
“a Transfer by [HCA3] or HCA-NH to a wholly-owned subsidiary of [HCA3].” Id.
Therefore, taking as true all the facts well pleaded in the Foundation’s
amended petition and construing all reasonable inferences in its favor, we find
that the Foundation’s allegations concerning the 1999 transaction are
reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery.
Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s grant of the defendants’ motion to
dismiss and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; vacated
in part; and remanded.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
16