THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-381
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KOREAN METHODIST CHURCH OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Argued: January 31, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 16, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Lynmarie C. Cusack, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John F. Bisson and John G.
Cronin on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Korean Methodist Church of New
Hampshire (Church), appeals the denial by the Superior Court (Coffey, J.) of its
preliminary objection to the declaration of taking filed by the State. See RSA
498-A:9-a, :9-b (Supp. 2007). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The State initiated this
condemnation proceeding in connection with the planned construction of a new
access road to the Manchester-Boston Regional Airport and the associated
environmental mitigation. See RSA 230:45 (Supp. 2007). Approximately 100
acres of upland forest and other terrestrial habitat will be destroyed because of
the project. Additionally, a new bridge and roadway will be laid over
approximately twelve acres of wetlands and one acre of the Merrimack River.
To compensate for these environmental impacts, the State has sought to
acquire approximately 760 acres for preservation, approximately four acres of
which belong to the Church.
On April 8, 2004, a special committee appointed by the Governor and
Executive Council held a public hearing, preceded by notice to each affected
property owner, see RSA 230:17 (1993), to determine if there was “occasion” for
the layout of the proposed mitigation area and to hear evidence regarding the
economic, social and environmental effects of the proposed mitigation efforts.
See RSA 230:14 (Supp. 2007) (amended 2006), :19 (1993), :45; see also
Rodgers Dev. Co. v. Town of Tilton, 147 N.H. 57, 59-60 (2001) (determining
whether “occasion” exists involves balancing public interest in layout against
rights of affected landowner and burden imposed upon municipality). The
State contends, and the Church does not dispute, that the Church failed to
attend this hearing. Following the hearing, the special committee determined
that there was occasion for the laying out of the mitigation area, which
included the area where the Church’s property is located. See RSA 230:19.
On November 1, 2006, the State filed a declaration of taking with the
New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA), indicating its intent to
take a conservation easement interest in the Church’s property. See RSA 498-
A:5 (Supp. 2007) (amended 2006). The Church filed its preliminary objection
to the State’s declaration of taking on December 4, 2006. See RSA 498-A:9-a.
In it, the Church contended that: (1) the taking of its property was not a
matter of public necessity; (2) other unimproved parcels suitable for mitigation
were available for purchase on the open market; (3) the net public benefit of the
taking was insufficient to warrant taking the Church’s principal asset, given
that the Church is a voluntary organization; (4) taking an easement on the
Church’s property unfairly saddled the Church with tax liability and liability for
third-party damages for the partial use of the easement area; and (5) the
Church has a pending agreement to sell a portion of the area to a third party
for $100,000. Notably, the Church did not allege that the special committee’s
finding of an occasion for laying out the mitigation area was fraudulent or
grossly mistaken. See RSA 230:14, :19, :45.
Consistent with RSA 498-A:9-b, the Church requested that the BTLA
transfer its preliminary objection to the superior court for an evidentiary
hearing “on the issues of necessity, public purpose and net public benefit.”
After reviewing the State’s response to the preliminary objection, the court
ruled that, based upon the record before it, the “preliminary objection must be
denied.” The State contends, and the Church does not dispute, that the
Church did not seek leave to submit a reply to the State’s response to its
preliminary objection.
2
The focus of the Church’s appeal is upon the trial court’s failure to hold
an evidentiary hearing before ruling on the preliminary objection. The Church
asserts, first, that this failure constituted an unsustainable exercise of
discretion, and, second, that it violated the Church’s State constitutional right
to due process.
Before addressing the Church’s first argument, we briefly outline the
process under the Eminent Domain Procedure Act, RSA chapter 498-A (1997 &
Supp. 2007). Before the State may initiate a condemnation proceeding, it must
obtain an independent appraisal of the property to be taken and, based upon
it, submit an offer to purchase the property to the property owner. See RSA
498-A:4 (Supp. 2007). If the offer is accepted, title may then be transferred.
See RSA 498-A:4, IV(b). If the offer is rejected, the State may commence
condemnation proceedings. See RSA 498-A:4, IV(c). To do so, the State must
first file a declaration of taking with the BTLA. See RSA 498-A:5. A record of
the declaration must then be filed with the applicable office of the registry of
deeds and notice must also be given to the condemnee. See RSA 498-A:7, :8
(1997). The condemnee may file a preliminary objection to the declaration of
taking within thirty days after the return day of the notice. See RSA 498-A:9-a.
There are three permissible grounds for the objection, one of which is to
challenge the necessity, public use and net-public benefit of the taking. See
RSA 498-A:9-a, I(c). If this is the ground upon which the condemnee files a
preliminary objection, the BTLA must transfer the objection to the superior
court, see RSA 498-A:9-b, I, which must then require the State to respond and
“may conduct an evidentiary hearing before it rules on the preliminary
objection,” RSA 498-A:9-b, II. If the superior court denies the preliminary
objection, the BTLA must then proceed to determine the amount of just
compensation due the condemnee for the taking. See RSA 498-A:9-b, III, :25
(Supp. 2007). If the superior court grants the preliminary objection, the BTLA
must then determine the damages, if any, due the condemnee, and dismiss the
declaration of taking. See RSA 498-A:9-b, IV; see also RSA 498-A:9-a, V.
The Church concedes, as it must, that RSA 498-A:9-b, II vests the
superior court with the discretion to hold an evidentiary hearing on a
preliminary objection to a declaration of taking. RSA 498-A:9-b, II provides
that the superior court “may” hold an evidentiary hearing. “It is a general rule
of statutory construction that the word ‘may’ is permissive in nature . . . .” In
the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 354 (2006).
We review the superior court’s decision to hold an evidentiary hearing
under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See id. at 355-56.
Under this standard, we review only whether “the record establishes an
objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made.” State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001). Unless a party establishes that such a
3
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of the party’s
case, it will not be disturbed. Id.
Here, the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the
trial court’s decision not to hold an evidentiary hearing on the Church’s
preliminary objection. The trial court ruled that, to prevail on its preliminary
objection, the Church had to establish that the special committee’s finding that
there was an occasion for the laying out of the mitigation area as proposed was
fraudulent or grossly mistaken. See RSA 230:14, :19, :45. The Church,
however, failed even to allege fraud or gross mistake, much less provide an
offer of proof. Absent this, we decline to hold that the trial court’s decision not
to hold an evidentiary hearing was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The Church asserts three arguments against this conclusion. First, the
Church contends that requiring it to prove fraud or gross mistake was error.
The State counters that the Church failed to preserve this argument, and we
agree.
As the appealing party, the Church had the burden of providing the court
with a record sufficient to demonstrate that it raised all of its appeal issues
before the trial court. Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004);
see Sup. Ct. R. 13, 16(3)(b). The record provided in this appeal, however, fails
to show that the Church ever argued before the trial court that requiring it to
prove fraud or gross mistake was error. Accordingly, the Church has failed to
preserve this argument, and we decline to address it. See Bean, 151 N.H. at
250.
Second, the Church argues that because the trial court did not hold an
evidentiary hearing, it considered “only one side of the debate.” To the extent
that this is true, it is not because there was no evidentiary hearing, but
because the Church’s preliminary objection failed to plead gross mistake or
fraud. If the trial court had “only one side of the debate” before it, it is because
the Church failed to provide the court with the other side.
Third, the Church asserts that the trial court’s decision not to hold an
evidentiary hearing was unsustainable because without it, the trial court
lacked support for certain findings. The only findings relevant to this appeal
concern the Church’s failure to plead gross mistake or fraud. As these findings
have ample support in the record, we uphold them.
We turn next to the Church’s contention that the trial court’s failure to
conduct an evidentiary hearing violated the Church’s State constitutional
rights to due process. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15.
4
To determine whether due process required an evidentiary hearing in the
superior court, we normally would examine the following three factors: (1) the
private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of an erroneous
deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and the probable
value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and (3) the
government’s interest, including the function involved and the fiscal and
administrative burdens that the additional or substitute procedural
requirements would entail. Appeal of Town of Nottingham, 153 N.H. 539, 551
(2006); see Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 335 (1976). The Church
“neither cites nor discusses the foregoing three-factor analysis,” Appeal of Town
of Nottingham, 153 N.H. at 552, and points to no controlling precedent
establishing that, in the face of the process that the Church indisputably
received, it also had a right to an evidentiary hearing in superior court. Under
these circumstances, therefore, we consider this argument undeveloped and
decline to review it. See id.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5