THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Portsmouth Family Division
No. 2007-405
CINTIA TOSTA
v.
RUSSELL BULLIS, JR.
Submitted: January 31, 2008
Opinion Issued: February 26, 2008
Cintia Tosta, by brief, pro se.
Minutelli Law Office, P.L.L.C., of Portsmouth (Steven J. Minutelli on the
brief), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Russell Bullis, Jr., appeals an order of
the Portsmouth Family Division (DeVries, J.), entered on the recommendation
of a Marital Master (Fishman, M.), denying his motion to dismiss a domestic
violence petition filed by his wife, the plaintiff, Cintia Tosta. He also appeals
the trial court’s order granting her a final domestic violence protective order
after a hearing. See RSA 173-B:5 (Supp. 2007). We reverse.
The record reveals the following. On June 18, 2006, the parties were
involved in an altercation while traveling in their car on a Massachusetts
highway. It is undisputed that the defendant struck the plaintiff during the
course of this argument, and that the blow caused her to bleed. Although the
plaintiff contacted the police to report having been assaulted after the parties
returned to their home in Hudson, no charges were ever filed against the
defendant in either Massachusetts or New Hampshire.
The parties subsequently began divorce proceedings in the Portsmouth
Family Division. Nevertheless, they continued to live together – without any
further instances of physical violence – until March 2007. On March 26,
tension between the parties again escalated during an argument about
potential post-divorce custody arrangements for their young daughter. The
next day, the parties had a second heated argument on the same subject. The
defendant claimed that the plaintiff repeatedly struck him during this dispute,
which prompted him to gather his belongings and move out of the parties’
home. The defendant did not inform the plaintiff of his decision to leave.
On March 29, 2007, the plaintiff filed a domestic violence petition
requesting protection from abuse, claiming:
[The defendant] [h]it me before 6-18-06 and police took report with
pictures. This in Mass[achusetts]. Divorce filed in Ports[mouth]
Family Court and I am afraid he will hit me again. He was driving
around my and my sister’s house this morning in Haverhill. He
says he has a big long knife in his car.
The plaintiff sought court orders restraining her husband from contacting her
or entering her residence, and awarding her temporary custody of the parties’
daughter.
The defendant filed a motion to dismiss the petition, arguing it failed to
allege that his conduct presented a “credible threat” to the plaintiff’s safety.
See RSA 173-B:1, I (2002). The trial court denied his motion. At the ensuing
hearing on the domestic violence petition, see RSA 173-B:3 (2002), the court
heard testimony from both parties about the assault that occurred during their
argument on June 18, 2006. The plaintiff explained the nine-month gap
between the assault and her decision to seek a protective order as follows:
I came this court this week because he left out of the house the
day before and he don’t do anything. I was at work and he just go
inside the house. He’s got all the stuff without talk to me[,] he was
going to leave to the house you know. It was so surprise and I
really scared what he thinking, why he wants to do it. So I know
he’s being violence before and I want to get – be safe me and my
childrens, especially my first son.
The plaintiff repeatedly expressed a general fear of the defendant, and claimed
not to know how she could be safe without a restraining order.
The plaintiff did not, however, provide evidence that the defendant had in
2
any way engaged – or even threatened to engage – in abusive behavior after
June 2006. See RSA 173-B:1, I(a)-(g) (listing acts which qualify as abuse).
There was no mention at the hearing of the defendant possessing a knife, and
the only evidence relating to the defendant having been at the plaintiff’s sister’s
house during the week of March 29 was his own testimony that he went there
to pick up the parties’ daughter from a third-party babysitter. Moreover, the
plaintiff expressed a willingness to allow the defendant to see their baby, and
testified that “[the defendant is] good for the baby. I never saw he’s being
violent with her.”
In an addendum to the final protective order, in addition to marking a
check-box indicating her conclusion that the defendant had committed assault,
the master made the following narrative findings:
[T]he [defendant] committed . . . abuse when he punched [the
plaintiff] on 6/18/06. Tension between the parties has
significantly escalated over the past several weeks – Mr. Bullis left
the home without notice to Ms. Tosta – she was fearful of his state
of mind. In addition, he was seen driving around both Ms. Tosta’s
[and] Ms. Tosta’s sister’s home on the day the [domestic violence
petition] was filed.
The trial court ordered the defendant to remain at least 100 feet away from the
plaintiff, to not enter her residence and to attend personal counseling for six
months, among other things.
On appeal, the defendant argues that: (1) the trial court erred by not
dismissing his wife’s domestic violence petition for failing to state a basis for
relief under RSA chapter 173-B; (2) the evidence presented at the hearing on
her petition was insufficient to support entry of a final protective order; and (3)
the court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion by concluding that
his alleged conduct constituted a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety and
entering a final protective order. We address each issue in turn.
With respect to the defendant’s first argument, “[i]n reviewing a motion to
dismiss for failure to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, we
assume the truth of the facts alleged by the plaintiff and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.” Farm Family
Cas. Ins. Co. v. Town of Rollinsford, 155 N.H. 669, 670 (2007). “We then
engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in [the] petition against the
applicable law.” In the Matter of Larue & Bedard, 156 N.H. ___, ___, 934 A.2d
577, 580 (2007). Where the facts alleged by a plaintiff are reasonably
3
susceptible of a construction that would permit legal relief, we will uphold the
denial of a motion to dismiss. See id. at ___, 934 A.2d at 580.
“Any person may seek relief pursuant to RSA 173-B:5 by filing a petition,
in the county or district where the plaintiff or defendant resides, alleging abuse
by the defendant.” RSA 173-B:3, I. “Abuse,” as that term is defined in RSA
chapter 173-B, means “the commission or attempted commission of one or
more of the following acts by a family or household member . . . where such
conduct constitutes a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety.” RSA 173-B:1, I.
Only one of the acts enumerated in the statute is at issue in this appeal:
assault, as defined in RSA 631:1 (2007) through RSA 631:3 (2007). See RSA
173-B:1, I(a). Thus, to survive the defendant’s motion to dismiss, the plaintiff
needed to allege sufficient facts to support a finding that the defendant had
assaulted her, and that this conduct constituted a credible threat to her safety.
See RSA 173-B:1, I; In the Matter of Alexander and Evans, 147 N.H. 441, 442
(2002).
The defendant concedes that the petition at issue here may be readily
understood to allege a simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a (2007).
Notwithstanding this, he maintains that “even if assault occurred[,] the most
liberal reading of the . . . petition does not lend itself to a conclusion that the
. . . assault represent[ed] a credible threat to Ms. Tosta” at the time she filed
her domestic violence petition. When making this argument, he emphasizes
the nine-month gap between the assault at issue here and the plaintiff’s
decision to seek a restraining order.
We find, however, that the allegations in the petition were susceptible of
a reading supporting the conclusion that the defendant’s conduct posed a
credible and continuing threat to the plaintiff’s safety. Her petition alleged that
the defendant had not only hit her in the past, but had recently followed her
while armed with a knife. These statements permit one to reasonably infer that
the plaintiff, who was in the midst of divorce proceedings, was at risk of further
abuse. Therefore, the trial court did not err when it found that the petition
survived the threshold inquiry presented by a motion to dismiss.
We next address the defendant’s argument that there was insufficient
evidence presented at the hearing on his wife’s petition to support entry of a
final domestic violence protective order. See RSA 173-B:5. “[W]e review
sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, and uphold the findings
and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidential support or
tainted by error of law.” Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H. 283, 284 (2001)
(quotation omitted); see RSA 173-B:3, VI. When performing this review, “[w]e
accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.” Fillmore, 147 N.H. at 285.
4
To obtain relief under RSA chapter 173-B, a plaintiff must show “abuse”
by a preponderance of the evidence. RSA 173-B:5, I. The threshold
misconduct which will support a finding of abuse, see RSA 173-B:1, I(a)-(g),
need not immediately precede the filing of a domestic violence petition. The
threat posed by such conduct to a plaintiff’s safety, however, must be ongoing,
since “[a] finding of abuse shall mean the defendant represents a credible
threat to the safety of the plaintiff.” RSA 173-B:5, I (emphasis added).
Further, upon such a showing, the trial court’s task is to “grant such relief as
is necessary to bring about a cessation of abuse.” Id. As we have observed in
the past, “[t]he purpose of [RSA chapter 173-B] is to preserve and protect the
safety of the family unit for all family . . . members by entitling victims of
domestic violence to immediate and effective police protection and judicial
relief.” In the Matter of Morrill and Morrill, 147 N.H. 116, 117 (2001)
(quotation omitted).
In short, domestic violence protective orders are to be utilized when a
victim has shown a need for protection from an ongoing, credible threat to her
safety. Given this statutory objective, we have required that the threshold
misconduct prompting a domestic violence petition be neither “too distant in
time” nor “non-specific.” Fillmore, 147 N.H. at 286. We have also required a
plaintiff to show more than a generalized fear for personal safety based upon
past physical violence and more recent non-violent harassment to support a
finding that a credible threat to her safety exists. Alexander and Evans, 147
N.H. at 441-43.
Turning to the case at hand, we agree with the defendant that there was
insufficient evidence to support a finding that he was engaged in “abuse”
warranting a protective order under RSA chapter 173-B. The plaintiff
demonstrated that she was assaulted by the defendant on one occasion during
the course of their relationship. While the record certainly supports the
master’s finding that this criminal conduct occurred, some nine months passed
between the assault and the plaintiff’s filing for a protective order. It was
undisputed that during those nine months, the parties lived together
continuously without further instances of physical violence on the part of the
defendant, despite the commencement of divorce proceedings. The plaintiff
also testified that it was the defendant’s sudden and unexplained decision to
leave her home, as opposed to his affirmative display of some threatening
behavior, that ultimately prompted her to file for a protective order. These
unique facts lead us to conclude that the assault at issue in this case fails to
qualify as the threshold element of misconduct that is a prerequisite to a
finding of abuse, see RSA 173-B:1, I; Fillmore, 147 N.H. at 286, since the link
between the plaintiff’s request for protection and the 2006 assault was
attenuated at best.
5
In addition, there was insufficient evidence to support a finding that the
defendant represented a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety at the time she
filed a domestic violence petition. The master received no evidence at the
hearing that the plaintiff was in need of protection from an ongoing, credible
threat to her safety. Indeed, there was no evidence that the defendant had in
any way threatened the plaintiff’s safety in the weeks or months leading up to
her filing. The only conclusion supported by a preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing on this matter is that some other forces, as opposed to
the June 2006 assault, prompted the plaintiff to seek a restraining order.
Accordingly, it was error for the trial court to enter a final domestic violence
protective order here.
Given this conclusion, we need not address the defendant’s argument
that the trial court’s entry of a final protective order was an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6