THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2007-657
APPEAL OF SAU #35 WHITE MOUNTAIN SCHOOL DISTRICT
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: June 18, 2008
Opinion Issued: September 12, 2008
Bernard & Merrill, PLLC, of Manchester (Gary S. Harding on the brief
and orally), for the appellant, Fire Casualty Insurance Co. of CT.
Fitzgerald & Nichols P.A., of Laconia (Shawn E. Nichols on the brief and
orally), for the claimant.
HICKS, J. The appellant, Fire Casualty Insurance Co. of CT (carrier),
insurance carrier for the White Mountain School District (district), appeals the
decision of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (board) ruling
that it must pay certain medical bills of the claimant, Lewis Mello. We reverse
and remand.
The record supports or the parties do not dispute the following. In
November 2002, Mello was employed as the business administrator for the
district. While attending a school board meeting on November 20, Mello
engaged in a “prolonged and heated discussion” with a member of the school
board and suffered a transient ischemic attack, also known as a mini stroke.
He was taken to the hospital later that night and treated for this condition.
Mello stopped working under doctor’s orders until May 2003, when he returned
full time.
Mello filed a workers’ compensation claim for indemnity and medical
benefits. In June 2003, a department of labor (DOL) hearing officer awarded
Mello temporary total disability benefits from November 21, 2002, through May
23, 2003, when he returned to work full time, and further ordered that
“treatment for [Mello’s] condition is found to be compensable and the
responsibility of the insurer.” The carrier did not appeal this decision.
Mello continued to see his doctor after May 2003 and the resulting bills
were forwarded to the carrier for payment. The carrier denied these claims by
verbally informing Mello’s health care provider in September 2004 that his
“case is closed” and to stop sending bills. Portions of some of the bills were
paid by Mello’s health insurance carrier.
Mello requested a hearing before the DOL in June 2005, seeking
coverage from the carrier for these claims. A hearing was held on October 6,
2005, and by decision dated October 20, 2005, the hearing officer determined
that the medical bills were compensable and ordered the carrier to pay the
medical bills within thirty days of the date of the decision. On October 25,
2005, the carrier filed a motion for reconsideration and a request for a stay of
medical payments. The carrier also filed an appeal with the board on October
27, 2005.
The carrier did not pay the medical bills and through letters sent to the
DOL in January 2006, Mello requested enforcement of the hearing officer’s
October 2005 decision. Both the carrier and Mello also requested a ruling on
the carrier’s motions. On February 10, 2006, over three months after the
carrier’s motions were filed, the hearing officer denied the motion for
reconsideration and granted the stay for medical payments pending appeal of
the case. No reason for this lengthy delay is evident from the record.
A hearing on the carrier’s October 27, 2005 appeal was held before the
board in July 2007 and a decision was issued August 2, 2007. The board
concluded that the carrier must pay Mello’s medical bills incurred from June
2003 through October 6, 2005, the date of the hearing before the DOL. The
board based its decision upon RSA 281-A:43, I(b), which provides that an
appeal taken from a decision of the hearing officer shall not “suspend the
operation of an award” unless the hearing officer so orders. RSA 281-A:43, I(b)
(1999). Because a stay was not issued within thirty days after the hearing
officer’s October 20, 2005 decision, the board concluded that the carrier was
required to pay the medical bills by the thirtieth day, despite the fact that a
request for a stay was filed within the thirty-day period and was eventually
2
granted on February 10, 2006. The board did not address the issue appealed
by the carrier regarding whether the medical visits were reasonable and
required due to the nature of Mello’s work injury. See RSA 281-A:23, I (1999).
The carrier filed a motion for reconsideration, which was denied. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the carrier argues that the board erred by: (1) addressing the
stay of medical payments when that issue was not before it on appeal; (2)
ordering the carrier to pay Mello’s medical bills; and (3) failing to address the
issue of whether Mello’s subsequent medical treatment was reasonable and
required by the nature of his injury.
We will not disturb the board’s decision absent an error of law, or unless,
by a clear preponderance of the evidence, we find it to be unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Fay, 150 N.H. 321, 324 (2003). We consider the
board’s factual findings to be prima facie lawful and reasonable. Id. As the
appealing party, the carrier has the burden of demonstrating that the board’s
decision was erroneous. Id.
The carrier argues that the board exceeded its authority by addressing
the effect of the stay upon the carrier’s obligation to pay the medical bills
because that issue was not specifically appealed by either party and therefore
was not before the board.
The right to appeal a decision of a DOL hearing officer is governed by
statute. See RSA 281-A:43 (Supp. 2007); RSA 281-A:50 (1999). RSA 281-
A:43, I(b) provides, in pertinent part, as follows: “An appeal from a decision of
the commissioner or the commissioner’s authorized representative shall be
taken to the board no later than 30 days from the date of such decision. Upon
the filing of an appeal the board shall . . . hold a full hearing on the appeal.”
On its face, this statute mandates that an appeal be
filed “no later than 30 days” from the DOL’s decision.
RSA 281-A:50 . . . permits “any person aggrieved
by a decision of the commissioner who was prevented
from appealing from such decision within 30 days
through mistake, accident, or misfortune and not
through the person’s own neglect” to petition the board
at any time within one year of the DOL’s decision to be
allowed an appeal.
Together these statutes limit the right to appeal
from a DOL decision to those who are “aggrieved” by
it[,] . . . [and] make clear that the failure to file a timely
appeal is fatal to a party’s right to pursue an appeal,
3
unless the party petitions pursuant to RSA 281-A:50
and the board grants the petition.
Appeal of Currin, 149 N.H. 303, 306-07 (2003) (brackets omitted).
There was no cause for Mello to file an appeal of the hearing officer’s
October 20, 2005 decision within the thirty-day period because the decision
was favorable to him, and no stay was issued at that time. While the carrier’s
appeal was pending before the board, Mello protested several times to the DOL
that the carrier refused to make payment following the expiration of the thirty-
day period. However, the hearing officer granted the stay three months after
the expiration of the thirty-day period. Mello then had an adverse ruling which
he could appeal to the board. Mello did not file an appeal, nor did he bring a
petition pursuant to RSA 281-A:50. Thus, the effect of the stay on the carrier’s
obligation to make payment was not an issue before the board and it should
not have been addressed. See Appeal of Fay, 150 N.H. at 324 (board’s de novo
review does not confer upon non-appealing parties the right to pursue their
claims on appeal before the board; nor can board rule on issues that were “not
raised at the department of labor hearing”).
Next, the carrier argues that the board erred by ordering it to pay Mello’s
medical bills. Because a stay was ultimately granted by the hearing officer, the
carrier argues that it was relieved from making payments as ordered in the
October 20, 2005 decision. The board based its decision that the employer was
obligated to pay the medical bills upon its conclusion that “although the
request for a stay was filed in a timely manner the filing did not operate in any
way to delay the effective date of the order. Therefore, the granting of the stay
83 days after the order took effect by operation of law was a nullity.”
Given our above holding that the stay was not an issue before the board,
we reverse the board’s decision that the employer was required to pay the
medical bills because the stay failed to suspend that obligation.
This brings us to the carrier’s final argument, that the board erred by
failing to address the issue appealed; namely, whether Mello satisfied his
burden to prove that his medical treatment was both reasonable and required
by the nature of his work injury. See RSA 281-A:23, I (“An employer subject to
this chapter, or the employer’s insurance carrier, shall furnish or cause to be
furnished to an injured employee reasonable medical . . . services . . . for such
period as the nature of the injury may require.”); see also Appeal of Fay, 150
N.H. at 325. During oral argument, opposing counsel conceded that the board
should have decided this issue.
The parties urge us to determine on appeal whether Mello’s medical
treatment is compensable under RSA 281-A:23, I. We decline to do so because
4
it is not our role at this stage of the proceedings. Appeal of Lalime, 141 N.H.
534, 538 (1996). In light of Mello’s concession that the board erred, we remand
for a determination regarding whether the medical bills at issue were the result
of treatment that was both reasonable and required by the nature of Mello’s
work injury. See RSA 281-A:23, I. To the extent Mello argues that the carrier
has waived, or was precluded from making, certain arguments before the board
on this issue, we leave that for determination by the board in the first instance.
Finally, the carrier argues that it is entitled to reimbursement from the
healthcare providers for any payments it has made. We decline to address this
issue, however, because it is not ripe for our review. Before the issue of
reimbursement can be considered, there must first be a determination in the
carrier’s favor that Mello’s medical bills are not covered under RSA 281-A:23, I.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
5