THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2007-257
HARRY A. SLEEPER
v.
THE HOBAN FAMILY PARTNERSHIP & a.
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 25, 2008
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (David P. Eby on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Matthew J. Lahey, P.A., of Laconia (Matthew J. Lahey on the brief and
orally), for the respondents.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Harry A. Sleeper, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) partially granting and partially denying his
petition for declaratory judgment. While the trial court ruled that the petitioner
had an easement by deed to access Beech Street in Alton for the purpose of
using a beach area, it denied his other claims on the ground that they were
barred by res judicata. The respondents, The Hoban Family Partnership, John
J. Hoban, Patrick J. Hoban and Diane V. Hoban, cross-appeal the trial court’s
ruling in the petitioner’s favor on his easement by deed claim. We affirm the
trial court’s ruling on the petitioner’s claim to an easement by deed, reverse its
res judicata ruling, and remand for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.
The record supports the following facts. Beech Street was originally
depicted on a plan recorded in 1889 by the Winnipesaukee Land Company. It
ran perpendicular from Lake Shore Avenue to the Lake Winnipesaukee
shoreline, bisecting Railroad Avenue and ending on Main Street. In 1979, the
Town of Alton’s board of selectmen released Lake Shore Avenue and the portion
of Beech Street that ran from Lake Shore Avenue to Railroad Avenue from all
public servitude and interests. The portion of Beech Street that was
discontinued became tax lot 76. There is a beach at the end of this lot.
The respondents now own tax lot 76, having purchased it in 1991. The
deed conveying tax lot 76 to the respondents stated that the lot was conveyed
subject to “whatever rights may exist in others to cross and recross and to use
the beach area on the shore of Lake Winnipesaukee” and “to a reservation in
favor of the Grantors, their heirs and assigns, for the benefit of Tax Lot 36 . . .
of access to and use of the said beach area.” The respondents also own tax lot
57 on which they have a home. Tax lot 57 borders tax lot 76.
The petitioner owns tax lots 36, 55 and 55-1 in Alton. Tax lots 55 and
55-1 run along the shore of Lake Winnipesaukee; tax lot 36 is located a few
blocks away from the shore. A portion of tax lot 55 abuts tax lot 76. The
petitioner purchased tax lot 36 in 1991 and tax lots 55 and 55-1 in 1998.
In 1991, Albert S. and Joan K. Drew, who then owned tax lots 55 and
55-1, brought a quiet title action against respondent John J. Hoban, claiming
title under a theory of adverse possession to “the parcel of land adjacent to,
and westerly of” their land “with frontage on Lake Winnipesaukee” as shown in
a shaded portion of a map submitted with their petition (the shaded area). A
portion of Beech Street, including the end of the street on which there is a
beach, was included in the shaded area. The court dismissed the Drews’
petition, finding that although they had proved twenty years of continuous and
uninterrupted use of the shaded area, they had not proved that their use was
exclusive.
After this decision, the respondents erected a fence at the edge of Beech
Street and the Drews’ property and posted “no trespassing” signs. Shortly after
purchasing the Drews’ property, the petitioner removed the fence. The
respondents continued to post “no trespassing” signs.
In 2005, the petitioner brought the instant petition, seeking, inter alia, a
declaration that: (1) he is the rightful owner of Beech Street to the center-line
point as it runs along his property; and (2) even if he does not own Beech
Street, he may use it to access his property and/or the beach and dock area
either because he has an easement to do so or pursuant to RSA 231:43 (Supp.
2007).
2
All parties moved for summary judgment. The trial court ruled that the
doctrines of res judicata and collateral estoppel barred the petitioner’s claims
to the portion of Beech Street that had been litigated in the Drews’ quiet title
action, but ruled that the petitioner’s claims to the portion of Beech Street that
was not at issue in the Drews’ quiet title action were not barred. Because
disputed issues of material fact remained, a trial was held.
Following the trial, which included a view, the court ruled that, in fact,
the doctrine of res judicata barred all of the petitioner’s claims to Beech Street
other than his claim to have an easement by deed. The court ruled that the
deed to the respondents’ property created an appurtenant easement, pursuant
to which petitioner’s tax lot 36 was the dominant estate to be benefited by use
of an easement over respondents’ tax lot 76 to access the beach area at the end
of Beech Street. This appeal and cross-appeal followed. We first examine the
petitioner’s appeal and then the respondents’ cross-appeal.
I
The petitioner first challenges the trial court’s post-trial determination
that res judicata barred his claims to ownership of Beech Street as well as his
claims to have a right to use the street for access either because of an
easement or under RSA 231:43. The applicability of res judicata is a question
of law that we review de novo. Meier v. Town of Littleton, 154 N.H. 340, 342
(2006). Res judicata precludes the litigation in a later case of matters actually
decided, and matters that could have been litigated, in an earlier action
between the same parties for the same cause of action. Id. For the doctrine to
apply, three elements must be met: (1) the parties must be the same or in
privity with one another; (2) the same cause of action must be before the court
in both instances; and (3) a final judgment on the merits must have been
rendered in the first action. Id. The petitioner contests elements (1) and (2).
The petitioner first contends that the Drew litigation could not act as a
bar because he was not in privity with the Drews. Specifically, he asserts that
privity did not exist because his interests in their litigation “were not in fact
represented and protected.” Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 779 (2003). To
the contrary, the petitioner was in privity with the Drews because he was their
successor in interest. See Innie v. W & R, Inc., 116 N.H. 315, 316 (1976); see
also Taylor v. Sturgell, 128 S. Ct. 2161, 2172 (2008); Restatement (Second) of
Judgments § 43 (1982).
Although generally res judicata does not apply to nonparties to the
original judgment, this rule is subject to exceptions. Sturgell, 128 S. Ct. at
2171-72 (construing federal common law). “[N]onparty preclusion may be
justified based on a variety of pre-existing substantive legal relationships
3
between the person to be bound and a party to the judgment.” Id. at 2172.
Qualifying relationships include that between a property owner and his
successor in interest. Id.; see Restatement (Second) of Judgments, supra
§ 43(1)(b). The rule that a successor in interest is bound by a judgment issued
to his predecessor in interest serves important policy interests. “[O]therwise a
transfer of property would unsettle controversies which an action was intended
to settle.” Restatement of Judgments § 89 comment c at 435 (1942).
“The substantive legal relationships justifying preclusion are sometimes
collectively referred to as ‘privity,’” Sturgell, 128 S. Ct. at 2172 n.8, although we
have used the term more broadly to refer to a “functional relationship, in
which, at a minimum, the interests of the non-party were in fact represented
and protected in the prior litigation.” Cook, 149 N.H. at 779. Here, because
the petitioner is the successor in interest to the Drews, he is in privity with
them and is bound by the judgment in their prior action. See Restatement
(Second) of Judgments, supra § 43(1)(b); see also Innie, 116 N.H. at 316.
Contrary to the petitioner’s assertions, we need not examine whether he and
the Drews also were in privity by virtue of their functional relationship because
the substantive legal relationship between them satisfies the privity
requirement.
The petitioner next asserts that his claims in this lawsuit and the Drews’
cause of action do not constitute the “same cause of action” for res judicata
purposes. New Hampshire embraces the modern trend “to define cause of
action collectively to refer to all theories on which relief could be claimed on the
basis of the factual transaction in question.” Eastern Marine Const. Corp. v.
First Southern Leasing, 129 N.H. 270, 275 (1987); see Goffin v. Tofte, 146 N.H.
415, 417 (2001); Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 24, at 197 (1982).
Generally, “[i]n determining whether two actions are the same cause of action
for the purpose of applying res judicata, we consider whether the alleged
causes of action arise out of the same transaction or occurrence.” Appeal of
Univ. System of N.H. Bd. of Trustees, 147 N.H. 626, 629 (2002). Res judicata
will bar a second action even though the plaintiff is prepared in the second
action to present evidence or grounds or theories of the case not presented in
the first action. Brzica v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, 147 N.H. 443, 455-56
(2002).
Under the Restatement (Second) of Judgments, supra § 43, a judgment
in an action that determines interests in real or personal property
“[c]onclusively determines the claims of the parties to the action regarding their
interests” in the “property involved in the action.” The effect of such a
judgment “is to delimit, as between such parties, what each has by way of an
ownership interest in the object. It is therefore an involuntary realignment of
their interests in the property and in effect a conveyance from the losing party
4
to the winning party.” Restatement (Second) of Judgments, supra § 43
comment a at 2.
The property at issue in the Drew litigation was the shaded area. The
Drew litigation settled the interests of the Drews and the respondents in this
area and settled the petitioner’s interests in this area because he was the
Drews’ successor in interest. The judgment in the Drew litigation, therefore,
precludes the petitioner from “seeking different kinds of relief, advancing
different theories, relying on different evidence, or asserting further claims to
redress as against [the respondents] with regard to” the shaded area. Id. § 43
comment b at 3.
Contrary to the petitioner’s assertions, the preclusive effect of the
judgment in the Drew litigation extends not only to his claims to own the
portion of Beech Street included in the shaded area, but also to his claim for
an easement over this area. Illustration 2 to Restatement (Second) of
Judgments, supra § 43, is on point:
A, the owner of Blackacre, brings an action against B, the
owner of Whiteacre, asserting an easement over Whiteacre by
reason of a certain conveyance from B. Judgment is given for B on
the ground that the conveyance did not give A an easement. A
thereafter conveys Blackacre to S. S is precluded from asserting
an easement over Whiteacre by virtue of A’s long adverse passage
over the course of the claimed easement.
In the Drew litigation, the Drews argued that they owned the shaded area
under a theory of adverse possession. The court’s judgment against them
precluded them and the petitioner from raising any other claim with regard to
the shaded area, including an easement claim.
While the Drew litigation is preclusive as regards the shaded area, it is
not preclusive, at least with respect to the petitioner, as regards any other
property owned by the respondents, including the portions of Beech Street that
are in the non-shaded area. See Restatement (Second) of Judgments, supra
§ 43 comment c at 4-5. A judgment in an action that determines interests in
real or personal property “[w]ith respect to other property held by a party to the
action, does not preclude a person who is a successor in interest thereof from
subsequently litigating issues determined in the action.” Id. § 43(2) (emphasis
added).
Illustration 4 to Restatement (Second) of Judgments, supra § 43 is
instructive:
5
A is the owner of two mobile homes that B contends were
sold to him. A brings an action with respect to one of the homes
for a declaration that they were not sold to B. Judgment is for B.
A then sells his interest in the other mobile home to S. S is not
precluded from bringing an action against B to establish S’s title to
the second home . . . .
In this illustration, A would likely be precluded from bringing an action
regarding the second home “because the identity of the basis of his claim
concerning the two homes,” that they were not sold to B, “implies that . . . A
should be regarded as having a single claim that is barred by the judgment.”
Id. § 43 comment c at 5. It would be unfair, however, to apply this same rule of
preclusion to S, unless S had knowledge of the dispute over title when he
acquired the property. Id. “Assuming S is not precluded by such equitable
considerations, however, there seems no good reason for saying that he may
not litigate a claim concerning what is now his property because his
predecessor in interest had an opportunity to do so but did not avail himself of
it.” Id.
Thus, while the Drews could have brought claims regarding the non-
shaded area, their failure to do so does not preclude the petitioner from doing
so in this litigation. Accordingly, the court erred to the extent that it ruled that
res judicata barred the petitioner’s claims with respect to the part of Beech
Street that is not in the shaded area. These claims include the petitioner’s
claims: (1) to access pursuant to RSA 231:43 as it pertains to any part of
Beech Street that is not in the shaded area; (2) to own the non-shaded portion
of Beech Street up to the center line, see Duchesnaye v. Silva, 118 N.H. 728,
732 (1978); (3) to have an implied easement in the non-shaded portion of
Beech Street for access to his garage, see id. at 733; and (4) to have a
prescriptive easement over the part of Beech Street that is in the non-shaded
area. We reverse the trial court’s rulings on these claims and remand for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Finally, the petitioner contests the trial court’s denial of his motion for
summary judgment on his claim for a prescriptive easement. He asserts that
the prescriptive easement claim was “actually litigated” in the Drew litigation
and that the trial court’s findings in that litigation are dispositive.
In reviewing the superior court’s summary judgment rulings, we consider
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and, if no
genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine whether the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Grand China v. United Nat’l Ins. Co.,
156 N.H. 429, 431 (2007). We review a trial court’s application of law to facts
de novo. Id.
6
To establish a prescriptive easement, the petitioner had to show, by a
balance of the probabilities, that he or the Drews used the shaded portion of
Beech Street for twenty years and that this use was adverse, continuous, and
uninterrupted in such a manner as to give notice to the respondents that an
adverse claim was being made to it. Bonardi v. Kazmirchuk, 146 N.H. 640,
642 (2001). The petitioner argues that the trial court in the Drew litigation
found all of these elements to exist and, therefore, he is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law on his prescriptive easement claim. To the contrary, while the
trial court in the Drew litigation found that the Drews used the shaded portion
of Beech Street continuously for twenty years, it did not find that their use was
adverse. The trial court specifically denied the Drews’ request for a finding that
they exercised “adverse use” over the disputed area.
II
In their cross-appeal, the respondents assert that the trial court erred in
failing to find that the beach area to which tax lot 36 is entitled access is a
separate triangular piece of land adjacent to Beech Street, rather than land
located at the end of Beech Street. We will not disturb the findings of the trial
court unless they lack evidentiary support or are erroneous as a matter of law.
New Hampshire Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709, 717 (2007). We
review legal conclusions, as well as the application of law to fact, independently
for error. Id. Our inquiry is to determine whether the evidence presented to
the trial court reasonably supports its findings, and then whether the court’s
decision is consonant with applicable law. Id. “The findings of the trial court
are within its sound discretion, particularly when a view has been taken.” Id.
(quotation and brackets omitted).
Based upon our review of the record submitted on appeal, we conclude
that there is evidence to support the trial court’s finding that the “beach area”
to which the deed referred was the beach area at the end of Beech Street. This
evidence included the trial court’s view of the area. While the evidence before
the court may have been conflicting, it was for the trial court to resolve
conflicts in evidence. Id. at 718. As there is evidence to support the trial
court’s finding, we uphold it.
Affirmed in part; reversed
in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7