THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2007-620
ROBERT E. NASER d/b/a REN REALTY
v.
TOWN OF DEERING ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 22, 2008
Cronin & Bisson, P.C., of Manchester (John G. Cronin and Daniel D.
Muller, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Cronin orally), for the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Matthew H. Upton and Matthew R.
Serge on the brief, and Mr. Upton orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Robert E. Naser d/b/a REN Realty, appeals an
order of the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) upholding decisions of the
defendant, the Town of Deering Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA), ruling that
his subdivision application failed to comply with the town’s zoning ordinance
and denying his request for a variance. We affirm in part, reverse in part and
remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. The plaintiff owns seventy-seven acres in Deering. In 1989, the
previous owners received approval from the Town of Deering Planning Board
(planning board) to develop the property by constructing twenty-five duplex
buildings. Throughout the approval process, there were numerous discussions
before the planning board about a conservation easement to be granted by the
property owners to the Town of Deering (town). In 1990, the previous owners
conveyed a conservation easement to the town over approximately fifty of the
seventy-seven acres. The deed did not condition the grant of the easement
upon the completion of the development or reserve a right of reverter to the
grantors.
Improvements began on the property but the development was never
completed and the property was conveyed to the plaintiff in 1994. In 2006, he
submitted a subdivision application to the planning board for the development
of fourteen single-family homes on the twenty-seven acres that were not
subject to the conservation easement. The planning board declined to accept
the application because it failed to comply with section 13 of the Deering
Zoning Ordinance (ordinance).
Section 13 regulates open space developments and permits an applicant
to increase density by decreasing lot sizes provided a requisite amount of open
space is preserved on the property. To determine the appropriate density, an
applicant is required to submit a yield plan that shows “that the net density
will be no greater than permitted within that zoning district for a conventional
subdivision or development.” Deering Zoning Ordinance § 13.5, b.
The plaintiff’s yield plan included the fifty acres subject to the
conservation easement in the density calculation, thereby allowing him to
construct fourteen homes on twenty-seven acres. The planning board found
that the inclusion of the fifty acres in the yield plan was improper and,
therefore, the open space subdivision ordinance was not satisfied.
The plaintiff then submitted an application to the ZBA appealing the
decision of the planning board and, in the alternative, requesting a variance
from section 13 to allow him to use the conservation easement land in the yield
plan. The ZBA denied both the appeal and the variance request. The plaintiff
appealed to the superior court, which affirmed the decision of the ZBA, ruling
that section 13 did not permit the plaintiff to use the conservation easement
land in the yield plan and that he failed to satisfy at least two of the five criteria
required for a variance.
The plaintiff appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in finding that:
(1) the yield plan did not satisfy the requirements of section 13; (2) he failed to
show that the variance was not contrary to the public interest and consistent
with the spirit of the ordinance; and (3) there was insufficient evidence for the
ZBA to determine that the previous owners’ grant of the conservation easement
to the town “was a quid pro quo transaction for Planning Board approval of the
original condominium plan.” We address each argument in turn.
2
I. Yield Plan
[T]he interpretation of an ordinance is a question of
law, which we review de novo. Because the traditional
rules of statutory construction generally govern our
review, we construe the words and phrases of an
ordinance according to the common and approved
usage of the language. When the language of an
ordinance is plain and unambiguous, we need not look
beyond the ordinance itself for further indications of
legislative intent, and we will not guess what the
drafters of the ordinance might have intended, or add
words that they did not see fit to include.
Stankiewicz v. City of Manchester, 156 N.H. 587, 592 (2007) (citations
omitted).
Section 13 establishes the requirements for an open space development.
The intent of the section “is to enable the applicant to decrease lot sizes and
leave the land ‘saved’ by doing so as open space . . . .” Deering Zoning
Ordinance § 13.4, a. “The total area of dedicated open space shall equal a
percentage of 50% of the total buildable area.” Id. § 13.5, f. “Buildable area” is
defined as “[t]he area of a site that does not include slopes of 25% or more,
submerged areas, utility right-of-ways, wetlands and their buffers.” Id. § 13.7,
a.
An applicant seeking to develop an open space subdivision must also
comply with certain requirements, including, inter alia, submission of a valid
yield plan, id. § 13.5, b, which is defined as “[a] plan submitted by the
applicant showing a feasible conventional subdivision under the requirements
of the specific zoning district in which the property is located and the
requirements of any and all State and local subdivision regulations.” Id.
§ 13.7, d. The yield plan is used by the planning board to determine the
appropriate density for the development. It must show “that the net density
will be no greater than permitted within that zoning district for a conventional
subdivision or development.” Id. § 13.5, b. The ordinance further provides
that “[t]he yield plan is meant to be conceptual in nature but must be realistic
and not show potential house sites or streets in areas that would not ordinarily
be legally permitted in a conventional layout.” Id. § 13.5, b.(1)
The plaintiff makes several arguments regarding the interpretation of the
yield plan. He argues that: (1) the express purpose of the yield plan is to
establish “the allowable density on the lot,” and “judging [the yield plan] based
upon [the] general goals and objectives” of the open space subdivision form of
development “renders the overall scheme inherently contradictory”; (2) for
regulatory purposes, the “lot” necessarily includes the portion burdened by the
3
existing conservation easement; and (3) the ordinance does not preclude the
use of existing open space, or land burdened by a conservation easement, in
satisfying open space requirements. In support of his last argument, the
plaintiff points out that, under the terms of the ordinance, the open space
preserved must equal fifty percent of the total “buildable area,” id. § 13.5, f.,
and the definition of buildable area does not exclude land already subject to a
conservation easement, id. § 13.7, a.
In his first argument, the plaintiff fails to point to an example of where
the trial court judged the yield plan “based upon [the] general goals and
objectives” of the open space subdivision form of development. However, even
if the trial court had so judged the yield plan, the plaintiff fails to sufficiently
develop this argument in his brief. He does not assert, for example, how the
yield plan should be properly judged in light of the open space subdivision
requirements. His argument is conclusory at best. Accordingly, we find no
error.
The plaintiff’s second and third arguments miss an important point.
Even assuming, arguendo, that the conservation easement land can be
included in the yield plan and considered as part of the entire lot for purposes
of satisfying the fifty percent open space requirement, the yield plan submitted
by the plaintiff does not satisfy the ordinance requirements for a yield plan.
The language of section 13 is clear: a yield plan must show a “feasible
conventional subdivision,” id. § 13.7, d. (emphasis added), and “must be
realistic and not show potential house sites or streets in areas that would not
ordinarily be legally permitted in a conventional layout,” id. § 13.5, b.(1)
(emphasis added). The plaintiff’s yield plan places lots within the conservation
easement land. The restrictions of the conservation easement granted to the
town, however, do not allow the land to be developed in this manner. The
easement provides, inter alia, that: “The Property shall be maintained in
perpetuity as open space”; “The Property shall not be subdivided”; and “No
dwelling . . . shall be constructed, placed or introduced onto the Property.”
While we recognize that the yield plan is “conceptual,” id. § 13.5, b.(1), the
ordinance expressly requires that the yield plan be “realistic,” id., and
“feasible,” id. § 13.7, d. We read this to require that the conventional
subdivision shown on the yield plan could actually be developed in accordance
with all applicable restrictions and regulations. See id. § 13.5, b.(4) (“The yield
plan shall comply with conventional subdivision standards and shall not
require a variance or waiver from the existing ordinances or regulations in
order to achieve the layout supporting the proposed density[.]”). Because the
conservation easement land can never be developed as a part of a subdivision,
locating lots on this land is not “realistic,” id. § 13.5, b.(1), and does not depict
a “feasible conventional subdivision,” id. § 13.7, d.
4
Accordingly, it was not error for the trial court to affirm the ZBA’s
decision to uphold the planning board’s finding that the yield plan did not
satisfy section 13 of the ordinance.
II. Variance
The plaintiff requested a variance from section 13 to use the conservation
easement land in the yield plan. He argues that the trial court erred in finding
that he did not satisfy two of the five variance criteria.
An applicant seeking a variance must demonstrate that: (1) the variance
will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions exist such that
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in
unnecessary hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the
ordinance; (4) substantial justice is done; and (5) granting the variance will not
diminish the value of surrounding properties. Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of
Chichester, 155 N.H. 102, 105 (2007).
The ZBA found that the plaintiff failed to satisfy the first four criteria and
denied the variance. The trial court focused only upon the public interest and
the spirit of the ordinance criteria and, based upon its finding that the plaintiff
failed to satisfy them, affirmed the ZBA’s denial of the variance.
The superior court’s review in zoning cases is limited.
Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima
facie lawful and reasonable and will not be set aside by
the superior court absent errors of law, unless the
court is persuaded by a balance of probabilities on the
evidence before it that the ZBA decision is
unreasonable. The party seeking to set aside the ZBA
decision in the superior court bears the burden of
proof. We, in turn, will uphold the superior court’s
decision unless it is not supported by the evidence or
is legally erroneous.
Kalil v. Town of Dummer Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 309 (2007)
(citations omitted).
The requirement that the variance not be
contrary to the public interest is related to the
requirement that the variance be consistent with the
spirit of the ordinance.
To be contrary to the public interest the variance
must unduly, and in a marked degree conflict with the
5
ordinance such that it violates the ordinance’s basic
zoning objectives.
Malachy Glen, 155 N.H. at 105 (quotations, citation, ellipsis and brackets
omitted).
The ZBA found that the plaintiff
failed to show that granting the variance would not be
contrary to the public interest. The Deering Master
Plan and the stated purpose of Section 13 of the
Ordinance make it plain that the Town of Deering has
a strong interest in preserving open space and that
granting the variance would unduly interfere with the
Town’s basic zoning objectives.
The trial court found the ZBA’s decision to be reasonable and lawful. It
found that “[t]he evidence before the ZBA demonstrated that the [plaintiff]
sought to substantially increase the density of a very small area,” i.e., the
unencumbered twenty-seven acres, and that “the [plaintiff’s] proposal did not
provide for any open space as part of the actual subdivision, instead relying
upon the land that was already established as such.” The court further found
that “[t]o allow the [plaintiff] to calculate density utilizing land already
encumbered by a conservation easement would be to ignore the very purpose of
this Ordinance section, that is, to preserve open space that might otherwise be
lost.”
The objectives listed under section 13 include, inter alia: “to conserve
agricultural and forestlands, habitat, water quality, and rural character that
would likely be lost through conventional development approaches”;
“[m]aintain the special elements of rural character of the town through the
preservation of natural resources and open space”; “assuring the permanent
preservation of open space”; and “[e]ncourage a less sprawling form of
development, thus preserving Open Space as undeveloped land.” Deering
Zoning Ordinance § 13.2. To promote these objectives, the ordinance requires
that fifty percent of “the total buildable area” be dedicated to open space. Id.
§ 13.5, f.
The conservation easement held by the town encompasses fifty of the
property’s approximately seventy-seven acres. These fifty acres are already
permanently preserved as open space; this portion of the property cannot be
developed under the terms of the easement deed. To grant the plaintiff a
variance to use this land to satisfy the open space requirements for his
subdivision would result in the development of fourteen single-family homes on
the entire remaining twenty-seven acres. We fail to see how permitting the
plaintiff to use the conservation land in this manner would “unduly, and in a
marked degree conflict with the ordinance.” Malachy Glen, 155 N.H. at 105
6
(quotation omitted; emphasis added). The plaintiff does not seek to develop the
conservation easement land in any way; rather, he seeks to identify it as the
open space land necessary to satisfy the applicable ordinance requirements.
We believe, as a matter of law, that this in no way conflicts with the ordinance’s
basic zoning objectives to conserve and preserve open space.
The town argues that granting the variance would conflict with the
ordinance because it would allow the plaintiff “to increase the lot density of the
remaining 27 acres from 7-9 house lots to 14 house lots with no preservation of
open space that would otherwise justify the added density.” The plaintiff,
however, is not seeking a variance to increase the lot density on his property
without preserving open space, but rather he seeks a variance to include that
portion of his land burdened by a conservation easement as satisfying the open
space requirement. As we stated above, this does not conflict in any way with
the ordinance. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s decision on this issue
as the evidence does not support it.
Because the trial court limited its review of the ZBA’s denial of the
plaintiff’s variance to the spirit of the ordinance and public interest criteria, we
will not address the remaining variance criteria on appeal and remand for the
trial court to consider the unnecessary hardship and substantial justice
criteria in the first instance.
III. Quid Pro Quo Transaction
The plaintiff lastly argues that the trial court erred in affirming the ZBA’s
finding that there was insufficient evidence for it to determine that the previous
owners’ grant of the conservation easement to the town “was a quid pro quo
transaction for Planning Board approval of the original condominium plan.”
He argues that the ZBA relied upon its finding of insufficient evidence in
denying his variance request and that a finding on this point in his favor would
support granting him a variance.
After considering the evidence before it, the ZBA found that “[t]he
evidence presented on this issue was insufficient for the ZBA to find either
way.” The trial court found that this decision was reasonable and lawful and
supported by the certified record. Such a finding by the trial court is
equivalent to a ruling that the plaintiff failed to carry his burden of proof on
this issue. Kalil, 155 N.H. at 309. Based upon the record before us, we cannot
say that the trial court’s decision was unsupported by the evidence or legally
erroneous.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
7
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
8