THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2007-051
IN THE MATTER OF RAYMOND LARUE, JR.
AND TRACY (LARUE) BEDARD
Argued: September 19, 2007
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2007
Wing & Weintraub, P.C., of Milford (David C. Wing on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Hamblett & Kerrigan, P.A., of Nashua (Andrew J. Piela on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
GALWAY, J. The respondent, Tracy (LaRue) Bedard, appeals the decision
of the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) dismissing her petition to bring forward and
modify the parties’ permanent order regarding parental rights and
responsibilities and child support. We reverse and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported by the
record. In June 2003, the petitioner, Raymond LaRue, Jr., filed for divorce. In
January 2005, the parties executed a permanent stipulation, which included
an agreement regarding custody of their two minor children. The stipulation
granted LaRue primary physical custody and allowed Bedard visitation one
weekday evening per week and every other weekend. Paragraph 3-E of the
stipulation permits modification of the visitation schedule by agreement of the
parties, and provides that the stipulated schedule would control in the absence
of such an agreement. The stipulation was approved by the trial court in
March 2005. However, since the divorce petition was originally filed, the
parties have agreed upon a more liberal visitation arrangement. In fact,
Bedard has had visitation every Monday morning to Wednesday, Thursday
morning to Saturday morning, and one weekend per month.
Bedard filed the underlying petition in August 2005, alleging grounds for
modification of the permanent order. Specifically, she argued under RSA 461-
A:11, I(a) (Supp. 2006) that the parties had made a de facto agreement to
modify the permanent stipulation through their conduct; that is, following a
different visitation schedule than that articulated in the stipulation. In
addition, Bedard alleged under RSA 461-A:11, I(c) (Supp. 2006) that there was
clear and convincing evidence that the stipulated schedule would be
detrimental to the children if implemented.
LaRue moved to dismiss Bedard’s petition, arguing the petition did not
set forth sufficient facts upon which relief could be granted or allege adequate
facts to meet the burden set forth in RSA 461-A:11 (Supp. 2006). After a non-
evidentiary hearing on the motion to dismiss, the trial court granted LaRue’s
motion, ruling, “The allegation upon which respondent premises her motion to
modify is factually incorrect. The parties’ [sic] have not, ‘(s)ince March of 2005’
modified their agreement by deeds, because the parties’ actual custodial
schedule has never been nearly as restrictive as respondent agreed to in the
permanent stipulation.” The trial court concluded:
Whatever the reason(s) that the parties decided to agree to a
written custodial schedule that was more restrictive that [sic]
what they were doing in practice, they have not substantially
changed their custodial schedule since the March 2005
permanent stipulation to warrant any change in custodial
time or child support.
On appeal, Bedard asserts the trial court erred by: (1) considering
LaRue’s dispute of certain factual allegations to support his motion to dismiss;
(2) improperly grafting a “substantial change in circumstances” burden onto
RSA 461-A:11, I(a); and (3) not addressing her request for modification under
RSA 461-A:11, I(c). LaRue responds that the dismissal was proper because
Bedard: (1) failed to allege sufficient facts to warrant a modification; (2) failed
to allege a detrimental present environment under RSA 461-A:11, I(c); and (3)
is judicially estopped from asserting that the parties’ actions can form the basis
for modification.
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our task is to
ascertain whether the allegations pleaded in the plaintiff’s writ are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery.” Plourde Sand &
Gravel v. JGI Eastern, 154 N.H. 791, 793 (2007) (quotation omitted). Applying
this standard to this case, we assume the truth of the facts alleged by Bedard
2
and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to her. See
id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in her petition
against the applicable law. See id. If the facts alleged do not constitute a basis
for legal relief, we will uphold the granting of a motion to dismiss. Farm Family
Cas. Ins. Co. v. Town of Rollinsford, 155 N.H. ___, ___, 927 A.2d 1234, 1236
(2007).
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole.” Chase v. Ameriquest Mortgage Co., 155 N.H. 19, 22 (2007). We begin
our analysis by looking to the language of the statute itself. In re
Guardianship of R.A., 155 N.H. 98, 99 (2007). If the language is plain and
unambiguous, then we need not look beyond it for further indication of
legislative intent. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written
and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that
the legislature did not see fit to include. Chase, 155 N.H. at 22.
RSA 461-A:11, I(a) provides, “The court may issue an order modifying a
permanent order concerning parental rights and responsibilities under any of
the following circumstances: (a) The parties agree to a modification.” The
statute does not specify under what circumstances an agreement to modify
may occur, or set forth any particular requirements for an agreement to
modify, such as a writing reflecting the agreement and its terms. Thus, from a
plain reading of the statute, and absent further statutory guidance, we
conclude that the legislature intended contract principles to apply in
determining whether the parties have agreed to a modification. It is well
established that contractual obligations can be modified by either an express or
an implied agreement between the parties. See Guri (Cushing) v. Guri, 122
N.H. 552, 555 (1982). Such an agreement can be inferred from the parties’
conduct. See Walker v. Percy, 142 N.H. 345, 349 (1997). “Whether a contract
has been modified is a question of fact for the trial court to determine . . . .” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Here, the trial court ruled that, as a matter of law, the parties’
undisputed actions could not form a de facto agreement to modify because
there had been no change in their actual visitation schedule subsequent to the
permanent stipulation. In so doing, the trial court considered the parties’
actions both before and after the stipulation was entered as a permanent order.
However, whether the parties had a consistent visitation schedule since before
the permanent stipulation is not the correct measure under the statute. The
permanent stipulation reflects a contractual agreement between the parties. It
is undisputed that the parties have not followed the stipulated schedule set
forth in that contract since it was executed; Bedard specifically alleged that the
parties have agreed since March 2005 to the modified schedule. As a result,
the parties’ conduct may be found to constitute an agreement to modify under
RSA 461-A:11, I(a). Therefore, Bedard has alleged sufficient facts to withstand
3
a motion to dismiss. If the legislature did not intend this application of
contract law to the modification of parental rights and responsibilities, “it is
free to amend the statute[ ] as it sees fit.” In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton,
154 N.H. 264, 268 (2006) (quotation omitted).
In this case, the primary issue is whether the parties’ modification of the
visitation schedule is a change from the permanent stipulation or whether it is
pursuant to the permanent stipulation under paragraph 3-E, which allows
modification of the visitation schedule by agreement of the parties. This
determination is a question of fact for the trial court. See Walker, 142 N.H. at
349. “It is a fundamental principle of contract law that one party to a contract
cannot alter its terms without the assent of the other party; the minds of the
parties must meet as to the proposed modification.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“[I]t is not sufficient to show an ambiguous course of dealing from which one
party might reasonably infer that the original contract was still in force, and
the other that it had been changed.” Id. (quotation omitted). Here, the trial
court did not hold an evidentiary hearing in order to resolve what, in fact, the
parties intended by their conduct. A factual finding after an evidentiary
hearing is necessary to determine whether or not an express or implied
agreement to modify occurred.
Bedard also argues that the trial court improperly required her to allege
a substantial change in circumstances since the execution of the permanent
stipulation in order to satisfy RSA 461-A:11, I(a). We do not read the trial
court’s order in this manner. Although the trial court noted that the parties
had not “substantially changed” their visitation schedule, Bedard misconstrues
the context of this statement within the court’s order. Reading the order in its
entirety, it is clear that the trial court’s choice of words reflects its conclusion
that there must be a change in the parties’ actual visitation schedule before an
agreement to modify by conduct could be found. There is no indication that
the trial court required a substantial change in circumstances be alleged to
support a claim of an agreement to modify.
Bedard also requested modification under RSA 461-A:11, I(c), dealing
with her allegation that the stipulated schedule would be detrimental to the
children if implemented. However, LaRue argues that Bedard has failed to
allege a detrimental present environment under RSA 461-A:11, I(c). In
addition, LaRue asserts that the modification petition should be dismissed on
the basis of judicial estoppel. The trial court did not make any determination
or ruling on these issues. Because the matter is being remanded in light of our
holding above, these issues should be addressed by the trial court in the first
instance.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4