THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Lebanon District Court
No. 2007-866
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PAUL FORMELLA
Argued: October 22, 2008
Opinion Issued: November 21, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
Green & Utter, P.A., of Manchester (Philip H. Utter on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
GALWAY, J. The defendant, Paul Formella, appeals his conviction
following a bench trial in the Lebanon District Court (Cirone, J.) for criminal
liability for the conduct of another. See RSA 626:8 (2007). We affirm.
The relevant facts are not in dispute. On the afternoon of Wednesday,
June 13, 2007, the defendant, then a junior at Hanover High School, and two
friends, were studying at the Howe Library near the school. Wednesdays were
typically early release days at the school, and students had been dismissed at
2:00 p.m. After studying for approximately two hours, the defendant and his
friends returned to the school to retrieve some books from their second-floor
lockers. Upon entering the school, they encountered another group of students
who said they intended to steal mathematics exams from the third floor. The
defendant and his companions were asked to serve as lookouts during the
theft, which they agreed to do. They were instructed to yell something like “did
you get your math book?” up to the third floor as a code to alert the thieves if
someone was coming.
The defendant and his friends then proceeded to their second-floor
lockers. The defendant testified that on their way to their lockers they looked
around to “confirm or dispel” whether anyone was there. Once the defendant
and his friends had retrieved their books, they “were all feeling like this was the
wrong thing to do,” and decided to head back down to the first floor to wait for
the other group. On their way down the stairs, they encountered some janitors
who told them that they ought to leave the school. The defendant and his
friends left the school building, but waited in the parking lot for approximately
five to ten minutes for the other group. Eventually, the other students exited
the school with the stolen examinations and all of the students shared the
exam questions.
The next week, someone informed the dean of students that some
students had stolen the exams. The police were called, and in connection with
their investigation they interviewed the defendant, who admitted his
involvement in the theft. He was later charged with criminal liability for
conduct of another. See RSA 626:8. Following his conviction, the defendant
appealed to this court.
On appeal, the defendant raises two interrelated arguments. He first
contends that the trial court erred in failing to make findings of fact relative to
the timing of his withdrawal from the theft and the completion of the theft
because, he argues, without such findings the trial court could not properly
apply RSA 626:8. Additionally, he argues that the trial court erred in denying
his motion to dismiss at the close of the State’s case because the evidence was
insufficient to find him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
Before addressing the defendant’s specific arguments, we must construe
RSA 626:8. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of
the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. State v. Drake, 155 N.H. 169, 174 (2007). When examining the
language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used. Id. We construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the
fair import of their terms and to promote justice. See RSA 625:3 (2007);
Petition of State of N.H., 152 N.H. 185, 187 (2005). In doing so, we must first
look to the plain language of the statute to determine legislative intent. Petition
of State of N.H., 152 N.H. at 187. Absent an ambiguity we will not look beyond
the language of the statute to discern legislative intent. State v. Stewart, 155
N.H. 212, 218 (2007).
2
RSA 626:8 provides, in relevant part, that an individual is criminally
liable for the conduct of another when he acts as an accomplice in the
commission of an offense. RSA 626:8, II(c). A person is an accomplice when
with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of an offense, he
aids or agrees or attempts to aid another person in planning or committing the
offense. RSA 626:8, III(a). RSA 626:8 further provides, however, that a person
is not an accomplice if he “terminates his complicity prior to the commission of
the offense and wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the commission of the
offense or gives timely warning to the law enforcement authorities or otherwise
makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.” RSA 626:8,
VI(c).
The defendant does not dispute that he became an accomplice in the first
instance when he agreed to act as a lookout. See State v. Merritt, 143 N.H.
714, 718 (1999) (noting that a defendant’s presence at the scene of the crime
may be sufficient for accomplice liability if it was intended to, and does, aid the
primary actor). Accordingly, we are concerned only with whether the
defendant’s later acts terminated his liability as an accomplice. We note that
the defendant does not contend that he gave timely warning to law enforcement
or otherwise made “proper effort” to prevent the offense. See RSA 626:8, VI(c).
Thus, under RSA 626:8, VI(c) the defendant was not an accomplice if: (1) he
terminated his complicity in the crime; (2) his termination occurred prior to the
commission of the offense; and (3) he wholly deprived his complicity of
effectiveness in the commission of the offense.
We conclude that the statute is ambiguous. As regards the third factor,
for example, the statute does not define what is required for a person to “wholly
deprive” his complicity of effectiveness in the commission of an offense.
According to the State, an overt act aimed at undermining the prior complicity
is required, while the defendant argues that, at least in this case, no such act
is necessary. As the statute does not clarify whether such an act is necessary,
we conclude that it is ambiguous, and we look to other sources to determine
legislative intent.
RSA 626:8, like much of our criminal law, is based upon the Model Penal
Code. See 2 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law § 13.3(d) at 367 n.71 (2d ed.
2003). Accordingly, we look to the Model Penal Code and its commentaries for
guidance. See State v. Donohue, 150 N.H. 180, 183 (2003). RSA 626:8 tracks
the provisions of section 2.06 of the Model Penal Code. Comment 9(c) to
section 2.06 addresses situations where liability may be averted if the
accomplice’s complicity is terminated prior to the commission of the crime.
Model Penal Code § 2.06 cmt. 9(c) at 326 (1985). The comment notes that the
actions sufficient to deprive the prior complicity of effectiveness vary with the
type of accessorial behavior. Id. Relevant to the analysis here, the comment
3
states that if “complicity inhered in request or encouragement, countermanding
disapproval may suffice to nullify its influence, providing it is heard in time to
allow reconsideration by those planning to commit the crime.” Id. The
comments thus indicate that in order to deprive the prior complicity of
effectiveness, one who has encouraged the commission of an offense may avoid
liability by terminating his or her role in the commission of the crime and by
making his or her disapproval known to the principals sufficiently in advance
of the commission of the crime to allow them time to reconsider as well.
While there appears to be a paucity of authority on the issue, the view
that an accomplice must make some affirmative act, such as an overt
expression of disapproval to the principals, accords with that of other
jurisdictions with statutes mirroring the provisions of the Model Penal Code.
See People v. Lacey, 200 N.E.2d 11, 14 (Ill. App. Ct. 1964)(“A person who
encourages the commission of an unlawful act cannot escape responsibility by
quietly withdrawing from the scene.”); People v. Brown, 186 N.E.2d 321, 324
(Ill. 1962); Commonwealth v. Spriggs, 344 A.2d 880, 883 (Pa. 1975).
Additionally, the relevant authorities weigh in favor of requiring any withdrawal
to be communicated far enough in advance to allow the others involved in the
crime to follow suit. See Lacey, 200 N.E.2d at 14 (“[I]t must be possible for the
trier of fact to say that the accused had wholly and effectively detached himself
from the criminal enterprise before the act with which he is charged is in the
process of consummation or has become so inevitable that it cannot reasonably
be stayed.”); see also LaFave, supra at 366 (“A mere change of heart, flight from
the crime scene, apprehension by the police, or an uncommunicated decision
not to carry out his part of the scheme will not suffice.”). This is not to say that
the terminating accomplice must actually prevent the crime from occurring.
Instead, he need only make some act demonstrating to the principals of the
crime that he has withdrawn, and he must do so in a manner, and at such a
time, that the principals could do likewise. We agree with the rationale of these
authorities.
With the above understanding, we turn to the defendant’s specific claims
of error. According to the defendant, the trial court erred in failing to make
findings of fact regarding the time the defendant terminated his complicity, and
the time the theft occurred because without such findings the trial court could
not properly apply the statute. Here, the trial court credited the defendant’s
claim that he did, in fact, terminate his complicity. Thus, he contends, it was
critical to know when he withdrew and when the crime was committed, so that
it could be determined whether he withdrew at a time sufficient to satisfy the
statute. We disagree.
The relevant portion of the statute is phrased in the conjunctive. For a
person not to be an accomplice he must terminate his complicity prior to the
commission of the offense and wholly deprive that complicity of its
4
effectiveness. See RSA 626:8, VI(c). Even assuming the defendant terminated
his complicity prior to the commission of the offense, he did not wholly deprive
his complicity of its effectiveness.
As stated above, to extricate himself from accomplice liability, the
defendant needed to make an affirmative act, such as communicating his
withdrawal to the principals. Here, the defendant made no such act. The
defendant testified that he and his companions simply left the scene. He did
not communicate his withdrawal, discourage the principals from acting, inform
the custodians, or do any other thing which would deprive his complicity of
effectiveness. In fact, the principals remained unaware of his exit. Thus, the
defendant did not do that which was necessary to undo his complicity.
The defendant contends that because he had been acting as a lookout,
leaving the scene so as to no longer be “looking out” deprived his complicity of
its effectiveness, and, therefore, findings regarding the timing of the offense
were required. We disagree. While at the point he left the scene he was no
longer an effective lookout, the defendant did nothing to counter his prior
complicity. According to the defendant, the principals had requested aid in
committing the offense, he agreed to provide it, and he agreed to warn the
principals if anyone approached, thus encouraging the act. Further, upon
reaching the second floor the defendant looked around to “confirm or dispel”
whether anyone was around who might have apprehended the thieves or
otherwise spoiled the crime. Thus, it was the complicity of agreeing to aid the
primary actors and then actually aiding them that needed to be undone;
silently withdrawing from the scene did not, in any way, undermine the
encouragement the defendant had provided. As there was no evidence that the
defendant had wholly deprived his complicity of its effectiveness, it was not
error for the trial court to refuse to make findings on the timing of the offense
because such findings would not have altered the result.
For essentially the same reasons, we reject the defendant’s argument
that the trial court erred in denying his motion to dismiss for insufficient
evidence. To succeed on a motion to dismiss, the defendant bears the burden
of establishing that the evidence, viewed in its entirety and with all reasonable
inferences drawn in the State’s favor, was insufficient to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that he was guilty of the crime charged. State v. Sideris, 157
N.H. 258, 263 (2008).
The defendant argues that the State did not meet its burden to show that
he did not effectively terminate his role in the offense. During trial, the State
presented the testimony of Captain Francis Moran of the Hanover Police
Department, who testified that the defendant had confessed his involvement in
the crime. He then recounted the events as the defendant had described them
to him. From this testimony, there was sufficient evidence to find that the
5
defendant was an accomplice in the crime. Moreover, as noted previously,
there was no evidence that the defendant had done anything to deprive his
complicity in the crime of its effectiveness. Accordingly, we conclude that the
evidence was sufficient to deny the defendant’s motion to dismiss.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS,
J., concurred specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. I agree with the majority that the
defendant, Paul Formella, did not wholly deprive his complicity of its
effectiveness, as that phrase has been interpreted by courts with provisions
similar to RSA 626:8, IV(c) (2007), and by the drafters of the Model Penal Code.
I write separately because I reach this result by using a slightly different
analysis from that of the majority. While the majority focuses upon the
ambiguity of the language of RSA 626:8, IV(c), my focus is upon the fact that
this provision derives from the Model Penal Code. The court’s longstanding
practice is to look to the Model Penal Code commentaries for guidance when
interpreting analogous New Hampshire statutes. State v. Donohue, 150 N.H.
180, 183 (2003). I see no reason to depart from this practice in this case.
The defendant’s principal appellate argument is that the evidence was
insufficient to find him criminally liable for the conduct of another beyond a
reasonable doubt. To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to
the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v.
MacDonald, 156 N.H. 803, 804 (2008). When the evidence is solely
circumstantial, it must exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under
this standard, however, the court still considers the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State and examines each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation. Id.
RSA 626:8 (2007) provides, in relevant part, that an individual is
criminally liable for the conduct of another when he acts as an accomplice in
the commission of an offense. RSA 626:8, II(c). A person is an accomplice
when “[w]ith the purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of [an]
offense, he . . . aids or agrees or attempts to aid [an]other person in planning or
committing” the offense. RSA 626:8, III(a). RSA 626:8, VI(c) further provides,
however, that a person is not an accomplice if he “terminates his complicity
prior to the commission of the offense and wholly deprives it of effectiveness in
the commission of the offense or gives timely warning to the law enforcement
authorities or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the
offense.”
6
As the defendant concedes, he became an accomplice when he agreed to
act as a lookout. See State v. Merritt, 143 N.H. 714, 718 (1999). He argues
that the evidence compelled a finding that nonetheless he was immune from
liability because he “terminate[d] his complicity prior to the commission of the
offense and wholly deprive[d] it of effectiveness in the commission of the
offense” when he left his lookout position. RSA 626:8, VI(c). The State
counters that merely abandoning his lookout post was insufficient to terminate
his complicity. The State argues that to terminate his complicity, the
defendant had to “make some effort to actually prevent the crime from
occurring,” which he did not do.
Resolving this dispute requires interpretation of RSA 626:8, VI(c). RSA
626:8 is based upon Model Penal Code section 2.06. See State v. Anthony, 151
N.H. 492, 494 (2004); see Model Penal Code § 2.06, at 295-96 (Official Draft
and Revised Comments 1985). To interpret RSA 626:8, VI(c), therefore, the
court looks to the Model Penal Code and its commentaries for guidance. See
Donohue, 150 N.H. at 183.
RSA 626:8, VI(c) tracks the language of Model Penal Code section
2.06(6)(c). Model Penal Code § 2.06, at 296. This part of the Model Penal Code
“establishes three special defenses to a charge that one is an accomplice. . . .
[T]he third [of these defenses] relates to a termination of the actor’s complicity
prior to the commission of the offense.” Id. at 298. “Termination requires that
the actor wholly deprive his conduct of its effectiveness in the commission of
the offense or that he give timely warning to law enforcement authorities or
otherwise make a proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.” Id.
According to the drafters of the Model Penal Code, the “general principle
advanced” in Model Penal Code section 2.06(6)(c) “is that the accomplice must
deprive his prior action of its effectiveness.” Id. cmt. 9(c) at 326. The action
that suffices varies with the kind of aid provided. Id. For instance, if the
accomplice provided arms to the principal, then merely stating that he
withdraws from the aid “ought not to be sufficient; what is important is that he
get back the arms,” thereby wholly depriving his aid of its effectiveness in the
commission of the offense. Id. By contrast, if the aid given consists of merely
encouraging the principal to commit the offense, then “countermanding
disapproval” may suffice to nullify the aid’s influence, provided it’s heard in
time to allow those planning to commit the crime to reconsider their actions.
Id. Because there will be cases in which the only way that an accomplice can
deprive his conduct of effectiveness is to actually prevent the crime, the
drafters included informing law enforcement as a method of termination. Id.
As “[t]he sort of effort that should be demanded turns so largely on the
circumstances,” the drafters thought it inadvisable to formulate a more specific
rule, and instead crafted a catch-all that provides immunity where the
7
accomplice “otherwise makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the
offense.” Id. at 296, 326.
Courts interpreting state analogs to Model Penal Code section 2.06 have
uniformly held that for termination to be effective, it must, at a minimum, be
communicated to the principal. See People v. Quiroz, 593 N.E.2d 675, 678 (Ill.
App. Ct. 1992). “A mere change of heart, flight from the crime scene,
apprehension by the police, or an uncommunicated decision not to carry out
his part of the scheme will not suffice.” 2 W. LaFave, Substantive Criminal Law
§ 13.3(d) at 366 (2d ed. 2003); see State v. Adams, 623 A.2d 42, 49 (Conn.
1993). “A person who encourages the commission of an unlawful act cannot
escape responsibility by quietly withdrawing from the scene.” People v. Lacey,
200 N.E.2d 11, 14 (Ill. App. Ct. 1964). “Rather, it is necessary that he: (1)
repudiate his prior aid, or (2) do all that is possible to countermand his prior
aid or counsel and (3) do so before the chain of events has become
unstoppable.” LaFave, supra at 366; see Adams, 623 A.2d at 49.
With this understanding of what it means to terminate one’s complicity
to avoid liability as an accomplice, the next step in my analysis is to examine
whether a rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable
inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could have found the
defendant criminally liable for the conduct of another.
I agree with the majority that the evidence was sufficient. A rational trier
of fact, viewing all of the evidence and the inferences therefrom in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found that the defendant did not
terminate his complicity when he abandoned his lookout post. To terminate
his complicity, the defendant had to wholly deprive his earlier aid to the
principals of its effectiveness. His earlier assistance enabled the principals to
commit the offense without fear of being caught. By merely abandoning his
post as a lookout, the defendant did nothing to deprive his earlier assistance of
its effectiveness. For all the principals knew, he was still acting as a lookout
and they could continue committing the offense without fear of being caught.
When he left his post, the defendant did nothing to dispel this belief. Had he
done something to dispel this belief, such as announcing to the principals that
he was leaving his post, the principals could have had an opportunity to
reconsider their actions. Without at least informing them that he was leaving,
the defendant did not wholly deprive his earlier assistance to the principals of
its effectiveness.
Accordingly, I agree with the majority that the defendant’s conviction for
criminal liability for the conduct of another must be affirmed.
8