THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-668
PHILIP S. HORNER
v.
GOVERNOR, STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE & a.
Argued: March 27, 2008
Opinion Issued: June 19, 2008
Philip S. Horner, pro se, and Richard E. Samdperil, of Exeter (Mr. Horner
on the brief, and Mr. Samdperil orally), for the plaintiff.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Karen A. Schlitzer, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Philip S. Horner, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his petition for a writ of prohibition to
enjoin the State from enforcing RSA 651-B:11 (2007 & Supp. 2007), which
mandates the collection of a sex offender registration fee. We affirm.
The plaintiff was convicted in 2000 of five counts of felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:3 (2007). Every sex offender and offender against
children is required to register with the New Hampshire Division of State Police
(division) which maintains the sex offender registry. RSA 651-B:2, I (2007), :11,
I (Supp. 2007). Upon release from prison, sex offenders must inform the
division where they intend to reside and the division enters this information into
the law enforcement name search system. RSA 651-B:3, I (Supp. 2007). When
the division is notified by law enforcement that a sex offender has moved to New
Hampshire, the division must locate the offender, serve notice of duty to register
and enter the offender’s information in the system. RSA 651-B:3, II (Supp.
2007). On a semi-annual basis, the division is required to verify the offender’s
address by sending a letter by certified mail to the offender. RSA 651-B:3, III
(2007). Offenders must register in person on a semi-annual basis, be
photographed and provide specific information about their appearance,
employment and vehicles. Id.; RSA 651-B:4, I(a)(2)-(3) (2007).
Pursuant to the statute, sex offenders must pay “a fee of $17 semi-
annually.” RSA 651-B:11, I. The plaintiff brought a petition for a writ of
prohibition contending that the statute violates the prohibition against
disproportionate taxation in Part I, Article 12 and Part II, Article 5 of the State
Constitution. Following a hearing, the trial court denied the petition, ruling
that the plaintiff failed to establish that RSA 651-B:11 imposes a tax.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the sex offender registration fee “is in
reality a disproportionate tax, being an enforced contribution to fund a public
safety measure (the registry) which benefits all citizens, not just registrants.”
The State argues that the charge is a fee because the statute serves a regulatory
purpose and the fee helps to defray the cost of maintaining the registry.
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo.” Nicolaou v. Vt. Mut. Ins. Co., 155 N.H. 724, 727 (2007). “In reviewing a
legislative act, we presume it to be constitutional and will not declare it invalid
except upon inescapable grounds.” Baines v. N.H. Senate President, 152 N.H.
124, 133 (2005) (quotation omitted).
RSA 651-B:11, I, provides:
A sexual offender or offender against children shall pay a fee
of $17 semi-annually. Of this amount, the department shall
receive $15 to be used to defray the costs of maintaining the sex
offender registry. Such funds shall be nonlapsing and shall be
continually appropriated to the department for such use. The
municipality in which the sexual offender or offender against
children registers shall keep the remaining $2 to defray any costs
associated with implementing the provisions of this paragraph.
The distinction between a tax and a fee “is often difficult to determine
because each partakes to some extent of the characteristics of the other.”
Opinion of the Justices, 98 N.H. 527, 528 (1953). However, our case law has
identified factors which aid in distinguishing a tax from a fee. First, “[a] tax is
an enforced contribution to raise revenue and not to reimburse the state for
2
special services.” American Automobile Assoc. v. State, 136 N.H. 579, 584
(1992) (quotation omitted). Second, to be valid, a fee “must be incidental to the
implementation of a regulatory program and cannot primarily be intended to
produce additional revenues.” Id. at 585. Third, “[t]o determine the proper
characterization of a statute, it is necessary to discover its basic purpose.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “In so doing, we must consider the statute’s declared
purpose as well as its essential characteristics.” Id. (quotation omitted).
We have previously determined that the sex offender registry serves a
regulatory purpose, “providing a means for law enforcement agencies in this
State to share information regarding the whereabouts of convicted sexual
offenders.” State v. Costello, 138 N.H. 587, 590 (1994). “It has long been
recognized that governmental undertakings can properly be supported in whole
or in part by charges made upon those who necessitate the services or who avail
themselves of the advantages offered thereby.” Opinion of the Justices, 117
N.H. 382, 384 (1977) (penalty assessment of $2 or 10% on each fine, penalty or
forfeiture imposed by the court for a criminal offense is not a tax where penalty
assessment would be used to provide funding for police training programs).
“Charges of this nature are not taxes, and constitutional limitations upon the
taxing power have no application thereto.” Id.
The plaintiff argues at length that “governmental fees must be voluntarily
assumed and must confer a particular benefit upon the party paying the fee,
rather than upon society as a whole.” The plaintiff offers no New Hampshire
law in support of this position. We decline to rely upon the federal and other
state cases set forth in his brief to determine whether, under our State
Constitution, the regulatory charge is a tax or a fee.
The plaintiff does not challenge whether the $17 fee approximates the
cost incurred in maintaining the sex offender registry. See D’Antoni v. Comm’r,
N.H. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs., 153 N.H. 655, 658 (2006) (amount of a
fee will be sustained if not grossly disproportionate to the regulatory expenses).
The division retains $15 of the $17 semi-annual charge “to defray the costs of
maintaining the sex offender registry,” while the respective municipality receives
$2 “to defray any costs associated with implementing the provisions of [the
statute].” RSA 651-B:11, I. There is no suggestion that such charges fail to
“bear a relation to the expense of rendering the particular service.” Opinion of
the Justices, 117 N.H. at 384.
We hold that the $17 semi-annual charge imposed upon sex offenders is
not intended to raise additional revenue but, rather, is used solely to support a
governmental regulatory activity made necessary by the actions of those who
are required to pay the charge. As the trial court found, the sex offender
registration fees “are applied directly to regulatory services that would not be
necessary if there were no sex offenders.” There is no evidence that the fee does
3
not “bear a relationship to and approximate the expense” of maintaining the sex
offender registry, see D’Antoni, 153 N.H. at 658, nor is there evidence that the
fee is not incidental to regulation but is rather “primarily for the purpose of
producing revenue.” Appeal of Ass’n of N.H. Utilities, 122 N.H. 770, 773 (1982)
(quotation omitted). Accordingly, the $17 semi-annual charge is properly
characterized as a fee and not a tax.
In addition, the plaintiff argues that “the addition of a monetary exaction
to criminal registration requirements violates New Hampshire’s constitutional
prohibition against retrospective laws.” The State Constitution provides that,
“Retrospective laws are highly injurious, oppressive, and unjust. No such laws,
therefore, should be made . . . for . . . the punishment of offenses.” N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 23. As discussed above, the sex offender registration law
serves a regulatory purpose. Thus, the $17 semi-annual charge under RSA
651-B:11 is not imposed as punishment, but to defray the costs of maintaining
the sex offender registry. Accordingly, there is no ex post facto violation. See
State v. Comeau, 142 N.H. 84, 88 (1997) (appropriate focus in ex post facto
analysis is whether law increases the punishment for or alters the elements of
an offense, or changes the ultimate facts required to prove guilt). Furthermore,
the fee is imposed at the time of registration with the division, which occurs
upon the sex offender’s release from prison. See RSA 651-B:2, I, :3, I, :11, I.
Therefore the requirements of registration and payment of the fee occur
prospectively, not retrospectively. See In re Estate of Sharek, 156 N.H. 28, 30
(2007).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4