THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hampton District Court
No. 2007-808
RITA MACPHERSON
v.
JAY S. WEINER
Submitted: September 16, 2008
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2008
Rita MacPherson, by brief, pro se.
Troy Watts, of North Woodstock, and Neil F. Faigel, of Andover,
Massachusetts, by brief, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Jay S. Weiner, appeals an order of the
Hampton District Court (Frasier, J.) granting the request by the plaintiff, Rita
MacPherson, to extend a final protective order for an additional five years. See
RSA 633:3-a, III-c (2007). We affirm.
The record reveals the following. On September 22, 2005, the plaintiff
obtained a final protective order against the defendant. On January 3, 2006,
the plaintiff filed a statement with the police, claiming that the defendant went
to her place of employment and also made telephone calls to her parents and to
her place of employment. On June 3, 2006, a witness observed the defendant
at the plaintiff’s residence. A complaint filed on June 6, 2006, alleged that the
defendant drove by the plaintiff’s residence seven times. The defendant was
subsequently convicted of violating the protective order. On August 30, 2006,
the district court extended the order for one year. There is no evidence that the
defendant violated the protective order during that year. On August 28, 2007,
the plaintiff requested, and the trial court granted, a five-year extension. The
defendant requested a hearing. See RSA 633:3-a, III-c.
At the hearing, the defendant represented, and the plaintiff did not
dispute, that he had complied with the protective order since June 2006. The
plaintiff informed the trial court that she requested an extension because the
defendant had violated the prior orders.
The trial court issued a written order, granting the plaintiff’s request for
a five-year extension, stating: “An important factor in the Court finding
plaintiff is entitled to have the order extended is that the defendant did
previously on June 5, 2006 violate a previous order then in effect, [d]efendant’s
claim he has not contacted plaintiff in over a year is not a reason to deny
[p]laintiff’s request or her fear of defendant.”
On appeal, the defendant raises four issues: (1) whether the plaintiff
submitted sufficient evidence of “good cause” to support the extension; (2)
whether an incident that occurred fifteen months prior to the plaintiff’s request
for extension is sufficient to satisfy the “good cause” standard; (3) whether the
district court unsustainably exercised its discretion in granting the extension;
and (4) whether RSA 633:3-a, III-c is void for vagueness as it relates to the
phrase “good cause,” and therefore violates the defendant’s due process rights.
The defendant’s arguments as to sufficiency of the evidence are
intertwined with questions of statutory interpretation regarding the “good
cause” standard in RSA 633:3-a, III-c. Specifically, the defendant points out
that it is undisputed that he has complied with the protective order since June
2006, and argues that violation of a protective order fifteen months prior to a
request for an extension is insufficient as a matter of law to meet the standard
of “good cause.” We, therefore, begin our analysis with a discussion of RSA
633:3-a, III-c.
RSA 633:3-a, III-c provides:
Any order under this section shall be for a fixed period
of time not to exceed one year, but may be extended by
order of the court upon a motion by the plaintiff,
showing good cause, with notice to the defendant, for
one year after the expiration of the first order and
thereafter each extension may be for up to 5 years,
upon the request of the plaintiff and at the discretion
of the court. The court shall review the order, and
each renewal thereof and shall grant such relief as
2
may be necessary to provide for the safety and well-
being of the plaintiff.
(Emphasis added.)
Interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Upton v. Town of Hopkinton, 157 N.H. 115, 118 (2008). When examining the
language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used. Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 191 (2007). We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. We interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result and review
a particular provision, not in isolation, but together with all associated
sections. Appeal of N.H. Troopers Assoc., 145 N.H. 288, 290 (2000).
Initially, we discuss the meaning of “good cause.” RSA 633:3-a, III-c
permits the court to extend a final protective order initially for one year.
Thereafter “each extension may be for up to 5 years” upon a showing of “good
cause.” RSA 633:3-a, III-c. RSA 633:3-a does not define “good cause.” But see
In re Alexander Grant & Co., 820 F.2d 352, 356 (11th Cir. 1987) (good cause is
“difficult to define in absolute terms, [but] it generally signifies a sound basis or
legitimate need to take judicial action”). It is, however, a common legal term.
E.g., Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(c) (“The court may, for good cause, issue an order to
protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or
undue burden or expense.”); RSA 12-E:5, II (2003) (“When a petition for a
hearing has been made, and good cause has been shown therefor, the
commissioner shall set a time and place for a hearing.”); RSA 29:12, I (2000)
(abatement of interest on taxes where good cause shown); RSA 30-B:21 (2000)
(transfer to another department of corrections where good cause shown);
Curras v. Unemployment Appeals Com’n, 841 So. 2d 673, 674 (Fla. Dist. Ct.
App. 2003) (to receive unemployment compensation one must show good cause
to quit); 7-Eleven, Inc. v. Dar, 757 N.E.2d 515, 522 (Ill. App. Ct. 2001)
(“Termination of a franchise must be supported by good cause.”).
The defendant points to RSA 633:3-a, III-a, which references RSA
chapter 173-B, and argues that we should apply the principles articulated in
Tosta v. Bullis, 156 N.H. 763 (2008), in construing the term “good cause.” See
RSA 633:3-a, III-a (remedy for stalking petitions look to domestic violence
petition remedy); RSA ch. 173-B (2002 & Supp. 2007) (domestic violence
petitions). In Tosta, we reiterated that “we have required that the threshold
misconduct prompting a domestic violence petition be neither ‘too distant in
time’ nor ‘non-specific.’” Tosta, 156 N.H. at 767 (quoting Fillmore v. Fillmore,
147 N.H. 283, 286 (2001)). Although we agree with the defendant that the trial
court should consider these factors, we disagree that they are the only factors
that define “good cause” within RSA 633:3-a, III-c. Furthermore, unlike in
3
Tosta, where the misconduct occurred nine months prior and the plaintiff
chose to stay with the defendant following the misconduct, see Tosta, 156 N.H.
at 768, the plaintiff here has refrained from intentional contact with the
defendant. The link between the abuse and the petition in Tosta was
“attenuated at best.” Id. Here, the defendant’s past acts of violating the court
order are the reason for the extension. Thus, any analogy to Tosta is
misplaced.
We interpret “good cause” in context by considering the statute as a
whole. RSA 633:3-a, III-a provides that “[a] person who has been the victim of
stalking as defined in this section may seek relief by filing a civil petition,” and
“the court shall grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a cessation of
stalking.” See RSA 173-B:5, I(a) (Supp. 2007) (providing procedures for
protective orders). The initial objective is to ensure the stalking ends. In
addressing any extension, RSA 633:3-a, III-c provides that the court may
extend the protective order on a “showing [of] good cause . . . to provide for the
safety and well-being of the plaintiff.” Thus, whether “good cause” exists
directly relates to the safety and well-being of the plaintiff. For a showing of
“good cause,” the trial court must therefore assess whether the current
conditions are such that there is still a concern for the safety and well-being of
the plaintiff. To do so, the trial court must review the circumstances of the
original stalking and any violation of the order. The trial court should also take
into account any present and reasonable fear by the plaintiff. Where the trial
court determines that the circumstances are such that, without a protective
order, the plaintiff’s safety and well-being would be in jeopardy, “good cause”
warrants an extension.
We next address whether the trial court’s finding was based upon
sufficient evidence. The defendant makes two claims: (1) as a matter of law
there was insufficient evidence because he had not violated the protective order
during the one-year extension; and (2) on these particular facts, his behavior
for the previous fifteen months did not warrant an extension. We reject both
arguments.
On appeal, we review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law
and uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidential support or tainted by error of law. Fisher, 155 N.H. at 190. We
accord considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given testimony. Id.
As to the defendant’s argument that there was insufficient evidence as a
matter of law, the defendant’s compliance with the order over the previous
fifteen months does not bar an extension. If we adopted the defendant’s
interpretation, any acts amounting to stalking, see RSA 633:3-a, II, regardless
of how severe, would result in a protective order “not to exceed one year,” RSA
4
633:3-a, III-c, provided the defendant did not violate the order. This
interpretation is flawed. If the legislature intended to allow for an extension
only when there was a violation of the prior order, the legislature would have
included that restriction in the statute. See Fisher, 155 N.H. at 191. It did
not. Thus, the defendant’s compliance with or violation of the protective order
is a factor for the trial court to consider.
As to the trial court’s specific findings in this case, the trial court based
its decision to extend the order primarily upon the defendant’s June 5, 2006
violation of the previous order. At the hearing, the trial court heard that in
June 2006, while the original protective order was in place, the defendant
“drove by [the plaintiff’s house] a dozen times.” The defendant “subsequently
was arrested and went to jail.” At the hearing, the plaintiff stated, “I do have
affidavits from the witnesses in the neighborhood that saw him during that
time period in the silver car.” The plaintiff explained to the court, “I am not
feeling with Mr. Weiner’s previous history that without the extension I can
move forward. I’m asking that I can be made to feel safe and not sorry.” Based
upon this evidence, the trial court could have reasonably found good cause to
extend the protective order.
The trial court is in the best position to view the current circumstances,
as well as the defendant’s prior acts, and determine whether an extension is
necessary for the safety and well-being of the plaintiff. Thus, the trial court
has discretion to extend a protective order. See RSA 633:3-a, III-c. We
caution, however, that this discretion is not without limitation. We regard this
as a close case. Nonetheless, there is sufficient evidence in the record to
support the finding that the defendant’s actions in driving by the plaintiff’s
residence multiple times in violation of the protective order only fifteen months
earlier, together with the plaintiff’s reasonable fear, constituted good cause.
Finally, we address the defendant’s argument that the term “good cause”
is impermissibly vague and violates his procedural due process rights. The
defendant does not specifically invoke a provision of the State Constitution in
his brief, and therefore fails to preserve a state constitutional claim. See State
v. Hancock, 156 N.H. 301, 305 (2007). We therefore limit our analysis to the
Federal Constitution.
“A statute can be impermissibly vague for either of two independent
reasons. First, if it fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable
opportunity to understand what conduct it prohibits. Second, if it authorizes
or even encourages arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.” Hill v.
Colorado, 530 U.S. 703, 732 (2000). “A party challenging a statute as void for
vagueness bears a heavy burden of proof in view of the strong presumption
favoring a statute’s constitutionality.” State v. MacElman, 154 N.H. 304, 307
(2006).
5
The defendant argues that “[t]he term ‘Good Cause’ should give a
[d]efendant some articulable level of conduct which, if refrained from, would
result in the ultimate end to the extensions . . . .” He maintains that “there
have been no incidents between the plaintiff and the defendant for a period of
fifteen months, a reasonable person of ordinary intelligence would neither
believe, nor understand, ‘Good Cause’ could exist to the extent that an order
could be extended for an additional period of five years.” He further argues
that it is unclear if the showing of good cause “can, or should, relate back to
the original precipitating event that gave rise to the initial order, or if “Good
Cause” should only relate to events that took place from and after the last
extension of the current order.” Although he does not clarify whether his
challenges to RSA 633:3-a, III-c are facial or as-applied, we interpret his
arguments to be both.
RSA 633:3-a, III-c sets forth what the trial court must consider in
determining if “good cause” exists. “The court shall review the order, and each
renewal thereof and shall grant such relief as may be necessary to provide for
the safety and well-being of the plaintiff.” RSA 633:3-a, III-c. Such relief may
include an extension of the order “for up to 5 years.” RSA 633:3-a, III-c.
Accordingly, we find that RSA 633:3-a provides notice to a person of
ordinary intelligence that, in addressing whether there is “good cause” for an
extension, the court will take into account the original act and any subsequent
acts. RSA 633:3-a further provides notice to a person of ordinary intelligence
that if the court finds “good cause” for the extension, the extension may be for
five years. The defendant knew or should have known that if he participated in
activity that constituted stalking or violated conditions of the original stalking
order, the court could issue an extended protective order. As to the
defendant’s concern that the statute does not provide guidelines for a
defendant to know the actions which will result in a five-year extension, we will
not find a statute unconstitutionally vague simply because it does not precisely
apprise an individual of the standards by which the decision will be made. See
Derry Sand & Gravel, Inc. v. Town of Londonderry, 121 N.H. 501, 505 (1981).
Accordingly, we reject the defendant’s arguments that “good cause” within RSA
633:3-a, III-c is vague either on its face or as applied to the defendant.
Furthermore, we note that “[c]ourts have rejected arguments that [‘good
cause’] renders a statutory provision vague.” State v. Miller, 964 So. 2d 911,
921 (La. 2007) (citing Wray v. Folsom, 166 F. Supp. 390 (W.D. Ark. 1958)); see
Derry Sand & Gravel, Inc., 121 N.H. at 505 (“This court has long recognized
that [‘good cause and sufficient reason’] provide adequate criteria to guide a
governmental body . . . in the exercise of its discretion.”).
6
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, we uphold the trial court’s
decision to grant the extension.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7