THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-794
IN THE MATTER OF THE LIQUIDATION OF
THE HOME INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: April 30, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 25, 2008
Orr & Reno, PA, of Concord (Ronald L. Snow and Lisa Snow Wade on the
brief) and Morrison & Foerster LLP, of New York, New York (Gary S. Lee & a. on
the brief and Kathleen E. Schaaf orally), for the appellant.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (J. Christopher Marshall, attorney, on
the brief) and Rackemann, Sawyer & Brewster PC, of Boston, Massachusetts
(J. David Leslie and Eric A. Smith on the brief, and Mr. Leslie orally), for the
respondent.
HICKS, J. The appellant, Century Indemnity Company (CIC), appeals an
order of the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) sustaining a referee’s ruling denying
CIC’s asserted setoff of reinsurance claims in the liquidation of The Home
Insurance Company (Home). The respondent is Roger A. Sevigny,
Commissioner of Insurance of the State of New Hampshire, solely as Liquidator
of The Home Insurance Company (the liquidator). We reverse and remand.
The following facts are supported by the record. Home is an insurance
company organized under the laws of New Hampshire. It was declared
insolvent and placed in liquidation by court order in June 2003. CIC is an
insurance company organized under the laws of Pennsylvania. CIC reinsures
Home with respect to certain contracts between Home and other insurers. As
claims pursuant to these contracts are allowed against Home in liquidation,
CIC remits monies to Home pursuant to a claims protocol agreed upon by
Home and the liquidator. The claims protocol provides that these payments to
Home “shall be net of setoff in compliance with” RSA 402-C:34 (2006) or as
otherwise allowed under New Hampshire law. RSA 402-C:34 provides, in
pertinent part:
I. SETOFFS ALLOWED IN GENERAL. Mutual debts or mutual
credits between the insurer and another person in connection with
any action or proceeding under this chapter shall be set off and the
balance only shall be allowed or paid, except as provided in
paragraph II.
II. EXCEPTIONS: No setoff shall be allowed in favor of any
person where:
. . .
(b) The obligation of the insurer to the person was
purchased by or transferred to the person with a view to its
being used as a setoff . . . .
RSA 402-C:34.
CIC also reinsures other insurance companies with which it is affiliated
(CIC and such affiliated companies being all directly or indirectly one hundred
percent owned by the same parent company) with respect to certain general
liability policies issued by them (the Covered Policies) pursuant to an
agreement titled “Pre-1987 General Liability Reinsurance Agreement” that took
effect on December 31, 1995 (the 1995 agreement). “Reinsurance results when
one insurer . . . ‘cedes’ (transfers) part of the risk it underwrites to another
insurer . . . .” In re Mission Ins. Co., 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 209, 211 (Ct. App. 1995).
Accordingly, we refer to the affiliated insurance companies reinsured by CIC as
the “affiliated cedents.”
Under the 1995 agreement, CIC agreed “to accept a one hundred percent
(100%) quota share participation in the [affiliated cedents’] liabilities relating to
Covered Policies” and to reimburse the affiliated cedents for all expenses
relating to claims under the covered policies in exchange for, inter alia: (1)
payment to CIC “of a sum equal to the net carried reserves . . . of the [affiliated
cedents] for liabilities relating to Covered Policies”; and (2) assignment to CIC
“of all rights to reinsurance recoverables (and any collateral pertaining thereto)
relating to Covered Policies” held by the affiliated cedents. Among the
reinsurance claims assigned to CIC in the 1995 agreement are reinsurance
2
obligations of Home to the affiliated cedents (the reinsurance recoverables). In
other words, Home is a reinsurer of the affiliated cedents with respect to some
of the Covered Policies and the affiliated cedents assigned their rights to
recover that reinsurance to CIC in the 1995 agreement.
Pursuant to the claims protocol, CIC sought to setoff amounts payable by
it to Home under the claims protocol against the reinsurance recoverables; that
is, claims against Home as reinsurer of the affiliated cedents, assigned by the
affiliated cedents to CIC in the 1995 agreement. The liquidator disagreed with
the validity of the asserted setoff and the parties jointly requested that the
referee deem the matter a disputed claim proceeding to be resolved in
accordance with RSA chapter 402-C (2006 & Supp. 2007) and an established
claims procedure order.
The matter proceeded before the referee, who denied setoff. The trial
court sustained that decision, agreeing with the “implicit [conclusion] in the
referee’s Ruling . . . that under the circumstances of this case, the subject
assignment does not establish the mutuality necessary to trigger the statute’s
setoff mandate.” Specifically, the court concluded that because “[t]he terms of
the assignment require the return of uncollectible reinsurance at face value to
[the affiliated cedents,] . . . the assignment is not absolute.”
On appeal, CIC argues that the court erred by ignoring the 1995
agreement’s plain language, which unconditionally assigned the affiliated
cedents’ claims to it. To the extent this case presents issues of contract
interpretation, we apply the following standard of review:
The interpretation of a contract is a question of law, which we
review de novo. When interpreting a written agreement, we give
the language used by the parties its reasonable meaning,
considering the circumstances and the context in which the
agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole.
Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will be determined from the
plain meaning of the language used in the contract.
Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs., 155 N.H. 368, 373 (2007)
(citations omitted). As to the issues of statutory interpretation presented, our
standard of review is as follows:
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. We
first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. . . .
Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
3
enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by
the entire statutory scheme.
Cloutier v. City of Berlin, 154 N.H. 13, 17 (2006) (citations omitted).
We start with the observation that, according to its plain language, RSA
402-C:34 allows the setoff of “[m]utual debts or mutual credits” unless certain
exceptions apply. Id. Although the term mutual is not defined in the statute,
it has a known meaning in our common law. We have noted that “[s]et-off is a
statutory right . . . in the nature of a cross-action” and explained that “[d]ebts
to be set off must be mutual, and to be mutual they must be due to and from
the same persons in the same capacity.” Dole v. Chattabriga, 82 N.H. 396, 397
(1926) (citations omitted). “Capacity,” for these purposes, “means legal
capacity (e.g., principal, agent, trustee, beneficiary).” Matter of Midland Ins.
Co., 590 N.E.2d 1186, 1192 (N.Y. 1992).
The referee and the trial court first noted that the obligations CIC sought
to set off against its obligations to Home “run facially from Home to CIC
affiliates, and not to CIC.” Thus, absent more, setoff of the reinsurance
recoverables against CIC’s obligations to Home would be a prohibited
triangular setoff: “[A] ‘triangular setoff,’ when A attempts to offset an obligation
owed to B against B’s debt to C, is prohibited because there is no mutuality of
debt between two parties.” In re U.S. Aeroteam, Inc., 327 B.R. 852, 864
(Bankr. S.D. Ohio 2005).
CIC, however, asserts something more; namely, that the assignment of
the reinsurance recoverables to it cures the lack of mutuality. The trial court
concluded that the assignment did not establish mutuality, finding dispositive
a put-back provision in the 1995 agreement that qualifies the assignment of
the reinsurance recoverables as follows: “provided, however, that [CIC] shall
return to the respective [affiliated cedent] for face value, any such assigned
reinsurance recoverables that are deemed by [CIC] to be uncollectible together
with the rights to any related collateral.”
The trial court reasoned:
The terms of the assignment require the return of uncollectible
reinsurance at face value to [the affiliated cedents]. As the
Liquidator notes, “[I]f the reinsurance is not collectible, then the
amount of the reinsurance recoverable (its ‘face value’) is returned
to the [affiliated cedent], which is then obligated to pay CIC that
amount through the quarterly accounting and setoff mechanism
provided in the [1995 agreement].” Thus, in this triangular
situation, the assignment is not absolute and the real parties in
interest are [the affiliated cedents]. The bottom line is that CIC is
4
asserting claims of its affiliates, and not its own claims. Under
these circumstances, mutuality is lacking.
CIC contends that this conclusion “ignores the plain language of the
[1995 agreement], which unconditionally assigned the claims of [the affiliated
cedents] to CIC.” The liquidator, on the other hand, contends that “the express
language of [the put-back] proviso to the assignment . . . renders the
assignment conditional, and not absolute.” Specifically, the liquidator asserts
that the “[t]he plain meaning and intent of the proviso is to condition the
assignment on the collectibility of the reinsurance,” and that CIC is “an
assignee for purposes of collection,” acting not in its own capacity but as agent
or trustee for the affiliated cedents.” Accordingly, we examine the distinction
between absolute assignments and assignments for collection.
Under the first type of assignment, the “creditor/assignor . . . [transfers]
his or her claim against a debtor in such a way as to effect a complete sale of
the claim.” DeBenedictis v. Hagen, 890 P.2d 529, 532 (Wash. Ct. App. 1995).
Such “[a]n absolute assignment divests the assignor of all control and right to a
cause of action against the original debtor; the assignee is entitled to control
and to receive the benefits of the contract between the original debtor and the
assignor.” Uni-Com Northwest, Ltd. v. Argus Pub. Co., 737 P.2d 304, 308
(Wash. Ct. App.), review denied, 108 Wash. 2d 1032 (Wash. 1987). Such an
assignment “can create mutuality for setoff purposes,” U.S. Aeroteam, 327 B.R.
at 865, as follows:
Under principles of contract law, when party A pays B’s debt to C
and obtains a valid assignment of C’s rights against B, party A may
now “step into the shoes” of C and assert all rights C had against
B. By way of assignment, there are mutual debts now owing
between parties A and B.
U.S. Aeroteam, 327 B.R. at 864-65 (citation omitted). This is precisely the
theory under which CIC claims mutuality.
Under the second type of assignment, the “creditor/assignor [assigns] his
or her claim against a debtor for purposes of collection.” DeBenedictis, 890
P.2d at 532.
Such an assignment transfers legal title to the claim, so the
assignee can sue in his or her own name[,] . . . [but] leaves
equitable ownership with the creditor/assignor. The resultant split
in ownership gives rise to a fiduciary relationship between the
assignor and assignee, and the relationship generally is one of
principal-agent.
5
Id. (citations omitted). Thus, an assignee for purposes of collection “has been
referred to as the trustee or agent of the assignor.” Harrison v. Adams, 128
P.2d 9, 12 (Cal. 1942).
The significance of this type of assignment, for our purposes, is that it
does not create mutuality between the assignee and the original debtor, and
therefore does not permit setoff. Specifically, an assignee for purposes of
collection cannot set off his personal debt against the assigned claim because,
“[s]ince mutuality is essential, the debtor must be the beneficial owner of the
claim or judgment which he seeks to set off and not merely a trustee on behalf
of an assignor who has retained the equitable interest in the thing assigned.”
Norman v. Berney, 45 Cal. Rptr. 467, 474 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965); see also
Prudential v. Superior Court (Garamendi), 842 P.2d 48, 53 (Cal. 1992) (“[S]etoff
can occur only between persons or entities of equal capacity; debts owed in a
fiduciary, agency, trustee, or partnership capacity are not subject to setoff.”).
To determine whether the assignment is absolute or conditional, we must
ascertain the parties’ intent. Cf. Centex Constr. v. Acstar Ins. Co., 448 F.
Supp. 2d 697, 705 (E.D. Va. 2006).
No particular phraseology is required to effect an assignment. The
ultimate test is the intention of the assignor to give and the
assignee to receive present ownership of the claim. A valid
assignment may be made by any words or acts which fairly
indicate an intention to make the assignee the owner of a claim.
Premier Capital v. Skaltsis, 155 N.H. 110, 115 (2007) (quotations and citations
omitted). For an assignment to be absolute, “[t]he assignor must not retain any
control over the fund or property assigned, any authority to collect, or any form
of revocation.” Centex Constr., 448 F. Supp. 2d at 705 (quotation omitted)
(applying Virginia law).
CIC contends that the “assignment is absolute because there is nothing
in the [1995 agreement] that permits the [affiliated cedents] to withdraw it.” It
asserts that “[t]he assignment cannot be revoked and the [affiliated cedents]
retain no rights in the reinsurance.” Finally, it argues that “[b]ecause CIC
never deemed the reinsurance uncollectible, the claims never reverted to the
[affiliated cedents] and mutuality under RSA 402-C:34 was preserved.” We
agree.
We address CIC’s final point first. CIC contends that the trial court erred
in ruling that the return of uncollectible reinsurance recoverables to the
affiliated cedents was required by the terms of the assignment. It argues that
this ruling “ignores the contractual predicate for the return of the reinsurance
claims – that CIC ‘deem’ them ‘uncollectible.’” It further asserts that “[t]he
6
option to return the assigned claims to the [affiliated cedents] belongs solely to
CIC and the transfer of the reinsurance claims to CIC is not affected unless CIC
affirmatively declares that they cannot be collected.”
The liquidator disputes the contention that the term “deem” gives CIC
discretion whether to return uncollectible reinsurance recoverables. He
contends that “the put back proviso is mandatory in providing that
uncollectible reinsurance ‘shall’ be returned to [the affiliated cedents].” He
further argues that “the plain meaning of ‘deemed’ does not mean ‘affirmatively
declared’ but only ‘think’ or ‘conclude’” and asserts that CIC has so concluded,
based upon the statement of its president that “Home will pay nothing now
that it is insolvent and CIC cannot recover any of those ceded liabilities where
Home is the only reinsurer of those liabilities.” The liquidator concludes that
by operation of the mandatory put back provision, “the claims now belong to
the affiliates, and not CIC.”
We do not agree that the reinsurance recoverables “now belong” to the
affiliated cedents. Whatever the meaning of the term “deem,” we conclude that
it requires some affirmative action on CIC’s part that it has not at this point
taken. As CIC argues, “[n]ot only has [it] not declared the reinsurance
uncollectible, this appeal is itself part of CIC’s continuing efforts to collect from
Home’s estate.” Accordingly, to the extent that the liquidator may be arguing
that the reinsurance recoverables have automatically reverted back to the
affiliated cedents by the terms of the 1995 agreement, we reject that
contention.
Returning now to the question whether the assignment was conditional
or absolute, we conclude that it was absolute. The consideration for the 1995
agreement included “assignment of all rights to [the] reinsurance recoverables.”
(Emphasis added.) This language evinces an intent “to give . . . present
ownership of” the reinsurance recoverables to CIC. Premier Capital, 155 N.H.
at 115. Nevertheless, the liquidator contends that the assignment is qualified
by the put back provision, which “makes the [affiliated cedents], and not CIC,
liable for the amount of the reinsurance, leaving the beneficial interest in the
provisionally assigned rights with the assignors.”
We cannot agree that the put back provision leaves a “beneficial interest”
with the affiliated cedents; rather, as argued elsewhere in the liquidator’s brief,
the provision “allocate[s] the credit risk on the reinsurance to the [affiliated
cedents.]” We do not consider this risk, however, a retained interest or incident
of ownership fatal to an absolute assignment. As CIC points out, the affiliated
cedents do not control the implementation of the put back provision: “The
option to return the assigned claims . . . belongs solely to CIC. . . .” Thus, the
put back provision does not constitute a prohibited means of control over the
7
reinsurance recoverables or “any form of revocation” in the hands of the
affiliated cedents. Centex Constr., 448 F. Supp. 2d at 705 (quotation omitted).
Nor does the put back provision evince an intent to make CIC an
assignee for purposes of collection on behalf of the affiliated cedents; indeed,
the opposite is the case. To the extent the reinsurance recoverables are
collectible, their proceeds, so far as appears, inure to CIC’s benefit, offsetting
its payment of liabilities under the covered policies. We see nothing in the
1995 agreement requiring CIC to remit or render an account of the proceeds of
the reinsurance collectibles to the affiliated cedents or to hold such proceeds
for their benefit. Cf. Purco Fleet Services v. Dept. of Finance, 90 P.3d 346, 351
(Idaho 2004) (“An assignee for collection holds any proceeds of the assigned
claim in trust for the assignor.”). To the extent the reinsurance recoverables
are uncollectible, the affiliated cedents pay their face value to CIC, who in
return transfers the reinsurance recoverables back to the affiliated cedents. As
CIC explains: the put back provision simply “provides an alternate way for CIC
to be reimbursed for its payments on the [affiliated cedents’] behalf. The
liquidator implicitly recognizes this when it asserts that “CIC itself is neutral, in
light of the proviso, because it will collect either from Home or from [the
affiliated cedents].” Thus, rather than being an assignment for collection, the
assignment is one for which collection is guaranteed by the assignor. Much
like the First Circuit Court of Appeals, “[o]ur research reveals no case refusing
to validate the use of a [claim] as a set-off simply because payment on the
[claim] was guaranteed.” Depositors Trust Co., Etc. v. Frati Enterprises, 590
F.2d 377, 380 (1st Cir. 1979). We have likewise found no case holding that a
guaranteed collection assignment is not an absolute assignment; to the
contrary, the case law suggests that the assignor in such assignments does not
retain a beneficial interest in the thing assigned:
The assignor may sue where he retains a beneficial interest in the
chose in action assigned, as where the assignment is for security,
or for collection, although it has been held that the fact that the
assignor has guaranteed collection of an assigned claim will not
permit him to sue thereon.
Rohner, Gehrig & Co. v. Capital City Bank, 655 F.2d 571, 579 (5th Cir. 1981)
(quotation and brackets omitted).
The liquidator nevertheless contends that because the put back provision
“leaves the risk of uncollectibility with [the affiliated cedents], . . . it is their
interests that are at stake in the claims.” We cannot conclude, however, that
because collection of the reinsurance recoverables would benefit the affiliated
cedents by reducing their liability, they have some claim or interest in the
reinsurance recoverables sufficient to negate an absolute assignment. Such
collection benefits the affiliated cedents merely collaterally or incidentally,
8
much like payment by a principal debtor benefits a guarantor. Accordingly, we
conclude that the assignment of the reinsurance recoverables pursuant to the
1995 agreement was absolute.
The liquidator nevertheless argues that we should affirm the trial court’s
order because the reinsurance recoverables were transferred to CIC with a view
toward their use as a setoff and because setoff was within the referee’s
discretion. CIC contends that these arguments are not properly before us
because they are not “fairly comprised” within the question presented in its
notice of appeal and the liquidator did not file a cross-appeal. Sup. Ct. R.
16(3)(b). Accordingly, CIC moves to strike these arguments from the
liquidator’s brief.
As the liquidator points out, however, the trial court made no rulings
adverse to him which could be appealed. Rather, the court made two
assumptions contrary to the liquidator’s position. First, the trial court
assumed, “without deciding, that the language of RSA 402-C:34 permits the
Court no discretion in allowing setoff if all requirements set forth in the statute
are met.” The court also assumed that “the 1995 assignment of reinsurance
recoverables was not made with a view to future setoff.” Nevertheless, the
court proceeded to decide the matter in the liquidator’s favor. The liquidator
also points out that we may sustain a trial court’s decision, though made upon
erroneous grounds, so long as there are valid alternative grounds to support it,
see Sherryland v. Snuffer, 150 N.H. 262, 267 (2003), and urges us to do so
here. For these reasons noted by the liquidator, we deny CIC’s motion to strike
and will address the liquidator’s additional arguments.
The liquidator contends that setoff should be denied under RSA 402-
C:34, II(b) because the reinsurance recoverables were transferred to CIC with a
view to being used as a setoff. CIC counters that the transfer could not have
been made with a view toward setoff because, pursuant to the 1995 agreement,
the transfer “occurred in 1995, when Home’s insolvency was years in the
future.” The liquidator nevertheless argues that the transfer did not occur
until CIC chose not to return the reinsurance recoverables to the affiliated
cedents:
CIC’s assertion of the claims reflects a decision today to have CIC,
not [the affiliated cedents], assert the claims to enable CIC to make
immediate use of them as asserted setoffs. In light of the proviso
mandating return of uncollectible reinsurance at “face value” to
[the affiliated cedents], this is a present transfer “with a view”
toward setoff.
(Emphasis added.)
9
The liquidator notes that RSA 402-C:3, XVII (2006) broadly defines
“[t]ransfer” to, in part, “include[] the sale and every other method, direct or
indirect, of disposing of or of parting with property or with an interest therein
or with possession thereof.” The pertinent question, however, is when the
transfer occurred. “[T]he ‘transfer’ for setoff purposes occurs when the right to
payment is transferred or assigned.” U.S. Aeroteam, 327 B.R. at 866. We
conclude that the right to payment was transferred in 1995; indeed, CIC could
not deem the reinsurance recoverables uncollectible unless it first had the right
to attempt to collect on them.
Furthermore, as the liquidator at least implicitly acknowledges, his
argument rests upon the premise that the 1995 transfer was conditional. He
argues that “CIC’s reliance on the date of the 1995 Reinsurance Agreement
simply ignores the salient fact that the agreement did not unconditionally
assign the [affiliated cedents’] reinsurance claims to CIC.” Having previously
concluded that the 1995 transfer was an absolute assignment that completely
transferred the affiliated cedents’ present ownership of the reinsurance
recoverables to CIC, we logically must reject this argument also.
Finally, the liquidator argues that we should affirm on the grounds that
the referee sustainably exercised her discretion in denying setoff. We agree
with the trial court, however, “that the language of RSA 402-C:34 permits the
Court no discretion in allowing setoff if all requirements set forth in the statute
are met.” RSA 402-C:34 provides that except as otherwise provided therein,
mutual debts or credits “shall be set off.”
The intention of the Legislature as to the mandatory or directory
nature of a particular statutory provision is determined primarily
from the language thereof. Words and phrases which are generally
regarded as making a provision mandatory include “shall” and
“must.” On the other hand, a provision couched in permissive
terms is generally regarded as directory or discretionary. This is
true of the word “may.” It is the general rule that in statutes the
word “may” is permissive only, and the word “shall” is mandatory.
Appeal of Rowan, 142 N.H. 67, 71 (1997) (quotation omitted). Thus, having
used the word “shall,” the legislature is presumed to have intended setoff under
RSA 402-C:34 to be mandatory rather than discretionary.
The liquidator asserts, however, that RSA 402-C:34 was based upon
Section 68 of the Bankruptcy Act, and argues that we should therefore look to
cases construing that section. In turn, the liquidator contends that although
the language of Section 68 of the Bankruptcy Act appears to be mandatory, it
has long been held to be permissive:
10
The provision is permissive rather than mandatory, and does not
enlarge the doctrine of set-off, and cannot be invoked in cases
where the general principles of set-off would not justify it. The
matter is placed within the control of the bankruptcy court, which
exercises its discretion in these cases upon the general principles
of equity.
Cumberland Glass Co. v. DeWitt, 237 U.S. 447, 455 (1915) (citations omitted).
We are not persuaded, however, to abandon settled rules of statutory
construction that provide: “When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent, and we will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Cloutier, 154 N.H. at
17. We have previously concluded that the word “shall” is “unambiguous. It is
mandatory, not permissive, language.” Theresa S. v. Sup’t of YDC, 126 N.H.
53, 55 (1985). Had the legislature intended to vest the liquidator with the
discretion to disallow setoffs, “it would have chosen more permissive language,
such as ‘may’ or ‘might.’” State v. Doyle, 156 N.H. 306, 309 (2007).
Accordingly, we decline to read RSA 402-C:34 to authorize discretionary
disallowance of otherwise qualifying setoffs.
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the trial court’s decision and
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
11