THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. 2007-245
PETITION OF GRANT KILTON
Argued: November 13, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 31, 2007
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Claremont and Concord (Jonathan
P. Baird & a. on the brief, and Mr. Baird orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Jill A. Desrochers, attorney, on the
brief, and Rosemary Wiant, attorney, orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Grant Kilton, has petitioned for a writ
of certiorari, see Sup. Ct. R. 11, challenging the denial by the respondent, the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services (department), of
his application for benefits under the Aid to the Permanently and Totally
Disabled (APTD) program. See RSA 167:6, VI (2002). We affirm.
I
The record supports the following facts. In April 2005, the petitioner
applied for benefits under the APTD program, which is one of various public
assistance programs administered by the department. See Baker v. City of
Concord, 916 F.2d 744, 745 (1st Cir. 1990). Pursuant to RSA 167:6, VI, a
person is eligible for APTD benefits “who is between the ages of 18 and 64 years
of age inclusive; is a resident of the state; and is disabled as defined in the
federal Social Security Act, . . . except that the minimum required duration of
the impairment shall be 48 months.” Disability is determined by reference to
“the standards for ‘substantial gainful activity’ as used in the Social Security
Act.” RSA 167:6, VI.
The department denied the petitioner’s application for APTD benefits in
mid-October because his impairment failed to meet “the severity required” and
would not prevent him “from performing substantial gainful activity for 48
consecutive months.” Specifically, the notice of denial informed the petitioner:
You have been denied the medical eligibility for Aid to the
Permanently & Totally Disabled (APTD) category of eligibility for NH
Medicaid. NH Medicaid requires that you have an impairment that
meets or equals the same level of severity as that established for
SSI/SSDI eligibility and that the impairment(s) prevent substantial
gainful activity for 48 consecutive months. (RSA 167:6, VI) You do
not have an impairment that meets the severity required nor will
your impairment prevent you from performing substantial gainful
activity for 48 consecutive months.
The notice also referred to medical records, which indicated that, while the
petitioner suffers from generalized anxiety disorder and depression, these
conditions should remit with counseling and medication, and that he had no
cognitive impairment that would prevent him from working in his prior job as a
machine operator or assembler. Moreover, the notice of denial noted that the
petitioner’s prognosis for returning to work was within a year or less, thus,
falling short of the forty-eight-month durational requirement for APTD benefits.
Further, the notice stated, in pertinent part: “If you disagree with this
decision, you have the right to appeal and ask for a fair hearing. You may
represent yourself or be represented by others including legal counsel, at the
appeal hearing.”
The petitioner timely requested a fair hearing. The form on which he did
so stated:
You may represent yourself or be represented by others, including
legal counsel. If you need free legal counsel, consult your
telephone directory or District Office for the New Hampshire Legal
Assistance office nearest you. Contact your representative as
quickly as possible to avoid unnecessary delay. THE DIVISION
WILL NOT PAY YOUR LEGAL FEES.
In November, the department sent the petitioner a notice of hearing,
scheduling the hearing for February 16, 2006. This notice provided, in
pertinent part: “Each party has the right to be represented by an attorney,
2
however, the cost of representation shall be at the party’s expense. Whether
you have an attorney or not, each party must comply with the mandatory pre-
hearing disclosure requirements. (See attached Frequently Asked Questions).”
The “Frequently Asked Questions” material included the following
information about a claimant’s right to an attorney: “You may represent
yourself, be represented by a friend, relative, or other person, or may be
represented by an attorney at your own expense[;]” and “You do not need an
attorney, however, you may want one to protect your interests and rights. The
laws and rules are the same whether or not you have an attorney.” The
“Frequently Asked Questions” attachment also included a list of organizations
to assist individuals or to provide them with a referral for legal counsel. This
list included numerous offices of New Hampshire Legal Assistance (NHLA). See
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.04(a)(2).
The petitioner represented himself at the February hearing, although his
case manager accompanied him for support. The department was also not
represented by counsel. A registered nurse, testifying for the department as a
medical witness, explained the process by which the petitioner’s application
was denied. Specifically, she testified that a medical review team examined his
application to determine: (1) whether he was currently engaged in substantial
gainful activity; (2) whether he had alleged a severe impairment; (3) whether
there was documentation to support such an allegation; and (4) whether his
impairments met the forty-eight-month durational requirement. She further
testified that based upon documents in the file, the review team determined
that the petitioner’s impairments (anxiety and depression) did not meet the
durational requirement because, with antipsychotic medication, his
impairments “immediately [a]meliorate[ ].”
The petitioner questioned the nurse briefly. The presiding officer then
asked the petitioner a number of questions “to help [him] tell [his] story.” The
petitioner testified that since the department had denied his application, he
had been hospitalized for anxiety and depression “three or four times.”
Because the petitioner had identified, but did not have possession of records
that the presiding officer believed might be relevant, she indicated that she
would hold the record open for sixty days to permit the petitioner to submit
additional information and to allow the department to submit further
information in response, if any.
On April 26, 2006, soon after the sixty days expired, NHLA informed the
department by letter that it now represented the petitioner and asked the
department to reconvene the hearing so that NHLA could represent him. In
early May, the department denied the request, stating that the record was now
closed and that granting the request “would only further delay the already too
lengthy appeal process.
3
Approximately three months later, on August 10, 2006, the presiding
officer issued her final decision affirming the initial decision to deny the
petitioner’s application for benefits. The petitioner, through counsel, moved for
reconsideration, asserting, among other things, that the department had failed
to notify him adequately of his right to seek free legal counsel. On March 9,
2007, the presiding officer denied the petitioner’s motion for reconsideration,
and this petition for writ of certiorari followed.
II
“The only judicial review of a fair hearings decision issued by the
[department] is by petition for a writ of certiorari.” Petition of Walker, 138 N.H.
471, 473 (1994). Review on certiorari is an extraordinary remedy, usually
available only in the absence of a right to appeal, and only at the discretion of
the court. Petition of Chase Home for Children, 155 N.H. 528, 532 (2007). Our
review of an administrative agency’s decision on a petition for certiorari is
limited to determining whether the agency has acted illegally with respect to
jurisdiction, authority or observance of the law or has unsustainably exercised
its discretion or acted arbitrarily, unreasonably or capriciously. Id. We
exercise our power to grant such writs sparingly and only where to do
otherwise would result in substantial injustice. Id.
III
The petitioner argues that his federal and state constitutional rights to
due process were violated because he received inadequate oral and written
notice of his right to seek free legal representation. See U.S. CONST. amend.
XIV; N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. We first address the petitioner’s claims under
the State Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. See State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). “This court is the final arbiter of the due
process requirements of the State Constitution.” In re Father 2006-360, 155
N.H. 93, 95 (2007) (quotation omitted).
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution provides, in pertinent part:
“No [person] shall be arrested, imprisoned, despoiled, or deprived of his
property, immunities, or privileges, put out of the protection of the law, exiled
or deprived of his life, liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the
law of the land.” “[T]he law of the land is synonymous with due process of
law.” Bragg v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 141 N.H. 677, 678 (1997)
(quotations omitted).
To determine whether particular procedures satisfy the requirements of
due process, we typically employ a two-prong analysis. Appeal of Town of
Bethlehem, 154 N.H. 314, 328 (2006). Initially, we ascertain whether a legally
4
protected interest has been implicated. See id.; see also Mathews v. Eldridge,
424 U.S. 319, 332 (1976). We then determine whether the procedures provided
afford appropriate safeguards against a wrongful deprivation of the protected
interest. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. at 328.
A
The department contends that the petitioner is not entitled to due
process protection because he has no legally protected property interest in
obtaining APTD benefits. We will assume, without deciding, that the petitioner
had a property interest entitled to due process protection. We turn then to
deciding whether the procedures at issue complied with due process. See id.
B
Without citing to any direct authority, the petitioner asserts that “due
process require[s] clear and understandable written notice about the right to
seek free legal counsel, followed by an oral inquiry from the Hearing Officer at
the administrative hearing about whether [the petitioner] understood he had
the right to seek free legal representation.” This notice, he asserts, should
include “essential information about the value of an attorney in helping to
protect an appellant’s interests.” He notes that these kinds of procedures are
statutorily required in social security administration appeals and, in effect,
asks the court to hold that they are constitutionally mandated in appeals from
the denial of an application for APTD benefits. See Evangelista v. Secretary of
H.H.S., 826 F.2d 136, 142-43 (1st Cir. 1987); cf. Simmons v. Traughber, 791
S.W.2d 21, 24-25 (Tenn. 1990) (ruling that these kinds of procedures are
required by state unemployment compensation statute). He cites no direct
authority to support his assertion that due process requires the notice to which
he claims entitlement, and we have found none. Our review of the record
reveals that, contrary to his assertions, the petitioner received all of the notice
that he was constitutionally due.
“For more than a century, the central meaning of procedural due process
has been clear: Parties whose rights are to be affected are entitled to be heard;
and in order that they may enjoy that right they must first be notified.” Berube
v. Belhumeur, 139 N.H. 562, 567 (1995) (quotation omitted). “The purpose of
notice under the Due Process Clause is to apprise the affected individual of,
and permit adequate preparation for, an impending ‘hearing.’” Memphis Light,
Gas & Water Div. v. Craft, 436 U.S. 1, 14 (1978). To satisfy due process, “[t]he
notice must be of such nature as reasonably to convey the required
information” and must be more than “a mere gesture.” Mullane v. Central
Hanover Tr. Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314, 315 (1950). “[W]hen notice is a person’s
due the means employed must be such as one desirous of actually informing
the absentee might reasonably adopt to accomplish it.” Jones v. Flowers, 547
5
U.S. 220, 229 (2006) (quotation, ellipsis and brackets omitted). “Due process,
however, does not require perfect notice, but only notice reasonably calculated,
under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of
the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections.” Appeal
of Hiscoe, 147 N.H. 223, 227 (2001) (quotation omitted). “Thus, our inquiry
focuses upon whether notice was fair and reasonable under the particular facts
and circumstances of each case.” Id.
With respect to terminating or reducing welfare benefits, we have held
that “a timely and adequate notice stating the reasons for the proposed action
must be given to the recipients of the benefits.” Petition of Clark, 122 N.H.
888, 891 (1982); see Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 267-68 (1970). “To be
considered adequate, the notice must give a reasonably complete statement of
the information upon which the proposed action is based, the full reasons for
that action, and any other data the recipients might need to figure out their
eligibility.” Petition of Clark, 122 N.H. at 891. We assume, without deciding,
that these rules apply to denials of an application for APTD benefits.
The record shows that, when the department denied the petitioner’s
application for APTD benefits, he was notified: (1) of the full reasons for the
denial; (2) how the department reached its decision; (3) the statutory basis for
the denial; (4) the standards by which his eligibility for APTD benefits was
determined; (5) that he had the right to appeal the denial and ask for a fair
hearing; (6) that he had the right to represent himself or be represented by
others, including legal counsel; and (7) if he wished to appeal, that he had
thirty days to contact his case worker and tell him or her that he wished to
appeal the denial.
In addition, the petitioner received notice on the form requesting a fair
hearing that: (1) if he needed help completing the form or wished to request a
hearing verbally, he could contact his district office; (2) he had the right to
represent himself or be represented by others, including legal counsel, at the
hearing; and (3) if he needed free legal counsel, he could consult the telephone
directory or NHLA; and (4) the department would not pay his legal fees.
Further, the notice of hearing notified the petitioner of the date, time and
location of the hearing, the applicable statutes and rules, that a presiding
officer would hold the hearing, that failure to attend the hearing without good
cause could result in the appeal being dismissed, and that he had a right to be
represented by an attorney at his own expense. See RSA 541-A:31, III (2007);
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.04 (notice of hearing must include information
required by RSA 541-A:31, III and “[a] list of the organizations in New
Hampshire which provide free or reduced cost legal services”).
6
Additionally, the petitioner received information from the department’s
“Frequently Asked Questions” regarding his rights at the hearing, including his
right to: be represented by an attorney at his own expense; examine his case
file; testify at the hearing; have witnesses testify at the hearing; introduce
evidence; present relevant arguments; cross-examine the other party’s
witnesses; and question or refute any testimony or evidence. The “Frequently
Asked Questions” also informed the petitioner about how to identify his
exhibits, what to do if he could not attend the hearing, when to arrive at the
hearing, the procedures that would be used at the hearing, and who to contact
if he had additional questions. Moreover, the “Frequently Asked Questions”
included a list of organizations in New Hampshire that could assist the
petitioner or provide him with a referral for legal counsel.
We hold that the notice the petitioner received more than satisfied due
process. See Garrett v. Puett, 707 F.2d 930, 931 (6th Cir. 1983) (notice of
reductions and terminations in welfare benefits satisfied due process when
they contained: (1) a detailed statement of the intended action; (2) the reason
for the change in status; (3) citation to specific statutory authority; and (4)
specific notice of the recipient’s right to appeal); Brown v. Lavine, 333 N.E.2d
374, 376 (N.Y. 1975) (regulations entitling recipient of aid to the disabled to
notice of any action affecting right to assistance, of right to fair hearing, of
method of obtaining fair hearing, that recipient may represent self or may be
represented by counsel, relative or friend or other spokesman, and of
availability of community legal services “amply safeguard” recipient’s interest).
The notice given to the petitioner gave him a “reasonably complete statement”
of the information upon which the denial of his application was based, “the full
reasons” for the denial, and data regarding what he might need to figure out
his eligibility. Petition of Clark, 122 N.H. at 891. Moreover, we hold that the
notice was fair and reasonable under the particular facts of this case. See
Appeal of Hiscoe, 147 N.H. at 227. The petitioner, thus, received all of the
notice to which due process entitled him. The Due Process Clause of the State
Constitution does not require that he receive any additional notice, including
notice of his ability to seek free legal counsel.
The petitioner also contends that the notice he received was insufficient
because it was misleading with respect to his right to seek free legal counsel.
We observe, first, that the petitioner had neither a statutory nor a regulatory
“right” to seek free legal counsel. Rather, by statute, he had a right to be
notified that he could have an attorney present at the fair hearing, see RSA
541-A:31, III, and pursuant to regulation, he had a right to receive a list of
organizations in New Hampshire that provide free or reduced cost legal
services, see N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.04.
The record demonstrates that the notice the petitioner received of these
rights was neither confusing nor misleading. The petitioner was notified
7
numerous times of his right to have counsel present at his own expense and he
was given the names and contact information for community organizations that
provide legal counsel. Several NHLA offices were included in that list and the
fair hearing request form specifically identified NHLA as an organization that
provides free legal services.
The petitioner also contends that the notice he received was
constitutionally infirm because it was not tailored to “the needs of [a]
vulnerable population, of which [the petitioner] is an example.” We hold that
the “practicalities and peculiarities” of this case do not require a different kind
of notice than that which the petitioner received. Jones, 547 U.S. at 230
(quotation omitted).
The petitioner does not argue that his physical or mental condition
prevented him from understanding the notice that his application was denied
or from complying with the administrative review process. See Udd v.
Massanari, 245 F.3d 1096, 1100-01 (9th Cir. 2001). Nor was there any
evidence that the petitioner was unable to challenge the decision to deny him
benefits. See id. at 1102. Indeed, the record shows that he timely submitted a
request for fair hearing.
While the petitioner relies upon Covey v. Town of Somers, 351 U.S. 141,
146-47 (1956), Vargas v. Trainor, 508 F.2d 485, 489-90 (7th Cir. 1974), cert.
denied, 420 U.S. 1008 (1975), and Tripp v. Coler, 640 F. Supp. 848, 850 (N.D.
Ill. 1986), these cases are distinguishable from the instant matter.
In Covey, the recipient of the notice had no guardian, was known to be
an incompetent and was “wholly unable to understand the nature of the
proceedings against her.” Covey, 351 U.S. at 146-47. By contrast, there is no
evidence that, and the petitioner does not allege that, he was unable to
understand the nature of the proceedings against him or unable to appeal the
denial of his application for benefits.
Nor is this case similar to Vargas. That case involved notice addressed to
the “aged, blind or disabled, many of whom . . . [it] could have [been]
anticipated, would be unable or disinclined, because of physical [or mental]
handicaps . . . to take the necessary affirmative action.” Vargas, 508 F.2d at
489. The notice in Vargas informed the recipients that they had only ten days
to meet with their caseworkers to learn why their benefits had been reduced or
terminated and then to appeal. Id. at 489-90. By contrast, here, the petitioner
was: afforded written notice of the reasons that the department denied his
application; given thirty days to meet with his case worker to notify him or her
that he intended to appeal; and given the option of requesting a fair hearing by
filing a form or by making the request verbally.
8
The notice the petitioner received here was also superior to that at issue
in Tripp. The appellants in Tripp were a class of people whose continued use of
Medicaid had been restricted or terminated by the Illinois Department of Public
Aid for overuse of medical services. Tripp, 640 F. Supp. at 849. The notices of
these decisions, however, failed to inform the class adequately of the agency’s
reasons for its decisions. Id. at 858-59. Rather, the notices gave ultimate
reasons, did not identify the legal standard by which a recipient’s medical
usage was judged, failed to identify the precise medical items or services at
issue, and even failed to identify which person in the recipient’s family was
determined to have overused medical care. Id. The notice the petitioner
received of the reasons the department denied his application has none of
these deficiencies.
The petitioner asserts that without additional notice of his “right” to seek
free legal counsel, the process he received was fundamentally unfair. The
parties argue that to determine whether due process requires the additional
safeguards the petitioner seeks in this appeal, we must balance the following
three factors:
(1) the private interest affected by the official action; (2) the risk of
an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures
used and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and (3) the government’s interest, including
the function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens
that additional or substitute procedural requirements would entail.
In re Father 2006-360, 155 N.H. at 95; see Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335. Because
both parties rely upon it, we assume, without deciding, that this three-part test
applies. But see Dusenbery v. United States, 534 U.S. 161, 168 (2002) (“We
have never viewed Mathews as announcing an all-embracing test for deciding
due process claims.”); Grayden v. Rhodes, 345 F.3d 1225, 1242 (11th Cir.
2003) (under Mathews, tenants entitled to contemporaneous notice, but court
declines to apply Mathews to decide what type of notice is adequate to meet the
contemporaneous notice requirement).
We find the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Mathews
instructive. In Mathews, the court evaluated whether due process required an
evidentiary hearing before an individual’s social security disability benefits
could be terminated. Mathews, 424 U.S. at 323. To be eligible for such
benefits, “a worker must demonstrate that he is unable to engage in any
substantial gainful activity,” as defined by the social security administration
act. Id. at 336 (quotation omitted).
In balancing the three factors set forth above, the Court first looked to
the interest of a social security disability benefits recipient in continued and
9
uninterrupted receipt of benefits pending final determination of his claim. Id.
at 340. The Court noted that although it had previously held that due process
required an evidentiary hearing before a welfare recipient could be temporarily
deprived of welfare benefits, see Goldberg, 397 U.S. at 264, the private interest
at stake in Goldberg differed from that at stake in Mathews. Mathews, 424
U.S. at 340-41. “[T]he disabled worker’s need is likely to be less than that of a
welfare recipient. In addition to the possibility of access to private resources,
other forms of government assistance will become available where the
termination of disability benefits places a worker or his family below
subsistence level.” Id. at 342. Because of “these potential sources of
temporary income, there is less reason here than in Goldberg to depart from
the ordinary principle . . . that something less than an evidentiary hearing is
sufficient prior to adverse administrative action.” Id. at 343.
The Court then examined “the fairness and reliability of the existing
pretermination procedures, and the probable value, if any, of additional
procedural safeguards.” Id. The Court observed that “the decision whether to
discontinue disability benefits will turn, in most cases, upon routine, standard,
and unbiased medical reports by physician specialists.” Id. at 344 (quotation
omitted). The risk of error, the Court ruled, was lower than in proceedings to
determine welfare eligibility where “a wide variety of information may be
deemed relevant, and issues of witness credibility and veracity often are critical
to the decisionmaking process.” Id. at 343-44. Thus, the Court reasoned,
“[t]he potential value of an evidentiary hearing . . . [was] substantially less . . .
than in Goldberg,” particularly “where, as here, the prescribed procedures not
only provide the claimant with an effective process for asserting his claim prior
to any administrative action, but also assure a right to an evidentiary hearing,
as well as to subsequent judicial review, before the denial of his claim becomes
final.” Id. at 344-45, 349.
The Court finally examined “the administrative burden and other societal
costs that would be associated with requiring, as a matter of constitutional
right, an evidentiary hearing upon demand in all cases prior to the termination
of disability benefits.” Id. at 347. The Court recognized that the financial cost
and administrative burden “would not be insubstantial.” Id. Ultimately, the
Court ruled that a pretermination evidentiary hearing was not required,
observing that this type of judicial procedure need not be imposed to assure
that the administrative process at issue was fair. Id. at 348-49.
The petitioner’s private interest in obtaining APTD benefits is similar to
the private interest at stake in Mathews. Like the recipient in Mathews, to be
entitled to benefits, the petitioner must demonstrate that he is unable to
engage in any “substantial gainful activity,” as defined by the social security
administration act. RSA 167:6, VI; see Mathews, 424 U.S. at 336. Moreover,
because the petitioner must meet an eligibility standard that is similar to that
10
in Mathews, determining the petitioner’s eligibility for APTD benefits “will turn,
in most cases, upon routine, standard, and unbiased medical reports by
physician specialists.” Mathews, 424 U.S. at 344 (quotation omitted).
Further, the process by which the petitioner’s eligibility for APTD benefits
is determined already includes the following safeguards: (1) assistance from
department personnel in completing an application for benefits, see RSA 167:8
(Supp. 2007); (2) written notification of whether the application has been
accepted or denied, see RSA 167:10 (2002); (3) if the application has been
denied, a statement of the specific reasons therefor, see id.; (4) if an application
has been denied, notice that the person is entitled to request a hearing, see
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.02; (5) a hearing notice that includes a statement
of the time, place, and nature of the hearing, a statement of the legal authority
under which the hearing is to be held, a reference to the particular sections of
the statutes and rules involved, a short and plain statement of the issues
involved, a statement that each party has the right to have an attorney present
to represent the party at the party’s expense, and a list of the organizations in
New Hampshire that provide free or reduced cost legal services, see RSA 541-
A:31, III; N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.04; (6) an evidentiary hearing held
before a presiding officer, see RSA 541-A:33 (2007); N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C
201.05, of which a record is made, and at which the rules of evidence do not
apply, see RSA 541-A:33; N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.15 to He-C 203.18; (7)
the right to have an attorney present at the hearing at the applicant’s expense;
see RSA 541-A:31, III; N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.04; (8) the opportunity to
present witnesses and cross-examine the other party’s witnesses at the
hearing, as well as to submit proposed findings of fact and rulings of law to the
presiding officer, see RSA 541-A:31, IV (2007); RSA 541-A:33; N.H. Admin.
Rules, He-C 203.19; (9) a written decision on the merits or a decision stated on
the record that includes findings of fact and conclusions of law, see RSA 541-
A:35 (2007); N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 203.19(c), He-C 203.22; (10) an
opportunity to file a motion for reconsideration, see N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C
204; (11) a written decision on the motion for reconsideration, see N.H. Admin.
Rules, He-C 203.22; and (12) the opportunity to seek judicial review by filing a
petition for writ of certiorari, see Petition of Walker, 138 N.H. at 473.
We hold that these procedures adequately ensure that the process for
reviewing APTD eligibility determinations is fair. See Brown, 333 N.E.2d at
376. The potential value of additional notice that an applicant may seek free
legal representation is relatively minimal. See id. at 376-77. The procedure
described above “as a whole would appear designed to minimize inaccuracies
and to assure quality and fairness in adjudication.” Id. at 376.
Finally, requiring the department to issue additional notices to the
applicant of his ability to seek free legal counsel would impose some financial
and administrative burden on the department, as would requiring the presiding
11
officer to notify the applicant verbally of this right. In balancing the three
factors, we conclude that given the petitioner’s property interest, the low risk of
erroneous deprivation of that interest, and the government’s interest in
avoiding a fiscal and administrative burden, due process does not require the
additional safeguards the petitioner identifies in this appeal. “We cannot say
that fairness can only be achieved” with the additional safeguards the
petitioner seeks in this appeal. Id. at 376. If these safeguards are to be
provided, “it is for the Legislature to say so, for constitutional due process does
not command it.” Id. To the extent that the petitioner argues that, as a matter
of policy, applicants appealing the denial of their applications for APTD benefits
should have the same procedural protections as are provided to claimants in
federal social security administration act appeals, see Evangelista, 826 F.2d at
142-43, he makes his argument in the wrong forum. Matters of public policy
are reserved for the legislature, and we therefore leave to it the task of
addressing the petitioner’s concerns. Cloutier v. City of Berlin, 154 N.H. 13, 22
(2006).
While at oral argument, the petitioner asserted, in effect, that he had a
due process right to counsel, in his brief he contended that he was “not asking
the Court to establish a new right to counsel in civil cases,” but rather was
“asking [it] to mandate meaningful notice.” Because the petitioner has not
briefed the argument that he had a due process right to counsel, we decline to
address it. See In the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 356 (2006).
The petitioner also argues that notice of his “right” to seek free legal
counsel was “essential information” that Part I, Article 1 of the State
Constitution required the department to give him. He relies upon Carbonneau
v. Town of Rye, 120 N.H. 96, 99 (1980), and Savage v. Town of Rye, 120 N.H.
409, 411 (1980), for this proposition. Both Carbonneau and Savage concern a
town’s obligation under Part I, Article 1 to assist its citizens. In Carbonneau,
we reminded the town of its obligation under Part I, Article 1 to assist its
citizens in applying for certain permits and approvals. See Carbonneau, 120
N.H. at 99. In Savage, we ruled that such assistance includes informing
applicants for subdivision approval “not only whether their applications are
substantively acceptable but also whether they are technically in order.”
Savage, 120 N.H. at 411. In neither case did we adopt the broad rule the
petitioner advocates in this appeal.
Because the Federal Constitution offers the petitioner no greater
protection under these circumstances, we reach the same conclusion under
both constitutions. See Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H. 419, 424 (1999).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12