THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2007-091
VERIZON NEW ENGLAND, INC.
v.
CITY OF ROCHESTER
Argued: November 8, 2007
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2007
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Jack B.
Middleton and Scott H. Harris on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the
plaintiff.
Wensley, Jones & Azarian, PLLC, of Rochester (Danford J. Wensley on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, City of Rochester (city), appeals a decision
of the Superior Court (Morrill, J.) ruling that the city’s taxation of the plaintiff,
Verizon New England, Inc. (Verizon), for its use and occupation of public
property violated Verizon’s equal protection rights. We affirm.
This case is before us for a third time. See Verizon New England v. City
of Rochester, 151 N.H. 263 (2004) (Rochester II); N.E. Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of
Rochester, 144 N.H. 118 (1999) (Rochester I). We recite only a brief history of
the facts necessary to decide this appeal.
Verizon provides telecommunications services to the residents of the city.
Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 265. In accordance with RSA 231:161 (1993), Verizon
obtained licenses from the city for the placement of its poles, wires, cables and
other equipment on city-maintained highways. Id.
In March 1996, the city manager and the commissioner of public works
petitioned the city council to amend Verizon’s pole licenses to include language
from RSA 72:23, I(b) (Supp. 1993) (amended 1999, 2002, 2003), and to require
Verizon to pay real estate taxes for its use of the public ways. Id.; see RSA
72:23, I (Supp. 1993) (amended 1999, 2002, 2003); RSA 72:6 (1991). In
August 1996, the mayor and the city council determined that the public good
required the licenses to be amended and granted the petition. Rochester II,
151 N.H. at 265.
Verizon appealed this decision to the superior court. Id. The trial court
held that: (1) Verizon’s licenses were not leases or other agreements within the
meaning of RSA 72:23, I; and (2) the mayor and city counsel erred in finding
that the public good required the city to amend Verizon’s licenses. Id. The city
appealed. Id.
In Rochester I, we reversed the trial court’s decision, holding that
Verizon’s pole licenses constituted agreements to occupy and use public
property, and, therefore, the terms of RSA 72:23, I(b) were applicable. Id. We
also held that the amendments were required by the public good. Id.
Accordingly, we reversed the trial court’s order insofar as it prohibited the city
from amending Verizon’s licenses and remanded for further proceedings.
On remand, after a bench trial, the trial court ruled that the city could
lawfully amend Verizon’s pole licenses to require Verizon to pay real estate
taxes. Id. The trial court, however, also found that the city “failed to follow a
recognized methodology in reaching its conclusions regarding the market value
of Verizon’s use of the land pursuant to its pole licenses.” Id. (quotation
omitted). Therefore, the trial court granted Verizon’s abatement petitions “to
the extent that the city’s tax bills . . . must be reassessed based on an
appropriate methodology.” Id. (quotation omitted). Both parties appealed. Id.
In Rochester II, Verizon argued that: (1) RSA 72:23, I, does not allow the
city to tax Verizon’s use of the public ways; (2) the city’s proposed tax
unconstitutionally singles out Verizon; and (3) the city’s amendment of
Verizon’s pole licenses is not consistent with the public good. Id. at 265-66.
The city cross-appealed and argued that the trial court erred in granting in part
Verizon’s petitions for abatement because Verizon failed, as a matter of law, to
satisfy its burden of establishing that it is paying more than its proportional
share of the common tax burden. Id. at 266.
2
We upheld the trial court’s ruling that the city could lawfully amend
Verizon’s pole licenses to require Verizon to pay real estate taxes. Id. at 267-
70. In its equal protection challenge, Verizon attacked the city’s use of its
broad taxing power under RSA 72:6 and the exemption in RSA 72:23, I, to
selectively impose real estate tax assessments upon Verizon’s use and
occupation of public land, but not upon the gas, cable and electric companies
that similarly use and occupy the public ways. Id. at 270. The trial court
found no equal protection violation, ruling that Verizon had “failed to
demonstrate that its total tax obligation is greater than its share of the
common burden.” Id. at 271 (quotation omitted).
We “vacate[d] the trial court’s ruling and remand[ed] for application of
the equal protection analysis set forth” in In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634
(2004). Id. We directed the trial court that, in applying the rational basis test,
it could “properly consider whether differences between the utilities justif[ied]
varying treatment by the legislature.” Id. Because “[t]he record [wa]s
insufficiently developed with respect to how the various utilities are taxed,” we
“remand[ed] for further proceedings consistent with th[e] opinion.” Id.
Additionally, we reversed the trial court’s partial grant of Verizon’s abatement
petitions because the trial court applied an erroneous standard, and,
consequently, “remand[ed] for further proceedings consistent with th[e]
opinion.” Id. at 272.
On remand, both parties moved for summary judgment. The city argued
that RSA 72:23, I, does not, on its face, violate equal protection. Verizon
contended that the city “singled Verizon out as the sole entity occupying the
public ways from which it[] seeks a real estate tax,” and, therefore, violated its
equal protection rights. Verizon also requested that the court grant its
abatement petitions because the city’s proposed tax was disproportionate. The
trial court ruled that RSA 72:23, I, is constitutional on its face, but found that
“the record [wa]s . . . insufficiently clear to warrant entry of summary judgment
for either party on” Verizon’s as-applied challenge. The court also found that
issues of fact remained with respect to Verizon’s abatement petitions. After a
bench trial, the trial court determined that the city’s taxation of only Verizon
for its use and occupancy of public property under its pole licenses is
unconstitutional because the city’s reasons for taxing Verizon alone are not
rationally related to any legitimate governmental interest. RSA 72:6, :23, I.
Foreseeing an appeal, the trial court additionally granted Verizon’s abatement
petitions, finding that, “as of April 1, 1996, the market value of the public land
used or occupied by Verizon for real estate tax purposes was $218,700,” and
the city’s tax assessment of this land was disproportionate.
On appeal, the city argues that the trial court erred by: (1) failing to
adhere to the scope of the remand in Rochester II by not confining its review of
Verizon’s equal protection challenge to whether RSA 72:23, I, is facially
constitutional; (2) improperly ruling that as applied, RSA 72:23, I, violates
3
Verizon’s equal protection rights; (3) revisiting the disproportionality issue on
remand; (4) failing to dismiss Verizon’s abatement petitions; and (5) quashing
the city’s subpoena seeking testimony from Verizon’s vice president for
governmental relations as to Verizon’s potential sale of its landlines.
We first address the equal protection issue. The city argues that the trial
court failed to adhere to the scope of the remand in Rochester II when it
addressed whether RSA 72:23, I, is unconstitutional as applied to Verizon. The
city interprets Rochester II as remanding to the trial court solely for an analysis
of whether RSA 72:23, I, on its face, violates the Equal Protection Clauses of
the State and Federal Constitutions. Based upon this interpretation, the city
argues that the trial court improperly heard additional evidence upon Verizon’s
as-applied equal protection challenge, and erred in finding an equal protection
violation. Verizon counters that it has always challenged RSA 72:23, I, as
applied, and the trial court properly considered additional evidence in
assessing its equal protection argument.
In Rochester II, we stated that “Verizon argue[d] that RSA 72:23 creates
an unconstitutional classification of taxpayers.” Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 270.
This language suggests that Verizon was challenging RSA 72:23 on its face.
However, we noted that Verizon contended that “the city’s proposed tax
unconstitutionally singles out Verizon.” Id. at 265-66 (emphasis added). It
maintained that “the city has issued real estate tax assessments to Verizon,
but not to the gas, cable and electric companies that use the public ways in a
manner indistinguishable from Verizon’s, thus violating its right to equal
protection.” Id. at 270. We thus understood that Verizon was also attacking
RSA 72:23, I, as applied to Verizon. We did not rule upon either challenge in
Rochester II. Rather, we vacated the trial court’s ruling because we had
recently clarified our equal protection analysis in In re Sandra H., and the trial
court had not applied the rational basis test as articulated in that case in
reviewing Verizon’s claims. Id. at 270-71. We then remanded for further
proceedings consistent with the opinion because the record, which included
transcripts from the first bench trial, was insufficiently developed with respect
to how the other utilities are taxed. Id. Contrary to the city’s contention, we
never suggested that upon remand the trial court was confined to addressing
only whether RSA 72:23, I, is facially unconstitutional. Indeed, if Verizon had
challenged RSA 72:23, I, on its face only, information concerning how the other
utilities are taxed would have been irrelevant. Accordingly, the trial court
properly interpreted Rochester II as requiring it to analyze RSA 72:23, I, both
on its face and as applied to Verizon. See 5 C.J.S. Appeal and Error § 1136
(2007).
On remand, in ruling upon the parties’ cross-motions for summary
judgment, the trial court found that the record was “insufficiently clear” with
respect to Verizon’s as-applied challenge to warrant judgment for either party.
It therefore denied the cross-motions and received additional evidence before
4
ultimately ruling that as applied, RSA 72:23, I, violates Verizon’s right to equal
protection. Because we specifically informed the trial court that upon remand
it could consider the differences between the utilities in applying the rational
basis test, Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 270-71, and the record was “still
insufficiently clear” with respect to how the utilities were taxed when the trial
court ruled upon the summary judgment motions, the trial court did not err in
receiving additional evidence upon this issue.
We now address the city’s argument that the trial court erred in ruling
that RSA 72:23, I, as applied, violates Verizon’s equal protection rights. The
city contends:
Verizon’s “as applied” challenge actually implicates
property taxation pursuant to RSA 72:6, and RSA
72:23, I, is merely a vehicle through which the tax
exemption, normally accorded to governmentally
owned land, is abrogated[, and, therefore,] . . . the
remedy to Verizon’s allegedly disparate property
taxation is to challenge its property tax assessment[s]
. . . through . . . petitions for abatement, . . . not
through an “as applied” assault on RSA 72:23, I.
Thus, the city argues that the trial court should not have applied the rational
basis test, but, should instead have inquired into “whether [Verizon] is being
asked to pay more than its just and fair proportion of the common tax burden.”
According to the city, “because . . . Verizon has failed to prove that its
assessments were disproportionate . . . [its] petitions for abatement . . . must
be dismissed.”
The city erroneously conflates Verizon’s equal protection challenge with
its distinct disproportionality argument. In its equal protection challenge,
Verizon is not arguing that it is paying more than its share of the common
burden; that is, that “its property is assessed at a higher percentage of fair
market value than the percentage at which property is generally assessed in
the city.” Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 272. Rather, it contends that the city has,
without a rational basis, intentionally applied RSA 72:23, I, to only Verizon,
even though other private utilities similarly use and occupy real estate on
public ways. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 2, 10, 12, pt. II, art. 5; U.S. CONST.
amend. XIV; Cagan’s, Inc. v. N.H. Dept. of Revenue Admin., 126 N.H. 239, 245-
46 (1985); cf. Appeal of Town of Bethlehem, 154 N.H. 314, 322-25 (2006);
Opinion of the Justices (Mun. Tax Exemptions for Elec. Utility Personal Prop.),
144 N.H. 374, 383-84 (1999). Thus, pursuant to our directive in Rochester II,
the trial court applied the correct test, that is, the rational basis test, in
reviewing this equal protection argument. Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 271;
Estate of Robitaille v. N.H. Dept. of Revenue Admin., 149 N.H. 595, 596-97
(2003); Cagan’s Inc., 126 N.H. at 245-46.
5
With respect to the trial court’s ultimate ruling that RSA 72:23, I, is
unconstitutional as applied, Verizon correctly notes:
The City does not contest the fact that it singled
Verizon out from the other utilities as the sole utility
against which it sought to exact a real estate tax based
on the value of the land used and occupied in the
public ways. Likewise, it does not contend that the
trial court had no basis to find that its assertion of the
tax against Verizon was unreasonable and arbitrary.
Instead, the city argues that the trial court misapprehended the facts
surrounding the city’s treatment of Verizon and other utilities. Specifically, the
city contends that the testimony and evidence from both trials established that:
“(1) both Verizon’s and [Public Service Company of New Hampshire]’s ‘pole
licenses’ were identically amended to include required language specified in
RSA 72:23, I; (2) the cable TV company had no ‘pole licenses’ on March 28,
1996; and (3) the gas Company had no written agreements with the City.”
Consequently, “the City had amended all the ‘pole licenses’ it could through the
authority of RSA 231:163.”
The city improperly narrows the constitutional issue to a determination
of whether it amended its pole licenses. First, the city ignores the plain
language of RSA 72:23, I(b), which states that the statute applies to “leases and
other agreements.” (Emphasis added.) It further disregards our prior holding
in this case that the term “agreement” in RSA 72:23, I, means “‘harmonious
understanding,’ or ‘the act of agreeing or coming to a mutual arrangement.’”
Rochester I, 144 N.H. at 121 (citation omitted). Simply because other utilities
arguably may not have had the same “pole licenses” as Verizon does not mean
they did not have “a mutual understanding and arrangement” with the city to
use and occupy public property. Id. Second, as discussed above, Verizon
challenges the city’s assessment of real estate taxes to only Verizon for the
public property used and occupied by its poles and wires. Thus, although the
city may have amended all its existing pole licenses and/or other agreements,
the relevant inquiry under Verizon’s equal protection challenge is whether the
city, without a rational basis, is singling out Verizon by not imposing this tax
upon the other utilities.
We now conduct this inquiry. We first examine the issue under the State
Constitution, relying upon federal opinions only for guidance. Robitaille, 149
N.H. at 596. Because the constitutionality of a tax is a matter of law, we review
the trial court’s decision de novo. Id.
“The equal protection clause protects [an entity] from state action which
selects [it] out for discriminatory treatment by subjecting [it] to taxes not
6
imposed on others of the same class.” Allegheny Pittsburgh Coal Co. v. County
Comm’n of Webster Cty., 488 U.S. 336, 345 (1989) (quotation and citation
omitted). As we discussed in Rochester II, “to determine whether Verizon’s
right to equal protection is being violated, we must apply the rational basis
test.” Rochester II, 151 N.H. at 270. Under this as-applied challenge, we
determine whether the city’s selective taxation of Verizon is rationally related to
a legitimate state interest. Id.; Allegheny Pittsburgh Coal, 488 U.S. at 344.
The evidence in the record demonstrates that Verizon uses and occupies
the public ways through its pole licenses in a manner indistinguishable from
the gas, cable, and electric companies that use and occupy the public ways
under “other agreements” with the city. As the trial court explained, each
utility “supplies a public service to citizens over and under the roads and
streets of Rochester. In order to do so, each must obtain Rochester’s
permission.” Each utility also has an agreement or “harmonious
understanding” with the city to use and occupy public ways: (1) the electric
company has pole licenses; (2) the gas companies have consent from the city
for their use and occupancy of the public ways, see RSA 231:184 (1993); and
(3) the cable television company has a franchise agreement.
However, the city does not impose a real property tax upon the other
utilities’ indistinguishable use and occupation of the public ways. The city
appears to argue that the gas and electric companies, unlike Verizon, already
pay this tax under RSA 72:8 (1991) (amended 1997). While RSA 72:8 allows
the city to tax electric and gas companies’ personal property, specifically,
“structures, machinery, dynamos, apparatus, poles, wires, fixtures . . ., and
pipe lines,” it does not authorize the city to tax the companies’ “use and
occupation” of real property owned by the public. Moreover, the evidence
demonstrates that the city does not in fact tax this “use and occupation” of
public land. Accordingly, the city is selectively applying RSA 72:23, I, against
Verizon.
There is no equal protection violation, however, if the city’s selective
taxation is reasonably related to a legitimate state interest. Rochester II, 151
N.H. at 270. Under this test, Verizon “has the burden to prove that the
[selection] is arbitrary or without some reasonable justification,” id. (citation
omitted), and, as in the federal test, “to negative every conceivable basis which
might support [the selection], whether or not the basis has a foundation in the
record,” Cmty Res. for Justice, Inc. v. City of Manchester, 154 N.H. 748, 761
(2007) (quotation and citation omitted). Here, the city offers, the record
reveals, and we can conceive of, no rational reason for selectively imposing this
tax upon Verizon, and not upon other utilities that use and occupy public
property in the same manner as Verizon. Moreover, the record fails to indicate
that any legitimate governmental interest is furthered by this disparate
treatment. Accordingly, we reject the city’s contention that the trial court erred
7
in ruling that its selective application of RSA 72:23, I, to Verizon is
discriminatory and violates our Equal Protection Clause.
The parties agree that the trial court struck Verizon’s tax liability for the
relevant years to remedy the city’s unconstitutional conduct. The city disputes
this remedy and argues that Verizon’s tax should be “reduc[ed] to a level that is
proportional to the level of taxation borne by other taxpayers in the taxing
district.” Verizon counters that “[m]erely reducing the tax payment Verizon
owes would . . . perpetuate the City’s unconstitutional scheme since Verizon
would still be the only utility using and occupying the public ways to pay a real
estate tax.” We agree with Verizon.
“The right invoked [in this case] is that to equal treatment; and such
treatment will be attained if either [the other utilities]’ taxes are increased or
[Verizon’s] own reduced.” Iowa Des-Moines Nat. Bank v. Bennett, 284 U.S.
239, 247 (1931); see also Heckler v. Mathews, 465 U.S. 728, 740 (1984); cf.
Smith v. N.H. Dept. of Revenue Admin., 141 N.H. 681, 697 (1997); McKesson
Corp. v. Div. of Alcoholic Beverages & Tobacco, 496 U.S. 18, 40-41 (1990).
However, “[t]he Equal Protection Clause is not satisfied if [the city] does not
itself remove the discrimination, but imposes on [the taxpayer] against whom
the discrimination has been directed the burden of seeking an upward revision
of the taxes of other members of the class.” Allegheny Pittsburgh Coal, 488
U.S. at 346 (citation omitted); see also Bennett, 284 U.S. at 247. “A taxpayer
in this situation may not be remitted by the [city] to the remedy of seeking to
have the assessments of the undervalued property raised.” Allegheny
Pittsburgh Coal, 488 U.S. at 346; see also Bennett, 284 U.S. at 247. Thus,
contrary to the city’s contention, when a tax violates the Equal Protection
Clause, “simply ensuring that [it] is set at fair market value does not remedy
the violation.” Tax Appeal of Cty. of Maui v. KM Hawaii, Inc., 915 P.2d 1349,
1357 (Haw. 1996) (citations omitted).
Because Verizon’s abatement applications show that Verizon has not
paid the taxes at issue, a refund is not now required. See Bennett, 284 U.S. at
247; cf. McKesson Corp., 496 U.S. at 40-41. Accordingly, we affirm the trial
court’s ruling striking the tax against Verizon. Because we uphold the trial
court’s ruling that RSA 72:23, I, is unconstitutional as applied to Verizon, we
do not reach the city’s remaining arguments.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8