THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2007-356
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ROBERT THERIAULT
Argued: April 10, 2008
Opinion Issued: May 2, 2008
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Robert Theriault, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Conboy, J.) denying his motion to dismiss the charges against
him. We affirm.
The record supports the following. The defendant was a court security
officer at Franklin District Court. At the courthouse on October 31, 2005, he
struck up a conversation with a woman and learned that she was in a dire
financial situation. Either that day or the following day, the defendant met
with the woman and her boyfriend at their motel. There, the defendant offered
to pay the couple to engage in sexual intercourse with each other, and
explained that he would need to watch them. He was later charged with
prostitution, RSA 645:2, I(f) (2007).
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the charges against him.
The trial court denied the motion, and the defendant was convicted on two
counts. On appeal, the defendant challenges the trial court’s denial of his
motion to dismiss, arguing that RSA 645:2, I(f) is facially overbroad under the
free speech provisions of both the New Hampshire and the Federal
Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 22; U.S. CONST. amends. I, XIV.
Because the issue before us is one of constitutional law, we review it de
novo. State v. MacElman, 154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006). We first address the
defendant’s claim under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226,
231 (1983), and cite federal authority for guidance only. Id. at 232-33; see also
State v. Brobst, 151 N.H. 420, 422-23 (2004) (adopting the reasoning from
several federal cases in our overbreadth analysis, making our analyses of the
present matter under the State and Federal Constitutions one and the same).
Our overbreadth law is well-defined:
The purpose of the overbreadth doctrine is to protect those
persons who, although their speech or conduct is constitutionally
protected, may well refrain from exercising their rights for fear of
criminal sanctions by a statute susceptible of application to
protected expression. While the Constitution gives significant
protection from overbroad laws that chill speech within the First
Amendment’s vast and privileged sphere, the application of the
overbreadth doctrine is strong medicine to be employed only as a
last resort. Thus, it remains a matter of no little difficulty to
determine when a law may properly be held void on its face and
when such summary action is inappropriate.
To provide guidance in this area the United States Supreme
Court has held that the overbreadth of a statute must be real and
substantial, judged in relation to the statute’s plainly legitimate
sweep. The criterion of substantial overbreadth precludes a court
from invalidating a statute on its face simply because of the
possibility, however slight, that it might be applied in some
unconstitutional manner. The substantial overbreadth doctrine
applies to constitutional challenges of statutes that prohibit
conduct, as well as challenges to those statutes prohibiting pure
speech and conduct plus speech.
If a statute is found to be substantially overbroad, the statute
must be invalidated unless the court can supply a limiting
2
construction or partial invalidation that narrows the scope of the
statute to constitutionally acceptable applications. If, on the other
hand, a statute is not substantially overbroad, then whatever
overbreadth may exist should be cured through case-by-case
analysis of the fact situations to which its sanctions, assertedly,
may not be applied.
Brobst, 151 N.H. at 422-23 (quotations, citations, and brackets omitted).
We are also guided in our analysis by the principle that “[i]n reviewing a
legislative act, we presume it to be constitutional and will not declare it invalid
except upon inescapable grounds.” Baines v. Senate President, 152 N.H. 124,
133 (2005) (quotation omitted). “In other words, we will not hold a statute to
be unconstitutional unless a clear and substantial conflict exists between it
and the constitution.” Id. (quotation omitted).
RSA 645:2, I(f) provides that a person is guilty of a misdemeanor if the
person “[p]ays, agrees to pay, or offers to pay another person to engage in
sexual contact as defined in RSA 632-A:1, IV or sexual penetration as defined
in RSA 632-A:1, V, with the payor or with another person.” (Emphasis added.)
Sexual contact is defined by RSA 632-A:1, IV (2007) as “the intentional
touching whether directly, through clothing, or otherwise, of the victim’s or
actor’s sexual or intimate parts, including breasts and buttocks,” and “includes
only that aforementioned conduct which can be reasonably construed as being
for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.” (Emphasis added.) RSA
632-A:1, V (2007) enumerates various acts constituting sexual penetration.
The defendant was charged with offering to pay two others to engage in
sexual penetration. He argues that RSA 645:2, I(f) is substantially overbroad
because it could be applied to criminalize constitutionally permissible activities
such as the production of a non-obscene but sexually explicit movie. We
disagree and hold that the statute is not substantially overbroad, because the
possibility that it might be applied in some unconstitutional manner is
exceedingly slight. See Brobst, 151 N.H. at 422.
Furthermore, “the overbreadth doctrine’s concern with chilling protected
speech attenuates as the otherwise protected behavior that it forbids the State
to sanction moves from pure speech toward conduct.” MacElman, 154 N.H. at
311 (quotation omitted). Thus, an overbreadth challenge will rarely succeed
against a law not specifically addressed to speech or to conduct that is
necessarily associated with speech, such as picketing and demonstrating. Id.
RSA 645:2, I(f) specifically targets conduct, i.e. prostitution, that is neither
protected speech nor necessarily associated with speech. The legislature has
determined that this conduct – paying others to engage in sexual contact or
penetration – is unlawful, and the defendant agrees that the State has a
3
legitimate interest in protecting its citizens from the effects of such conduct.
Cf. Webb v. State, 575 N.E.2d 1066, 1070 (Ind. Ct. App. 1991) (“Certainly
prostitution is not a constitutionally protected activity . . . .”). Put another way,
the criminalization of prostitution is a valid exercise of the State’s police power.
The defendant contends that the trial court acknowledged that RSA
645:2, I(f) infringes upon constitutionally protected activity and that the trial
court created an incongruity in its analysis by adopting a limiting construction.
We disagree. The trial court simply found that the statute is “not substantially
overbroad in relation to its legitimate sweep as to warrant a declaration that it
is invalid.” We agree with this conclusion, and, thus, a limiting construction is
unnecessary. See Brobst, 151 N.H. at 422.
Because we reject the defendant’s facial challenge and hold that RSA
645:2, I(f) is not substantially overbroad, any applications of the statute that
infringe upon protected conduct, to the extent that such applications exist,
may be remedied on a case-by-case basis. See MacElman, 154 N.H. at 311.
The defendant makes no “as-applied” challenge, nor does he argue that paying
or offering to pay two people to engage in sexual intercourse is constitutionally
protected activity. We are thus presented with a fact situation to which the
sanctions imposed by RSA 645:2, I(f) may be constitutionally applied. See
Brobst, 151 N.H. at 422-23.
Because the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater
protection than does the State Constitution under these circumstances, see id.;
Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413 U.S. 601, 613 (1973), we reach the same result
under the Federal Constitution.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and GALWAY, JJ., concurred.
4