THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2008-512
DANA DUXBURY-FOX
v.
EUGENE SHAKHNOVICH & a.
Argued: April 7, 2009
Opinion Issued: September 18, 2009
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Cooper Cargill Chant, P.A., of North Conway (Randall F. Cooper and
Christopher T. Meier on the brief, and Mr. Cooper orally), for the respondents.
HICKS, J. The respondents, Eugene and Marsha Shakhnovich, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.) ruling that the petitioner, Dana
Duxbury-Fox, and the third-party respondents, Mrs. Benjamin Earle, W.R and
M.M. Amundsen Rev. Trust, Warren and Mary Amundsen, Trustees, Marion
Sokolov, Lawrence J. Walsh, Jane S. Walsh and Ivan Sokolov (the campers),
have an appurtenant easement to use a fifty-foot right-of-way over the
respondents’ land. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the trial court or are supported in the
record. All parties own land on Lower Beech Pond in Tuftonboro that was once
part of a larger parcel owned by Charles H. Brown. Charles H. Brown
subdivided a portion of the parcel into five lots, each of which had shore
frontage on the pond but was landlocked, in terms of road access, by the
remaining portion of the parcel he retained. One of the five lots is now owned
by the petitioner; the others are owned by the campers.
The chain of title to the petitioner’s lot originates in two deeds, dated
October 1, 1927, and September 8, 1930, from Charles H. Brown to the
petitioner’s grandfather, Robert Craig. The 1927 deed contained the following
language: “Permission is hereby given for said grantee to pass and repass over
land of said grantor to lot above mentioned.” The 1930 deed stated: “It is
understood and agreed that the said Robert Craig, his heirs and assigns, shall
have the right to pass and repass over the land of said grantor.” Historically,
the petitioner and the campers accessed their property two ways: (1) by boat
via a portion of Charles H. Brown’s remaining land known as “Sandy Beach”;
and (2) by a footpath over a different portion of the grantor’s land (the overland
right-of-way).
Charles H. Brown passed away in 1951. By deed dated March 11, 1961,
his widow conveyed a portion of his remaining property, including Sandy
Beach, to Harold Brown. In 1971, Harold Brown had a subdivision plan
approved by the Tuftonboro Planning Board and recorded in the registry of
deeds. It depicted a parcel he had previously conveyed to Paul E. and Eleanor
E. Snow, a lot he subsequently conveyed to Alden Ringer (which included
Sandy Beach), and a fifty-foot right-of-way. After approval of the subdivision
plan, the campers stopped using Sandy Beach and began using the right-of-
way depicted on the plan. In 1973, the campers constructed a gravel driveway
and parking area in the fifty-foot strip. They also installed a dock in the pond.
When Harold Brown died in 1972, his property passed to his widow,
Ethelyn Brown. She conveyed the fifty-foot right-of-way to her son, Charles E.
Brown on July 18, 1987. The deed, drafted by a non-lawyer, stated:
This parcel is designated as Map 069 Parcel 001 Lot 013 in the
Town of Tuftonboro Tax Records, and was approved by the
Tuftonboro Planning Board on June 16, 1971, when the
neighboring lot was being purchased by the Ringers.
Some western shore owners (Lower Beach [sic] Pond) with
limited access to their lots, have been permitted use of this 50 foot
wide area in order to reach the Pond from Brown Road (Lawrence
Walsh, Ruth Mills, Trygve Amundsen and Messrs, Sokolov and
Earle).
2
At some point, the Snow lot was conveyed to the Beards, who built a
house. In order to correct a set back violation created by the construction of
their house, the Beards purchased the fifty-foot strip from Charles E. Brown.
The deed repeated the same language contained in the deed from Ethelyn to
Charles E. Brown.
In 2004, the respondents bought the Beard property and in 2005, they
informed the petitioner and the campers that they had been granted only a
license to use the right-of-way and that the respondents were terminating the
license. The petitioner then commenced this action to quiet title and for
injunctive relief.
The trial court ruled that the 1927 and 1930 deeds from Charles H.
Brown to Robert Craig created an appurtenant easement rather than a license.
The court concluded:
[T]he petitioner and the campers have an appurtenant easement to
use the fifty-foot right-of-way as outlined in the [Tuftonboro]
Planning Board’s subdivision plan of 1971. The petitioner and the
campers may use the right-of-way for parking motor vehicles,
storage of boat trailers, and landing, loading, and unloading of
boats at the dock or on the shore.
On appeal, the respondents argue that the trial court erred in:
(1) finding the 1927 and 1930 deeds to Robert Craig ambiguous and admitting
extrinsic evidence; (2) “interpreting the deeds to afford [the petitioner] any right
over the Subject Parcel, rather than a separate overland right of way”;
(3) “finding that the Subject Parcel may be burdened by an easement not found
in its chain of title, but rather language offering permission to specified
individuals”; and (4) sanctioning the petitioner’s expansion of the alleged
easement. We will address these arguments in turn.
“The interpretation of deeds in a quiet title dispute is ultimately to be
resolved by this court.” Harvey v. Hsu, 144 N.H. 92, 93 (1999) (quotation
omitted). “Our determination of disputed deeds is based on the parties’
intentions gleaned from construing the language of the deed from as nearly as
possible the position of the parties at the time of the conveyance and in light of
surrounding circumstances.” Id. (quotation omitted). “A deed is patently
ambiguous when the language in the deed does not provide sufficient
information to adequately describe the conveyance without reference to
extrinsic evidence.” Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 566 (1994). When
such ambiguity exists, “[e]xtrinsic evidence of the parties’ intentions and the
circumstances surrounding the conveyance may be used to clarify the [deed’s]
terms.” Id.
3
The trial court found the language of the 1927 and 1930 deeds
ambiguous as to whether the grant of an easement or a license was intended.
After considering extrinsic evidence, the court concluded that the language in
those deeds “creates two distinct tenements in which a dominant estate is
benefited by use of an easement on a servient estate.” With respect to those
original deeds, the respondents do not challenge the finding that an easement
was intended, but rather dispute the easement’s location.
The respondents first point to language in the original deeds granting a
right to “‘pass and repass over the land of [Charles H. Brown]’” and contend
that it unambiguously refers to a right-of-way solely over land; specifically, the
overland right-of-way. They argue that the deeds do “not refer to a passage
over land to the water, or even over land then water to the petitioner[’s] lot[],
and therefore cannot be ambiguous as to whether this grant could refer to the
Respondent[s’] land which only makes access to the water possible.” We
disagree, as we find the language “over the land” neither dispositive nor
unambiguous.
We take judicial notice that Lower Beech Pond is a state-owned body of
water, see Official List of Public Waters (DES 1990, revised 2007), available at
http://des.nh.gov/organization/commissioner/pip/publications/wd/documen
ts/r-wrd-91-4.pdf, and that no “individual shall have or exercise in any such
body of water any rights or privileges not common to all citizens of this state.”
RSA 271:20 (1999). Accordingly, Charles H. Brown could not have granted the
petitioner a right-of-way over the water and even a means of access via the
water could only be granted as an overland easement. We conclude that
because the 1927 and 1930 deeds do not “adequately describe,” Flanagan, 138
N.H. at 566, where the grantees may “pass and repass” over the grantor’s land,
they are ambiguous with respect to the location of the easement granted. The
trial court therefore properly admitted extrinsic evidence to interpret those
deeds. Id.
The respondents next argue that even considering extrinsic evidence, the
1927 and 1930 deeds do not grant the petitioner a right-of-way over the
respondents’ land to access her lot by water. The respondents assert that “by
the admission of certain of the Petitioner’s witnesses themselves, most notably
Judge Walsh, the grant in the original deeds referred to the footpath passage
over land, not over water and the Respondent’s land.” Admittedly, Walsh, who
is one of the campers and a retired attorney and district court judge, opined
that the right-of-way granted in his deed was one over land. To the extent
Walsh’s testimony may be read to express an opinion on the interpretation of
the easement granted in the original deeds as well as his own deed, that is an
opinion upon the ultimate issue before the court. Walsh was not certified as
an expert, and even if he had been, his opinion would not have been binding
upon the court, which was just as capable of interpreting the deeds based
upon the evidence. While Walsh could certainly testify as to factual matters
4
regarding, for instance, historical means of access, his interpretation of the
deeds in question expressed an opinion upon an issue of law. See Motion
Motors v. Berwick, 150 N.H. 771, 775 (2004) (“The proper interpretation of
a . . . deed[] is a question of law for this court.”). “A witness . . . may not
ordinarily give an opinion regarding a matter of law.” Cyr v. J.I. Case Co., 139
N.H. 193, 199-200 (1994). Accordingly, the trial court was not compelled to
adopt the “admission” of Walsh or any other witness as to the proper
interpretation of the original deeds.
We conclude that the trial court’s location of the easement granted in the
1927 and 1930 deeds is both correct as a matter of law and supported by the
evidence. “Defining the rights of the parties to an expressly deeded easement
requires determining the parties’ intent in light of circumstances at the time
the easement was granted.” Dumont v. Town of Wolfeboro, 137 N.H. 1, 5
(1993). “[I]n the case of a grant of an undefined way, as, for example, the right
to pass and repass across the grantor’s [land,] . . . [i]f the parties cannot agree,
equity determines the location of the way.” White v. Hotel Co., 68 N.H. 38, 43
(1894). Where the “location and limits of the reserved way are not specified[,]
[i]t is a reservation of a reasonably convenient and suitable way across the
granted land to the place or places mentioned.” Gardner v. Webster, 64 N.H.
520, 522 (1888). This rule is neither arbitrary, nor a deviation from our task to
determine the parties’ intent; it rests upon the presumption that “a reasonably
convenient and suitable way” is, in fact, what the parties intended. Id. As we
explained in Gardner: “It is improbable that two men have understandingly
entered into a bargain which contains a stipulation plainly and clearly to the
disadvantage of both. . . . The language of their deed is to be read in the light of
this improbability.” Id. Thus, “[t]he convenience of both parties is evidence of
the locality of” a disputed right-of-way, id., and “[t]he benefit to one party or
injury to the other of a particular construction may be of decisive weight in
determining whether it was intended,” id. at 521.
The petitioner, Charles E. Brown, Walsh and Morrison all testified that
the landlocked parcels historically have been accessed by a footpath and by
boat. The testimony indicated, however, that access has been primarily by
boat. An explanation for the relative infrequency of footpath use was provided
by Morrison, whose lot has been in his family since “[a]bout 1947.” He testified
that the historical access had been “[g]enerally by boat, and in the spring or
bad weather when the ice is either coming in or going out, we might go through
the woods.” He described the woods as “so thick and the walking . . . so tough
. . . [that the campers] all had a more or less of an emergency right-of-way out,
but there . . . very certainly wasn’t any good paths out.” On the evidence,
therefore, access by boat was the more “reasonably convenient and suitable
way,” id. at 522, to the landlocked lots, and we find no error in the trial court’s
determination that the original deeds granted such access.
5
We also find no error in the trial court’s implicit determination that in
1973, the owners of the dominant and servient estates mutually relocated the
easement granted in the original deeds. Specifically, the trial court found:
(1) that “Harold Brown[] created [the] planned fifty-foot right-of-way, with the
effect of swapping it for the Sandy Beach access point, which the campers
historically used”; and (2) that “[t]he campers used this right-of-way for over
thirty years without issue.” Again, the law and the record support the court’s
findings and rulings. We have recognized that where the location of a deeded
right of way is uncertain, it may be clarified by the agreement of subsequent
owners. See Donaghey v. Croteau, 119 N.H. 320, 324 (1979). We have also
noted:
When a deeded right-of-way is obstructed or impaired by the
conduct of the owner of the servient estate, the owner of the
dominant estate may deviate from the deeded right-of-way in order
to preserve the right granted as long as the proposed deviation is
not unduly burdensome to the servient estate.
Flanagan, 138 N.H. at 573.
Walsh testified that when he filed an appearance in the probate estate of
Harold Brown because he “got worried about the right-of-way,” Ethelyn Brown
assured him that “Harold ha[d] set a right-of-way for the use . . . of cottage
owners, and she brought in a plan that day,” presumably the 1971 subdivision
plan. Thus it appears that Harold Brown initially sought to unilaterally change
the location of the historical right of way in conjunction with subdividing and
selling the Snow and Ringer lots. While Harold Brown could not have effected
such a change unilaterally, see Sakansky v. Wein, 86 N.H. 337, 340 (1933)
(owners of servient estate may not “compel the [owner of the dominant estate]
to detour over other land of theirs”), the campers acquiesced in the relocation
and, as the trial judge found, with ample support in the evidence, they used
the new right-of-way “for over thirty years without issue.” Cf. Donaghey, 119
N.H. at 324 (continued use of right-of-way “is evidence of the intended location
of the way”). Accordingly, we find no error in the trial court’s location of the
right-of-way.
The respondents next contend that the trial court erred in finding that
the petitioner and the campers have an easement over their land because:
(1) the petitioner and the campers are strangers to the respondents’ chain of
title; and (2) the language appearing in their chain of title would grant, at most,
a revocable license to specified persons. They argue: “Simply, the [petitioner’s]
rights over the Subject Parcel are limited to the language of the Deeds in the
chain of title to the Subject Parcel, and the language in these deeds speaks
only to permission to specified individuals, which is insufficient to create an
easement right.” The language to which respondents refer is the paragraph
that originated in the deed from Ethelyn Brown to Charles E. Brown:
6
Some western shore owners (Lower Beach [sic] Pond) with
limited access to their lots, have been permitted use of this 50 foot
wide area in order to reach the Pond from Brown Road (Lawrence
Walsh, Ruth Mills, Trygve Amundsen and Messrs, Sokolov and
Earle).
The respondents’ arguments rest upon the premise that the petitioners
and the campers are strangers in title to the respondents’ lot because “[n]one of
the [campers or the petitioner] are in the chain of title to the Subject Parcel.
Likewise, none of the deeds in the chains of title to the [campers’ or the
petitioner’s] properties mention the Subject Parcel.” We concur with the
Vermont Supreme Court, which in Moore v. Center, 204 A.2d 164, 167 (Vt.
1964), found such a contention “unsound.” The defendant in Moore argued
that he did not have constructive notice of an easement conveyed in a deed
“concern[ing] other lands of the common grantors which are outside his chain
of title.” Moore, 204 A.2d at 167. The court rejected that argument as “based
on the erroneous notion that since the title to the fee of the dominant estate is
not part of the defendant’s tract, the easement created in favor of that estate is
outside the defendant’s line.” Id. It then explained that “[t]he grantors of the
plaintiffs’ easement were not strangers to the defendant’s title[ where] . . . one
of the grantors of the right[] was the defendant’s immediate predecessor in the
servient estate.” Id.
Similarly, here, title to the petitioner’s, the campers’ and the
respondents’ lots can all be traced back to a common owner, Charles H. Brown.
The trial court found that the easement rights now held by the petitioner were
conveyed in the 1927 and 1930 deeds from Charles H. Brown to the petitioner’s
predecessor in title, Robert Craig. The respondents’ title to the fifty-foot strip
can be traced back to the passage of title to Charles H. Brown’s property to his
widow after his death in 1951, and her conveyance of the property containing
the fifty-foot strip to Harold Brown in 1961. As we recently explained in
Soukup v. Brooks, 159 N.H. ___, ___ (decided June 12, 2009), running the
grantor index for Charles H. Brown from the date he acquired the larger parcel
through the time the parcel containing the respondents’ lot was conveyed out
would have revealed the grant of the easement at issue. Although the terms of
the easement are admittedly ambiguous, the 1927 and 1930 deeds provided
constructive notice of the easement and imposed a duty upon the respondents
to make inquiry as to its location. See Amoskeag Bank v. Chagnon, 133 N.H.
11, 14, 15 (1990). We further note that as the petitioner’s rights originate in
the 1927 and 1930 deeds, the 1987 deed from Ethelyn to Charles E. Brown is
irrelevant and we need not determine whether the petitioner is a stranger to
that deed or the nature of the rights or licenses, if any, it may grant to the
individuals named therein.
The respondents next argue that the trial court improperly expanded any
easement granted in the original deeds beyond a reasonable use. “In
7
determining permissible use of an easement, courts are guided by the principle
of ‘reasonable use.’” Boston & Me. Corp. v. Sprague Energy Corp., 151 N.H.
513, 519 (2004). The determination of whether the use of an easement is a
reasonable use is a question of fact for the trial court and “[w]e will not
overturn the factual findings of the trial court when they are supported by the
evidence.” Id. (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
“An enlargement of use is permissible if the change of a use is a normal
development from conditions existing at the time of the grant, such as an
increased volume of traffic.” Id. (quotation omitted). The easement holder
cannot, however, “materially increase the burden of it upon the servient estate,
nor impose a new or additional burden thereon.” Id. (quotation omitted). “The
test to determine the right to make a particular alteration is whether the
alteration is so substantial as to result in the creation and substitution of a
different servitude from that which previously existed.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The respondents argue that “the change of use from a wooded footpath to
[a] (differently located) parking lot, boat trailer storage, and boat pier is not a
simple ‘increased volume of traffic’ or ‘normal development from conditions
existing at the time of the grant.’” (Quoting Boston & Me. Corp., 151 N.H. at
519.) Again, the respondents’ argument rests upon the faulty premise that the
original easement granted in the 1927 and 1930 deeds was solely the
pedestrian footpath through the woods. The trial court found, however, that
the petitioner and the campers had historically accessed their lots both by an
overland footpath and by boat from Sandy Beach. As discussed above, there is
ample support in the record for that finding.
Moreover, while the campers improved the fifty-foot strip with a gravel
driveway, parking area and dock, the evidence indicates that the nature of the
use did not substantially change. For instance, although Walsh testified that
he did not maintain a dock on Sandy Beach, he did leave his boat on the
beach. In addition, as the intended use of the easement has always been to
provide access from the road to the shore so that the petitioner’s family and the
campers could get to their lots by boat, the parking of vehicles nearby implicitly
has always been connected to use of the right-of-way. Accordingly, we cannot
conclude that constructing the dock and improving the fifty-foot strip to
accommodate off-road parking was “so substantial as to result in the creation
and substitution of a different servitude from that which previously existed.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
8