THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2008-500
ROBERT FARRAR & a.
v.
CITY OF KEENE
Argued: February 18, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 7, 2009
Hoppock & Lachman, PLLC, of Keene (Joseph S. Hoppock on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Leon I. Goodwin, III, assistant city attorney, and Thomas P. Mullins, city
attorney, by brief, and Mr. Goodwin orally, for the respondent.
Bradley & Faulkner, P.C., of Keene (Gary J. Kinyon on the brief and
orally), for the intervenor.
DUGGAN, J. The intervenor, Peter Hill, and the respondent, the City of
Keene, appeal the decision of the Superior Court (Arnold, J.) vacating the
decision of the City of Keene Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). The
petitioners, Robert Farrar and Jeananne Farrar, cross-appeal. We reverse in
part, affirm in part, and remand.
The record supports the following. On January 17, 2007, Hill applied for
use and area variances for his property located at 75 Winter Street in Keene.
The property is a 0.44 acre lot with a historic building consisting of nineteen
rooms and over 7000 square feet of living area. Winter Street runs through two
zoning districts—the office district and the center business district. The
property at issue is located in the office district.
As to the area variance, Hill requested permission to reduce the number
of required onsite parking spaces from twenty-three to ten. The ZBA partially
granted Hill’s request, decreasing the number of required parking spaces to
fourteen. As to the use variance, Hill proposed changing the use from a
residential single family dwelling to a mixed use with two residential units and
office space. The office district permits both multifamily and office uses, but
does not expressly permit mixed use. The ZBA granted Hill’s request for a use
variance. The Farrars, abutters to the property, moved for rehearing, arguing
that the vice chairperson had a conflict of interest and the ZBA erred in
granting both variances. The ZBA denied the motion. The Farrars appealed to
the superior court.
The superior court found no conflict of interest and affirmed the ZBA’s
decision on the area variance, but vacated the use variance. As to the latter,
the superior court found that Hill failed to submit evidence as to the first prong
of the unnecessary hardship test—that the zoning restriction as applied
interferes with his reasonable use of the property considering its unique setting
in the environment. As to the remaining criteria of the variance standard, the
superior court held that the record supported the ZBA’s findings that Hill met
his burden. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Hill and the City argue that the superior court erred in: (1)
overlooking evidence of unnecessary hardship, specifically the large size of the
house, the lot size compared with the number of available parking spaces and
the unusual layout of the district; (2) failing to give deference to the ZBA
decision and the ZBA members’ use of their own personal knowledge; and (3)
failing to remand to the ZBA.
The Farrars argue that the superior court correctly found that Hill failed
to prove unnecessary hardship, maintaining that Hill’s financial hardship is
personal and unrelated to any unique characteristic of the property. The
Farrars claim that Hill failed to submit “actual proof” to determine if there is a
reasonable return on his investment in the property. Alternatively, the Farrars
argue in their cross-appeal that the superior court erred in finding there was
sufficient evidence before the ZBA for Hill to sustain his burden on the other
elements of the use variance standard.
2
On appeal, we will uphold the superior court’s decision unless the
evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Malachy Glen Assocs. v.
Town of Chichester, 155 N.H. 102, 105 (2007). Our inquiry is not whether we
would find as the superior court found, but rather whether the evidence before
the court reasonably supports its finding. Cmty. Res. for Justice v. City of
Manchester, 154 N.H. 748, 751 (2007). The ZBA’s factual findings are deemed
prima facie lawful and reasonable and will not be set aside by the superior
court absent errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by a balance of
probabilities on the evidence before it that the ZBA decision is unreasonable.
Malachy Glen Assocs., 155 N.H. at 105.
To obtain a variance, a landowner bears the burden of showing that: (1)
the variance will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions
exist such that literal enforcement of the ordinance results in unnecessary
hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the ordinance; (4)
substantial justice is done; and (5) granting the variance will not diminish the
value of surrounding properties. Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152 N.H. 74,
77 (2005).
I. Unnecessary Hardship
Initially, we consider whether the superior court erred by overlooking
evidence of unnecessary hardship. To establish unnecessary hardship for a
use variance, an applicant must show that: (1) the zoning restriction as
applied interferes with the applicant’s reasonable use of the property,
considering the unique setting of the property in its environment; (2) no fair
and substantial relationship exists between the general purposes of the zoning
ordinance and the specific restriction on the property; and (3) the variance
would not injure the public or private rights of others. Simplex Technologies v.
Town of Newington, 145 N.H. 727, 731-32 (2001). The superior court based its
decision upon the first prong of the Simplex standard.
A. First Prong of Unnecessary Hardship
“As our cases since Simplex have emphasized, the first prong of the
Simplex standard is the critical inquiry for determining whether unnecessary
hardship has been established.” Harrington, 152 N.H. at 80. “A number of
nondispositive factors are encompassed within this prong.” Id. First, “whether
the zoning restriction as applied interferes with a landowner’s reasonable use
of the property.” Id. Next, “whether the hardship is a result of the unique
setting of the property.” Id. at 81. Finally, “whether the landowner’s proposed
use would alter the essential character of the neighborhood.” Id.
The superior court focused upon the first two nondispositive factors. It
found that “Hill failed to present the ZBA with evidence of his property’s unique
3
setting in its environment,” and instead presented evidence of his own personal
financial hardship. We disagree.
There was evidence before the ZBA that the property is unique in that it
is a large residence that cannot reasonably be used as such consistent with the
zoning ordinance. Hill submitted evidence that the property includes a historic
building that, unlike the other buildings in the area, is used as a residence. He
submitted a partial list of properties in the office district, and represented that
his residence is one of the larger buildings. He testified that “the house is not
usable for a private family and . . . the location of it and the size of it rule this
out.” Hill further testified that he is unable to sustain the property as his
residence without the additional income. Based upon all the evidence, the ZBA
concluded that the “economics [of] trying to maintain it as a private home is
[sic] understandable.”
The ZBA considered that similar large residences have been converted to
office space consistent with the zoning ordinance, and that Hill’s proposal is a
reasonable compromise to keep it as a residence. Jeananne Farrar testified
that “there are exquisite old homes throughout downtown . . . that . . . have
been snapped up by professionals after the office zone was put into place,” and
evidence before the ZBA included the fact that the buildings on either side of
the property are office buildings. Hill represented that if the ZBA did not grant
the use variance, the property would be either office space or torn down.
Based upon this evidence, the ZBA could reasonably find that although the
property could be converted to office space consistent with the ordinance, the
zoning restriction still interferes with Hill’s reasonable use of the property as
his residence. See Harrington, 152 N.H. at 80-81 (stating landowner not
required to show he is deprived of all beneficial use of the land).
Although Hill submitted minimal evidence of a reasonable return of his
investment in the property, this is only one of the nondispositive factors that
the ZBA must consider. See id. at 80 (“reasonable use” factor “includes
consideration of the landowner’s ability to receive a reasonable return on his or
her investment”). Another factor is whether Hill’s proposal would alter the
essential character of the neighborhood. See id. at 81. To that extent, the
superior court did not consider that the office district includes as permitted
uses both offices and residences, and, thus, that a mixed office and residential
use would not alter the character of this area.
After review of the record, we acknowledge that this is a close case. In
close cases, where some evidence in the record supports the ZBA’s decision,
the superior court must afford deference to the ZBA. See Garrison v. Town of
Henniker, 154 N.H. 26, 29 (2006) (superior court’s review in zoning cases is
limited). The ZBA, composed of members of the community and having
knowledge and understanding of the surrounding area, is in the best position
4
to make decisions regarding use of the land. If the ZBA grants the variance
and evidence in the record supports the decision, the superior court should
defer to the ZBA’s conclusion. See Ouellette v. Town of Kingston, 157 N.H.
604, 611 (2008). Here, the superior court did not give such deference to the
local board. We thus conclude that the superior court erred in ruling that the
record does not support the ZBA’s finding of unnecessary hardship.
Because Hill has the burden to prove the five criteria of the use variance
test, we also address the Farrars’ cross-appeal, in which they argue the
superior court erred in concluding that the ZBA did not act unlawfully or
unreasonably in finding Hill met his burden regarding the other two
unnecessary hardship prongs and the remaining use variance criteria.
B. Second & Third Prongs of Unnecessary Hardship
As to the second prong of the unnecessary hardship test, the applicant
must show that no fair and substantial relationship exists between the general
purposes of the zoning ordinance and the specific restriction on the property.
Simplex, 145 N.H. at 732. The superior court found that, on the record, “the
ZBA could reasonably conclude that there was no substantial relationship
between the general purposes of the zoning ordinance and this specific
property.” The record supports the superior court’s reasoning for this
conclusion; i.e., that mixed uses are allowed in the adjoining district and the
variance would not alter the composition of the neighborhood.
As to the third prong, the applicant must show that the variance would
not injure the public or private rights of others. Id. We have said that this
prong of the unnecessary hardship test is coextensive with the first and third
criteria for a use variance. See Chester Rod & Gun Club v. Town of Chester,
152 N.H. 577, 580 (2005). For the reasons stated below, we conclude that the
record supports the superior court’s determination that the ZBA adequately
considered this issue.
II. Public Interest & Spirit of the Ordinance
“The requirement that the variance not be contrary to the public interest
is related to the requirement that the variance be consistent with the spirit of
the ordinance.” Malachy Glen Assocs., 155 N.H. at 105 (quotation omitted). A
variance is contrary to the public interest or injurious to the public rights of
others if it “unduly, and in a marked degree conflict[s] with the ordinance such
that it violates the ordinance’s basic zoning objectives.” Chester Rod & Gun
Club, 152 N.H. at 581 (quotation and citation omitted). Because the
fundamental premise of zoning laws is the segregation of land according to use,
“[o]ne way to ascertain whether granting the variance would violate basic
zoning objectives is to examine whether it would alter the essential character of
5
the locality.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted). “Another approach . . . is to
examine whether granting the variance would threaten the public health, safety
or welfare.” Id.
The Keene Zoning Ordinance states that the office district serves
to provide for noncommercial offices within walking distance to the
downtown. The uses are intended to be low intensity such as
professional offices. This zone is intended also to serve as a buffer
between the intense uses such as those in the central business,
central business limited, commerce zones, and residential areas.
The record shows that the ZBA found that the mixed office and residential use
had “fairly low intensity.” The ZBA considered the purpose of the office district
as a low intensity buffer zone, and stated that “the apartments may limit the
amount of traffic whereas if the whole building were office space, there would
be more traffic.” The record further reveals that the Farrars were concerned
that the property would be used for commercial purposes. Jeananne Farrar
testified at the ZBA hearing that she thinks “the owner is attempting to create a
commercial use of the property that is in reality suppose[d] to serve as a buffer
between the intense commercial use of downtown and the low residential use
. . . .” The ZBA considered the Farrars’ concern over commercial use and
determined that Hill was requesting mixed office and residential use, and that
any argument that the office use is actually commercial is an issue for code
enforcement. Thus, the superior court did not err in finding that the ZBA
could reasonably conclude that the variance would not be contrary to the
public interest or unduly, in a marked degree, conflict with the ordinance.
III. Substantial Justice
“Perhaps the only guiding rule [as to the factor of ‘substantial justice’] is
that any loss to the individual that is not outweighed by a gain to the general
public is an injustice.” Malachy Glen Assocs., 155 N.H. at 109 (citation
omitted). We have also considered whether the proposed use is consistent with
the area’s present use. Id.
Referencing its determination that the ZBA erred in finding unnecessary
hardship, the superior court initially stated that the applicant’s loss is “difficult
to assess” because he “did not present evidence that denial of the variance
would interfere with his reasonable use of the property.” The superior court,
however, nonetheless found that “the ZBA reasonably concluded that the
proposed use would not alter the character of the area, injure the rights of
others, or otherwise undermine the public interest,” and further that “[t]he
ZBA’s decision that granting the variance would work substantial justice was
consistent with the evidence before it and reasonable.”
6
Although we disagree with the superior court’s initial finding that denial
of the variance would not interfere with the applicant’s reasonable use of the
property, we agree with the superior court in its ultimate finding concerning
substantial justice. The record shows that the applicant currently resides at
the property, has made substantial renovations to the property as a residence
and is unable to sustain the property as his residence without the additional
income from offices. The record also shows that the office district permits both
office and residential uses as separate primary uses. Thus, as the superior
court concluded, the record supports the ZBA’s finding that the variance would
work substantial justice.
IV. Surrounding Property Values
The superior court found that “the ZBA considered noise, traffic,
aesthetics and intensity of use in considering what effect, if any, the variance
would have on surrounding property values.” The superior court also found
that the ZBA acted reasonably and within its authority in “deciding that the
proposed use would not negatively impact the value of the surrounding
properties.” Our review of the record reveals support for this finding. The ZBA
considered that the residential appearance of the building would not change,
that there are currently office usages on either side of the property and that if
the property was used entirely as an office building—as permitted by the
zoning ordinance—there would be greater traffic and intensity.
Accordingly, we reverse the superior court’s order vacating the ZBA’s
decision to grant Hill’s use variance application.
Reversed in part; affirmed in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7