THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-248
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ARTHUR KOUSOUNADIS
Argued: February 18, 2009
Reargued: September 10, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 4, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Francis G. Holland, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Arthur Kousounadis, was convicted
by a jury in Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) of felony criminal threatening, see RSA
631:4, I(a), II(a)(2) (2007); RSA 625:11, V (2007), and violation of a protective
order, see RSA 173-B:9, III (2002). He was sentenced under RSA 651:2, II-g
(2007). We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
I
The record supports the following facts. The defendant and his former
wife, Aspasia Kousounadis, married in 1972. They divorced in 1996. They
reconciled in 2001, and lived together in Lowell, Massachusetts, until the
defendant moved out in October 2006. The following month, Aspasia obtained
a restraining order against him in a Lowell court. The defendant was present
in the courtroom when the order was issued.
On December 1, 2006, the defendant purchased a semi-automatic
shotgun with a special scope and ammunition from a sports shop in Hooksett.
When he was filling out the required federal forms, he falsely stated that he
was not subject to a restraining order. On December 6, he drove to the
Pheasant Lane Mall in Nashua, where Aspasia worked at Macy’s. He parked
his GMC Jimmy in the parking garage near her Honda. At around 8:30 p.m.,
Aspasia approached her car. When she opened her car door, she saw the
defendant standing in front of her car, near his GMC. He said he wanted to
talk; she responded, “No, I don’t want to. We’re through.” After saying, “okay,”
the defendant opened a back door to his vehicle and took out a shotgun.
Aspasia ran as soon as she saw it. While she was running, she heard a
gunshot. She kept running until she reached the Macy’s employee entrance,
where she rang the security bell. She testified at trial that, although she was
scared, she was not fearful that she would be shot.
In their investigation of the scene, the police found a shell casing and
plastic packing material used in shotgun shells near Aspasia’s vehicle. They
also found a hole in the wall at Macy’s and a shotgun slug inside the store.
The defendant went to the Nashua police station the next morning of his own
volition and was arrested. He was booked by an officer using standard
procedure, and placed in a holding cell.
He was subsequently indicted on one count of attempted murder, one
count of felony criminal threatening and one count of violation of a protective
order. Prior to trial, he moved to suppress all evidence obtained as a result of
his statements to the Nashua police following his arrest on December 7, 2006.
After a hearing, the Trial Court (Mohl, J.) denied his motion. The defendant
also moved to dismiss the charge that he violated a protective order,
contending that New Hampshire courts lacked jurisdiction to try him for
allegedly violating an order issued in Massachusetts. This motion was also
denied. Following a four-day trial, the jury found the defendant guilty of felony
criminal threatening and violating a protective order, but not guilty of
attempted murder.
The defendant filed two post-trial motions to set aside his conviction for
criminal threatening. In the first, he contended that in closing argument, the
State had “argued a different crime than was alleged in the indictment.” In the
second, he argued that because the court failed to instruct the jury on the
definition of “deadly weapon,” the jury could not have found that the shotgun
he used was a deadly weapon, an element of criminal threatening. He also
2
moved to bar application of the enhanced sentencing provisions for use of a
deadly weapon, see RSA 651:2, II-g, because the jury had not made a factual
finding that he used one. The trial court denied all three motions.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) denying
his motion to suppress; (2) denying his motion to dismiss the charge of
violating a protective order; (3) denying his two motions to set aside the
criminal threatening verdict; and (4) denying his motion to bar an enhanced
sentence. We address each argument in turn.
II
The defendant first argues that the police subjected him to custodial
interrogation without first reading him his Miranda rights in violation of Part I,
Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution. See State v. Gagnon, 139 N.H.
175, 177 (1994); Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966). He further contends
that the police failed to “scrupulously honor[ ]” his invocation of his right to
counsel. As a result, he asserts that “the [S]tate could not prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that [his] confession as to the location of the gun was . . .
voluntary.” We first address the defendant’s arguments under the State
Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept
its factual findings unless they lack support in the record or are clearly
erroneous. State v. Plch, 149 N.H. 608, 613, cert. denied, 540 U.S. 1009
(2003). Our review of the trial court’s legal conclusions, however, is de novo.
Id.
The police must give Miranda warnings before conducting custodial
interrogation. State v. Turmel, 150 N.H. 377, 382 (2003). It is the State’s
burden to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that a defendant’s
constitutional rights under Miranda were not violated before it is permitted to
admit a defendant’s statements into evidence. State v. Chapman, 135 N.H.
390, 394 (1992). “[O]nce a defendant has invoked his right to counsel by
declining to speak to the police without a lawyer present, the police must
refrain from or stop interrogation, and scrupulously honor the defendant’s
right to stop it.” State v. Elbert, 125 N.H. 1, 9 (1984) (citation omitted)
(conducting analysis under the Fifth Amendment to the United States
Constitution). The State then bears the burden of proving beyond a reasonable
doubt that it was the defendant who initiated further conversation without any
prompting from the police. Plch, 149 N.H. at 616. The police have a duty to
see to it that an opportunity to consult with counsel is provided before further
questioning may proceed. State v. Tapply, 124 N.H. 318, 325 (1983).
3
The State does not dispute that the defendant was in custody after he
was arrested, booked and placed in a holding cell. However, the record
contains conflicting testimony on what occurred following the defendant’s
arrest. Detective Daniel Archambault, who interviewed the defendant, testified
that he did not ask him any questions before he gave him his Miranda
warnings and had the defendant sign a form waiving them. In contrast, the
defendant testified that Detective Archambault “asked [him] right away . . .
what happened at the mall” before informing him of his Miranda rights or
turning on the interview recording equipment. The trial court considered the
defendant’s recorded interview with Detective Archambault as well as their
conflicting testimony in resolving the issue of credibility in favor of the State.
The defendant argues that because he and Detective Archambault each
had a markedly different version of what happened following his arrest, the
State failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that it had not violated his
Miranda rights. We disagree. Determining whether the defendant was
interrogated prior to his Miranda warnings required the trial court to weigh the
credibility of the witnesses. It has broad discretion in doing so. See State v.
Patch, 142 N.H. 453, 458-59 (1997). Based upon the record before us, we
cannot say that the trial court’s factual finding that the defendant was not
subject to custodial interrogation before receiving and waiving his Miranda
rights either lacked support in the record or was clearly erroneous.
With respect to the defendant’s invocation of his right to counsel, we
similarly conclude that the trial court’s factual finding that the police
scrupulously honored it was supported by the record and not clearly
erroneous. Detective Archambault interviewed the defendant twice. The first
interview was terminated immediately when the defendant requested counsel.
The detective told him that if he wanted to speak further, he should tell the
booking officer. The defendant was then returned to his cell, and
approximately fifteen minutes later, he asked to speak once again with the
detective. After they were back in the interview room, the detective turned on
the recording equipment and advised the defendant again of his Miranda
rights, which he again waived. During the second interview, the defendant told
the detective where the gun and ammunition were located.
As the trial court observed, the interview transcript established that
Detective Archambault terminated the first interview upon the defendant’s
request for a lawyer. During the second interview, he offered the defendant an
opportunity to use the telephone to contact an attorney, which the defendant
declined. The detective did not have an obligation to independently contact a
public defender on behalf of the defendant, as the defendant’s argument
suggests. See Jackson v. Frank, 348 F.3d 658, 663 (7th Cir. 2003) (“Neither
Miranda nor any other provision of federal law requires a public defender to be
immediately available to a suspect during interrogation.”), cert. denied, 541
4
U.S. 963 (2004). Although the defendant may have made some voluntary
statements without first adequately waiving his right to counsel, “[v]olunteered
statements of any kind are not barred by the Fifth Amendment.” Miranda, 384
U.S. at 478. We conclude that the record does not support the defendant’s
contention that the police failed to scrupulously honor his invocation of his
right to counsel. The State met its burden of proving beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant’s statements were untainted. Accordingly, we hold
that the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s motion to suppress.
Because the Federal Constitution does not provide any greater protection
than does the State Constitution with regard to the defendant’s claims of error,
we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution. See Plch, 149 N.H.
at 620.
III
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in failing to dismiss
the charge that he violated a protective order because “New Hampshire has no
jurisdiction over the enforcement of [the Massachusetts] order.” He cites no
authority to support this argument and concedes that this assertion is contrary
to statute. We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. State v.
Bernard, 158 N.H. 43, 44 (2008).
RSA 173-B:13, II (2002), entitled “Orders Enforceable,” provides: “Any
protective order issued by any other state . . . shall be deemed valid if the
issuing court had jurisdiction . . . and the person against whom the order was
made was given reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard.” In addition,
“[a] person shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor if such person knowingly
violates . . . any foreign protective order enforceable under the laws of this
state.” RSA 173-B:9, III (2002). The defendant does not argue that the
Massachusetts order was invalid for lack of jurisdiction or due process, nor
does he offer any other reason why it should not be enforced. Accordingly, we
hold that the trial court properly denied his motion to dismiss.
IV
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his first
motion to set aside the criminal threatening verdict because the State “argued
a different crime [during closing argument] than [it] alleged in the indictment.”
Specifically, the defendant points to the prosecutor’s argument that: “When
Aspasia took off running, mission accomplished, she’s scared, ladies and
gentlemen. She’s terrified. But he didn’t stop there.” The prosecutor later
stated: “[The defendant] pulled that trigger and he wasn’t trying to scare her
because she was already terrified at that point. He was trying to kill her.” The
defendant contends that these statements are an “admission” that the criminal
5
threatening was complete before the shotgun was fired, when Aspasia took off
running in fear. The indictment charges that the defendant “purposely
attempted to place [her] in fear of imminent bodily injury” when he “pulled out
a firearm . . . and fired the shotgun.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, he argues the
State’s “admission” in closing argument that Aspasia was scared before the
shotgun was fired precludes the jury from finding him guilty of each element of
the crime. We disagree.
We will uphold a trial court’s denial of a motion to set aside the verdict
unless its ruling was made without evidence or constituted an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. State v. Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 466 (2007). Here, the
challenged language in the State’s closing argument was neither an
“admission” nor directed to the criminal threatening charge. The prosecutor
was attempting to persuade the jury that it should find the defendant guilty of
attempted murder. In any event, closing arguments are intended to persuade
the jury to adopt one party’s view of the evidence and are not considered
statements of fact. See State v. Belkner, 117 N.H. 462, 471 (1977). The court
properly instructed the jury that “what is said by the lawyers in closing
arguments . . . is not evidence.” The record reflects that the jury’s verdict was
supported by the evidence, and we cannot say that the trial court committed
an unsustainable exercise of discretion in denying the defendant’s motion.
The defendant further argues that the trial court erred in denying his
first motion to set aside the verdict because the State “failed to provide
sufficient evidence upon which the jury could enter a finding of guilty on the
charge of criminal threatening.” Specifically, he argues that the State
presented no evidence establishing that when the defendant pulled out the
shotgun, he was acting with the purpose of placing Aspasia in fear of imminent
bodily injury, as opposed to merely placing her in fear generally. To the extent
that the defendant is contending that the trial court should have dismissed his
case based upon insufficient evidence, we disagree. To succeed on his motion,
the defendant had the burden of establishing that the evidence, viewed in its
entirety and with all reasonable inferences drawn in favor of the State, was
insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty of the crime
charged. State v. Huffman, 154 N.H. 678, 685 (2007). By the defendant’s own
admission, he pulled out the gun with the purpose of frightening Aspasia.
Whether the defendant purposely placed or attempted to place Aspasia in fear
of imminent bodily injury was a question of fact for the jury, and the jury was
so instructed. On this record, viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
we hold that there was sufficient evidence presented for the jury to conclude
that the defendant acted with the purpose of placing the victim in fear of
imminent bodily injury.
6
V
Next, the defendant argues that because the trial court failed to instruct
the jury on the definition of “deadly weapon,” the jury could not have made a
finding that the shotgun he used was a “deadly weapon,” a necessary element
of the felony criminal threatening charge. The State disagrees, and further
contends that any error was harmless.
The defendant requested the trial court to include the statutory definition
of deadly weapon in the jury instructions. Ultimately, the court instructed the
jury on the criminal threatening charge as follows:
The definition of this crime has three elements, each of which the
State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt in order for you to
find the defendant guilty of this offense.
These elements are: First, that the defendant attempted to
place Aspasia Kousounadis in fear of imminent bodily injury;
second, that the defendant did so through conduct that is by
removing a deadly weapon, a shotgun, from his car and firing it in
the vicinity of Aspasia Kousounadis; and third, that the defendant
acted purposely, that is that it was the defendant’s conscious
object or specific intent to withdraw the shotgun from his car and
fire it in the vicinity of Aspasia Kousounadis for the purpose of
placing her in fear of imminent bodily injury.
After he was convicted, the defendant moved to set aside the verdict, arguing
that the trial court’s failure to instruct on the definition of a deadly weapon
precluded the jury from rendering a finding on a necessary element of the
felony criminal threatening charge.
“The purpose of the trial court’s charge is to state and explain to the jury,
in clear and intelligible language, the rules of law applicable to the case.” State
v. McMillan, 158 N.H. 753, 756 (2009) (quotation omitted). “When reviewing
jury instructions, we evaluate allegations of error by interpreting the disputed
instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood
them, and in light of all the evidence in the case.” Id. “We determine whether
the jury instructions adequately and accurately explain each element of the
offense and reverse only if the instructions did not fairly cover the issues of law
in the case.” Id. “Whether or not a particular jury instruction is necessary,
and the scope and wording of the instruction, is within the sound discretion of
the trial court, and we review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id.
7
A person commits the crime of criminal threatening when “[b]y physical
conduct, the person purposely places or attempts to place another in fear of
imminent bodily injury or physical conduct.” RSA 631:4, I(a). The crime is a
class B felony if the person “[u]ses a deadly weapon as defined in RSA 625:11,
V.” RSA 631:4, II(a)(2). A deadly weapon is “any firearm, knife or other
substance or thing which, in the manner it is used, intended to be used, or
threatened to be used, is known to be capable of producing death or serious
bodily injury.” RSA 625:11, V. The defendant contends that for the shotgun to
constitute a deadly weapon, it must be “used, intended to be used or
threatened to be used” in a manner “known to be capable of producing death or
serious bodily injury.” The State disputes the application of the qualifying
phrase to “firearm,” and argues that a firearm is a deadly weapon per se under
the statute.
We first address the parties’ dispute regarding the statutory meaning of
“deadly weapon,” and then turn to consider whether the instructions fairly
covered the issues of law in the case. The interpretation of a statute is a
question of law, which we review de novo. State v. Dodds, 159 N.H. ___, ___
(decided August 21, 2009). “In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the
final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole.” Id. at ___. We construe provisions of the Criminal
Code according to the fair import of their terms and to promote justice. See
RSA 625:3 (2007). We first look to the language of the statute itself, and, if
possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning.
Dodds, 159 N.H. at ___. Further, we interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language it did not see fit to include. State v. Hynes, 159 N.H. 187, 193 (2009).
Finally, we interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme
and not in isolation. Id.
In construing the plain meaning of deadly weapon, we must discern
whether the term “firearm” is modified by the phrase “which, in the manner it
is used, intended to be used, or threatened to be used, is known to be capable
of producing death or serious bodily injury,” RSA 625:11, V. Reviewing the
composition and structure of the statute, we conclude that at least two
interpretations of the deadly weapon statute are reasonable. On one hand, the
comma after “firearm” and the lack of a comma after “knife” might indicate that
the legislature composed a list of items to be modified by the qualifying phrase
in the latter part of the statute. Under this interpretation, each item listed (any
firearm, any knife, any substance and any thing) would be modified by the
qualifying phrase, “which, in the manner it is used, intended to be used, or
threatened to be used, is known to be capable of producing death or serious
bodily injury.” On the other hand, the comma after “firearm” could set off the
category of “any firearm” from the category of “knife or other substance or
thing,” such that the qualifying phrase would modify only the latter category of
8
items. Accordingly, on its face, the statute is subject to two reasonable
interpretations with respect to firearms as deadly weapons, i.e., (1) a firearm is
a deadly weapon only when it is used, intended to be used, or threatened to be
used in a manner that is known to be capable of producing death or serious
bodily injury; or (2) a firearm is a deadly weapon per se. See In re Richard M.,
127 N.H. 12, 17 (1985) (while the legislature is not compelled to follow
technical rules of grammar and composition, the court examines the
composition and structure of the text to discern its intended meaning).
The manner in which the term “deadly weapon” is functionally used
throughout the Criminal Code does not resolve the ambiguity. See Hynes, 159
N.H. at 193 (we interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory
scheme). Each of the crimes that rely upon “deadly weapon” as an element, as
well as the enhanced sentencing statute itself, could be implemented using
either interpretation. See, e.g., RSA 630:1-a, I (2007) (first degree murder);
RSA 635:1, II (2007) (class A felony burglary); RSA 644:1, IV (2007) (class B
felony riot); RSA 651:2, II-g (deadly weapon enhanced sentencing).
Accordingly, we turn to the legislative history of the deadly weapon statute to
discern legislative intent. See State v. Jennings, 159 N.H. 1, 5 (2009) (court
reviewed legislative history to discern legislative intent where statutory phrase
was subject to more than one reasonable interpretation).
The term “deadly weapon” has been part of our substantive criminal law
for nearly 150 years. See, e.g., GS 264:7 (1867) (manslaughter enhanced to
first degree when perpetrated by person bearing a “deadly weapon”). The
legislature first defined the term, however, when it adopted the revised
Criminal Code, Laws 1971, 518:1, which became effective in November 1973,
see RSA 625:2, I (2007). The revised Criminal Code was recommended by the
Commission to Recommend Codification of Criminal Laws (Commission), which
was created by legislative directive in 1967. Laws 1967, ch. 451. In April
1969, the Commission, chaired by Chief Justice Frank R. Kenison, issued the
Report of Commission to Recommend Codification of Criminal Laws (Report)
providing a comprehensive draft revised Criminal Code, see Report at iv, and
included comments that detail the source of the recommended language for
each draft section, see, e.g., id. at iii.
In the Report, the Commission identified its “basic aim” as “produc[ing] a
more concise and simplified criminal law than now applies in this state.” Id. at
iv; see also N.H.S. Jour. 1641-42 (1971). In performing this task, the
Commission reviewed draft laws and comments from a wide variety of sources,
but “found especially useful the Model Penal Code, the Michigan Revised
Criminal Code, Final Draft—September 1967, and the New York Penal Law,
1967.” Report, supra at iii. The Report notes that ultimately, the Commission
had been “continuously desirous of shaping a criminal law that is adapted to
the conditions and traditions of the State of New Hampshire.” Id.; see also
9
N.H.S. Jour. 1642 (1971) (revised Criminal Code intended, among other things,
to align New Hampshire criminal law with decisions of the supreme court with
respect to individual rights).
With respect to the draft definition section, the comments explain that
while some defined terms were adopted from the Model Penal Code, the “deadly
weapon” definition was based upon terminology found in the Michigan Revised
Criminal Code, Final Draft (1967). Report, supra § 570:11 (General
Definitions) comments at 9. In explaining the intended meaning of the term
“deadly weapon,” the Commission stated:
“Deadly weapon” is defined in recognition of the fact that virtually
anything, if used in a fitting manner, can cause death or serious
injury. Whether there is a deadly weapon involved is, therefore,
made to turn on how the actor proposes to use the thing he wields.
Report, supra § 570:11 comments at 10. Notably, the current provision
defining “deadly weapon” is identical to the draft provision as recommended by
the Commission. Compare id. § 570:11, V with RSA 625:11, V. Therefore, we
conclude that the legislature, in adopting the Commission’s Report, intended
for the qualifying phrase comprising the latter portion of the deadly weapon
statute to modify each item listed, including “firearm.”
Accordingly, we hold that a firearm is a deadly weapon under RSA
625:11, V if, in the manner it is used, intended to be used, or threatened to be
used, it is known to be capable of producing death or serious bodily injury.
Therefore, the State bore the burden in this case to prove beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant used a firearm in such a manner that it constituted a
deadly weapon. See RSA 631:4, II(a)(2) (criminal threatening is a class B felony
when the actor uses a deadly weapon). We have previously held that this is a
question of fact for the jury based upon the totality of the circumstances. State
v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 714-15 (2003); see also State v. Sands, 123 N.H. 570,
591 (1983) (interpreting State and Federal Constitutions as guaranteeing a jury
determination on all factual elements of the crime charged).
The trial court rejected the defendant’s request to instruct the jury on the
statutory definition of “deadly weapon,” and failed to otherwise require the jury
to determine whether the manner of the use of the shotgun rendered it a
deadly weapon within the meaning of the statute. While the jury was asked to
find the manner in which the defendant used the shotgun, it was not asked
whether using a shotgun in that manner was known to be capable of causing
serious bodily injury or death. Rather, the trial court’s instruction stated,
“removing a deadly weapon, a shotgun, from his car and firing it in the vicinity
of Aspasia.” Thus, the trial court instructed the jury that a shotgun, used in
that manner, was a deadly weapon per se. Accordingly, the instructions
10
relieved the jury from its obligation of determining whether the shotgun in this
case constituted a deadly weapon. Because the trial court removed from the
jury’s consideration an element of the felony charge, the jury instructions were
in error.
The State alternatively argues, however, that the trial court’s instructions
required the jury to find that the defendant, in fact, used the shotgun in a
manner that satisfies the statutory definition of a deadly weapon. It contends
that because the instructions required the jury to find that the defendant
purposely withdrew the shotgun and fired it “in the vicinity of Aspasia
Kousounadis,” the verdict in this case necessarily includes the jury’s factual
finding that the defendant used a firearm in a manner that qualified it as a
deadly weapon. It relies upon State v. Hatt, 144 N.H. 246, 248 (1999), in
which we held that a firearm that is threatened to be fired at a person is
generally understood to be capable of causing death or serious bodily injury.
We disagree with the State’s argument, and conclude that its reliance on
Hatt is misplaced. In Hatt, the trial court, sitting without a jury, convicted the
defendant of robbing a store while armed with a deadly weapon, based upon its
finding that an unloaded handgun, which the defendant threatened to fire at a
person, was a deadly weapon under RSA 625:11, V. Id. at 246-47. Because
Hatt involved a bench trial, this finding constituted a factual finding, and not
one of law. See id. at 246. Moreover, the sole issue on appeal in Hatt was one
of statutory construction: “whether an unloaded handgun constitutes a ‘deadly
weapon’ as defined by RSA 625:11, V.” Id. at 247. When we stated that “a
firearm, threatened to be fired at a person, is generally understood to be
capable of causing death or serious bodily injury,” we only answered the
statutory question posed, and ruled that the trial court’s factual finding was
not erroneous as a matter of law. Id. at 248.
We cannot conclude, as a matter of law, that charging the jury to
determine whether shooting a firearm “in the vicinity” of a person necessarily
required the jury to render an essential factual finding on an element of the
felony charge – namely, that the defendant used, intended to use, or threatened
to use a firearm in a manner that is known to be capable of producing death or
serious bodily injury. Whether the specific manner in which the defendant
used the shotgun and the circumstances surrounding that use rendered the
shotgun a deadly weapon is a factual issue within the exclusive province of the
jury. Hull, 149 N.H. at 714.
Finally, the State argues that if the trial court erred in failing to properly
instruct the jury on an element of the charged offense, any error was harmless.
Not all constitutional errors, however, are subject to harmless error analysis.
Some errors require outright reversal. Thus, we must first determine whether
the error at issue is subject to harmless error analysis.
11
“Generally, . . . if [a] defendant had counsel and was tried by an impartial
adjudicator, there is a strong presumption that any other errors that may have
occurred are subject to harmless-error analysis.” State v. O’Leary, 153 N.H.
710, 714 (2006) (quotation omitted). “[O]nly such constitutional errors as
necessarily render a trial fundamentally unfair require reversal without regard
to the evidence in the particular case.” State v. Williams, 133 N.H. 631, 634
(1990) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “Errors that partially or completely
deny a defendant the right to the basic trial process, such as the complete
denial of a defendant’s right to counsel, or adjudication by a biased judge, rise
to the level of fundamental unfairness, thereby obviating consideration of the
harmless error doctrine.” O’Leary, 153 N.H. at 714. Though we have never
clearly defined any single analytical framework for determining which
constitutional errors are or are not subject to harmless error analysis, we have
held that certain errors invariably are not. See State v. Ayer, 150 N.H. 14, 24-
25 (2003) (applying the federal distinction between a “structural defect” and a
“trial error,” and holding that denial of a defendant’s right to self-
representation is a “structural defect”), cert. denied, 541 U.S. 942 (2004); State
v. Hall, 148 N.H. 394, 400 (2002) (instructing jury to presume defendant’s
mental state, the only element at issue); State v. Reid, 134 N.H. 418, 423
(1991) (improper jury instruction on the requisite mental state for resisting
arrest charge); Williams, 133 N.H. at 634-35 (direction of a verdict for the
prosecution on an element of the offense).
In Williams, the defendant was charged with securities fraud resulting
from false and misleading statements he made while selling interests in limited
partnerships. Williams, 133 N.H. at 632-33. The trial judge instructed the
jury that the limited partnership interests the defendant sold were securities.
Both the State and the defendant agreed this should have been a
determination of fact made by the jury as an element of the crime, but the
State argued that the harmless error doctrine applied. Id. at 633-34. We held
that it did not, because the trial judge’s error was “akin to the direction of a
verdict for the prosecution on an element of the offense charged,” and therefore
“a constitutional error requiring reversal without regard to the weight of the
evidence.” Id. at 634.
The present case is no different from Williams in that the trial court
essentially instructed the jury that the shotgun used by the defendant was a
deadly weapon, just as the trial court in Williams instructed the jury that the
partnership interests sold were securities. To reach a verdict of guilty, the jury
was required to find that the defendant used the shotgun as a deadly weapon,
i.e., in a manner “known to be capable of producing death or serious bodily
injury.” RSA 625:11, V. The jury was never instructed on the definition of
deadly weapon; thus, its verdict was necessarily incomplete and “akin to the
direction of a verdict for the prosecution on an element of the offense charged.”
12
Williams, 133 N.H. at 634. Accordingly, the jury instruction is not subject to
harmless error analysis.
The State argues that our holding in Williams has been “implicitly
overruled” by the United States Supreme Court in Neder v. United States, 527
U.S. 1 (1999). We recognize that the federal opinions we cited for guidance in
Williams have been modified by subsequent decisions of the United States
Supreme Court. See, e.g., Neder, 527 U.S. at 9-15 (holding that an instruction
that omits an element of the offense is subject to harmless error analysis).
Neder, however, has been widely criticized, and we decline to follow it with
regard to our interpretation of the New Hampshire Constitution. As one
commentator noted:
Harmless error analysis depends upon the existence of a verdict of
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt on the elements of the crime.
The appellate court must assess the possibility that the error
affected the jury’s verdict. If there is no verdict on an element of
the crime, it is not possible to conclude that the error did not affect
the verdict.
Carter, The Sporting Approach to Harmless Error in Criminal Cases: The
Supreme Court’s “No Harm, No Foul” Debacle in Neder v. United States, 28
Am. J. Crim. L. 229, 232 (2001); see also Fairfax, Harmless Constitutional
Error and the Institutional Significance of the Jury, 76 Fordham L. Rev. 2027,
2030 (2008) (arguing that jury instructions that omit an element of the offense
produce “flawed verdicts” that cause “profound . . . injury” to “the very
structure of the Constitution itself” and to the jury’s role in criminal trials).
As Justice Scalia pointed out in his Neder dissent, it is “structural error,”
not subject to harmless error analysis, for a court to enter a directed verdict,
“no matter how clear the defendant’s culpability.” Neder, 527 U.S. at 32-33
(Scalia, J., dissenting). By the same token, “failure to prove one [element], no
less than failure to prove all, utterly prevents conviction.” Id. at 33. The
failure to instruct the jury on one element of a crime is thus indistinguishable
from a directed verdict, and deprives a defendant of his right to a jury trial.
See id. at 31 (explaining that “trial by jury means determination by a jury that
all elements were proved”). Moreover, “[t]he very premise of structural-error
review is that even convictions reflecting the ‘right’ result are reversed for the
sake of protecting a basic right.” Id. at 34; see also Ayer, 150 N.H. at 24-25
(applying the federal distinction between a “structural defect” and a “trial
error”).
This court “has the power to interpret the New Hampshire Constitution
as more protective of individual rights than the parallel provisions of the United
States Constitution.” Ball, 124 N.H. at 231-32. We reaffirm that under our
13
State Constitution, a jury instruction that omits an element of the offense
charged is an error “that partially or completely den[ies] a defendant the right
to the basic trial process,” O’Leary, 153 N.H. at 714, and thus is not subject to
harmless error analysis, see Williams, 133 N.H. at 634. Accordingly, we
reverse the defendant’s conviction on the felony criminal threatening charge
and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
VI
The defendant’s argument that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to bar imposition of an enhanced sentence is based upon the jury
instruction argument described above and Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S.
466 (2000). Under Apprendi, any fact that increases the penalty for a crime
beyond the prescribed statutory maximum, other than the fact of a prior
conviction, must be submitted to a jury and proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490. Because we reverse the defendant’s felony criminal
threatening conviction, we need not address whether the trial court erred in
imposing an enhanced sentence for this charge.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; and remanded.
DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS, J., with whom HICKS,
J., joined, concurred in part and dissented in part.
DALIANIS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. I join the
majority opinion with respect to parts I, II, III and IV, but respectfully dissent
with respect to parts V and VI. The majority concludes that the trial court’s
failure to instruct the jury on the definition of a deadly weapon, see RSA
625:11, V (2007), is an error that defies harmless error analysis pursuant to
our interpretation of the New Hampshire Constitution in State v. Williams, 133
N.H. 631, 634-35 (1990). I agree that this case is like Williams, but I disagree
that Williams is still good law. Instead, I would follow the approach taken by
the United States Supreme Court in Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 8-15
(1999), apply harmless error analysis, and conclude that the State has met its
burden in proving any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
I do not lightly recommend overruling Williams. “The doctrine of stare
decisis demands respect in a society governed by the rule of law because, when
governing legal standards are open to revision in every case, deciding cases
becomes a mere exercise of judicial will, with arbitrary and unpredictable
results.” State v. Holmes, 154 N.H. 723, 724 (2007) (quotations omitted).
When asked to reconsider a previous holding, the question is not whether we
would decide the issue differently de novo, but whether the ruling has come to
be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement was for that very reason
doomed. Id. Several factors inform our judgment, including whether: (1) the
14
rule has proven to be intolerable simply by defying practical workability; (2) the
rule is subject to a kind of reliance that would lend a special hardship to the
consequence of overruling; (3) related principles of law have so far developed as
to have left the old rule no more than a remnant of abandoned doctrine; and (4)
facts have so changed, or come to be seen so differently, as to have robbed the
old rule of significant application or justification. Id. at 724-25. I believe the
third factor compels us to overrule Williams. Related principles of both federal
and State law with respect to harmless error review of constitutional errors
have so far developed as to have left the old rule from Williams no more than a
remnant of abandoned doctrine.
In Williams, the defendant was charged with securities fraud resulting
from false and misleading statements he made while selling interests in limited
partnerships. Williams, 133 N.H. at 632. The trial judge instructed the jury
that the limited partnership interests the defendant sold were securities. Id. at
633. Both the State and the defendant agreed this should have been a
determination of fact made by the jury as an element of the crime, but the
State argued that the harmless error doctrine applied. Id. at 633-34. We held
that harmless error did not apply because the trial judge’s error was “akin to
the direction of a verdict for the prosecution on an element of the offense
charged,” and therefore “a constitutional error requiring reversal without
regard to the weight of the evidence.” Id. at 634.
In Williams, we relied upon federal opinions for guidance that have since
been clarified by subsequent decisions of the United States Supreme Court.
See, e.g., Neder, 527 U.S. at 15 (holding that an instruction that omits an
element of the offense is subject to harmless error analysis). In Neder, the
defendant was convicted by a jury in Federal District Court of several fraud
and tax offenses as a result of engaging in real estate transactions financed by
fraudulently obtained bank loans. Id. at 4, 6. At trial, the District Court
erroneously instructed the jury that it need not consider the issue of
materiality of any false statements to convict on the tax offenses and bank
fraud. Id. at 6. It similarly failed to include materiality as an element of mail
fraud and wire fraud in instructing the jury on those charges. Id. Nonetheless,
the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit affirmed the
conviction, holding that although the District Court’s instructions were error,
the error was subject to harmless error analysis, and that the error was
harmless because “materiality was not in dispute” and, therefore, the error “did
not contribute to the verdict.” Id. at 7 (quotations omitted).
The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari to decide “whether,
and under what circumstances, the omission of an element from the judge’s
charge to the jury can be harmless error.” Id. Relying upon some of the cases
we looked to for guidance in deciding the same issue in Williams, the Court
held that a jury instruction that omits an element of the offense is an error that
15
“differs markedly from the constitutional violations we have found to defy
harmless-error review.” Id. at 9. The Court further reasoned: “We have often
applied harmless-error analysis to cases involving improper instructions in a
single element of the offense.” Id. at 9. To support this assertion, the Court
cited Rose v. Clark, 478 U.S. 570 (1986), which we also cited in Williams.
At issue in Clark was the trial court’s erroneous instruction charging the
jury to presume malice “in the absence of evidence which would rebut the
implied presumption” for a second degree murder charge where malice was one
of the elements of the crime. Clark, 478 U.S. at 574 (quotation omitted).
Although the Clark Court held that the error in that case was subject to
harmless error analysis, id. at 580, it also said: “harmless-error analysis
presumably would not apply if a court directed a verdict for the prosecution in
a criminal trial by jury.” Id. at 578. When we decided Williams, we understood
this phrase to mean that if a court “direct[s] a verdict for the prosecution” on a
single element of the offense, this type of error could never be subject to
harmless error review. Williams, 133 N.H. at 634. At the time, some federal
courts of appeals had drawn similar conclusions. See Hoover v. Garfield
Heights Mun. Court, 802 F.2d 168, 177 (6th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 480 U.S.
989 (1987); United States v. White Horse, 807 F.2d 1426, 1429 (8th Cir. 1986).
While our interpretation of Clark in Williams may have been an accurate
statement of federal law at the time, Neder represents a development in the law
such that this interpretation is no longer good federal law. Indeed, the Neder
Court relied upon Clark to reach the exact opposite of the conclusion we
reached in Williams.
Related principles of New Hampshire law with respect to what types of
constitutional error are subject to harmless error analysis have also developed
post-Williams. For example, we expressly adopted the federal distinction
between a “structural defect” and a “trial error.” See State v. Ayer, 150 N.H.
14, 24-25 (2003), cert. denied, 541 U.S. 942 (2004). As we explained in Ayer,
“[a] structural defect affects the very framework in which a trial proceeds” and
arises “from errors that deprive a criminal defendant of the constitutional
safeguards providing a fair trial.” Id. at 24. A “trial error,” by contrast, “occurs
during the presentation of a case to a jury and can be quantitatively assessed
in the context of other evidence in order to determine whether the error was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
While the harmless error doctrine applies to trial errors, it does not apply to
structural errors. See id.
Unlike the majority, which apparently, though not explicitly, believes the
error to be a structural error, I believe that a jury instruction that omits an
element of the offense is a trial error. Neder, 527 U.S. at 15. It can be
quantitatively assessed in the context of other evidence to determine whether
the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The case before us
16
provides a fitting example because there was no evidence to suggest that the
defendant used the shotgun in such a way that it was not a deadly weapon,
nor does he suggest that he would offer any upon remand. Accordingly, when
assessed in context, we can easily determine that the result would be the same
and that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
Williams, I believe, is also out of step with basic tenets we have recently
reaffirmed concerning the applicability of harmless error analysis under the
New Hampshire Constitution. Specifically, “if the defendant had counsel and
was tried by an impartial adjudicator, there is a strong presumption that any
other errors that may have occurred are subject to harmless-error analysis.”
State v. O’Leary, 153 N.H. 710, 714 (2006) (quotation omitted). Here, the
defendant had counsel at all stages of the proceedings, and he does not
contend that the judge was biased. Thus, there was a presumption that the
instructional error was subject to harmless error analysis.
In light of these subsequent developments of related principles of both
state and federal harmless error law since we decided Williams, I would
conclude that related principles of law have so far developed as to have left the
old rule from Williams no more than a remnant of abandoned doctrine. I
would, therefore, overrule Williams, holding that an instruction that omits an
element of the offense can be subject to harmless error analysis. Such a
holding, moreover, is consistent with more recent decisions of other
jurisdictions. See, e.g., Com. v. McCombs, No. 2007-SC-000127-DG, 2009 WL
735794, at *4 (Ky. Mar. 19, 2009); State v. Daniels, 91 P.3d 1147, 1156 (Kan.)
cert. denied, 543 U.S. 982 (2004); State v. Flanagan, 680 N.W.2d 241, 244-45
(N.D. 2004).
I would then examine whether the error at issue was, in fact, harmless.
An error is harmless only if it is determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that
the verdict was not affected by the error. State v. Connor, 156 N.H. 544, 549
(2007). The State bears the burden of proving the error was harmless. Id.
The harmless-error doctrine recognizes the principle that the
central purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual question
of the defendant’s guilt or innocence, and promotes public respect
for the criminal process by focusing on the underlying fairness of
the trial rather than on the virtually inevitable presence of
immaterial error.
State v. Dupont, 149 N.H. 70, 74 (2003) (quotation omitted).
I would hold that the State met its burden of proving harmless error in
this case. By his own admission, the defendant brandished a shotgun in
response to his wife’s refusal to speak to him, with the purpose of scaring her.
17
The third element in the instructions required the jury to find that “it was the
defendant’s conscious object or specific intent to withdraw the shotgun from
his car and fire it in the vicinity of Aspasia Kousounadis.” Firing a shotgun in
the vicinity of the victim is using it in a manner “known to be capable of
producing death or serious bodily injury.” RSA 625:11, V. Accordingly, the
instructions taken as a whole required the jury to find, independent of the
erroneous instruction, that the defendant used the shotgun as a “deadly
weapon,” despite the trial court’s failure to inform the jury of the statutory
definition of that term. Thus, the verdict was unaffected by the error.
Other considerations regarding whether an error is subject to harmless
error analysis are also satisfied here, as discussed above. Therefore, I would
hold that the trial court’s failure to instruct the jury on the statutory definition
of a deadly weapon was harmless error.
I would apply similar reasoning to reject the defendant’s argument that
the trial court erred in denying his motion to bar imposition of an enhanced
sentence. His argument is based upon the erroneous jury instruction
regarding the definition of a deadly weapon and Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530
U.S. 466 (2000). Under Apprendi, any fact that increases the penalty for a
crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum, other than the fact of a prior
conviction, must be submitted to a jury and proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490. The defendant advances his argument only under
the Federal Constitution. See State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632-33 (1986)
(holding that when a defendant fails to cite a New Hampshire constitutional
provision, we will not perform a state constitutional analysis). The United
States Supreme Court has held that Apprendi claims are subject to harmless
error analysis. See Washington v. Recuenco, 548 U.S. 212, 218-22 (2006).
Accordingly, I would apply harmless error analysis and reject this argument for
the same reasons as above.
HICKS, J., joins in the dissent.
18