THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Ossipee Family Division
No. 2008-326
IN THE MATTER OF JAMIE M. HUFF AND LAWRENCE R. HUFF
Argued: January 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: March 5, 2009
Minutelli Law Office, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Steven J. Minutelli on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Law Office of Leslie H. Johnson, PLLC, of Center Sandwich (Leslie H.
Johnson on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner and mother, Jamie M. Huff, appeals the
ruling of the Ossipee Family Division (Patten, J.), entered upon the
recommendation of a Marital Master (Barber, M.), adopting the parenting plan
of the respondent and father, Lawrence R. Huff. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following. The parties married in 2005, and
have one child together, K.H., born in July 2006. Both parties have children
from prior marriages. During the marriage, the parties lived in Effingham. In
October 2006, the mother filed a domestic violence petition, filed for divorce
and returned to Leicester, Massachusetts with the child. The father was
awarded parenting time every other weekend. The father usually exercised his
parenting time at Kristen Wickman’s residence. Wickman is the mother of the
father’s two daughters, ages eleven and eight.
In November 2007, while the divorce was pending, the father pleaded
guilty to a felony and was sentenced to three to six years in the New Hampshire
State Prison. At the final divorce hearing, the father requested one full
weekend of parenting time per month. He planned to allocate the weekend
between himself at the prison and Wickman, Cheryl Burns (a long-time friend
of the father), or another third party. The father planned to have Wickman or
Burns facilitate visitation at the prison and allow the child time to bond with
his half-siblings. The parties represented to the trial court that the father
could only visit with the child at the prison on Saturdays between 8:30 a.m.
and 11:00 a.m. Thus, the father proposed that the child stay overnight on
Friday with Wickman or Burns, visit him during the prison visiting hours, and
spend the rest of the weekend with his half-siblings. He stated that he was
essentially delegating his remaining parenting time to Wickman or Burns. He
also stated that this arrangement would be best considering the drive from the
mother’s residence to the prison – approximately two hours each way.
The guardian ad litem (GAL) recommended that the father be awarded
parenting time one Saturday per month and that the mother transport the
child half-way and Burns, or another acceptable third party, transport the
child the remaining distance to the prison. The GAL stated: “I think
transporting a child is one thing, staying a weekend with people that are not
related is another thing.” The GAL acknowledged that the only reason for the
weekend visitation would be to allow the child to visit with his half-siblings.
The GAL stated that, instead, the mother and Wickman could make
arrangements for the children to visit. The mother agreed with the GAL’s
recommendation; however, because the child is only eighteen months old, she
preferred to transport the child herself the entire distance to the prison.
Each recommended parenting plan called for the father to have the same
amount of actual parenting time with the child. The trial court adopted the
father’s recommendation; specifically, the parenting schedule provides that the
child will reside with the mother except:
Mr. Huff shall have parenting time one weekend per month at the
New Hampshire State prison, with Mr. Huff’s time to be in the
presence of Cheryl Burns, Kristen Wickman, or other third party
acceptable to the prison and Petitioner. The child shall be picked
up at approximately 8:00 on Friday and returned at 4:00 on
Sunday. This will allow the child to have time with his two half
siblings, whom he otherwise would not have time with.
On appeal, the mother argues: (1) there was insufficient evidence to
show that the father’s parenting plan was more appropriate than her plan; (2)
the trial court committed legal error in awarding the father parenting time that
he cannot exercise and thereby giving de facto parenting time to an unrelated
2
third party; and (3) the trial court committed legal error by inappropriately
applying the best interest standard.
The crux of the mother’s arguments depends upon whether an
incarcerated parent’s visitation can be delegated to a third party. The mother
argues that the trial court’s decision to award parenting time to a third party
over her objection exceeds its statutory authority and infringes upon her
fundamental right to parent. We first address the mother’s statutory
argument. “The superior court’s jurisdiction to award custody is purely
statutory, and the best interests of the child guide all custody decisions in New
Hampshire.” In the Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. 200, 203,
(2006). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. State v. Gallagher, 157 N.H. 421, 422 (2008).
RSA chapter 461-A (Supp. 2008) pertains to parental rights and
responsibilities. The trial court has broad statutory authority to allocate rights
between parents. See RSA 461-A:2. The statute encourages frequent contact
between the child and both parents. See id. By contrast, the trial court’s
authority to order visitation with third parties is limited. Pursuant to RSA 461-
A:6, V, the trial court may award parenting time to stepparents or
grandparents. RSA chapter 461-A is silent as to custody or visitation with
other third parties. There is therefore no express statutory authority to order
visitation with unrelated third parties. In fact, we have held that custody
cannot be awarded to an unrelated third party over the objection of a fit parent.
In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545, 549 (2003). Here, admittedly,
the trial court’s order does not expressly grant visitation to an unrelated third
party, but rather to an incarcerated father who delegated it to an unrelated
third party. In evaluating whether such a delegation is equivalent to granting
visitation directly to a third party, we must examine the effect of incarceration
upon parental abilities.
Among the factors the trial court “shall consider” in evaluating the best
interest of the child and determining parental rights and responsibilities is “[i]f
a parent is incarcerated, the reason for and the length of the incarceration, and
any unique issues that arise as a result of incarceration.” RSA 461-A:6, I(k).
Thus, the legislature has acknowledged that incarceration affects one’s ability
to exercise parental responsibilities. The statute, however, does not instruct
the trial court as to what extent incarcerated parents may delegate their
authority. We must, therefore, determine whether application of this factor
supports the trial court’s order in this case.
Our case law, as well as that of other jurisdictions, suggests that the
legislature included this factor because an incarcerated parent is unable to
care for his child during the period of incarceration. See In re Adam M., 148
3
N.H. 83, 85 (2002) (“Although [father’s] efforts to maintain contact with his
child are commendable, the fact still remains that the child has been and will
be without his father’s care during most of his formative years as a result of his
father’s criminal behavior.”). Although incarceration alone “does not
necessarily preclude the incarcerated parent from being a child’s legal
custodian,” Reed v. Albaaj, 723 N.W.2d 50, 57 (Minn. Ct. App. 2006), an
incarcerated parent is “unavailable” by reason of his or her incarceration. See,
e.g., In re L.N., 689 N.W.2d 893, 897 n.4 (S.D. 2004); In re Isayah C., 13 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 198, 207 (Ct. App. 2004); Randy K. v. Evelyn ZZ, 692 N.Y.S.2d 804,
806 (App. Div. 1999); Babcock v. Wonnacott, 885 P.2d 522, 524 (Mont. 1994);
In re Interest of Ditter, 322 N.W.2d 642, 645 (Neb. 1982) (per curiam).
Because the incarcerated parent is unable to care for the child, the trial
court is limited in the parental rights and responsibilities it may award an
incarcerated parent. We have consistently stated that it is in the best interest
of the child to be in the care of the child’s parents. See In the Matter of Nelson
& Horsley, 149 N.H. at 549. Thus, whether the incarcerated parent retains
parental responsibility to designate caregivers hinges upon the status of the
other parent. Limited circumstances exist that warrant the incarcerated
parent retaining the right to designate a third-party caregiver. Where one
parent is unfit and the other is incarcerated, for example, the incarcerated
parent may maintain custody and designate a caregiver for the child. See In re
Isayah C., 13 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 207. Where, however, the non-incarcerated
parent is fit, the incarcerated parent may not designate a third-party caregiver.
See Babcock, 885 P.2d at 524. Instead, the non-incarcerated parent retains
custody and the incarcerated parent may visit with the child. See id.; Matter of
Davis v. Davis, 648 N.Y.S.2d 742, 743 (App. Div. 1996) (incarcerated parent
entitled to reasonable visitation and grandparents will provide transportation to
the prison). The incarcerated parent, therefore, may not designate a third-
party caregiver, over the objection of the other parent, absent a finding that the
non-incarcerated parent is unfit. Where both parents are fit, the trial court
may only award the incarcerated parent that visitation time which he can
actually exercise.
For example, in Babcock, where both parents were fit, the mother had
legal and physical custody of the child and the father had visitation. Babcock,
885 P.2d at 523. The mother was then convicted of a felony and sentenced to
five years in prison. Id. The father requested permanent custody of the child.
Id. The Montana trial court held that it was in the child’s best interest to
remain in the legal custody of the mother and awarded temporary custody to
the child’s maternal great aunt. Id. at 523-24. The father retained visitation
rights. Id. at 524.
On appeal, the Montana Supreme Court reversed. Id. The court held
that the incarcerated parent was unable to care for the child during her
4
incarceration, and, thus, pursuant to statutory and constitutional authority,
the father was entitled to custody. Id. (“right of a parent to custody of his or
her child is a fundamental, constitutional right”); see Mont. Code Ann. § 40-6-
221 (“If either parent is dead or unable or refuses to exercise parenting or has
abandoned the family, the other parent is entitled to the parenting . . . of the
child . . . .”). The court said: “It has long been the law in Montana that where
a third party seeks custody to the exclusion of a natural parent, the right of the
natural parent prevails until a showing of forfeiture of that right.” Babcock,
885 P.2d at 524. The court went on to say that “[a] finding of abuse, neglect, or
dependency,” through proper procedure, is necessary for forfeiture. Id. The
court held that proper procedure was not followed, and thus the trial court
erred in awarding custody to a third party. Id. at 525.
The Babcock analysis is consistent with our own law. See In re Adam
M., 148 N.H. at 84. RSA chapter 169-C provides procedural requirements for
the court to limit parental rights. Biological and adoptive parents are
“presumed to be fit parents . . . until they are found to be unfit in an
abuse/neglect proceeding or a termination of parental rights proceeding.” In re
Alexis O., 157 N.H. 781, 789 (2008) (quotation omitted). Once a parent is
deemed unfit, the other parent must be awarded custody unless the State can
prove that parent is also unfit. RSA 169-C:19-e, I (Supp. 2008). This is
because “fit parents are presumed to act in the best interest of their children.”
In the Matter of R.A. & J.M., 153 N.H. 82, 96 (2005) (plurality opinion). Thus,
absent a determination that the non-incarcerated parent is unfit, the trial
court’s statutory authority to grant third-party visitation is limited to
grandparents and stepparents. See RSA 461-A:6, V.
Here, neither parent has been declared unfit. Thus, the trial court’s
authority is limited to awarding visitation to the incarcerated father that he can
actually exercise. Time allocated to the father beyond that, which is then
delegated to a third party, is equivalent to awarding an unrelated third party
visitation rights. The trial court’s order in effect grants visitation of an
eighteen-month-old child to an unrelated third party for an entire weekend.
Our conclusion concerning the absence of statutory authority in this
case is consistent with the right of parents to raise and care for their children,
which is a fundamental liberty interest protected by Part I, Article 2 of the New
Hampshire Constitution. In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. at 547.
Similarly, the United States Supreme Court has recognized that “the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects the fundamental right of
parents to make decisions concerning the care, custody, and control of their
children.” Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 66 (2000) (plurality opinion).
Parents’ rights over their children “are not easily set aside. Only in the most
unusual and serious of cases may such fundamental rights be abrogated in
favor of an unrelated third person.” In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149
5
N.H. at 548. Parental rights “have been found to operate against the State,
against third parties, and against the child.” Id. at 547 (quotation omitted).
“[P]arents have a natural entitlement to the exclusive . . . management of their
children.” Id. at 548.
The mother argues that on this record the family division should have
adopted her parenting plan. Whether the mother’s plan should now be
adopted, in light of our decision, may require additional testimony and fact-
finding. Thus, such a review is best left to the trial court. We hold, instead,
that the trial court exceeded its statutory authority and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this decision.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6