THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2008-712
IN THE MATTER OF
KATHALEEN A. DUFTON AND TERRY L. SHEPARD, JR.
Argued: May 5, 2009
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2009
Nadeau Law Offices, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Justin P. Nadeau on the brief
and orally), for the grandmother.
Bradley & Faulkner, P.C., of Keene (Douglas F. Green and Susan R.
Abert on the brief, and Ms. Abert orally), for the father.
DALIANIS, J. The grandmother, Kathaleen A. Dufton (grandmother),
appeals the order recommended by a Marital Master (Forrest, M.) and approved
by the Superior Court (Arnold, J.), dismissing her petition for grandparent
visitation. See RSA 461-A:13 (Supp. 2008). We reverse and remand.
The grandmother alleges or the record supports the following facts. The
grandmother is the biological mother of Vicki Shepard, who is the now
deceased wife of the respondent, Terry L. Shepard, Jr. (father), and the mother
of the minor grandchildren. The grandmother was sixteen years old when she
gave birth and relinquished her parental rights to her daughter. The daughter
was later adopted.
The grandmother and her daughter reunited when the daughter was
twenty-six, and, for the next thirteen years, until the daughter’s untimely death
from cancer, they were very close. They vacationed and spent holidays together
and visited every other weekend. The grandmother helped her daughter
through her pregnancies and attended the birth of her two granddaughters.
The grandmother celebrated all special occasions with her daughter and
granddaughters, including the children’s baptisms and birthdays. When the
grandmother’s daughter fell ill with cancer, the grandmother stayed with her at
the hospital and accompanied her to all of her doctor visits. When the
grandmother’s daughter died in March 2005, the grandmother was at her
bedside.
For several months after his wife’s death, the father would not allow the
grandmother to visit with her grandchildren. Then, in November 2005, he
allowed the grandmother to visit with her granddaughters every other weekend,
during school vacation weeks, and over the summer. In the summer of 2007,
the children were with the grandmother for six weeks.
At some point thereafter, the father again denied the grandmother
visitation with the children, prompting her to file the instant petition. The
father moved to dismiss on the grounds that because the grandmother had
relinquished her parental rights to her daughter, she was not a “grandparent”
of her daughter’s children and, therefore, lacked standing to petition for
grandparent visitation.
Initially, the trial court denied the father’s motion. The trial court
reasoned that the grandmother had standing to seek visitation because she is
the biological grandmother of the children and the grandparent visitation
statute applies to both adoptive and natural grandparents. See RSA 461-A:13,
I. The court ruled that the plain meaning of the word “natural” is “biological.”
Accordingly, as the children’s natural grandmother, the grandmother had
standing to seek visitation.
The father moved for reconsideration, arguing that: (1) the grandmother
is not a natural grandmother because she was not the legal parent of the
children’s mother; and (2) it would violate his substantive due process rights to
allow the grandmother, whom the father characterized as “an unrelated third
party,” to petition for visitation. See Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 66-67
(2000) (plurality holding that visitation statute allowing any third party to seek
visitation is “breathtakingly broad,” and, as applied, unconstitutionally
infringed upon parent’s fundamental right to make decisions regarding care,
custody and control of child); In the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545,
548 (2003) (“Only in the most unusual and serious of cases may . . .
fundamental rights [of the natural or adoptive parent over his children] be
abrogated in favor of an unrelated third person.”). The trial court granted the
2
motion for reconsideration, ruling that the grandmother lacked “legal standing
to pursue grandparent visitation,” but stating that it was “deeply troubled that
the [father] would deprive his children of a relationship with the
[grandmother].” This appeal followed.
Usually, in ruling upon a motion to dismiss, the trial court is required to
determine whether the allegations contained in a petitioner’s pleadings are
sufficient to state a basis upon which relief may be granted. Ossipee Auto
Parts v. Ossipee Planning Board, 134 N.H. 401, 403 (1991). To make this
determination, the court would normally accept all facts pled by a petitioner to
be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to
her. In the Matter of Lemieux & Lemieux, 157 N.H. 370, 372-73 (2008). When,
however, the motion to dismiss does not contest the sufficiency of the
petitioner’s legal claim, but instead, as in the present case, challenges her
standing to sue, the trial court must look beyond her unsubstantiated
allegations and determine, based upon the facts, whether the petitioner has
sufficiently demonstrated her right to claim relief. Ossipee Auto Parts, 134
N.H. at 404. Because the underlying facts are not in dispute, we review the
trial court’s decision de novo. Johnson v. Town of Wolfeboro Planning Bd., 157
N.H. 94, 96 (2008).
The sole issue for our review is whether the grandmother is a
“grandmother” within the meaning of the grandparent visitation statute. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. N.H.
Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709, 713 (2007). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. In the Matter of
Kenick & Bailey, 156 N.H. 356, 358 (2007). We first examine the language of
the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
RSA 461-A:13, the grandparent visitation statute, provides, in pertinent
part:
I. Grandparents, whether adoptive or natural, may petition
the court for reasonable rights of visitation with the minor child as
provided in paragraph III. The provisions of this section shall not
apply in cases where access by the grandparent or grandparents to
the minor child has been restricted for any reason prior to or
contemporaneous with the divorce, death, relinquishment or
termination of parental rights, or other cause of the absence of a
nuclear family.
This language is identical to the language of RSA 458:17-d, I (1992) (repealed
2005), the predecessor to RSA 461-A:13, I. We have previously interpreted this
language to confer standing upon a grandparent, either natural or adoptive,
3
“whenever a grandchild’s nuclear family is the subject of divorce, death,
relinquishment or termination of parental rights unless the grandparent’s
access to the grandchild has been earlier, or contemporaneously, restricted.”
O’Brien v. O’Brien, 141 N.H. 435, 437 (1996) (quotation omitted).
In O’Brien, we explained that grandparent visitation rights existed only in
the absence of the grandchild’s nuclear family. Id. We also explained that the
reason for the absence of the nuclear family was not limited to “divorce, death,
relinquishment or termination of parental rights,” but included “other
cause[s].” Id. (quotations omitted). Under our interpretation in O’Brien,
therefore, a grandparent may petition for visitation only if the grandchild’s
nuclear family is absent for some reason, which includes, but is not limited to
“divorce, death, relinquishment or termination of parental rights” and only if
the grandparent’s access to the grandchild has not been restricted for any
reason before or contemporaneously with the event giving rise to the absence of
a nuclear family. Id. (quotation omitted).
In this case, the grandchildren’s nuclear family is absent because their
mother, the grandmother’s daughter, died. Thus, the grandmother is entitled
to seek visitation provided that: (1) she is the children’s adoptive or natural
grandmother; and (2) her access to the children was not “restricted for any
reason” before or contemporaneously with her daughter’s death. RSA 461-
A:13, I. Because it is the only issue on appeal, we confine our analysis to the
first condition: whether the grandmother is the children’s “natural”
grandmother for the purposes of the grandparent visitation statute. We first
look to the plain meaning of the word “natural,” and agree with the
grandmother that this word is synonymous with “biological.”
A “natural” parent is a parent who has conceived or “begotten” a child, as
opposed to a parent who has adopted the child. Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1506 (unabridged ed. 2002); see Black’s Law
Dictionary 1054 (8th ed. 2004) (“natural” means “[o]f or relating to birth”; a
“natural child” as distinguished from an “adopted child”). Because the
grandmother gave birth to the children’s mother, she is their “natural”
grandmother within the meaning of the grandparent visitation statute. See
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 988 (defining
“grandmother” as “the mother of one’s father or mother”).
The father argues that to the extent that we interpret the grandparent
visitation statute to allow the grandmother to seek visitation, the statute
conflicts with New Hampshire’s adoption laws. We need not decide whether
such a conflict exists, however, for even if it does, we hold that the grandparent
visitation statute, which was first enacted in 1989, see Laws 1989, 314:2, and
specifically addresses visitation by natural grandparents, controls.
4
“When a conflict exists between two statutes, the later statute will
control, especially when the later statute deals with a subject in a specific way
and the earlier enactment treats that subject in a general fashion.” Bel Air
Assocs. v. N.H. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs., 154 N.H. 228, 233 (2006)
(quotation omitted). While generally, a natural parent has no parental rights to
the child she relinquished, see RSA 170-B:11 (Supp. 2008), and, thus, for the
purposes of adoption law, is not the grandmother of her child’s children, she
may be considered the natural grandmother of those children for the purposes
of the grandparent visitation statute. By enacting the grandparent visitation
statute, the legislature specifically gave natural grandmothers the right to seek
visitation when the grandchild’s nuclear family is absent for some reason and
the grandmother’s access to the grandchild has not been restricted for any
reason before or contemporaneously with the event that gave rise to the
absence of a nuclear family. See RSA 461-A:13, I; O’Brien, 141 N.H. at 437.
This specific statute controls over the more general adoption laws. See
Sanborn Regional Sch. Dist. v. Budget Comm. of the Sanborn Regional Sch.
Dist., 150 N.H. 241, 242 (2003).
The father next asserts that the grandmother is not the children’s
natural grandmother because her rights to them are only derivative of her
parental rights to their mother. Having relinquished her parental rights to the
children’s mother when the mother was an infant, she has no familial
relationship to the children.
We rejected a similar proposition in Preston v. Mercieri, 133 N.H. 36
(1990). In that case, the child’s paternal grandmother moved to enforce a
stipulation regarding visitation. Preston, 133 N.H. at 37-38. The grandmother
and child had lived together, with the child’s father (the grandmother’s son), for
four months before the father suddenly died. Id. at 37. After the father died,
the child’s mother refused to allow the grandmother to visit the child. Id. at
37-38. The grandmother filed a petition for visitation, which the trial court
granted. Id. at 38. The mother appealed, and while the appeal was pending,
the parties entered into a stipulation about visitation. Id.
In the meantime, the mother’s new husband adopted the child. Id. The
mother then took the position that the child’s adoption by his stepfather
rendered the grandmother an unrelated third party and negated her right to
visitation. Id. The grandmother sought to enforce the stipulation. Id. The
trial court ruled in her favor, and we affirmed. Id. at 37, 38.
Like the father in this case, the mother argued that New Hampshire’s
adoption statutes severed her child from his biological father’s family tree, thus
making the grandmother a stranger to the child and extinguishing her
visitation rights. Id. at 39. We disagreed, in part, because of the difference
between stepparent adoption of an older child and traditional infant adoption.
5
Id. at 44-45. While in a traditional adoption, “where the child is an infant and
emotional bonds have not yet formed with natural relations, there are policy
reasons for secrecy which justify a shield of confidentiality ensuring anonymity
and precluding post-adoption visitation,” these policy justifications do not exist
in the case of a stepparent adoption. Id. at 45. In a stepparent adoption of an
older child, the child already has a substantial relationship with his
grandparents, “and anonymity cannot be achieved because the child knows
and remembers his grandparents and retains emotional ties with them after
adoption.” Id. In such a case, we observed, it would be “cruel and inhumane”
to terminate the relationship between the child and his grandparents abruptly.
Id.
For similar reasons, we reject the father’s contention that the
grandmother’s right to seek visitation under the grandparent visitation statute
is merely derivative of her parental rights to the children’s mother. As in
Preston, the policy justifications for requiring anonymity or preventing contact
between the grandmother and the children of her now deceased daughter are
not present. Here, the grandmother and her daughter reunited when the
daughter was twenty-six, and had a loving, close relationship until the
daughter died thirteen years later. While an adoption decree may serve to
“sever[ ] the child from its own family tree and engraft[ ] it upon another, . . .
such an analogy loses its rationale” when, as in this case, the adopted child
has reached maturity and pursued a relationship with the mother who
relinquished her. Id. (quotation omitted).
Moreover, as in Preston, anonymity cannot be achieved because of the
existing relationship between the grandmother and her daughter’s children. As
in Preston, it would be “cruel and inhumane” to terminate that relationship
merely because the grandmother relinquished her parental rights to the
children’s mother when the mother was an infant. Id. “In a situation such as
the present one, where the child’s natural parent has died suddenly, the love
and commitment of grandparents can be a source of security which lessens the
trauma occasioned by the parent’s death.” Id.
We conclude, therefore, that the fact that the grandmother relinquished
her parental rights to the children’s mother when the mother was an infant has
no bearing, per se, upon her ability to seek visitation with the grandchildren
now. See id. at 45-46. Because we hold that the grandmother’s right to seek
visitation with her grandchildren is not derivative of her parental rights to the
children’s mother, we necessarily reject the father’s assertion that the
grandmother is “judicially estopped from claiming legal rights derivative of
parental rights that she has previously voluntarily surrend[er]ed in a previous
adoption proceeding.” (Emphasis omitted.)
6
We also necessarily reject his contention that to interpret the
grandparent visitation statute to apply to the grandmother violates his
substantive due process rights because it will allow an “unrelated third party”
to seek visitation with his children. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 66-67; In the
Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. at 548. Having given birth to the
children’s mother, the grandmother is their natural grandmother for the
purposes of the grandparent visitation statute, and, therefore, is related to
them. As the father does not argue that it violates his substantive due process
rights to allow a natural grandmother to petition for visitation, we leave this
issue for another day.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we conclude that the grandmother
is the children’s “natural” grandmother for the purposes of the grandparent
visitation statute.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7