THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2008-632
MOTORSPORTS HOLDINGS, LLC
v.
TOWN OF TAMWORTH
Argued: October 7, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 9, 2010
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas Quarles, Jr. and
Kevin M. Baum on the brief, and Mr. Quarles orally), for the petitioner.
Rath, Young and Pignatelli, P.C., of Concord (Andrew W. Serell on the
brief and orally), for the intervenors.
BRODERICK, C.J. The intervenors, Amy K. Berrier and other abutters,
landowners and residents of Tamworth, appeal the decision of the Superior
Court (Houran, J.) that vacated and remanded the Town of Tamworth Planning
Board’s decision to deny the application for a special use permit sought by the
petitioner, Motorsports Holdings, LLC (Motorsports). We affirm in part, reverse
in part and remand.
I
We draw the facts from the certified record, the trial court’s order, and
our prior decision in Anderson v. Motorsports Holdings, 155 N.H. 491 (2007).
Motorsports owns approximately 250 acres of land in the Town of Tamworth.
It wishes to build a private country club and motorsports facility, including a
“3.1-mile long, European-style road course” and structures to support the
repair, servicing, and garaging of racing vehicles, as well as a hotel, restaurant,
access road, and parking facilities. Construction would involve dredging and
filling 14,759 square feet of wetlands and would affect 16,952 square feet of
intermittent streams. In total, construction would affect at least sixteen
distinct wetlands areas.
Motorsports has obtained: (1) a dredge-and-fill wetlands permit from the
New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services (DES); (2) a site-specific
alteration-of-terrain permit from DES; (3) a wetlands permit from the United
States Army Corps of Engineers; and (4) a water quality certificate from DES.
DES required Motorsports to provide a conservation easement on 107 acres of
land in Sandwich to mitigate the negative environmental impacts of the project.
Motorsports also had applied for a special use permit, pursuant to Tamworth’s
Wetlands Conservation Ordinance (WCO); however, it withdrew its application
before the Tamworth Planning Board (planning board) had completed its
review.
Subsequently, residents from the Town of Tamworth sought a
declaratory judgment from the superior court, requesting a ruling that
Motorsports would have to obtain a special use permit under the WCO before
beginning construction. The court ruled that the Town was a necessary party
to the action, and notified the Town that, whether or not it participated, it
would be bound by the result. The Town chose not to participate. Later, on
summary judgment, the trial court ruled that regardless of Motorsports’
acquisition of state and federal permits, it needed to apply for a special use
permit under the WCO. Motorsports appealed, arguing, among other things,
that because relevant state and federal regulations were more stringent and
comprehensive than the WCO, the WCO, by its own terms, was not applicable
to the project and, therefore, no special use permit was required. See
Anderson, 155 N.H. at 494. We rejected this argument and held that
Motorsports was obligated to obtain the local permit. Id. at 497.
Before our decision was issued, however, Motorsports applied for a
special use permit. In its application, Motorsports identified the percentage of
wetlands on the entire site that would be affected by the project, stating:
The Project Site contains a total of 15.14 acres of combined
wetlands and waterbodies, which represents 6% of the total land
2
area of the parcel (251 acres). . . . The[] direct impacts [to wetlands
caused by the proposed project] result in a total disturbance of
approximately 31,711 square feet (0.73 acres) to the [Wetlands
Conservation District], which represents approximately 4.8% of the
total wetlands and waterbodies identified on-site and
approximately one half of which are intermittent or seasonal
streams and drainageways.
The application also identified the land area that fell within the 25-foot
wetlands buffer zone governed by the WCO:
The total area of site within the 25-foot buffer to wetlands
encompasses approximately 10.3 acres. The Project layout
presented herein has been designed to minimize impacts to the 25-
ft buffer to approximately 2.1 acres (20.4%). These buffer zone
impacts are primarily associated with the grading of roads, access
ways, and parking areas. There are no buildings of [sic]
subsurface sewage disposal systems located within the 25-foot
buffer area.
The application also described the design and scope of the proposed project,
the particular design efforts intended to protect the wetlands, and the resulting
anticipated impacts. It itemized seventeen wetland impact areas, describing (1)
the nature of the existing wetland, (2) the nature of the impact that the
proposed project would cause, (3) the particular section of the WCO applicable
to each wetlands impact (e.g., access ways, waterways, and other uses), and (4)
the particular design of the proposed project intended to minimize a direct
impact to the affected wetland areas.
Both the planning board and the Tamworth Conservation Commission
(TCC), including its Wetlands and Subsurface subcommittee (TCC
subcommittee), reviewed the application at a series of meetings during the fall
of 2006. In an effort to address concerns raised by the TCC, Motorsports
presented an amended plan to the planning board on September 27. Some of
the changes increased impacts to buffer zones. The planning board conducted
public hearings on October 17 and November 1. During the planning board
review process, Motorsports had an opportunity to make detailed presentations
of its proposed project, the TCC presented its recommendation to deny the
application, and members of the public presented their concerns. At the end of
the November 1 hearing, the planning board concluded the public hearing
portion of the review process, and Motorsports offered to propose conditions to
the special use permit it was seeking. On November 6, the planning board
conducted a site walk.
3
On November 8, the planning board voted to deny Motorsports’
application for the permit, deciding that the proposed project did not meet five
of seven Section A criteria under the WCO. Motorsports appealed to the
superior court, which granted leave to certain abutters and residents of
Tamworth to intervene, including the appealing intervenors before us. The trial
court conducted a hearing in June 2008, during which one witness, the
president of Motorsports, testified and the parties presented offers of proof and
legal argument. Subsequently, the trial court vacated the planning board’s
decision and remanded the matter. It declined to reach certain procedural
issues. The intervenors appealed to this court, and Motorsports cross-
appealed.
II
The trial court’s review of the planning board’s decision was governed by
RSA 677:15, V (Supp. 2009), which provides that the trial court “may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review
when there is an error of law or when the court is persuaded by the balance of
probabilities, on the evidence before it, that said decision is unreasonable.”
The trial court’s review is limited:
[It] must treat the factual findings of the planning board as
prima facie lawful and reasonable and cannot set aside its
decision absent unreasonableness or an identified error of
law. The appealing party bears the burden of persuading the
trial court that, by the balance of probabilities, the board’s
decision was unreasonable. The review by the superior court
is not to determine whether it agrees with the planning
board’s findings, but to determine whether there is evidence
upon which they could have been reasonably based.
Upton v. Town of Hopkinton, 157 N.H. 115, 118 (2008) (citations omitted); see
also RSA 677:15, V. We will uphold a trial court’s decision on appeal unless it
is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Upton, 157 N.H. at 118.
In this case, the trial court did not reach the issue of whether there was
sufficient evidence upon which the planning board could reasonably deny
Motorsports’ application for a special use permit. Rather, the trial court
vacated the planning board’s decision and remanded after concluding that the
board committed three errors of law. First, it concluded that the planning
board erred in voting on the project as a whole by applying the Section A
criteria under the WCO to both the access way and non-access way impact
areas. Second, it concluded that by voting on the project as a whole, the
planning board failed to provide guidance to the petitioner in violation of its
constitutional obligation to do so under Part I, Article 1 of the State
4
Constitution. Third, it concluded that the planning board erred in failing to
determine whether and where the WCO is more stringent than state and
federal regulations as required by our decision in Anderson, 155 N.H. at 497-
98.
On appeal, the intervenors argue that the trial court erred by: (1) ruling
that the planning board failed to provide Motorsports with the measure of
assistance required under Part I, Article 1 of the New Hampshire Constitution;
(2) ruling that the planning board was required to separately address whether
Motorsports was entitled to approval of proposed “access ways”; and (3)
compelling the planning board on remand to initially make explicit
determinations addressing whether and where the WCO was more stringent
than applicable state and federal wetlands regulations. They also contend that
we should decide, as a matter of law, that the planning board adequately set
forth grounds for denying Motorsports’ application as required by RSA 676:4,
I(h) (Supp. 2009). In its cross-appeal, Motorsports argues that the trial court
erred by failing to address whether the planning board illegally deliberated and
rendered a final vote at the November 8 meeting that had been publicly noticed
only as a work session. It also contends that the trial court erred by failing to
find that the planning board did not provide an adequate statement of the
grounds for disapproving the application for a special use permit as required
under RSA 676:4, I(h).
III
We begin with an overview of the relevant portions of the WCO. The
ordinance sets forth a regulatory permitting scheme that governs the use of
and impact on wetlands in the Town of Tamworth; it does not regulate zoning.
Cf. Summa Humma Enters. v. Town of Tilton, 151 N.H. 75, 78 (2004) (whether
the proposed use is an appropriate use of land is a zoning question). The
ordinance was established “to regulate the uses of lands subject to standing
water, flooding, or high water tables for extended periods of time.” Tamworth
WCO “Title and Authority.” In particular, the ordinance regulates the
“wetlands conservation district,” which includes “wetlands,” “waterbodies,” and
their adjacent buffer zones. Id. art. C; art. B.8, art. B.10, art. F.
Some activities and uses within the wetlands conservation district
require a special use permit while others do not. See id. art. D, art. E. With
respect to special use permits, the WCO provides in part:
1. Special Use Permits may be issued by the Board, after
proper public notice and public hearing, for undertaking the
following uses in the Wetlands Conservation District when the
application has been referred to the Commission and to the Health
5
Officer for review and comment at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing.
. . . .
(a) Streets, roads, and other access ways, utility right-of-way
easements, including power lines and pipe lines, if so located and
constructed as to minimize any detrimental impact to such uses
upon the wetland.
(b) Water impoundments for the purposes of creating a
waterbody for wildlife, on-site detention of surface runoff, fire
protection, and/or recreational uses.
(c) The undertaking of a use not otherwise permitted in the
Wetlands Conservation District, if it can be shown that such
proposed use is not in conflict with any and all of the purposes and
intentions listed in Section A of this ordinance.
Id. art. E (italics, parentheses, and asterisks omitted). In reviewing an
application for a permit that implicates any of these three categories of special
uses, the planning board is required to consider certain facts and
circumstances, including, “the effects on the wetland’s capacity to . . . prevent
flooding, . . . [and] control sediment . . . .” Id. art. E.5(a). However, when
considering the propriety of a proposed special use under the third category,
that is, a use that is “not otherwise permitted,” an applicant also must show
that the proposed use does not conflict with the purposes and intentions listed
in Section A. Id. art. E.1(c). That section, in turn, provides:
A. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by controlling and guiding the use of
land areas which have been found to be subjected to standing
water, flooding, high water tables for extended periods of time.
It is intended that this Ordinance shall:
1. Prevent the development of structures and land uses on
naturally occurring wetlands which will contribute to pollution of
surface and ground water by sewage, sediment, or noxious
substances.
2. Prevent the destruction of, or significant changes to natural
wetlands which provide flood protection.
6
3. Protect rare, unique, and unusual natural communities,
both floral and faunal.
4. Protect wildlife habitats and maintain ecological balances.
5. Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers (water-
bearing stratum) and aquifer recharge areas.
6. Prevent expenditure of municipal funds for the purposes of
providing and/or maintaining essential services and utilities which
might be required as a result of misuse or abuse of wetlands.
7. Encourage those low-intensity uses that can be
harmoniously, appropriately and safely located in wetlands.
Id. art. A (italics, parenthesis, and asterisk omitted). We observe that some
overlap exists among the review standards applicable to all proposed special
uses under subsection E.5 and the Section A requirements that apply to the
“not otherwise permitted” special use category. Additionally, the wetlands
ordinance provides: “Where any provision of this ordinance is in conflict with
State or Federal law or regulation, or other Town ordinance, the more stringent
provision shall apply.” Id. art. I. Within this framework, we now address the
parties’ arguments.
IV
We turn first to a request, made by both parties, that we reach an issue
the trial court declined to address; namely, whether the board adequately
provided grounds for its decision in accord with RSA 676:4, I(h). The trial
court concluded that it was unnecessary to decide this statutory issue because
it vacated the planning board’s decision on other grounds and determined that
the statutory issue was not likely to arise on remand. The statutory issue is
similar to the issue raised by the intervenors regarding the measure of
assistance required under Part I, Article 1 of the State Constitution. Because
we decide cases on constitutional grounds only when necessary, see Hughes v.
N.H. Div. of Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 35 (2005), we address the statutory
issue and decline to address the constitutional issue.
The parties agree that in denying the special use permit application, the
planning board was required to comply with RSA 676:4, I(h), which provides:
“In case of disapproval of any application submitted to the planning board, the
ground for such disapproval shall be adequately stated upon the records of the
planning board.” This statutory requirement compels the planning board to
“sufficiently apprise [an applicant] of the planning board’s reasoning and
provide an adequate record of the board’s reasoning for us to review on
7
appeal.” Route 12 Books & Video v. Town of Troy, 149 N.H. 569, 575 (2003).
Compelling planning boards to adequately state grounds for disapproval
therefore anticipates an express written record that sufficiently apprises an
applicant of the reasons for disapproval and enables “a reviewing authority [to]
hold the board accountable.” Patenaude v. Town of Meredith, 118 N.H. 616,
619 (1978) (decided under former statute); see also K & P, Inc. v. Town of
Plaistow, 133 N.H. 283, 290 (1990) (decided under current statute). Thus, we
have noted that planning boards “should fully discuss [the] reasons for
[disapproving an application] in the board meeting minutes.” Patenaude, 118
N.H. at 619.
A written denial letter combined with the minutes of a planning board
meeting can satisfy the statutory requirement under RSA 676:4, I(h). See, e.g.,
Star Vector Corp. v. Town of Windham, 146 N.H. 490, 494 (2001) (planning
board issued detailed denial letter which provided multiple reasons for
disapproval, and minutes reflected board’s specific concern with applicant’s
proposed control regarding release of hazardous substance); K & P, Inc., 133
N.H. at 288 (planning board issued general denial letter, but minutes reflected
that board disapproved proposed plan due to safety concerns associated with a
long, dead-end road); Route 12 Books & Video, 149 N.H. at 575 (planning
board issued a written letter that unequivocally identified three distinct
reasons for denying the application, and minutes reflected extended discussion
on each reason given in the letter). Ultimately, whether planning board records
“adequately state[]” the ground for disapproval in accord with RSA 676:4, I(h)
depends upon the particular case. See Patenaude, 118 N.H. at 620.
In this case, the planning board apparently did not issue a written
decision that outlined its reasons for denying Motorsports’ application for a
special use permit. But see RSA 676:3, I (Supp. 2009) (local land use board
shall issue a final written decision which either approves or disapproves an
application for a local permit); Town of Tamworth Planning Board Rules of
Administrative Procedure § 5.K (“Notice of decision using Appendix D.2 or D.3
will be made available for public inspection at the Town Office building within
72 hours after the decision is made, as required by RSA 676:3.”). A written
decision is not included in the certified record, and the intervenors do not
contest Motorsports’ assertion that the planning board did not provide it with
one. Rather, the intervenors argue that the November 8 minutes constitute an
adequate statement of the planning board’s reasons for disapproving
Motorsports’ application for a special use permit in accord with RSA 676:4, I(h).
We disagree.
As an initial matter, we observe that the certified record forwarded to us
by the planning board includes a copy of the minutes of the November 8
meeting that contains gaps. We also received a spiral binder titled “Index to
Intervenors’ Supplemental Certified Record,” which includes a copy of the
8
November 8 minutes purporting to be a “complete set,” but which is marked
“draft” on top of the first page. This same “draft” copy is included in the
intervenors’ appendix on appeal, and, on its face, it is more inclusive than the
written minutes provided in the certified record transferred to us from the
planning board. Additionally, Motorsports included in its appendix a
document that purports to be a transcript of the November 8 meeting, but it is
not certified and, thus, we will not review it. See generally Sup. Ct. R. 15. For
our purposes, therefore, we consider the November 8 minutes in the certified
record, as well as the more complete “draft” minutes which the intervenors
included in the appeal record without objection from Motorsports. The certified
record also includes a DVD recording of the November 8 meeting, which the
trial court reviewed in rendering its decision on the merits. However, because
we issued an order on January 23, 2009, instructing the parties that we would
not review DVD recordings of planning board meetings absent a transcript, we
will not consider the DVD recording of the November 8 meeting.
Turning to the merits of whether the planning board adequately provided
grounds for its decision, we conclude that the November 8 minutes reveal two
significant legal flaws. First, the minutes demonstrate that the board members
were not clear on how the WCO applied to Motorsports’ application for a special
use permit. The special use permit application relates to numerous wetland
impact areas and buffer zones in the context of a large and complicated project.
Also, the wetland impact areas apparently consist of a relatively small portion
of the project site and implicate different sections of the WCO for access way
and non-access way impacts. At the start of the November 8 planning board
meeting, town counsel made an introductory statement outlining a review
procedure in which the board would take into account the different sections of
the ordinance relevant to the wetland impacts outlined in Motorsports’ special
use permit application. The minutes characterize town counsel’s statement as
follows:
The Planning Board will go through the 7 requirements of Section
A and if [Motorsports] meets all the requirements then the issue
becomes [moot] and we do not have to proceed further. As I see it,
if it turns out that [Motorsports] does not meet all of the 7
requirements then we will have another discussion about what
requirements they are required to meet.
A number of wetlands are affected by this proposal, 16 or 17 areas,
it doesn’t make sense from a time frame point of view to deal [with]
the 7 requirements for each impact area. We will go through the 7
criteria and if any of the Planning Board has any specific issue
with any wetland area then we will discuss that. Other[wise] we
will go through the 7 criteria and see if the project meets all of
these criteria.
9
This procedure proposed that the board review the project as a whole in light of
the Section A criteria, discuss the necessary requirements to be met should the
application fail to meet all criteria, and identify any specific issue the board
may have with regard to any particular wetland impact. Without deciding
whether the method set forth by town counsel would satisfy the law, the record
demonstrates that the planning board did not follow it.
The board voted on each of the seven criteria delineated in Section A of
the WCO with respect to the proposed project as a whole and concluded that
the application did not satisfy criteria 1, 2, 4, 5, and 7. It is unclear, however,
whether the board applied the Section A criteria to all or just some of the
impact areas. The minutes reveal that when reviewing the project as a whole,
some confusion arose among individual board members as to whether the
Section A criteria applied to both the access way and non-access way impact
areas identified in the application. The trial court ruled, and the parties agree,
that only non-access way impacts are subject to the seven criteria under
Section A, and that different criteria apply to access way impacts. It is
questionable, however, whether the board agreed as to how the WCO applied.
One board member suggested that the Section A criteria applied to both access
way and non-access way impacts, while another member opined that Section A
does not apply to access way impacts and that “access ways, roads, streets are
clearly allowed.” Other board members remained silent on this issue. This
confusion was not resolved on the record before us. Thus, when the board
voted on the project as a whole, it is unknown whether board members applied
Section A properly. Some members may have determined that some or all of
the impacts failed to meet Section A criteria, without distinguishing between
access ways and non-access ways, whereas other members may have denied
the application after determining that some or all of the non-access way
impacts failed to meet Section A criteria. Therefore, we conclude that the
November 8 minutes fail to sufficiently apprise Motorsports of the planning
board’s reasoning and fail to provide an adequate record of its reasoning to
afford meaningful appellate review.
Even assuming the board properly applied the WCO, the manner in
which the planning board voted on the project as a whole presents an
additional legal flaw reflected in the November 8 minutes. The intervenors
argue that casting separate votes on each of the seven Section A criteria
constituted an adequate statement for the grounds of disapproval necessary to
comply with RSA 676:4, I(h). They contend that the board was not required to
“restat[e] the voluminous evidence” and “set forth in detail” the evidence upon
which the board relied when voting against five of the criteria. Motorsports
contends, however, that the planning board failed to provide reasons for
denying the permit in a manner that enabled the superior court to
meaningfully review the merits of the board’s decision or Motorsports to
understand how each of the wetland impacts was deficient.
10
At the November 8 meeting, the board voted on each of the seven Section
A criteria, concluding that the application did not satisfy criteria 1, 2, 4, 5, and
7. The minutes do not reflect which of the at least sixteen wetland impacts or
corresponding buffer zones the planning board considered to be problematic
with respect to any particular Section A criteria that the board voted was not
satisfied. For example, the first criteria under Section A provides that the WCO
shall “[p]revent the development of structures and land uses on naturally
occurring wetlands which will contribute to pollution of surface and ground
water by sewage, sediment, or noxious substances.” Tamworth WCO, art A.1
(italics, parenthesis and asterisk omitted). The WCO defines “pollution” as
“[h]armful thermal effect or the contamination, or rendering unclean or impure
of any wetlands . . . by reason of any waste or other materials discharged or
deposited therein . . . [including] erosion and sedimentation resulting from any
filling or excavation activity.” Id. art. B.6. Although the minutes reflect some
concern about the excavation of retaining walls and footings, and about fill
running over culverts, the board did not identify which of the at least sixteen
wetland impacts would be unlawfully polluted, or how the fill would constitute
“pollution” within the meaning of the WCO. Furthermore, the minutes
demonstrate that virtually no discussion occurred prior to the board’s vote that
Motorsports’ application failed to satisfy several other criteria.
We reject the intervenors’ argument that “[a] reviewing court can clearly
determine which criteria the Board found were not satisfied, and can satisfy its
role in determining whether there is evidence in the record to sustain the
Board’s finding on each of these five criteria, under the standards set forth in
Summa Humma Enters., 151 N.H. at 79 . . . and [in] Cherry, 150 N.H. at 724.”
(Footnote omitted.) In Summa, we stated that in reviewing planning board
decisions, the superior court must “determine whether there is evidence upon
which [the planning board’s findings] could have been reasonably based.”
Summa Humma Enters., 151 N.H. at 79. In Cherry, we stated that “if any of
the [planning] board’s reasons for denial of the special use permit support its
decision, then the . . . appeal must fail.” Cherry v. Town of Hampton Falls, 150
N.H. 720, 724 (2004). Application of these standards, however, is based upon
the premise that the planning board has made findings that provide an
adequate record of the board’s reasoning sufficient for a reviewing court to
render meaningful review. In neither Summa nor Cherry did we consider the
issue of how to satisfy RSA 676:4, I(h).
Further, we reject the intervenors’ suggestion that the superior court was
required to comb through the voluminous record to ascertain, if possible, what
portion of the proposed project caused which disqualifying wetland impacts.
Rather, it was the planning board’s statutory responsibility to identify the
particular aspects of the proposed project that it found were deficient under the
governing WCO criteria and the adversely affected wetland impact areas and
buffer zones. Notwithstanding that some aspects of the proposed project,
11
including the construction phase, may affect numerous wetland areas and
buffer zones throughout the site, the planning board was required to set forth
its reasoning regarding the aspects of the proposed project it found to be
deficient in relation to the wetland impacts.
We also reject the intervenors’ contention that requiring the board to
address each of the wetland impact areas, as well as buffer zones, separately,
and consider each requisite criteria for each impact, would impose a “nearly
impossible burden” on the planning board and “involve a logistical nightmare of
more than a hundred votes.” Neither the trial court’s ruling nor our holding
today compels a particular methodology for the board to implement when
reviewing Motorsports’ application. We note that minutes of a TCC
subcommittee meeting included in the certified record indicate that the
subcommittee implemented a process whereby it reviewed distinct wetland
impacts, considered the WCO criteria in light of access way and non-access
way impacts, and identified some concerns it had with the project. Thus, at a
minimum, the TCC subcommittee minutes demonstrate the feasibility of a
decision-making method that addresses particular aspects of the project’s
wetland impacts.
The intervenors point to the September 12 meeting minutes of the TCC
subcommittee to support their claim that Motorsports was advised of the
numerous deficiencies in its proposed project. However, Motorsports
submitted a revised plan to the planning board after the September 12 TCC
subcommittee meeting. Thereafter, a multitude of concerns were expressed at
the public hearings on October 17 and November 1, various favorable and
unfavorable aspects of the individual impact areas were discussed by the TCC
and its subcommittee, both Motorsports and residents opposing the permit
gave detailed presentations on different features of the project design, and the
planning board conducted a site walk. When the planning board disapproved
the application on November 8, however, it did not indicate whether it agreed
with the particular deficiencies that the TCC subcommittee had previously
identified or whether Motorsports’ revised plan failed to cure any deficiencies
previously expressed by the planning board. Moreover, while the WCO requires
the TCC to provide comment to the planning board regarding a landowner’s
application for a special use permit, it is the planning board’s duty to consider
the evidence and provide an adequate statement of grounds for disapproval.
The intervenors also point to other evidence in the record that they claim
established the proposed project’s unacceptable impacts on the wetlands as a
whole, thereby justifying denial of Motorsports’ application. That the
intervenors can point to evidence in the record which is supportive of the
planning board’s decision does not relieve the board of its statutory duty to
provide adequate reasoning so as to apprise Motorsports of the deficiencies it
found and to provide a record for meaningful appellate review.
12
We underscore the trial court’s observations that “[t]his is a large and
complicated project with extensive submissions to the Board, and a long
history before the Board and State and Federal permitting agencies.” Further,
the WCO is not a zoning ordinance under which the planning board determines
whether a proposed project constitutes an appropriate use of land. Rather, it
sets forth a regulatory permitting scheme governing the use of and impact
upon wetlands. Thus, the planning board’s task is to review the application,
and identify any deficiencies it perceives regarding particular wetland impact
areas.
Under the circumstances of this case, we hold that casting separate votes
on each of the seven Section A criteria with respect to the project as a whole,
without providing reasons, explanations or findings directed to adversely
affected wetland areas or buffer zones, does not constitute an adequate
statement for the grounds of disapproval necessary to comply with RSA 676:4,
I(h). Because the November 8 minutes do not satisfy RSA 676:4, I(h), we hold
that the record supports the trial court’s ruling to vacate and remand.
V
We turn next to the intervenors’ argument that the trial court erred when
it ruled that the planning board was required to separately address whether
Motorsports was entitled to approval of access way impacts associated with its
proposed project. They contend that because the “minimization” criteria
necessary for approving access ways “could only be determined with reference
to a specific approvable project,” the board would have been required to
address the requested access roads only if the project itself had met the criteria
for approval. Thus, according to the intervenors, once the board “voted to deny
[a special use permit] for the racetrack project, there was no approvable
project” to provide the necessary context for reviewing the proposed access
ways.
We conclude that the intervenors misconstrue the trial court’s ruling.
The trial court did not rule that the planning board was required to vote
separately on whether the access way impacts were subject to approval under
the WCO. Rather, the trial court determined that the manner in which the
board voted on the project as a whole left it unable to meaningfully review the
propriety of the board’s vote to deny the permit application. The trial court
ruled that under the WCO, separate criteria apply to access way and non-
access way wetland impacts, and it interpreted the planning board’s decision
as erroneously applying the access way criteria to the project as a whole. The
trial court concluded that, in doing so, the board acted unlawfully and vacated
the board’s decision, reasoning:
13
In its discussion and voting, the Board did not distinguish
between the access impact areas and the non-access impact
areas. Since the Board applied the intentions listed in Section A
to the entire project as a whole, it appears on the face of the
record that the Board unlawfully applied the Section A intentions
to access areas, and the record leaves the court no way of
determining whether this is so and, if so, whether under the
correct standard, Section E(1)(a), the access ways would have
been approved, or whether application of the correct standard to
the access ways would have had an impact on the Board’s
decision as to the non-access portions of the application.
We conclude that the trial court did not compel the board, on remand, to
vote on both the access way impacts and non-access way impacts separately.
Rather, it concluded that the board erred by applying the wrong legal criteria to
access-way impacts, and as a result the court was unable to meaningfully
review the planning board’s decision. Whether or not the board is required
under the ordinance to separately review the requested access way impacts,
even if the non-access way impacts do not satisfy the Section A criteria, is an
issue appropriately left for the board to consider in interpreting the WCO since
the matter is already subject to remand for the board’s failure to provide an
adequate statement of grounds for disapproval under RSA 676:4, I(h). See
Trottier v. City of Lebanon, 117 N.H. 148, 150 (1977) (“The administrative
construction of [an] ordinance by the zoning authorities . . . [while] neither
conclusive nor binding, . . . is entitled to consideration.”).
VI
The intervenors further argue that the trial court erred when it ruled that
the planning board, on remand, must initially make explicit findings as to
whether particular provisions of the WCO that are applicable to Motorsports’
special use permit application are more stringent than state and federal
wetlands regulations. They contend that the trial court’s ruling is based upon
a misreading of our decision in Anderson and puts a “nearly impossible”
burden on the planning board. Motorsports contends, however, that our
decision in Anderson directed the planning board, in accordance with the
WCO, to initially determine whether any of the criteria for approval under the
ordinance were more stringent than state and federal wetlands regulations. It
argues that under RSA 676:4, I(g), the planning board had the authority to hire
experts, given the complexity of the task.
The trial court ruled that
in applying the Wetlands Ordinance, the Board did not make any
explicit initial determinations as to whether and where the
14
Wetlands Ordinance is more stringent than the State and Federal
regulations. See Anderson, 155 N.H. at 497-98. The court is
mindful that the Board did not have the benefit of the Supreme
Court’s decision in Anderson at the time it considered the
petitioner’s application, so simply points out for consideration on
remand that, in addition to this order, the Anderson holding,
including its requirement in this regard, controls the Board’s
review.
We conclude that the trial court misconstrued our holding in Anderson.
Central to one issue in Anderson was the following provision under the
WCO: “Where any provision of this ordinance is in conflict with State or
Federal law or regulation, or other Town ordinance, the more stringent
provision shall apply.” See Anderson, 155 N.H. at 497-98. In Anderson,
Motorsports argued that the relevant state and federal regulations are more
stringent and comprehensive than the WCO, and, thus, because it secured the
necessary state and federal wetlands permits, the WCO was inoperable by its
own terms, obviating the need for Motorsports to seek a special use permit. Id.
at 497.
We rejected Motorsports’ argument and held that the WCO did not
eliminate the need to acquire a special use permit even if the state and federal
regulations were in conflict with and more stringent than the WCO
requirements. Id. In construing the stringency provision, we determined that
if provisions of the WCO conflict with and are less stringent than
comparable provisions in state or federal regulations, the more
stringent provisions must be satisfied to obtain a special use
permit. Nothing in Section I eliminates the requirement to obtain a
special use permit when provisions from state or federal
regulations are more stringent.
Id. We did not address “whether any provisions of the WCO conflict with and
are less stringent than provisions of state and federal regulations” because
“[e]ven if the respondent identified such provisions of the WCO, [it] would still
have to apply for a special use permit.” Id. at 497-98. While we cautioned that
“the Board may not interpret the [applicable WCO] standards . . . illegally or
unreasonably in order to support a determination of stringency,” id. at 498, we
did not place any responsibility on the board to initially decide whether any
WCO provision was in conflict with and was more stringent than state and
federal regulations when reviewing or denying an application for a special use
permit. Therefore, the trial court erroneously interpreted the Anderson
decision as compelling the board on remand to “make explicit initial
15
determinations as to whether and where the Wetlands Ordinance is more
stringent than the State and Federal regulations.”
VII
In its cross-appeal, Motorsports asks us to reach a procedural issue that
the trial court declined to address. It argues that the trial court erred by failing
to rule on whether the planning board illegally deliberated and rendered a final
vote in violation of its right to meaningful notice and opportunity to participate
in review of its application. In particular, it contends that because the
planning board publicly noticed the November 8, 2008 meeting as a “work
session” and gave no indication that it intended to deliberate and render a final
vote on the application, the board’s vote to deny the application must be
reversed pursuant to RSA 676:4, IV. The trial court declined to rule on this
procedural challenge because it determined that the issue was not likely to
arise on remand. We agree and similarly decline to address this argument.
Finally, Motorsports argues that “remand is no longer available” and that
we should uphold the trial court’s decision by vacating the planning board’s
denial of its application. It contends that because a majority of the original
planning board members no longer sit on the board, a quorum will not be
available to consider the case on remand. This argument is premised on the
notion that Motorsports is entitled to the same planning board members to
decide the matter on remand, a novel notion for which it fails to provide
adequately developed legal argument and legal support. Accordingly, we
decline to address its argument. See Guy v. Town of Temple, 157 N.H. 642,
657-58 (2008) (judicial review not warranted for sweeping legal assertion that
lacked adequately developed argument or legal support).
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
16