THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-246
LIBERTARIAN PARTY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SECRETARY OF STATE
Argued: November 19, 2008
Opinion Issued: December 19, 2008
New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union, of Concord, for the plaintiff, filed
no brief.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general, for the defendant, filed no brief.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III on
the brief, and Richard Lehmann orally), for intervenor New Hampshire
Republican State Committee.
Finis E. Williams, III, of Concord, on the brief and orally, and Wadleigh,
Starr & Peters, of Manchester (Kathleen Sullivan on the brief), for intervenor
New Hampshire Democratic Party.
GALWAY, J. The New Hampshire Republican State Committee (NHRSC)
appeals a decision of the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) challenging the remedy
fashioned by the trial court for alleged violations of RSA 654:46 (2008) by the
New Hampshire Democratic Party (NHDP). We conclude that the NHRSC lacks
standing and accordingly dismiss its appeal.
The record reveals the following. On July 18, 2007, RSA 654:46 went
into effect. That statute required the Secretary of State, upon the request of a
“party,” to furnish certain lists of voting information compiled by the State to
that “party.” See RSA 654:46, I. At the time, the only entities in the state
which qualified as parties were the NHRSC and the NHDP. See RSA 652:11
(2008) (defining “party”). On August 9, 2007, the Libertarian Party of New
Hampshire (LPNH) filed a petition seeking to have RSA 654:46 declared
unconstitutional, as well as preliminary and permanent injunctions preventing
distribution of the State’s lists to the NHRSC and the NHDP. The NHDP
intervened in the matter.
The trial court held a hearing on the preliminary injunction request on
August 13, 2007. The NHRSC did not participate in the proceeding. The trial
court denied the injunction and its order was not appealed. Thereafter, the
NHRSC and the NHDP obtained the State’s lists pursuant to RSA 654:46. The
NHDP sold the lists to various groups, and the NHRSC provided the list without
charge to at least one other group.
On November 15, 2007, the trial court held a hearing on the merits to
address the constitutionality of the statute. The NHRSC did not move to
intervene and did not participate in the hearing. On November 26, 2007, the
trial court issued an order finding RSA 654:46 unconstitutional. That order
also was not appealed. Pursuant to the terms of the trial court’s order, a
hearing was scheduled to address what further relief, if any, was necessary.
On December 5, 2007, the NHRSC intervened in the matter. On
February 12, 2008, the trial court held a hearing to address the issue of an
appropriate remedy. The original parties to the matter, the LPNH and the State
of New Hampshire, acknowledged the difficulty of crafting a remedy since the
lists had already been released, but did not argue for the imposition of any
particular remedy. The NHRSC argued that it would be appropriate to require
the NHDP to disgorge any funds obtained by selling the lists. On February 28,
2008, the trial court issued an order preventing the NHDP and NHRSC from
further distributing the lists, but did not require the NHDP to disgorge any
funds. The NHRSC appeals from this order.
Although no party disputes the NHRSC’s standing to raise the arguments
it brings to this court, a party’s standing is a question of subject matter
jurisdiction, which may be addressed at any time. Hughes v. N.H. Div. of
Aeronautics, 152 N.H. 30, 35 (2005). “In evaluating whether a party has
standing to sue, we focus on whether the party suffered a legal injury against
which the law was designed to protect.” Asmussen v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of
2
Safety, 145 N.H. 578, 587 (2000) (quotations and brackets omitted). The
requirement that a party demonstrate harm to maintain a legal challenge rests
upon the constitutional principle that the judicial power ordinarily does not
include the power to issue advisory opinions. Id. at 588.
So far as we can discern, the NHRSC argues that it has suffered injury
because the NHDP made money by selling the lists and it did not, thereby
placing it at a disadvantage. During oral argument before this court the
NHRSC contended: “We are an injured party to the extent that we operate in
this closed environment with our competitors on the Democratic side and they
benefited from this conduct and that benefit is directly to our detriment. Any
benefit that they received came at our expense.” Any financial or political
advantage potentially gained by the NHDP from selling the lists, however, is
not, in any meaningful sense, an injury to the NHRSC. Moreover, while the
NHRSC at times presents this as a case of unjust enrichment, casting the
argument in such a way does nothing to demonstrate injury to it. Even
presuming the NHDP was unjustly enriched, it was not at the expense of the
NHRSC.
Additionally, the only issue on appeal is the correctness of the equitable
remedy crafted by the trial court. The propriety of affording equitable relief in a
particular case rests in the sound discretion of the trial court. Foley v.
Wheelock, 157 N.H. 329, 332 (2008). “We, in turn, review an equitable order
for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id. The party asserting that a
trial court’s order is unsustainable must demonstrate that the ruling was
unreasonable or untenable to the prejudice of its case. Id. As the NHRSC has
not suffered legal harm, we fail to see how it could show any prejudice
sufficient to overturn the trial court’s equitable ruling.
Finally, the NHRSC’s lack of a legal harm is thrown into sharp relief by a
review of the remedy it seeks. The NHRSC contends that any funds obtained
by the NHDP through the sale of the lists ought to be disgorged and paid to the
Secretary of State. The Secretary of State, however, opted not to pursue a
financial remedy. Accordingly, the relief sought is for the benefit of another
party who has chosen not to request it. Cf. Gill v. Gerrato, 156 N.H. 595, 599
(2007) (defendant lacked standing to assert the rights of another). In short, the
NHRSC has simply not suffered any harm against which the law was designed
to protect, and the remedy it seeks is incompatible with the position of the
party on whose behalf it professes to be arguing. Cf. Hughes, 152 N.H. at 35.
Accordingly, we conclude that the NHRSC lacks standing to pursue this appeal
and we, therefore, dismiss it.
Dismissed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3