THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-420
GEOFFREY J. RALLIS
v.
DEMOULAS SUPER MARKETS, INC.
Argued: June 16, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 10, 2009
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Robert A. Shaines and
Laurie A. Lacoste on the brief, and Mr. Shaines orally), for the plaintiff.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (John A. Curran
and Edwinna C. Vanderzanden on the brief, and Mr. Curran orally), for the
defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, Geoffrey J. Rallis, appeals a jury verdict in
favor of the defendant, Demoulas Super Markets, Inc., in his negligence case.
He argues that the jury instructions given by the Superior Court (McHugh, J.)
were erroneous. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. On August 22, 2004, the
plaintiff slipped and fell while shopping at the Market Basket Supermarket in
Stratham. He alleged that he was walking in the produce aisle when his left
foot slipped out from under him because the floor was wet and had green
beans on it. He fell on his left hip and shoulder, refracturing his left hip, which
he had injured six weeks earlier. In June 2005, the plaintiff sued the
defendant for negligence.
Before trial, the plaintiff filed a motion in limine asking the court to give
the following jury instruction:
If the plaintiff proves that he suffered an injury which
occurred as a result of an unsafe condition in the defendant’s self-
service store and that unsafe condition was reasonably foreseeable
as a result from the defendant’s self-service mode of operation and
the defendant failed to take reasonable steps to protect patrons
from such foreseeable risk, the law imposes liability on the
defendant store owner. The store owner has the burden of proving
by a preponderance of the evidence that it exercised reasonable
care in the maintenance of the premises under the circumstances
of the case.
The trial court denied the plaintiff’s motion. Over the plaintiff’s
objection, the court ultimately instructed the jury as follows:
Now, ladies and gentlemen, we’re going to talk a little bit
about liability of property owners and there’s a general law with
respect to that and a particular law, and I’m going to review both of
those with you now. The general law, with respect to property
owners, is as follows:
All property owners are under a duty to use reasonable care
under all circumstances in the maintenance and operation of their
properties. The test of reasonable care is what the ordinary,
prudent person would do under the same or similar
circumstances. It is up to you to decide whether or not the
defendant exercised reasonable care under all of the circumstances
in the maintenance and operation of the property on the day in
question.
The character of and the circumstances surrounding the
entry onto the property by the plaintiff will be relevant and
important in determining whether the defendant acted with
reasonable care under all the circumstances. A failure to fulfill
this duty of reasonable care would amount to legal fault if it [were]
a cause or substantial cause of the accident.
2
The defendant, as an owner, cannot be expected to
guarantee the safety of those entering the premises, nor is the
defendant required to keep or maintain their property absolutely
safe. In short, no liability is imposed merely because an accident
occurred on the defendant’s property without a showing of legal
fault on the defendant’s part.
Now, the following is the specific law with respect to retail
store owners:
When a business invitee, such as the plaintiff in this case, is
injured as a result of a foreign substance on the floor of the
premises of the retail store, the business invitee must prove that
the owner’s negligence existed by establishing only one of the
following three things:
First, that the defendant caused the substance to be on the
floor prior to the fall. That is, it was the defendant’s employees,
not customers, that caused the substance to be on the floor.
Secondly, that the defendant had actual knowledge of the
existence of the foreign substance. That is, on the specific day and
time of the plaintiff’s fall, the defendant knew there was a foreign
substance on the floor in the area of the plaintiff, that caused him
to fall.
And, thirdly, that the foreign substance was on the floor for
such a length of time that the defendant should have known it, in
fact, existed.
On appeal, the plaintiff first argues that the jury instruction the court
gave was flawed because it failed to inform jurors that he could establish the
defendant’s negligence by showing that it knew or should have known that
green beans in the produce section of its store tended to fall on the floor,
thereby creating an unsafe condition for customers.
The purpose of jury instructions is to identify issues of material fact, and
to explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the proper legal
standards to be applied to factual findings in reaching a verdict. N.H. Ball
Bearings v. Jackson, 158 N.H. ___, ___, 969 A.2d 351, 363 (2009). The scope
and wording of jury instructions are within the sound discretion of the trial
judge and are evaluated as a reasonable juror would have interpreted them.
Id. at ____, 969 A.2d at 363. In reviewing the instructions, we consider the jury
charge as a whole to determine whether the instructions fairly presented the
3
case to the jury in such a manner that no injustice was done to the legal rights
of the litigants. See id. at ___, 969 A.2d at 363.
We apply a two-step analysis to determine whether to reverse a jury
verdict in a civil case based upon an erroneous jury instruction. O’Donnell v.
HCA Health Servs. of N.H., 152 N.H. 608, 615 (2005). First, the appealing
party must show that it was a substantial error such that it could have misled
the jury regarding the applicable law. Francoeur v. Piper, 146 N.H. 525, 531
(2001). Second, if we conclude that the error was a substantial one, we will
reverse the jury verdict unless the opposing party shows that the error did not
affect the outcome at trial; in other words, the error was harmless. Id. at 532;
see Hodgdon v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 147 N.H. 286, 292 (2001).
Having reviewed the jury charge in its entirety, we conclude that it
inaccurately summarized the applicable law and could have misled the jury.
We further conclude that this was a substantial error.
The trial court instructed the jury that the plaintiff could establish the
defendant’s negligence by showing either that: (1) its employees caused the
green beans to be on the floor; (2) it had actual knowledge that they were on
the floor, whatever the cause; or (3) the length of time that the green beans
were on the floor charged the defendant with constructive knowledge of their
presence. By so limiting the circumstances under which the plaintiff could
establish the defendant’s constructive knowledge that there were green beans
on the floor, the trial court erred.
Under New Hampshire law, premises owners are governed by the test of
reasonable care under all the circumstances in the maintenance and operation
of their premises. See Simpson v. Wal-Mart Stores, 144 N.H. 571, 574 (1999).
A premises owner owes a duty to entrants to use ordinary care to keep the
premises in a reasonably safe condition, see True v. Meredith Creamery, 72
N.H. 154, 156 (1903), to warn entrants of dangerous conditions and to take
reasonable precautions to protect them against foreseeable dangers arising out
of the arrangements or use of the premises. Pridham v. Cash & Carry Bldg.
Center, Inc., 116 N.H. 292, 294-95 (1976). Accordingly, under New Hampshire
law, a premises owner is subject to liability for harm caused to entrants on the
premises if the harm results either from: (1) the owner’s failure to carry out his
activities with reasonable care; or (2) the owner’s failure to remedy or give
warning of a dangerous condition of which he knows or in the exercise of
reasonable care should know. Partin v. A & P Tea Co., 102 N.H. 62, 63-64
(1959); see Restatement (Second) of Torts §§ 341-A, 343 (1965).
With respect to the second theory of liability -- the owner’s failure to
remedy or warn of a dangerous condition of which he knows or in the exercise
of reasonable care should know -- the landowner’s duty of care depends upon
4
whether he had actual or constructive notice of the dangerous condition. See
Partin, 102 N.H. at 64; Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra § 343.
In “slip and fall” cases, we have found that a landowner may have
constructive knowledge that an item has fallen to the floor based upon the
length of time it was there. See Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Philip, 112 N.H. 282,
283, 286 (1972); Partin, 102 N.H. at 64.
This is not, however, the only way to prove constructive knowledge under
New Hampshire law. In Tremblay v. Donnelly, 103 N.H. 498, 500 (1961), for
instance, we upheld the trial court’s denial of the defendants’ motion for
nonsuit when there was evidence from which the jury could find that the
defendants knew or should have known that pears tended to fall from the tree
onto the porch and could have taken steps to prevent it. Upon entering the
defendants’ premises, the plaintiff slipped and fell on a pear on the porch.
Tremblay, 103 N.H. at 499. We held that the fact that there were no pears on
the porch when the plaintiff originally left her apartment did not necessarily
relieve the defendants of liability. Id. at 504. The jury could still find the
defendants liable if “in the exercise of reasonable care they should have
previously taken steps to prevent pears from falling upon the porch, regardless
of when they might fall.” Id.
Similarly, in Simpson, 144 N.H. at 573-74, we ruled that the trial court
properly denied the defendant’s motions for directed verdict and judgment
notwithstanding the verdict when there was evidence from which the jury could
have found that the defendant knew or should have known that icy conditions
on the exit way created a hazard to its customers and the defendant failed to
take preventative action. The jury could have found actual or constructive
knowledge from evidence that: (1) on the day in question, there was so much
precipitation that a plowing company spent between four and one-half and five
hours clearing snow and spreading nine tons of salt on the store’s parking lot;
(2) snow and ice were seen up against the store building that day; and (3) the
head of maintenance testified that during the winter, ice and snow posed a
hazard to customers. Simpson, 144 N.H. at 573-74.
Thus, by informing the jury here that the plaintiff could establish that
the defendant had constructive knowledge of the green beans only by showing
the length of time they were on the floor, the trial court inaccurately stated the
applicable law. Under New Hampshire law, constructive knowledge may also
be established by other means. The jury in this case could have been misled
by the trial court’s instructions to find that the defendant was not negligent
even if the defendant knew that green beans regularly fell on the floor, creating
a hazard to customers, but failed to take corrective action. This was a
substantial error because it could have led the jury to reach a different verdict
from that it might have reached had the error not occurred. See Jackson v.
5
Morse, 152 N.H. 48, 51 (2005) (court will find reversible error if an erroneous
civil jury instruction could have misled the jury into basing its verdict upon a
misperception of the law).
Additionally, even without showing that the defendant had actual or
constructive notice of green beans being on the floor, the plaintiff might have
established the defendant’s negligence on the first theory of liability – that the
defendant failed to make its premises reasonably safe and to carry out its
duties with reasonable care. To prevail under this theory, the plaintiff would
have had to show that the defendant’s conduct created a foreseeable risk of
harm; in other words, it was reasonably foreseeable that an injury might occur
because of the defendant’s actions or inactions. See White v. Asplundh Tree
Expert Co., 151 N.H. 544, 547 (2004); cf. Kellner v. Lowney, 145 N.H. 195, 198
(2000).
We applied this first theory of liability in Jacobson v. Yokens, Inc., 104
N.H. 331 (1962), a case that is similar to the instant case. The plaintiff in that
case was injured when she slipped and fell on the floor while attending a coffee
hour at the defendant’s restaurant. Jacobson, 104 N.H. at 332. Coffee and
cream were on the floor where she fell. Id. The floor was made of hard maple
and had been cleaned with “Super Shine-All” the day before the plaintiff fell.
Id. at 332-33. Thus cleaned, when dry, the floor “more than met the minimum
standards of slip resistance,” but when wet with coffee and cream, the floor
became dangerously slippery. Id. at 333.
We ruled that the trial court properly withdrew from the jury the
question of whether the coffee and cream were on the floor for a long enough
time to afford notice of their presence and opportunity to remove them. Id. at
334. We concluded, however, that the jury was properly asked to decide
whether the defendant was negligent for failing to make its premises
reasonably safe and to carry out its duties with reasonable care when there
was evidence that the defendant knew that the floor became dangerously
slippery when it was wet with coffee and cream and that such spillages
regularly occurred. Id. at 334-35. “While the question of knowledge on the
part of the defendant that coffee and cream had been spilled was withdrawn
from the jury, the issue remained as to whether the defendant exercised
reasonable care to guard against the risk of injury as a result of spillage on the
floor.” Id. at 334-35. We noted that “[t]he fact that coffee was spilled by one or
more of the guests rather than an employee would not relieve the defendant of
its duty to exercise care.” Id. at 335.
Having concluded that the jury instruction error was substantial, we
next consider whether the defendant has met its burden of showing that the
error did not affect the outcome below. In its brief, the defendant argues only
that the trial court’s instruction was correct. The defendant does not argue
6
that even if it were erroneous, the error did not affect the outcome. At best, the
defendant asserts that there was evidence to support a jury finding that the
defendant exercised reasonable care under the circumstances, even assuming
constructive knowledge. The defendant neither contends nor demonstrates,
however, that the evidence compelled such a finding. See Kallgren v.
Chadwick, 134 N.H. 110, 117 (1991). Accordingly, we reverse the jury’s
verdict.
Because the issue is likely to arise on remand, we next address the
plaintiff’s alternative argument that the court should abandon its traditional
approach to premises liability under which the burden of proof remains with
the plaintiff at all times and adopt an approach that shifts the burden to the
defendant. See Owens v. Publix Supermarkets, Inc., 802 So. 2d 315, 331 (Fla.
2001), overruled in part by Fla. Stat. Ann. § 768.0710 (LexisNexis 2008).
Under this approach, once the plaintiff proves that an injury occurred as a
result of a premises hazard or a transitory foreign substance in a self-service
store, the owner of the premises is presumed to have been negligent unless the
owner shows by a preponderance of evidence that it exercised reasonable care
in maintaining the premises under the circumstances. See id. Courts in
Colorado, Florida, Georgia and Kentucky have adopted this burden-shifting
approach. See Safeway Stores, Inc. v. Smith, 658 P.2d 255, 258 (Colo. 1983);
Owens, 802 So. 2d at 331; Davis v. Bruno’s Supermarkets, Inc., 587 S.E.2d
279, 280-81 (Ga. Ct. App. 2003); Lanier v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 99 S.W.3d
431, 436-37 (Ky. 2003). Courts in New Jersey and Oklahoma use a form of
this approach. See Wollerman v. Grand Union Stores, Inc., 221 A.2d 513, 514-
15 (N.J. 1966); Lingerfelt v. Winn-Dixie Tex. Inc., 645 P.2d 485, 489 (Okla.
1982).
We decline the plaintiff’s invitation to adopt the burden-shifting approach
to premises liability. “The doctrine of stare decisis demands respect in a
society governed by the rule of law, for when governing legal standards are
open to revision in every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of
judicial will with arbitrary and unpredictable results.” Jacobs v. Director, N.H.
Div. of Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 504 (2003) (quotations omitted). Thus,
when asked to reconsider a previous holding, the question is not whether we
would decide the issue differently de novo, but “whether the ruling has come to
be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement was for that very reason
doomed.” Id. at 504-05 (quotation omitted); see Planned Parenthood of
Southeastern PA. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 854 (1992). Several factors inform
our judgment, including: (1) whether the rule has proven to be intolerable
simply in defying practical workability; (2) whether the rule is subject to a kind
of reliance that would lend a special hardship to the consequences of
overruling; (3) whether related principles of law have so far developed as to
have left the old rule no more than a remnant of abandoned doctrine; and (4)
whether facts have so changed, or come to be seen so differently, as to have
7
robbed the old rule of significant application or justification. Jacobs, 149 N.H.
at 505; see Planned Parenthood, 505 U.S. at 854-55.
The plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that our traditional approach to
premises liability meets this stringent standard. Nothing in his argument
persuades us that our traditional approach to premises liability has proven
unworkable or was badly reasoned. Nor does the fact that, at most, six
jurisdictions have adopted the burden-shifting approach to premises liability
persuade us that related principles of law have so far developed as to have left
our traditional approach to premises liability no more than a remnant of
abandoned doctrine.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8