THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2008-551
JEAN I. FLAHERTY
v.
DAVID E. DIXEY & a.
Argued: January 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: February 19, 2009
Law Office of Thomas Morgan, PC, of Salem (Thomas Morgan on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Wensley & Jones, P.L.L.C., of Rochester (Franklin C. Jones on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. This case began in 1992 as a petition for the partition of real
estate between the plaintiff, Jean I. Flaherty, and the defendants, David E.
Dixey, Granite State National Bank and the Town of Ossipee. Neither the bank
nor the town is a party to the current matter in which defendant Dixey (the
defendant) appeals an order of the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.) denying his
motion to vacate a default and decree pro confesso, and to grant a new trial.
We vacate and remand.
The relevant facts are not in dispute. In the 1980s, the plaintiff and the
defendant purchased two adjoining lots in Ossipee as joint tenants with rights
of survivorship. In the late 1980s, the defendant moved onto one of the lots
(Lot 2) and resided there, first in a trailer and later in a log home constructed
with his own funds. He has resided there continuously since that time.
In 1992, the plaintiff brought a petition in the superior court seeking
partition of the real estate and monetary damages. In her petition the plaintiff
requested that Lot 2 be awarded to the defendant, and that the other lot (Lot 1)
be awarded to her. She also sought to recover money she allegedly spent
purchasing the two lots, as well as damages for being ousted from Lot 2. The
defendant, though apparently aware of the petition, filed no appearance or
answer and took no action relative to the petition. Approximately six months
after the petition was filed, the defendant was deemed to be in default and the
plaintiff was informed that judgment would be entered in her favor upon the
filing of a motion for entry of judgment pro confesso.
Six months later, the plaintiff had not filed a motion but did file a
proposed decree pro confesso. The proposed decree provided that both lots
would be awarded to the plaintiff, along with money damages. The Trial Court
(Gray, J.) signed the proposed decree, without amendment, in February 1993.
The defendant did not receive a copy of the decree, or notice that it had been
signed. The plaintiff never recorded the decree in the registry of deeds, the
defendant never paid the damages assessed, and the plaintiff never sought
execution on the damages award.
In July 2007, the defendant filed a motion seeking to vacate the 1993
default and decree and to grant a new trial, arguing, in part, that he was not
aware of the 1993 decree until May 2007. The plaintiff did not file a timely
appearance and answer to the defendant’s motion and, in October 2007, a
notice of default issued. Shortly thereafter, the plaintiff filed a motion for late
appearance and a motion for the removal of the default against her. Rather
than hold a hearing or rule upon the motions, on April 29, 2008, the trial court
issued an order in which it, sua sponte, applied the equitable doctrine of laches
and concluded that it barred the defendant’s attempt to reopen the case.
Following the denial of his motion to reconsider, the defendant appealed.
Before addressing the merits of the defendant’s appeal, we first deal with
his pending motion to strike. In that motion, the defendant argues that the
plaintiff’s brief relies upon a deposition that was not in the record before the
trial court and, therefore, both the deposition and any portions of the plaintiff’s
brief relying upon it should be stricken. In response, the plaintiff argues that
the defendant has also relied upon portions of the deposition, as well as other
information not in the record before the trial court. Therefore, she argues, the
motion to strike ought to be denied.
On appeal, we consider only evidence and documents presented to the
trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 13; Lake v. Sullivan, 145 N.H. 713, 717 (2001).
Accordingly, we grant the motion to strike. We also note that to the extent
2
either party relies upon documents or evidence not presented to the trial court,
we do not consider them.
Regarding the defendant’s claims on appeal, he raises numerous issues
all relating to a single inquiry – whether the trial court erred in sua sponte, and
without a hearing, applying the doctrine of laches to dismiss his attempt to
undo what he alleges was an impermissible decree in 1993. We conclude that
the trial court erred.
Laches is an equitable doctrine that bars litigation when a
potential plaintiff has slept on his rights. Laches is not a mere
matter of time, but is principally a question of the inequity of
permitting the claim to be enforced – an inequity founded on some
change in the conditions or relations of the property or the parties
involved. When the delay in bringing the suit is less than the
applicable statute of limitation period, laches will constitute a bar
to suit only if the delay was unreasonable and prejudicial. In
determining whether the doctrine should apply to bar a suit, the
court should consider the knowledge of the plaintiffs, the conduct
of the defendants, the interests to be vindicated, and the resulting
prejudice. The trial court has broad discretion in deciding whether
the circumstances justify its application, and unless we find that
the trial court’s decision is unsupported by the evidence or
erroneous as a matter of law, we will not overturn it.
Premier Capital v. Skaltsis, 155 N.H. 110, 118 (2007) (citations, quotations,
ellipsis, and brackets omitted).
We conclude that the trial court’s findings regarding the defendant’s
knowledge and the prejudice to the plaintiff are not supported by evidence in
the record. Thus, we conclude that there would be no inequity in permitting
him to pursue his claim.
Regarding the defendant’s knowledge, the trial court found that despite
his claim that he was not properly served, he was aware of the petition. While
it may be the case that he was aware of the petition, the trial court points to no
evidence and makes no ruling about whether he was aware of the alteration in
the requested relief and the extinguishment of his rights in Lot 2. Moreover,
the defendant avers that he periodically reviewed the registry of deeds between
1993 and 2007 and found no information indicating that his ownership rights
had been terminated. As such, the evidence does not support the trial court’s
conclusion that the defendant knew of the decree so as to justify the imposition
of laches.
Relative to the prejudice to the plaintiff, the trial court found that she
would be “significantly prejudiced” should the defendant’s motion to vacate the
3
default and decree and for a new trial be granted, but did not state why that is
so. There is, however, no evidence in the record indicating that the plaintiff
has ever treated this property as her own since the decree was signed in 1993.
There is no evidence that she attempted to reside there, or collect rent from the
defendant, or do anything else indicating that she owned the property free of
any ownership claim by the defendant. While there appear to have been
discussions between the parties about the property between 1993 and 2007,
there is nothing indicating that the plaintiff ever sought the removal of the
defendant from the property, or that she had informed him of the decree.
Furthermore, the defendant has paid to insure and maintain the property since
1993 and, though there is some dispute, he alleges to have paid all of the taxes
on the property. We thus do not agree that the evidence supports the
conclusion that the plaintiff would be prejudiced by the defendant’s challenge
to her claim of ownership. In short, there would be no inequity in permitting
the defendant the opportunity to prove that his rights to the property ought not
to have been eliminated in 1993.
The plaintiff alleges that she will be prejudiced because due to the lapse
of time, evidence regarding whether the “defendant had consent to enter Lot 2,
and on what terms” will be less reliable, if available at all. We do not agree that
the diminution in the value of the available evidence is sufficiently prejudicial
to cut short the defendant’s attempt to show that he is the rightful owner of the
property upon which he has resided for more than fifteen years.
The plaintiff also contends that she would be prejudiced by the fact that
the property has increased in value and, because she is the owner, removing it
from her ownership would constitute economic prejudice. While the plaintiff
might experience some prejudice as a result of a piece of valuable property
being removed from her ownership, as noted, the defendant has argued that
his inspections of the registry of deeds did not reveal that his rights in Lot 2
were ever terminated. Thus, he believed that his right as a joint tenant
continued to exist. As such, he would suffer prejudice by being prevented from
attempting to prove that he owns Lot 2. We, therefore, do not agree that the
potential prejudice against the plaintiff is sufficient to support the imposition of
laches. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred in applying the
doctrine of laches.
In the interest of judicial economy we also address the defendant’s claims
that the decree pro confesso and default against him ought to be vacated, and
a new trial granted. As noted previously, the plaintiff’s original prayers for
relief included the request that the defendant be awarded Lot 2. This request
was altered when the proposed decree was submitted.
As pointed out by the defendant, Superior Court Rule 24, which was in
effect in 1992, states: “No plaintiff shall have leave to amend, unless in
matters of form, after a default, until a notice upon the defendant, to show
4
cause why the amendment should not be allowed, has been served.” There is
no dispute that the defendant did not receive notice of the proposed decree
which was filed subsequent to his default. Further, it can hardly be gainsaid
that the amendment of the relief from a more or less equal partition of the
property to an award of the entire property along with a judgment of monetary
damages is something more than a “matter of form.” Thus, the defendant was
entitled to have been served with