THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Portsmouth Family Division
No. 2008-023
IN THE MATTER OF J.B. AND J.G.
Argued: May 21, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 6, 2008
Shaheen & Gordon, P.A., of Dover (Stacey Shaheen Bellabona on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Wensley & Jones, PLLC, of Rochester (Daniel J. Harkinson on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. This is an interlocutory appeal, see Sup. Ct. R. 8,
from rulings of the Portsmouth Family Division (DeVries, J.), entered on the
recommendation of a Marital Master (Fishman, M.), denying the respondent’s
motion to dismiss. We affirm and remand.
I
The record reveals the following facts. In November 2001, the
respondent, J.G., gave birth to a child, A.B., at Wentworth-Douglass Hospital
in Dover. The petitioner, J.B., was listed as the child’s father on the birth
certificate. The parties, who never married, also executed an affidavit of
paternity at the time of A.B.’s birth, recognizing the petitioner as the child’s
father. See RSA 5-C:24 (Supp. 2007).
Although the parties have not lived together since A.B.’s birth, the
petitioner has consistently maintained contact with the child. The respondent
acknowledges that from 2003 through September 2006, A.B. was in the
petitioner’s care three or four days each week and that in 2004, she obtained a
child support order against him.
After the parties had a disagreement about A.B.’s schooling in September
2006, the petitioner filed a parenting petition in the family division to establish
his parental rights and responsibilities. See RSA ch. 461-A (Supp. 2007). In
her reply, the respondent alleged that the petitioner was not A.B.’s biological
father. Thereafter, the trial court, in response to requests from both parties,
ordered paternity testing. See RSA 522:1 (2007). The results of that testing
demonstrated that the petitioner was not A.B.’s biological father. We have not
been asked to decide if the trial court erred in ordering such testing, but we
note our recent decision in In the Matter of Gendron & Plaistek, 157 N.H. ___,
___ (decided May 20, 2008) (where out-of-state acknowledgement of paternity
signed at birth established legal father, trial court erred in ordering genetic
marker testing).
After receiving these test results, the respondent moved to dismiss the
petitioner’s parental rights action. She argued that the petitioner did not fall
within the class of persons entitled to such rights under RSA chapter 461-A,
and that granting parental rights to the petitioner would violate her
constitutional right, as a fit natural parent, to raise and care for A.B., see In
the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 545, 547 (2003). After initially
granting the respondent’s motion, the trial court later reversed itself and
ordered an immediate resumption of contact between the petitioner and the
child. This interlocutory appeal followed.
II
In reviewing a trial court’s order on a motion to dismiss, “we assume the
truth of the facts alleged by the [petitioner] and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the [petitioner].” Tosta v. Bullis, 156
N.H. 763, 766 (2008) (quotation omitted). “We then engage in a threshold
inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the applicable law. Where
the facts alleged by a [petitioner] are reasonably susceptible of a construction
that would permit legal relief, we will uphold the denial of a motion to dismiss.”
Id. (quotation, brackets, and citation omitted).
The family division transferred the following questions for our
consideration, which guide our “threshold inquiry” in this case:
2
(1) May petitioner maintain a parenting petition under N.H. RSA
[chapter] 461-A, when he is neither a stepparent, biological parent, or
grandparent to the child?
(2) Would allowing this petitioner to maintain a parenting petition violate
respondent’s fundamental liberty interest to raise her son, as secured by
both [the] Federal and State Constitutions?
We answer the first question in the affirmative, the second question in the
negative, and accordingly affirm the trial court’s denial of the respondent’s
motion to dismiss.
III
We turn first to the statutory question presented by this appeal. “In
matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. We
look first to the statutory language itself, and where possible, we ascribe the
plain and ordinary meanings to words used.” Appeal of Regenesis Corp., 156
N.H. 445, 455 (2007) (quotation omitted). “We do not consider words and
phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the statute as a whole.
This enables us to better discern the legislature’s intent and to interpret
statutory language in light of the policy or purpose sought to be advanced by
the statutory scheme.” Grand China v. United Nat’l Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 429,
431 (2007) (citation omitted). “When interpreting two statutes that deal with a
similar subject matter, we construe them so that they do not contradict each
other, and so that they will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the
legislative purpose of the statutes.” Id.
RSA chapter 461-A, titled “Parental Rights and Responsibilities,” was
enacted by the legislature in 2005. RSA 461-A:6 lays out the framework within
which “parental rights and responsibilities” (formerly known as custody rights)
are to be allocated. The term “parental rights and responsibilities” is defined to
mean “all rights and responsibilities parents have concerning their child.” RSA
461-A:1, IV (emphasis added). The chapter does not explicitly define the term
“parent.” It does, however, contemplate an award of parental rights to a
stepparent or a grandparent, if in the best interests of the child. RSA 461-A:6,
V.
Neither party asserts that the petitioner could be considered a stepparent
or grandparent of A.B. In her brief, the respondent argues that the petitioner
also cannot be considered A.B.’s “parent” under RSA chapter 461-A. She urges
us, citing a dictionary only, to adopt a definition of “parent” as “one that begets
or brings forth offspring.” The respondent then reasons:
3
DNA testing conclusively proves that Petitioner is not A.B.’s
biological father, and in no way did Petitioner “beget” or “bring
forth” A.B. . . . Because Petitioner is not within any of the classes
of people who may be awarded parental rights and responsibilities
under N.H. RSA [chapter] 461-A, the Family Division incorrectly
failed to dismiss the Parenting Petition.
We cannot agree, however, that the legislature intended such a limited
definition of the term “parent” when it repeatedly employed that term in RSA
chapter 461-A. After considering the overarching statutory scheme in this
area, as we must, we observe that the legislature has set forth too many
alternative routes to establish parental status that do not require proof of
biological ties for us to give the respondent’s argument much weight. See, e.g.,
RSA ch. 170-B (Supp. 2007) (outlining adoption procedures); RSA 458:23
(2004) (legitimacy of child presumed when born of a marriage entered into in
good faith); RSA 168-A:2, I(a) (2002) (paternity may be established by
voluntarily petitioning court). The petitioner’s lack of a biological connection to
A.B. is therefore not fatal to his request for parental rights and responsibilities
under RSA chapter 461-A, so long as he alleges sufficient facts to establish his
status as a parent by other means.
The petitioner has met this threshold. We have long held that “the
establishment of paternity is ‘an essential prerequisite to imposing the
obligation for child support.’” In the Matter of Haller & Mills, 150 N.H. 427,
429 (2003) (quoting Watts v. Watts, 115 N.H. 186, 188 (1975)). Thus, when the
respondent actively sought and received a child support order against the
petitioner in 2004, she necessarily acknowledged his status as A.B.’s parent.
Further, we note that in this state, “[p]aternity [is] established upon the
filing of . . . [a]n affidavit of paternity with the clerk of the town where the birth
of the child occurred pursuant to RSA 5-C:24.” RSA 168-A:2, I(b) (Supp.
2007). An affidavit of paternity requires information about a child’s supposed
“natural” father, and must be signed by the child’s mother. RSA 5-C:25, I(b),
(c) (Supp. 2007). “The affidavit of paternity [has] the legal effect of establishing
paternity without requiring further action pursuant to this chapter, unless
rescinded pursuant to RSA 5-C:28.” RSA 168-A:2, I(b). RSA 5-C:28, I (Supp.
2007), in turn, provides: “A parent or legal guardian may request to rescind an
affidavit of paternity from the clerk of the city or town where the birth occurred
within 60 days of the filing of an affidavit of paternity unless an administrative
or judicial proceeding related to the child results in an earlier date.” After this
sixty-day rescission period has passed, “any challenge to the affidavit shall be
decided only by a court of competent jurisdiction.” RSA 5-C:28, III (Supp.
2007). In this case, no challenge to the parties’ affidavit of paternity has been
filed.
4
On the record before us, the petitioner has made sufficient allegations to
establish that he is a parent of A.B. To date, no court has entered an order
terminating the petitioner’s child support obligation, or rescinding the parties’
affidavit of paternity, see RSA 5-C:28, III. Consequently, we hold that the trial
court properly denied the respondent’s motion to dismiss, and that the
petitioner has standing to seek full parental rights and responsibilities under
RSA chapter 461-A, which shall be assigned in accordance with the best
interests of the child. See RSA 461-A:6.
We do not address the soundness of an order that would directly or
indirectly grant the respondent’s request, as set forth earlier in her proposed
order on her motion to dismiss, that the petitioner be “adjudicated to not be
the father of [A.B.],” as the issue is not before us. But see McRae v. McRae,
115 N.H. 353, 355 (1975) (allowing challenge to paternity after lengthy period
of acquiescence, and passage of several opportunities to raise the issue, “would
contravene the policy of this State’s law to protect the child and the spouse
from the belated resort to scientific proof” in an effort to terminate parental
responsibility).
IV
We next consider the second transferred question. Because the
petitioner has alleged sufficient facts to establish that he is a parent of A.B., we
presume that he currently enjoys rights equal to those of the respondent to
raise and care for the child. Cf. Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. at 547. As a
result, we see no unconstitutional intrusion on the respondent’s right to raise
and care for A.B. by the trial court’s continued consideration of the pending
parenting petition, and, therefore, hold that it correctly denied the respondent’s
motion to dismiss.
Affirmed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5