THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-095
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRIAN A. SHEPHERD
Argued: June 11, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 4, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Ann M. Rice, associate attorney general,
on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following his conviction for aggravated felonious sexual
assault, see RSA 632-A:2, I(b) (Supp. 2008), the defendant, Brian A. Shepherd,
appeals the decision of the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) denying his motion for
a new trial. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following. The defendant and E.T. attended high
school together and became friends. They never dated, but E.T. was interested
in dating the defendant. The defendant eventually moved to Massachusetts to
live with his father, but the defendant and E.T. saw each other occasionally.
On December 1, 2003, the defendant was in New Hampshire visiting his
mother. He made arrangements to see E.T. E.T., the defendant, and some
other friends went to the defendant’s mother’s house, where they watched
television, smoked marijuana, and had dinner. They purchased beer and went
to Matthew MacDuff’s deceased father’s trailer. After arriving at the trailer,
they smoked marijuana while waiting for other guests. Four guests then left to
purchase more beer, leaving the defendant and E.T. at the trailer. E.T. and the
defendant began kissing on the couch, and E.T. expressed an interest in having
sex with the defendant, but they did not have a condom. Prior to that evening,
E.T. and the defendant had spoken several times about having sex. They
agreed that if the defendant obtained a condom, they would have sex later that
night.
At around 10:00 p.m., several other guests arrived and everyone began
drinking beer and playing drinking games, which involved encouraging each
other to drink. They also smoked more marijuana. Everyone became
intoxicated. After the drinking games, they continued talking and watching
television for approximately three hours, socializing in the living room and the
bathroom.
E.T. testified that she drank several beers and smoked marijuana,
causing her memory of the evening to be impaired. She testified that after
socializing in the bathroom, she returned to the living room to sit on the couch.
The defendant “got up to go get another beer, and [she] watched him walk into
the kitchen, and that was it.” E.T. testified that she could not remember
anything after that moment. Her next memory occurred when she woke up on
a bed, laying on her back, with two men in the room. She testified that one
man was having vaginal intercourse with her and another man’s penis was
inside her mouth. She heard someone say “I think she’s going to pass out,”
and recognized MacDuff’s voice. E.T. testified that she “[c]losed [her] eyes and
hoped it was some kind of bad dream.” She testified that her next memory was
when other people entered the bedroom: “there was lots of commotion, like the
door was open, and there was lots of commotion.” E.T. was unable to move at
that point and did not recall getting dressed. E.T. testified that she
remembered waking up again alone in the bedroom and going to find the
defendant. The defendant was sleeping in another bedroom and E.T. got into
the bed where the defendant and MacDuff were sleeping.
The next morning, the defendant drove E.T. home. E.T. testified that
after she went home, she began thinking about the night before and vaguely
remembered the sexual activity. She initially thought the two men in the room
were MacDuff and Ron Olson. She told a friend that she was adamant that the
defendant was not involved. E.T. went to the Exeter Police Station and gave a
statement as to what she remembered. She also complained of vaginal pain
2
and went to see Dr. Gwendolyn Gladstone for a sexual assault examination and
interview.
On December 8, 2003, Detective Mulholland interviewed the defendant at
the police station. The defendant recounted the events of the evening and
stated that nothing happened in the bedroom, and that he and MacDuff went
into the bedroom to check on E.T., who was passed out on the bed. As the
interview progressed, the defendant stated that he received fellatio from E.T.
After this interview, Mulholland believed the two men in the room were the
defendant and MacDuff. Mulholland then interviewed MacDuff, who eventually
indicated that the defendant had sexual intercourse with E.T. while he received
oral sex. Mulholland invited the defendant to the police station to answer more
questions. He asked the defendant if there was anything else he wanted to say,
to which the defendant indicated that he had consensual vaginal intercourse
with E.T. that evening.
The defendant and MacDuff were each charged with aggravated felonious
sexual assault, alleging that they engaged in sexual penetration while E.T. was
“physically helpless to resist.” See RSA 632-A:2, I(b). The defendant and
MacDuff were tried separately. At the defendant’s trial, the theory of defense
was that E.T. consented to the sexual activity.
The State relied upon the testimony of E.T. and Olson as evidence of
what occurred in the bedroom. Olson testified that the defendant, MacDuff,
and E.T. went into the bedroom after several hours of drinking. He testified
that he believed the defendant and E.T. were having sex because “[t]hat’s what
she . . . seemed like she wanted.” Olson and some other guests went to the
bedroom and found the door closed and locked. Olson pushed open the door,
but the defendant’s foot blocked it. Olson observed the defendant having sex
with E.T. while MacDuff lay on the floor. Once Olson entered the room, the
defendant moved away from E.T., causing her legs to fall to the side. E.T. did
not move or make any effort to cover herself.
MacDuff, who testified for the defense under a grant of use immunity,
said that E.T. “had been flirting with [the defendant] throughout the whole
night, and pretty much just about everybody else in the house, but it was
mostly focused on [the defendant] and then moved on to both [MacDuff and the
defendant].” He testified, inconsistent with his prior interview, that while in the
bedroom, E.T. discussed participating in sexual activity with both him and the
defendant. MacDuff testified that E.T. engaged in oral sex with him and then
sexual intercourse with the defendant, during which time she was alert and
responsive. He testified: “I remember hearing [E.T.] fully conscious because
she was making noises and enjoying herself.” MacDuff testified that he then
crawled to the floor and fell asleep.
3
Following four days of trial, the jury returned a verdict of guilty. The trial
court sentenced the defendant to serve three to six years in prison.
Subsequent to the defendant’s conviction and before MacDuff went to
trial, counsel for the State advised MacDuff’s counsel that he had learned that
Dr. Gladstone had redacted portions of the report the defendant had received
before trial. The State submitted an unredacted copy of the report to the
Superior Court (Coffey, J.) for in camera review. The trial court found certain
evidence discoverable, permitted MacDuff’s defense counsel an opportunity to
review the unredacted report, and ruled during MacDuff’s trial that certain
statements made by E.T. during direct examination opened the door to
questions regarding the redacted information. Shortly after the introduction of
this information, E.T. refused to participate in the trial and the charge against
MacDuff was dismissed.
The defendant filed a motion for in camera review of the unredacted
report. The defendant further requested a hearing to examine Dr. Gladstone
about the contents of the report and circumstances of the redactions. The
Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) granted the defendant’s requests and held a
hearing. At the hearing, Dr. Gladstone testified that she regularly conducts
sexual assault examinations. As part of such examinations, she uses a rape
kit supplied by the New Hampshire Attorney General’s Office. On December 3,
2003, she conducted an examination of E.T., and produced five pages of
“progress notes.” She submitted the notes to the police, but intentionally
omitted the bottom half of page one and all of page two. These pages included
reference to E.T.’s history of depression, her treating therapists, and her
request that Dr. Gladstone delay informing her mother as “[E.T.] expects her
mother to be angry with her.” Dr. Gladstone omitted these pages believing that
the information was privileged. She also omitted the page numbers from the
report. The information contained in Dr. Gladstone’s complete report resulted
in the discovery of other mental health records from Deborah Addario at
Seacoast Mental Health.
Following the hearing, the defendant moved to set aside the verdict and
for a new trial based upon the newly discovered evidence. On March 6, 2007,
the trial court granted the motion, concluding: “[T]he omitted evidence led to
the discovery of mental health records that provided information regarding the
victim’s state of mind. The defendant could have used the specific diagnoses
contained in those records to rebut the victim’s claim of non-consensual sexual
intercourse.” The trial court then granted the defendant’s request for in
camera review of E.T.’s mental health counseling records from a number of
other sources. The trial court also granted the State’s request for a Daubert
hearing regarding the diagnosis contained within the records. See Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
4
In November 2007, the parties deposed Deborah Addario regarding her
diagnosis of E.T. The defendant learned that an evaluation of E.T. included an
assessment of “[p]oor judgment or impulsive behavior resulting in dangerous or
risky activities that could lead to injury or getting into trouble, more than other
youth.” Addario also checked boxes on a form indicating that E.T. has certain
behaviors consistent with Oppositional Defiance Disorder (ODD). ODD may
include the behavior of “blam[ing] others for mistakes,” but this box was not
checked on the form. Because Dr. Walter Wingate approved the diagnosis of
ODD, the defense then requested his treatment records of E.T. After reviewing
the records, the trial court denied the defendant’s request, stating: “While the
doctor has diagnosed the victim with Oppositional Defiance Disorder, he
specifically noted that this diagnosis did not include the criteria indicating the
victim blames others for her conduct.”
In January 2008, the trial court issued its final order regarding the
admissibility of E.T.’s mental health status and reversed itself on the motion for
new trial. The trial court concluded that the records indicating that E.T. had
“poor judgment or impulsive behavior” did not include a diagnosis – instead
this language was contained within a pre-printed assessment form. The trial
court concluded: “While the conduct of Dr. Gladstone in redacting portions of
the victim’s medical records constituted a violation of the defendant’s rights to
discover relevant evidence, there are other avenues available to address this
indiscretion.” The trial court concluded that “Dr. Gladstone’s conduct alone
does not require a new trial.” The defendant filed a motion for reconsideration,
which was denied.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion for a new trial because the information meets the newly discovered
evidence standard. Alternatively, he argues the non-disclosure of this
information violated his due process rights under Brady and Laurie. See Brady
v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963); State v. Laurie, 139 N.H. 325 (1995).
Because the standard of review in a due process analysis is more
favorable to the defendant, we first address the defendant’s argument that the
non-disclosure violated his due process rights. We first address the
defendant’s claim under the New Hampshire Constitution, citing federal
opinions for guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 232-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 15 “imposes on the prosecutor the duty to disclose
evidence favorable to the accused where the evidence is material either to guilt
or to punishment.” State v. Dewitt, 143 N.H. 24, 33 (1998) (quotation omitted).
In Brady, the United States Supreme Court held that “suppression by the
prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon request violates due
process where the evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment,
irrespective of the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution.” Brady, 373 U.S.
5
at 87. The Court later stated that this rule applies where only a general
request for exculpatory information was made. United States v. Agurs, 427
U.S. 97, 106-07 (1976). Disclosure is required in this circumstance because
an incomplete response to a request for exculpatory information gives the
impression that the evidence does not exist. Laurie, 139 N.H. at 328. “In
reliance on this misleading representation, the defense might abandon lines of
independent investigation, defenses, or trial strategies that it otherwise would
have pursued.” Id.
Generally, to secure a new trial pursuant to the Due Process Clauses of
the State and Federal Constitutions, a defendant must prove that the
prosecution withheld evidence that is favorable and material. Dewitt, 143 N.H.
at 33; see United States v. Bagley, 473 U.S. 667, 674 (1985). It is the
defendant’s burden to prove the evidence is favorable. See Laurie, 139 N.H. at
329-30. As we discussed in Laurie, however, our constitutional analysis differs
from that under the Federal Constitution regarding when the defendant has
the burden to prove materiality. Under the Federal Constitution, the defendant
has the burden to prove both that the evidence is favorable and material. See
id. at 328. As to materiality, the defendant must demonstrate “a reasonable
probability that, had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of
the proceeding would have been different.” Bagley, 473 U.S. at 682. In Laurie,
we found that this standard imposed too severe a burden upon the defendant
because “the prosecutor decides which information must be disclosed to a
defendant in compliance with constitutional mandates.” Laurie, 139 N.H. at
329. As a result, we held that, “[u]pon a showing by the defendant that
favorable, exculpatory evidence has been knowingly withheld by the
prosecution, the burden shifts to the State to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the undisclosed evidence would not have affected the verdict.” Id. at 330.
Thus, under Laurie, the defendant has the initial burden to show that
the evidence withheld by the State was favorable. Id. “Favorable evidence is
that which is admissible, likely to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence,
or otherwise relevant to the preparation or presentation of the defense.”
Dewitt, 143 N.H. at 33. Favorable evidence may include impeachment
evidence. See Laurie, 139 N.H. at 327.
Once the defendant proves that the evidence is favorable, the next issue
is whether the State knowingly withheld the evidence. If the defendant carries
this burden, there is a presumption that the evidence is material and the
burden shifts to the State to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the
undisclosed evidence would not have affected the verdict. See State v. Lucius,
140 N.H. 60, 63-64 (1995). If, however, the defendant fails to prove the State
knowingly withheld the evidence, then the defendant retains the burden to
prove that the evidence is material. See Dewitt, 143 N.H. at 35. When the
defendant retains the burden to prove materiality, we apply the federal
6
standard; i.e., the defendant must demonstrate “a reasonable probability that,
had the evidence been disclosed to the defense, the result of the proceeding
would have been different.” Bagley, 473 U.S. at 682; see Dewitt, 143 N.H. at
33.
We initially address whether the defendant here met his burden to prove
that the undisclosed information is favorable. The undisclosed evidence
included information that E.T. has a history of depression and had recently
seen mental health counselors. As we have stated, “Information pertaining to a
witness’s mental stability may be relevant to credibility, and therefore useful as
impeachment evidence at trial.” Dewitt, 143 N.H. at 34 (citations omitted). On
cross-examination, the unredacted report could have led the defense to
question E.T. as to whether she has “poor judgment or impulsive behavior.”
Consistent with our decision in Dewitt, we conclude that the undisclosed
evidence was favorable. Id. at 35. “[W]e recognize that a witness’s mental
health may be relevant to that witness’s credibility, and where, as here, the
witness is adverse to the defendant, such information is sufficiently favorable
to the defendant to trigger the State’s obligation to disclose it.” Id.
Although we have recently stated that the trial court may prohibit cross-
examination of a witness as to his or her mental health, see State v. Fichera,
153 N.H. 588, 601 (2006), our inquiry in this due process analysis is not
whether the evidence is admissible, but instead whether it is favorable — i.e.,
whether it would have helped the defense in the preparation or presentation of
its case, see Dewitt, 143 N.H. at 33. Although the defendant may not have
been able to introduce evidence of E.T.’s mental health history at trial, the
evidence is sufficiently favorable to require disclosure. We conclude that the
defendant has met his burden to show that the evidence within Dr. Gladstone’s
report was favorable evidence.
We next consider whether the State knowingly withheld the exculpatory
evidence. First, the State does not contest that Dr. Gladstone’s report falls
within the State’s duty to disclose under Laurie. Second, while Dr. Gladstone
testified that she redacted the information because it was privileged, the
privilege issue was not raised on appeal. Third, even if Dr. Gladstone believed
that the evidence was privileged, she could have obscured the privileged
portions with a marker, allowing the document to remain physically intact,
thereby putting the reader on notice that information had been redacted.
Instead, rearranging the notes and omitting page numbers gave the false
impression that the report was complete.
Because the State knowingly withheld favorable evidence, the burden
then shifts to the State to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that “the
undisclosed evidence would not have affected the verdict.” Laurie, 139 N.H. at
330. We cannot conclude that the State has met this burden. The
7
uncontroverted evidence at trial included that E.T. and the defendant went to a
party together where they both drank heavily and smoked marijuana. They
discussed having sexual intercourse prior to the party and intended to have
sexual intercourse that evening if the defendant could find a condom. Olson
testified that E.T. was flirting with the defendant all evening and he observed
her walk into the bedroom with the defendant and MacDuff following her. He
assumed that E.T. and the defendant were having sex because “[t]hat’s what
she . . . seemed like she wanted.”
The State’s case hinged on E.T.’s credibility and whether she accurately
described her level of consciousness. The undisclosed evidence could have led
to a line of impeachment questioning that may have affected the verdict. At
trial, defense counsel asked E.T., “So could it have been your master plan to
get [the defendant] drunk and get him into the room and have sex with him?”,
to which E.T. replied in the negative, saying, “I’m not that kind of a person.”
This answer begs the question as to what kind of a person E.T. is. Provided the
defendant had the evidence of E.T.’s mental health history, he would have had
a good faith basis to ask her if she is the type of person who has poor judgment
or makes impulsive decisions. The defendant could have asked her if in fact
she is the type of person who would participate in risky sexual behavior. The
jury could have then observed her answers and demeanor to assess her
credibility.
Moreover, the redacted information included E.T.’s reaction to Dr.
Gladstone informing her mother of the sexual activity:
[E.T.] feels safe going to spend time for a few days at [her friend’s]
house and wants to get some clothes from her house [first]. She
asked me [Dr. Gladstone] to inform her mother of what happened
but asked me not to do so until she picked up her clothes in order
to avoid a confrontation. She expects her mother to be angry with
her “we don’t have a good relationship” and said that if any of the
medication would cost her mother “a penny, she won’t pay for it.”
Had the defense been aware of this statement, it likely could have elicited it
from E.T. or Dr. Gladstone and then at least argued to the jury that it is
unusual for a sexual assault victim’s mother to be angry with the victim.
Although we recognize that the State’s evidence at trial was not limited to
E.T.’s testimony, and thus the verdict did not rest solely on her credibility, we
cannot conclude that the other evidence was of an overwhelming nature so that
the undisclosed impeachment evidence would not have affected the verdict.
The State’s other evidence included Olson’s observations of E.T. lying on the
bed motionless and the defendant’s statements to the police. As to Olson’s
observations, there was no dispute at trial that E.T. was intoxicated. The issue
8
was whether or not she was physically helpless to resist. E.T.’s behavior, once
Olson opened the bedroom door, could have been consistent with both
intoxication or helplessness. Moreover, the defendant originally denied any
sexual activity with E.T. He later changed his story, claiming the sexual
activity was consensual. The defendant, however, was aware that E.T. was
alleging that she was raped, and thus any decision to deny sexual activity
could have been based upon his fear of being charged with the alleged rape.
Given the State’s heavy burden, we conclude that the defendant’s due
process rights entitle him to a new trial. Because we reverse based upon the
defendant’s argument pursuant to his due process rights under the State
Constitution, we need not address the defendant’s arguments pursuant to the
Federal Constitution or the newly discovered evidence standard.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9