THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Nashua District Court
No. 2008-868
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JAMES KELLY
Argued: October 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: November 17, 2009
Orville B. Fitch, II, acting attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, James Kelly, appeals an order of the
Nashua District Court (Bamberger, J.) imposing his previously deferred
sentence. We affirm.
The record evidences the following facts. In 2006, the defendant was
found guilty of violating a protective order. He was sentenced to serve twelve
months in jail, with the sentence deferred for one year. In August 2008, the
defendant was found guilty of violating a protective order for conduct that
occurred in October 2006. He appealed the 2008 conviction to this court; his
appeal is currently pending.
Based only upon the 2008 conviction, the State asked the court to
impose the previously deferred sentence. The defendant argued that the court
could not impose the deferred sentence based upon the 2008 conviction alone
because his appeal of that conviction was still pending. The trial court
disagreed, and imposed the deferred sentence. This appeal followed.
The sole issue for our review is whether the trial court erred by imposing
the previously deferred sentence based only upon a non-final conviction. We
review a trial court’s imposition of a deferred sentence for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. See State v. Gibbs, 157 N.H. 538, 540 (2008) (standard
of review for decisions to impose suspended sentences).
We have previously held that there is a condition of good behavior
implied in deferred and suspended sentences. State v. Auger, 147 N.H. 752,
753 (2002). “Good behavior” is limited to conduct conforming to the law. State
v. Palermo, 146 N.H. 144, 146 (2001). A deferred sentence may be imposed
upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence of a violation of the condition
upon which the sentence was deferred. See Gibbs, 157 N.H. at 540 (referring
to suspended sentences). “To impose a suspended or deferred sentence on the
ground that the defendant has violated . . . [a] condition of good behavior, a
trial court must find that the defendant engaged in criminal conduct.” Auger,
147 N.H. at 753. When a sentence has been deferred upon a condition of good
behavior, the State satisfies its burden of proof “either by establishing the fact
of a criminal conviction for the acts which constitute the violation or by proof of
the commission of the underlying acts.” Gibbs, 157 N.H. at 540 (quotation
omitted; emphases added).
The defendant argues that, in this case, evidence of his non-final
conviction was insufficient, standing alone, to prove that he violated the
condition of good behavior. Absent “proof of the commission of the underlying
acts,” he argues, the trial court erred by imposing the deferred sentence. Id.
(quotation omitted); see Moody v. Cunningham, 127 N.H. 550, 553-54 (1986)
(holding evidence of criminal indictment was insufficient, standing alone, to
justify imposing suspended sentence; “[i]n the absence of a criminal conviction,
the fact-finder must make an independent determination that the defendant
committed the alleged violations”).
This precise issue is one of first impression in New Hampshire. We,
therefore, look to other jurisdictions for guidance. See State v. Legere, 157
N.H. 746, 752 (2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1623 (2009). In the related
context of revocation of probation, “[t]he great weight of authority in this
country permits the revocation of probation based solely upon the probationer’s
2
subsequent criminal conviction, even though that conviction is pending on
appeal.” Hutchinson v. State, 438 A.2d 1335, 1336 (Md. 1982) (citing cases);
see United States v. Gentile, 610 F.2d 541, 542 (8th Cir. 1979) (“Federal courts
have consistently ruled that a criminal conviction provides sufficient grounds
for revocation of probation even though an appeal from the conviction is still
pending.”); see also 6 W. LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 26.10(c), at 890
(3d ed. 2007). The reason for this rule was well stated in Roberson v. State of
Connecticut, 501 F.2d 305, 308 (2d Cir. 1974):
A criminal conviction after a trial at which the probationer was
entitled to all the protections afforded a criminal defendant
including formal rules of evidence, the right to assigned counsel if
indigent, and the requirement that the state establish guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt certainly affords a more than sufficient basis
for revocation of probation, even if that conviction is still awaiting
appellate review.
“The rationale is that a judgment of conviction is presumed correct and that a
probationer should not be insulated from having his probation revoked during
the frequently extended process of appellate review.” 6 LaFave, supra
§ 26.10(c), at 890-91 (quotations omitted).
We find the reasoning of the Roberson court persuasive, and, therefore,
hold that a trial court does not err by imposing a deferred sentence based
solely upon evidence of a conviction that has been appealed. While we
recognize that there is a “risk of unfairness” to a defendant whose freedom is
taken away because of a conviction that is later reversed, we find competing
policies more compelling under these circumstances. Roberson, 505 F.2d at
308. As one court has explained:
To hold otherwise would adversely affect the administration
of our criminal justice system, to the potential detriment of both
the public and the probationer. If we recognized a right to
suspension of a revocation order during the pendency of the appeal
from the subsequent conviction, we would run the risk of releasing
repeat offenders into the community to await the outcome of the
appellate process. To avoid this, the authorities would rely more
heavily on the less formal probation revocation hearings held
before trial, at which the [State] do[es] not have the burden of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt, evidentiary rules are relaxed and
following which the probationer could be incarcerated immediately.
People v. Avery, 225 Cal. Rptr. 319, 322 (Ct. App. 1986) (citations omitted); see
Roberson, 501 F.2d at 308-09 (commenting that it would create a
“constitutional anomaly” to treat a probationer who had already received a full
3
criminal trial on an offense justifying revocation of probation more favorably
than a probationer who is found to have committed such an offense on the
basis of the independent evidence introduced at a relatively informal revocation
hearing).
To the extent that the defendant argues that our decision in Stapleford v.
Perrin, 122 N.H. 1083 (1982), precludes us from adopting the Roberson rule,
he is mistaken. The issue in Stapleford was whether the defendant had
received sufficient due process in a proceeding in which the prosecution sought
to bring forward a previous conviction that had been marked “Continued for
Sentence.” Stapleford, 122 N.H. at 1086-87 (quotation omitted). Because the
process afforded the defendant did not include the procedural protections we
held were mandatory, we vacated the trial court’s decision and remanded for
the court to give the defendant the process he was due. Id. at 1089.
One of the reasons the process afforded the Stapleford defendant was
constitutionally infirm was that the State offered “no evidence” to support its
motion, but relied merely upon the prosecutor’s statement reciting the
defendant’s arrest record and the fact that he had been convicted of a
misdemeanor and that this conviction was on appeal. Id. at 1086. Contrary to
the defendant’s assertions, in Stapleford we never addressed the merits of the
trial court’s decision; we never opined about whether actual evidence of,
instead of a prosecutor’s unsupported statement about, a conviction pending
appeal constituted sufficient proof that a defendant violated a condition of good
behavior. Stapleford, therefore, provides no support for the defendant’s
position.
Alternatively, the defendant argues that even if a non-final conviction is
sufficient proof that a defendant has violated a condition of good behavior, we
should require trial courts to stay imposing a deferred or suspended sentence
until the conviction becomes final. This is necessary, he asserts, to “prevent a
defendant from serving an imposed sentence based on a conviction this Court
later finds illegitimate.” He concedes that he has not yet served his deferred
sentence because he was released on bail pending the instant appeal.
We decline the defendant’s invitation to adopt his proposed general rule.
As the State rightly argues: “To the extent a defendant facing a deferred or
suspended sentence has unique circumstances justifying a stay, he is free to
petition the trial court or this Court to ask for one.” We also decline his
invitation to issue an advisory opinion regarding the impact that a reversal of
his 2008 conviction would have upon his deferred sentence. The defendant’s
appeal of the 2008 conviction remains pending. “This court . . . decides actual
cases, not hypothetical ones.” In the Matter of Jacobson & Tierney, 150 N.H.
513, 519 (2004) (Nadeau, J., dissenting).
4
At oral argument, the defendant contended that the trial court erred by
refusing to allow him to attack the 2008 conviction collaterally. To the extent
that this argument differs from those we have addressed, it is insufficiently
developed for our review. See State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003). To
the extent that the defendant implied at oral argument that the process he
received at the deferred sentence hearing was constitutionally infirm, he has
not briefed this argument, and we deem it waived. See State v. Fortier, 146
N.H. 784, 792 (2001).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5