THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Salem Family Division
No. 2008-655
IN THE MATTER OF JEFFREY M. GRAY AND JANETTE L. GRAY
Submitted: October 8, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2010
Jeffrey Gray, by brief, pro se.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (James W. Kennedy, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the New Hampshire Department of Health and
Human Services.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Jeffrey Gray, appeals an order of the Salem
Family Division (Ryan, J.) finding that he failed to comply with the family
division’s July 8, 2005 Uniform Support Order. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Jeffrey Gray and Janette Gray
are the parents of two children; they divorced in August 2002. In October
2004, the Salem Family Division (DiMeo, J.) awarded custody of the children to
the children’s aunt. In a separate order, the family division ordered the father
and mother to pay child support directly to the aunt. They appealed the
custody order.
While the appeal was pending, the father moved to modify the support
order. On July 8, 2005, the Salem Family Division (Korbey, J.) modified the
order so that the father was to make his child support payments directly to the
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). The
father did not appeal.
In January 2006, we held that under RSA 458:17 the family division
lacked statutory authority to award custody to the aunt. In the Matter of
Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. 200, 204-05 (2006). Within a month of our
decision, the aunt obtained a guardianship over the children in Maine. In
March 2006, the Salem Family Division (Korbey, J.) ceded jurisdiction over the
custody of the children to the State of Maine. The father appealed that
decision.
In September 2006, while that appeal was pending, the father moved to
vacate the October 2004 support order. He argued that after our decision in
Jeffrey G., the family division did not change the support order to reflect the
change in custody. He contended that it was unreasonable to continue child
support payments when the guardianship was on appeal to both the Maine and
New Hampshire Supreme Courts. On November 15, 2006, the Family Division
(DeVries, J.) denied the father’s motion without prejudice. The court
suspended the enforcement and collection of his obligation, with the obligation
continuing to accrue, while the appellate courts determined to whom he owed a
duty of support. DHHS moved for reconsideration.
In an unpublished order dated November 28, 2006, we affirmed the
family division’s order ceding jurisdiction over the children’s custody to Maine.
Petition of Jeffrey G., No. 2006-0349 (N.H. November 28, 2006). On January
30, 2007, the Family Division (Hurd, J.) partially granted DHHS’s motion to
reconsider suspending enforcement of the support order and scheduled a
hearing. At the hearing, the family division vacated its suspension of the
enforcement of the support order. On February 28, 2007, the father filed a
“notice to court, office of child support enforcement, and child support referee”
stating that the family division lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the
issues of custody and support. The Family Division (Hurd, J.) granted DHHS’s
motion to dismiss the notice.
On April 29, 2008, DHHS moved for the father to show cause why he had
not complied with the support order. On August 12, 2008, the Salem Family
Division issued an order finding the father in contempt because he had failed
to comply with the support order. As of July 25, 2008, the father owed
$29,901.84 in child support. This appeal followed.
2
I. Salem Family Division’s Authority to Enforce the Support Order
The father raises twenty-one issues on appeal, including several
jurisdictional arguments stemming from his claim that the court’s authority to
award support pursuant to RSA 458:17 (2004) (now codified at RSA 461-A:14, I
(Supp. 2009)) is dependent upon its authority to award custody. Therefore, he
argues, the support order is unenforceable because in Jeffrey G. we held that
the Salem Family Division did not have jurisdiction to award custody of the
children to the aunt. DHHS counters that the father’s arguments are barred
by res judicata and collateral estoppel because he failed to appeal the family
division’s earlier decisions. Alternatively, DHHS argues that support and
custody are independent, so that the family division retained authority to
enforce the support order.
We first address whether the father’s failure to appeal the family
division’s previous rulings bars his jurisdictional arguments in this appeal.
Subject matter jurisdiction is “[j]urisdiction over the nature of the case and the
type of relief sought; the extent to which a court can rule on the conduct of
persons or the status of things.” Black’s Law Dictionary 931 (9th ed. 2009). In
other words, it is “a tribunal’s authority to adjudicate the type of controversy
involved in the action.” Shoop v. Kittitas County, 30 P.3d 529, 532 (Wash. Ct.
App. 2001), aff’d on other grounds, 65 P.3d 1194 (Wash. 2003). “A court lacks
power to hear or determine a case concerning subject matters over which it has
no jurisdiction.” Daine v. Daine, 157 N.H. 426, 428 (2008) (bracket and
quotation omitted). A party may challenge subject matter jurisdiction “at any
time during the proceeding, including on appeal,” and may not waive subject
matter jurisdiction. Close v. Fisette, 146 N.H. 480, 483 (2001). Therefore, the
father may raise these arguments on appeal.
To determine whether the family division had subject matter jurisdiction
over the father’s support order, we must interpret the relevant statutes. When
undertaking statutory interpretation, “[w]e first examine the language found in
the statute and where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
words used.” Appeal of Garrison Place, 159 N.H. __, __ (decided December 16,
2009) (quotation omitted). “When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indications of legislative
intent.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Courts can neither ignore the plain language
of the legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not see fit to include.”
Appeal of Astro Spectacular, 138 N.H. 298, 300 (1994) (quotation omitted).
“We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the context of the overall
statutory scheme.” Coco v. Jaskunas, 159 N.H. __, __ (decided December 16,
2009) (quotation omitted).
3
The plain language of RSA chapter 490-D (Supp. 2009) grants subject
matter jurisdiction to the family division over the father’s support order. See
Daine, 157 N.H. at 427 (finding “court’s authority in matters of marriage and
divorce is strictly statutory”). Pursuant to RSA chapter 490-D, the legislature
has granted the family division jurisdiction over “[p]etitions for divorce, nullity
of marriage, alimony, custody of children, support, and to establish paternity.”
RSA 490-D:2, I. The family division’s authority includes the power to address
child support in divorce proceedings. See RSA 458:17. The family division’s
decrees remain in effect until they are judicially modified, unless the court has
provided for earlier cessation of payments or the child support obligation
terminates by operation of law. In the Matter of Feddersen & Cannon, 149
N.H. 194, 200 (2003). The family division’s jurisdiction continues “with respect
to all subsequent proceedings which arise out of the original cause of action.”
Daine, 157 N.H. at 427-28 (quotation omitted). Therefore, the family division
retained the ability to modify and enforce the support order.
The father, however, argues that our decision in Jeffrey G. terminated his
obligation to comply with the support order. We disagree. In Jeffrey G., we
only considered whether the family division had statutory authority to award
custody of the minor children to the aunt. Moreover, we unequivocally stated
that “the trial court had jurisdiction to determine custody of the children
pursuant to RSA 458:17.” Jeffrey G., 153 N.H. at 204. We went on to hold
that the court “did not have authority to grant custody to [the aunt] in this
context.” Id. at 205. This was based on RSA 458:17, VI, which “identifies only
two classes of third parties, grandparents and stepparents, who may be
awarded custody if the court determines that such an award is in the best
interests of the child.” Id. at 203-04 (quotation omitted). Because the aunt did
not fall into either of those two classes of third parties, the family division could
not award her custody in this case. Id. at 205. Our decision did not divest the
family division of jurisdiction over the issues of custody or support; we merely
held that the family division could not award custody to the aunt. Id.
We conclude that the family division retained jurisdiction over the issue
of child support after it ceded jurisdiction over the custody dispute to Maine.
The Uniform Interstate Family Support Act, codified at RSA chapter 546-B
(2007), governs support orders. It provides that the family division “has
continuing, exclusive jurisdiction over a child support order . . . [a]s long as
this state remains the residence of the obligor.” RSA 546-B:7, I. Under the
plain language of the statute, a New Hampshire court retains jurisdiction over
a child support order even when the children move to a different state.
Therefore, although the family division no longer has jurisdiction over custody,
it may enforce the support order because the record reflects that the father, the
obligor, continues to reside in New Hampshire.
4
II. Family Division’s Order Finding the Father in Contempt
The father raises several challenges to the family division’s decree that he
is not in compliance with the support order. First, he argues that the family
division unsustainably exercised its discretion when it found that he was
voluntarily underemployed and not in compliance with the support order.
Next, he contends that the court erred in requiring him to submit income tax
returns for 2001 to 2005 because they do not reflect his present income.
Finally, he challenges the court’s finding that he is $29,901.84 in arrears.
DHHS contends that the Salem Family Division properly found he was
voluntarily underemployed and that he failed to comply with the support order.
We agree.
“The court’s powers in custody, maintenance, and education of children
in divorce and separation cases are conferred entirely by statute. We afford
broad discretion to the trial court in divorce matters, and will not disturb the
trial court’s rulings regarding child support absent an unsustainable exercise
of discretion or an error of law.” In the Matter of Johnson & Johnson, 158 N.H.
555, 558 (2009) (quotation omitted). “The party challenging the court’s order
has the burden of showing that the order was improper and unfair.” Id.
(quotation omitted). The father has not met this burden.
We cannot conclude that the family division unsustainably exercised its
discretion when it found the father failed to comply with the support order. At
the hearing, the father provided no evidence to show that his financial
circumstances had changed, thus requiring a modification of the support
order. The only evidence before the family division was a financial affidavit the
father submitted. In addition, the family division found the father to be
voluntarily underemployed “[b]ased upon his most current financial affidavit
and the total absence of any evidence that he is physically or mentally
incapacitated.” This was further supported by “the lack of any requests since
2005 to modify his obligation based upon a substantial change in
circumstances.”
Next, we address the father’s argument that the family division
improperly required him to submit his tax returns for the years 2001-2005.
When calculating a parent’s child support obligation, the court must first
determine the parent’s “present income.” Feddersen, 149 N.H. at 196 (2003).
“It is up to the trial court to decide what income figures should be used based
upon the facts presented at the hearing” and “the credibility and forthrightness
of the noncustodial parent in disclosing income.” Id. (quotations omitted).
This includes the use of past tax returns when the obligor provides
“misleading” information on the financial affidavit. Id. at 197. Here, the family
division observed that the father’s “reported income and expenses as well as
his attitude and demeanor” raised doubts about “his credibility and
5
forthrightness.” Therefore, the family division properly ordered the father to
submit the past tax returns to aid in establishing his present income.
Finally, the father contests the family division’s finding that he owes
$29,901.84, arguing that he only owes $5,743 because that was the amount
owed when we issued our decision in Jeffrey G. As set forth above, support
orders remain in effect until they are judicially modified. See In the Matter of
Haller & Mills, 150 N.H. 427, 429-30 (2003). Because the Salem Family
Division issued no subsequent orders modifying the support order, the father’s
obligation remained intact. Consequently, we cannot conclude that the family
division unsustainably exercised its discretion when it found that the father
owed $29,901.84 as of July 25, 2008.
We have reviewed the father’s remaining arguments and hold that they
lack merit and warrant no extended consideration. Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H.
321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6