THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2008-046
IN THE MATTER OF MARY BETH GEORGAKILAS AND GEORGE
GEORGAKILAS
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2008
Mary Beth Georgakilas, pro se, filed no brief.
Mark S. Moeller, P.A., of Dover (Mark S. Moeller on the brief and orally),
and Robert G. Eaton, of Rye, by brief, for the respondent.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, George Georgakilas, appeals an order
recommended by a Marital Master (Nute, M.) and approved by the Superior
Court (Fauver, J.) denying his motion for reformation of the certificate of his
divorce from the petitioner, Mary Beth Georgakilas. We affirm.
The parties divorced in 2006. Their final divorce decree incorporated the
terms of their permanent stipulation, which included a parenting plan
regarding their then two-year-old son. See RSA 461-A:4 (Supp. 2007). With
respect to decision-making responsibility, paragraph A of the parenting plan
stated that “[b]oth parents shall share in the responsibility for making major
decisions about the child,” “[e]ach parent shall make day-to-day decisions for
the child during the time he/she is caring for the child,” and “[b]oth parties
shall be consulted and agree on [the child’s] religion.” Regarding residential
responsibility, paragraph B of the parenting plan provided that the respondent
“shall have liberal and generous parenting time with his son . . . whenever [the
respondent] is not flying [as a commercial airline pilot] and is in New
Hampshire.” This provision also stated: “The parties acknowledge and agree
that each of them [is] a kind, caring, loving and nurturing parent and that their
son . . . will benefit by having active involvement by both parents, with the goal
of each party’s parenting time being approximately equal.” Paragraph C, the
provision concerning the child’s legal residence for school attendance stated:
“This Parenting Plan is for equal or approximately equal periods of residential
responsibility. For school purposes only, the child’s legal residence shall be
with [the petitioner].”
The certificate of divorce entered by the court stated that the parties had
joint legal custody of their son, but that the mother had physical custody of
him. Thereafter, the respondent moved to modify the certificate of divorce to
reflect the fact that the parties had joint physical custody of their son. In
denying the motion, the trial court interpreted the parties’ parenting plan to
grant the petitioner primary residential responsibility for the child. The trial
court stated that it could not “construe the language of the Parenting Plan as
equal, ‘50/50’ or shared residential responsibility. If that were the case, the
parties should have used the terminology in paragraph B of the Parenting Plan
for ‘shared (or joint) residential responsibility,’ but they did not do so.” The
court noted that “the Parenting Plan forms supplied by the Court and available
to the public on the internet” use this specific language. “If counsel wish to
create their own format,” the court cautioned, “they should be sure to follow
the requirements for delineating the parenting rights and responsibilities.” The
court concluded that because paragraph B of the parties’ parenting plan did
not state that they had “shared (or joint) residential responsibility,” the
certificate of divorce “correctly complie[d] with the [court’s] understanding of
the Parenting Plan as written,” and would not be revised.
On appeal, the respondent argues that the trial court misinterpreted the
parties’ parenting plan and, therefore, erred when it denied his request to
amend the certificate of divorce to reflect the fact that the parties shared
physical custody of their son. We disagree.
In interpreting the meaning of a divorce decree, we review the decree de
novo. Sommers v. Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 692 (1999). We consider the intent
of the parties as expressed in the language of the stipulation. Id.
Under the plain meaning of their stipulation, the parties were to have
“equal or approximately equal” residential responsibility for their son. In
paragraph C, the plan states: “This Parenting Plan is for equal or
approximately equal periods of residential responsibility.” Additionally,
paragraph B provided: “The parties acknowledge and agree that each of them
[is] a kind, caring, loving and nurturing parent and that their son . . . will
2
benefit by having active involvement by both parents, with the goal of each
party’s parenting time being approximately equal.”
As a matter of law, however, “approximately equal” residential
responsibility is insufficient to confer “custodial parent” status. The term
“custodial parent” is defined by statute. See RSA 461-A:20 (Supp. 2007).
Pursuant to RSA 461-A:20, a “custodial parent” is “a parent with 50 percent or
more of the residential responsibility” and a “non-custodial parent” is “a parent
with less than 50 percent of the residential responsibility.” A parent with 49
percent of the residential responsibility is “non-custodial” by definition.
Given the parties’ choice to use the phrase “equal or approximately
equal” to describe their residential responsibility for their son as well as their
description of the respondent’s frequent absences from the state for his job as a
commercial airline pilot, we conclude that the trial court did not err when it
declined to reform the parties’ certificate of divorce and, in effect, confer
“custodial parent” status upon the respondent. Unless the parties had agreed
that the parties would each have fifty percent of the residential responsibility
for their son, pursuant to RSA 461-A:20, only one of them could be the
“custodial parent.” As drafted by the parties, their stipulation confers this
status upon the petitioner. Accordingly, contrary to the respondent’s
assertions, the certificate of divorce comports with the parties’ stipulation and
the applicable law. Should the legislature disagree with our construction of
RSA 461-A:20, it is, of course, free to amend it. See Appeal of Malouin, 155
N.H. 545, 554 (2007).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3