THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-186
IN THE MATTER OF JONI GUY AND DANIEL R. GUY
Argued: February 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: March 5, 2009
Francis G. Holland, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the petitioner.
William Aivalikles, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Daniel R. Guy, appeals the final decree in
his divorce from the petitioner, Joni Guy, which a Marital Master (Forrest, M.)
recommended and the Superior Court (Groff, J.) approved. The respondent
argues that the trial court erred when it granted the petitioner a fault-based
divorce. The petitioner filed a cross-appeal, asserting that the trial court erred
with respect to the division of a particular marital asset. We reverse in part,
vacate in part and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The parties married in March
1987. The petitioner filed for divorce in March 2006, seeking a divorce on the
grounds of conduct endangering her health and reason, adultery, and habitual
drunkenness. See RSA 458:7, II, V, VII (2004). Alternatively, she sought a
divorce on the ground of irreconciliable differences. See RSA 458:7-a (Supp.
2008).
The trial court heard the matter in December 2007. The court dismissed
the grounds of habitual drunkenness and adultery, see RSA 458:7, II, VII, but
granted the petitioner a divorce on the ground that the respondent had “so
treated [her] as seriously to injure [her] health or endanger [her] reason.” RSA
458:7, V. With respect to the parties’ property settlement, the court
determined that an equal division of their assets was equitable. The court
specifically considered two factors that might favor an unequal division: (1) the
respondent’s fault in causing the breakdown of the parties’ marriage; and (2)
the value of his inheritance. Because these two factors “effectively cancel[led]
each other out,” the court concluded that dividing the parties’ assets equally
was equitable.
We first address the respondent’s contention that the trial court erred by
granting the petitioner a divorce on the ground of conduct that seriously
injured her health or endangered her reason. RSA 458:7 provides, in pertinent
part, that the trial court shall grant a divorce “in favor of the innocent party . . .
[w]hen either party has so treated the other as seriously to injure health or
endanger reason.” RSA 458:7, V. This provision was first enacted in 1840.
See Laws 1840, 573:1; see also Robinson v. Robinson, 66 N.H. 600, 609 (1891).
“It was intended to provide for a divorce . . . where the conduct complained of
did not fall within the established definition of extreme cruelty.” Robinson, 66
N.H. at 609. Divorce upon the ground of extreme cruelty required proof of
actual or threatened direct bodily injury; “[t]he infliction of mere mental pain,
however seriously it might injure health or endanger reason, was not legal
cruelty.” Id. at 608. The sufferer of such conduct had no remedy at law. Id. at
608-09. While “[c]onstant, innumerable, and nameless indignities of speech
and action, each possibly petty in itself, might cause mental anguish less
endurable, more hurtful to physical well-being, and more likely to overturn
reason, than any degree of pain produced by blows,” and while this conduct
“might make life intolerable and death welcome, . . . [it was] not legal cruelty.”
Id. at 609. “In consideration of this state of the law,” in 1840, the legislature
enacted the predecessor to RSA 458:7, V. Id.
The language of the current statute is nearly identical to that which was
first enacted in 1840. Laws 1840, 573:1. In 1867, the language was amended
slightly to clarify that the adverb “seriously” was intended to modify both
“injure health” and “endanger reason.” The 1867 version of the statute allowed
a divorce to be decreed: “V. When either party has so treated the other as
seriously to injure health. VI. When either party has so treated the other as
seriously to endanger reason.” GS 163:3 (1867). Sections V and VI of the 1867
version of the law were later merged. See PL 287:6 (1926). They have
remained so ever since. See RL 339:6 (1942); RSA 458:7 (1955).
The gravamen of a cause of action for divorce on this ground “is the
injury to health and the danger to reason” suffered by the innocent spouse.
Robinson, 66 N.H. at 609. “Whether the behavior proved is a sufficient ground
2
of divorce depends on . . . whether it has seriously injured health or
endangered reason. This is the sole test.” Id. at 610.
“Any behavior of one party which affects the other physically or mentally
is treatment within the meaning of the statute.” Id. It does not matter whether
the conduct was directed towards the innocent spouse or whether the guilty
spouse engaged in the conduct with malevolent intent. Id. at 609-10.
While the statute does not require proof of conduct that would have
affected an average or reasonable person, it does require proof that the health
or reason of the complaining spouse was actually affected. In the Matter of
Gronvaldt & Gronvaldt, 150 N.H. 551, 553 (2004). Whether the innocent party
has been so treated is a question of fact to be determined by the trial court. Id.
We will sustain its findings and rulings unless they are lacking in evidential
support or tainted by error of law. Id.
In its narrative order, the trial court found that the following conduct
seriously injured the petitioner’s health or endangered her reason. In
December 2005, the petitioner surreptitiously discovered the respondent’s e-
mail password and accessed his e-mail account. She discovered that the
respondent was exchanging e-mails with other women, including a former
girlfriend. In their e-mails the respondent and his former girlfriend professed
their love for one another, and, at times, their e-mails were sexually suggestive.
When the petitioner discovered the e-mails, she felt “angry, upset, and
distraught.”
This kind of effect upon the petitioner’s physical and mental health is
insufficient, as a matter of law, to sustain a divorce under RSA 458:7, V. In
cases involving a divorce granted upon these grounds, the effect upon the
“innocent” spouse has been much more severe than mere anger and upset and
the conduct in which the “guilty” spouse engaged was more brutal than merely
e-mailing a former girlfriend. See id. at 553-54 (husband drank alcohol on a
daily basis, was verbally abusive to wife, threatened to punch wife, exhibited
uncontrolled anger and used scare tactics to intimidate wife, causing wife to
suffer emotional distress and undergo counseling during parties’ marriage);
Routhier v. Routhier, 128 N.H. 439, 440 (1986) (during marriage, husband
admitted to having affairs with other women, drank excessively, and was
domineering, argumentative and verbally abusive, which caused wife to seek
counseling for two years in the 1960s and again after their separation in 1980);
Morgan v. Morgan, 101 N.H. 470, 471 (1958) (husband hit wife, threatened to
kill her, and used obscene and abusive language towards her, causing wife to
become “highly nervous and to lose weight”); Szulc v. Szulc, 96 N.H. 190, 191
(1950) (husband drank heavily and used abusive and profane language,
causing wife to lose considerable weight and to become “a complete wreck”
(quotation omitted)).
3
We hold that the respondent’s conduct was insufficient, as a matter of
law, to constitute treatment that seriously injured the petitioner’s health or
endangered her reason. RSA 458:7, V. Feeling “angry, upset and distraught”
does not constitute either a serious injury to one’s health or a serious
endangerment to one’s reason within the meaning of the statute. The conduct
at issue did not do any harm to the petitioner’s physical well-being. Nor did it
cause her to suffer the type of “mental anguish” that the statute was intended
to encompass. Robinson, 66 N.H. at 609. Accordingly, we reverse the trial
court’s decision to grant the petitioner a fault-based divorce under RSA 458:7,
V.
Because the trial court specifically considered the respondent’s fault in
causing the breakdown of the parties’ marriage when dividing the parties’
assets, we vacate the court’s property division. In light of this vacatur, we need
not address the petitioner’s issue in her cross-appeal. We remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed in part; vacated in part; remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4