THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-378
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GABRIEL BILC
Argued: March 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 1, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Kenna, Johnston & Sharkey, P.A., of Manchester (Kevin E. Sharkey on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Gabriel Bilc, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (McGuire, J.) granting the State’s motion to remand his cases to
the Hillsborough District Court on the basis that the convictions are class B
misdemeanors, which cannot be appealed to the superior court. We reverse
and remand.
The defendant was charged in district court with one count of criminal
threatening and one count of criminal trespass, both class A misdemeanors.
See RSA 631:4 (2007); RSA 635:2 (2007); RSA 625:9, IV(a)(2) (2007). Following
a bench trial, the defendant was found guilty and fined $350 plus a $70
penalty assessment on each charge. The defendant appealed to the superior
court, seeking a jury trial on both charges.
The State moved to remand the cases to the district court, arguing that
the defendant’s appeal to the superior court for a trial de novo was improper
because RSA 625:9, VIII (2007) converts district court convictions for class A
misdemeanors to class B misdemeanor convictions whenever the sentences
imposed consist only of fines less than $1,200. The defendant objected,
arguing that the State and Federal Constitutions guarantee the right to a jury
trial whenever a defendant is charged with a criminal offense carrying a
possible penalty of one year’s incarceration, regardless of the sentence actually
imposed. The trial court granted the State’s motion and remanded the cases to
the district court for imposition of the fines previously assessed.
On appeal the defendant argues that the trial court’s ruling that he was
not entitled to a jury trial violates Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The
State agrees that, as applied in this case, RSA 625:9, VIII, read in conjunction
with RSA 599:1 (Supp. 2008), deprived the defendant of his right to a jury trial.
We first address this claim under the State Constitution and cite federal
opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 232-33 (1983).
Because we hold that the defendant was denied his right to a jury trial under
our State Constitution, we need not address the defendant’s argument under
the Federal Constitution. See State v. Theriault, 158 N.H. 123, 130 (2008).
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution provides: “No subject shall be
arrested, imprisoned, despoiled, or deprived of his property, immunities, or
privileges, put out of the protection of the law, exiled or deprived of his life,
liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the land . . . .”
“It has never been denied or doubted that by this article trial by jury according
to the course of the common law is secured to the defendant in all criminal
cases without exception.” State v. Gerry, 68 N.H. 495, 496 (1896). The right to
a jury trial is a fundamental right under our State Constitution. State v.
Morrill, 123 N.H. 707, 711 (1983).
New Hampshire has a two-tier statutory scheme for the trial of class A
misdemeanors under which a person charged is tried in the district court
without a jury and if found guilty is given the right of appeal to the superior
court with a trial de novo by jury. See State v. Despres, 107 N.H. 297, 298
(1966). Appeals from the district court are governed by RSA 599:1, which
provides, in part:
A person convicted by a district court of a class A
misdemeanor, at the time the sentence is declared, may appeal
therefrom to obtain a de novo jury trial in the superior court . . . .
If, after a jury trial in the superior court, the defendant is found
guilty, the superior court shall sentence the defendant, and the
defendant may appeal questions of law arising therefrom to the
supreme court.
2
We have held that this two-tier system is constitutional in that it assures “an
absolute right of appeal to the Superior Court where the trial is de novo before
a jury.” Jenkins v. Canaan Mun. Ct., 116 N.H. 616, 618 (1976) (quotation
omitted).
As amended in 2007, RSA 625:9, VIII provides:
If a person convicted of a class A misdemeanor has been
sentenced and such sentence does not include any period of actual
incarceration or a suspended or deferred jail sentence or any fine
in excess of the maximum provided for a class B misdemeanor in
RSA 651:2, IV(a), the court shall record such conviction and
sentence as a class B misdemeanor.
Based upon this statute, the superior court ruled that because the defendant’s
class A misdemeanor convictions must be recorded as class B misdemeanor
convictions, “the defendant cannot face the possibility of incarceration from
these charges” and therefore “has no right to a jury trial.” (Quotation and
brackets omitted.)
In Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145, 154 (1968), the United States
Supreme Court held that “the right to jury trial in serious criminal cases is a
fundamental right and hence must be recognized by the States as part of their
obligation to extend due process of law to all persons within their jurisdiction.”
As the Court explained:
A right to jury trial is granted to criminal defendants in order to
prevent oppression by the Government. Those who wrote our
constitutions knew from history and experience that it was
necessary to protect against unfounded criminal charges brought
to eliminate enemies and against judges too responsive to the voice
of higher authority. The framers of the constitutions strove to
create an independent judiciary but insisted upon further
protection against arbitrary action. Providing an accused with the
right to be tried by a jury of his peers gave him an inestimable
safeguard against the corrupt or overzealous prosecutor and
against the compliant, biased, or eccentric judge. If the defendant
preferred the common-sense judgment of a jury to the more
tutored but perhaps less sympathetic reaction of the single judge,
he was to have it.
Id. at 155-56.
Although the defendant in Duncan was charged with a crime punishable
by up to two years in prison, he had been sentenced to only sixty days’
incarceration and a $150 fine. Id. at 146. The Court was not persuaded,
3
however, by the State’s argument that based upon his sentence, the defendant
was not entitled to a jury trial. Id. at 159. In determining whether a crime is
serious, the Court reasoned that the penalty authorized for a particular crime
is of “major relevance.” Id. “The penalty authorized by the law of the locality
may be taken as a gauge of its social and ethical judgments of the crime in
question.” Id. at 160 (quotation and citation omitted). Moreover, the severity of
the penalty authorized, not the one actually imposed, is the relevant measure.
Id. Serious crimes, for purposes of the Sixth Amendment, are defined to
include any offense which carries a maximum penalty of more than six months
imprisonment; the right to a jury trial attaches to those crimes regardless of
the sentence in fact imposed. See Baldwin v. New York, 399 U.S. 66, 69 (1970)
(the possibility of a one-year sentence is enough in itself to require the
opportunity for a jury trial); Lewis v. United States, 518 U.S. 322, 325-26
(1996) (the maximum authorized penalty provides an objective indication of the
seriousness with which society regards the offense and it is that indication that
is used to determine whether a jury trial is required). We agree that “it is the
legislative determination of an offense’s seriousness which entitles an accused
to jury trial and not the possibly arbitrary decision-making of the trial court.”
State v. Grimble, 397 So. 2d 1254, 1256 (La. 1980).
Under the New Hampshire Constitution, the right to a jury trial is
guaranteed to “all criminal defendants facing the possibility of incarceration.”
Opinion of the Justices (DWI Jury Trials), 135 N.H. 538, 542 (1992). Having
been found guilty of two class A misdemeanors, the defendant faced possible
incarceration, thereby entitling him to seek a de novo jury trial in the superior
court. We hold that, as applied by the superior court, the provisions of RSA
625:9, VIII operated to deny the defendant’s rights in violation of Part I, Article
15 of our State Constitution. Accordingly, we reverse the superior court’s
ruling and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4