THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-467
EXETER HOSPITAL, INC.
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE INSURANCE GUARANTY ASSOCIATION
Argued: January 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: February 20, 2009
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (James Q. Shirley
and Karyl R. Martin on the brief, and Mr. Shirley orally), for the petitioner.
Nixon Peabody LLP, of Manchester (Courtney Q. Brooks & a. on the brief,
and Mark D. Robins orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, New Hampshire Insurance Guaranty
Association (NHIGA), appeals an order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.)
granting summary judgment in favor of the petitioner, Exeter Hospital, Inc.
(Exeter), and denying NHIGA’s cross-motion for summary judgment. The trial
court declared that Exeter, whose liability insurer is insolvent, has a right to
indemnification from NHIGA for $299,999 and is not required under RSA 404-
B:12, I (2006) to exhaust a codefendant’s insurance coverage. We affirm.
The relevant facts are as follows. Dr. Thomas Wharton is a cardiologist
employed by Atlantic Cardiology Associates, P.A. (ACA). ACA agreed to provide
Exeter with Dr. Wharton’s professional services as the medical director of its
cardiac catheterization laboratory. The agreement describes Dr. Wharton’s
relationship with Exeter as that of an independent contractor.
Dr. Wharton began treating Daniel Smith for exertional angina in 2000.
He performed various procedures over the course of Smith’s treatment. In May
2001, Dr. Wharton performed a balloon dilation at Exeter in order to cure
obstructions within Smith’s previously implanted vein grafts. Smith’s right
ventricle became lacerated during the procedure. Efforts to repair the damage
at Portsmouth Hospital were unsuccessful and Smith died days later.
Smith’s wife brought a medical malpractice action in March 2003 as
administratrix of his estate against Dr. Wharton, ACA and Exeter. Smith’s
estate alleged that Dr. Wharton unreasonably undertook a high risk procedure,
that “Smith was not advised of [the] risks” and that “Exeter Hospital lacked the
facilities or staff to treat . . . complications.” The writ of summons asserted
against each defendant a violation of informed consent (Counts I, V, VIII);
negligence and wrongful death (Counts II, IV, VII); and wanton, malicious or
oppressive conduct (Counts III, VI, and IX).
Dr. Wharton had professional liability insurance through ACA. Exeter
had institutional liability insurance through PHICO Insurance Company. The
Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania ordered PHICO liquidated in February
2002 due to insolvency, triggering certain duties on the part of NHIGA to “step
into the shoes” of PHICO. See RSA ch. 404-B (2006).
NHIGA informed Exeter by letter that “there is potentially one covered
claim against Exeter under [its policy with PHICO] for the alleged bodily
injuries of Mr. Smith.” NHIGA, however, reminded Exeter that, by statute, “the
maximum potential recovery from NHIGA [on this claim] would be $299,999
minus the $50 statutory deductible.” It also reminded Exeter of its duty to
exhaust “solvent insurance” coverage for vicarious liability claims.
Dr. Wharton and Exeter eventually reached a settlement agreement with
Smith’s estate. Dr. Wharton, who had sufficient insurance to cover the entire
amount, contributed part of the settlement. Exeter paid the balance, which
exceeded the $299,999 NHIGA maximum coverage. NHIGA refused to
reimburse any part of Exeter’s settlement contribution, citing Exeter’s statutory
duty to exhaust Dr. Wharton’s insurance coverage. Exeter petitioned for
declaratory judgment seeking indemnification. Both parties moved for
summary judgment.
The trial court ruled in favor of Exeter. It first concluded that Dr.
Wharton was an independent contractor. It found no indication that Exeter
was “vicariously liable” for his negligence under any of the three exceptions to
the rule that an employer is generally not liable for the negligence of an
2
independent contractor. See Lawyers Title Ins. Corp. v. Groff, 148 N.H. 333,
336 (2002) (listing exceptions as “(1) negligence of the employer in selecting,
instructing or supervising the contractor; (2) employment for work that is
inherently dangerous; and (3) instances in which the employer is under a
nondelegable duty”).
The trial court further noted that, although the claims against Exeter
and Dr. Wharton overlapped in some respects, Exeter “alone is alleged to be
negligent for its operation of the hospital.” Reasoning that the dispute was
more closely aligned with our decision in N.H. Ins. Guaranty Assoc. v. Elliot
Hosp., 154 N.H. 571 (2006), than OB/GYN Assocs. of S.N.H. v. N.H. Ins.
Guaranty Assoc., 154 N.H. 553 (2006), the trial court concluded that Exeter
had no duty to exhaust Dr. Wharton’s insurance before seeking reimbursement
from NHIGA and that “NHIGA . . . is obligated to reimburse Exeter Hospital for
$299,999 of the settlement agreement payment.”
On appeal, NHIGA advances four reasons why Exeter is subject to the
exhaustion requirement within RSA 404-B:12, I: (1) the Smith estate alleged
the same claim against Exeter and Dr. Wharton; (2) there was insufficient
evidence to conclude as a matter of law that Dr. Wharton was an independent
contractor; (3) the Smith estate could nevertheless invoke the doctrine of
apparent authority to establish vicarious liability; and (4) the Smith estate
could have attributed Dr. Wharton’s liability to Exeter because Exeter owed to
Smith a non-delegable duty.
“While we conclude that the trial court reached the correct result, we
affirm on the basis of slightly different reasoning.” Mathena v. Granite State
Ins. Co., 129 N.H. 249, 251 (1987). In reviewing the superior court’s summary
judgment rulings, we consider the evidence in the light most favorable to each
party in its capacity as the non-moving party and, if no genuine issue of
material fact exists, we determine whether the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. Elliot, 154 N.H. at 574. The instant dispute
requires interpretation of the New Hampshire Insurance Guaranty Association
Act (Guaranty Act), RSA ch. 404-B. The interpretation of a statute is to be
decided ultimately by this court. N.H. Ins. Guaranty Assoc. v. Pitco Frialator,
142 N.H. 573, 576 (1998). We interpret the Guaranty Act by focusing first
upon its language, then by considering the context of the overall statutory
scheme, and, finally, by looking for guidance to other states’ interpretations of
similar statutes. OB/GYN, 154 N.H. at 556.
The Guaranty Act is intended
to provide a mechanism for the payment of covered claims under
certain insurance policies to avoid excessive delay in payment and
to avoid financial loss to claimants or policyholders because of the
3
insolvency of an insurer, to assist in the detection and prevention
of insurer insolvencies, and to provide an association to assess the
cost of such protection among insurers.
RSA 404-B:2. RSA chapter 404-B applies broadly to many forms of direct
liability insurance, see RSA 404-B:3, and “shall be liberally construed to effect
[its] purpose,” RSA 404-B:4.
NHIGA is “a nonprofit unincorporated legal entity,” RSA 404-B:6, funded
through insurer assessments, RSA 404-B:8, I(c). It is “obligated to the extent
of the covered claims,” RSA 404-B:8, I(a), and “deemed the insurer to the extent
of its obligation on the covered claims,” RSA 404-B:8, I(b). See Benson v. N.H.
Ins. Guaranty Assoc., 151 N.H. 590, 598-99 (2004) (discussing statutory
framework of NHIGA).
We normally conduct a two-part test “in order to determine the payment
obligations of NHIGA in cases involving third-party claims against the insured
which have been paid by the insured.” Pitco Frialator, 142 N.H. at 578. “We
first examine the underlying action brought against the insured and determine
the existence and extent of NHIGA’s obligation to defend and indemnify in that
action.” Id. NHIGA does not contend that it had no duty to defend Exeter.
Thus, our inquiry is limited to determining “the existence and extent of
NHIGA’s payment obligation with respect to the insured’s reimbursement claim
against NHIGA.” Id. at 578-79.
The section of the Guaranty Act at issue is the “Nonduplication of
Recovery” provision of RSA 404-B:12, which provides, in relevant part:
Any person having a claim against an insurer under any
provision in an insurance policy other than a policy of an insolvent
insurer which is also a covered claim . . . shall be required to
exhaust first his right under such policy. Any amount payable on
a covered claim under this chapter shall be reduced by the amount
of any recovery under such insurance policy.
RSA 404-B:12, I. “[This] provision prevents claimants from double recovery or
windfall by virtue of an insurance company’s insolvency.” OB/GYN, 154 N.H.
at 558 (quotation omitted).
By its terms, the Guaranty Act requires exhaustion for each “claim
against [a solvent] insurer” that also constitutes “a covered claim.” RSA 404-
B:12, I; see Elliot, 154 N.H. at 575 (discussing the two statutory prerequisites
triggering exhaustion requirement).
4
“Covered claim” is defined within the Guaranty Act as “a net unpaid
claim, in excess of $50 . . . which arises out of and is within coverage and not
in excess of the applicable limits of an insurance policy to which this chapter
applies issued by an insurer, if such insurer . . . is declared insolvent.” RSA
404-B:5, IV. NHIGA does not dispute that the relevant claims in the
underlying action are covered claims. Therefore, we proceed to examine the
factual allegations and legal assertions in the Smith estate action to determine
which covered claims, if any, are also “claim[s] against an insurer.” RSA 404-
B:12, I; see Elliot, 154 N.H. at 577; OB/GYN, 154 N.H. at 559.
“[C]laim against an insurer,” RSA 404-B:12, I, is not specifically defined
within the Guaranty Act. We have construed the term to contemplate “both an
insured’s claim against a solvent insurer and the third-party claim against the
insured that gives rise to the insured’s claim against its solvent insurer.”
OB/GYN, 154 N.H. at 558; see Pitco Frialator, 142 N.H. at 578. Because the
litigants dispute only Count VII for negligence and wrongful death, we limit our
discussion to this claim. See OB/GYN, 154 N.H. at 558. To the extent Count
VII comprises the “same claim[],” Elliot, 154 N.H. at 577; see OB/GYN, 154
N.H. at 559, asserted against Dr. Wharton, it constitutes a “claim against an
insurer,” RSA 404-B:12, I, subject to exhaustion of his insurance.
Count VII can be read to assert vicarious liability on the basis of Dr.
Wharton’s agency relationship with Exeter. Assuming without deciding that
such an agency relationship existed, any vicarious liability is clearly a “claim
against an insurer,” RSA 404-B:12, I, because it duplicates the assertions of
fault against Dr. Wharton. OB/GYN, 154 N.H. at 559 (Where “the only theory
of liability . . . asserted against [the insured codefendant] is vicarious liability
. . . [and] no acts or omissions by [the insured codefendant are] alleged, nor . . .
any theory of direct liability[,] . . . [t]he claims . . . are the same because they
are based upon identical factual allegations and legal assertions.”).
Count VII, however, advances other theories of liability unique to Exeter.
Paragraph two of the writ of summons alleges that Dr. Wharton “acted under
the supervision and direction of and as an employee, agent and/or servant of
. . . Exeter.” After reiterating this allegation in paragraph thirty eight,
paragraph forty broadly avers that Exeter “had a duty to exercise the degree of
care, knowledge and skill of the average hospital . . . [and] breached its duty
causing . . . [d]amages.” The plaintiff’s pretrial statement elaborated that “[i]t
was a departure from good and accepted practice for Exeter . . . to permit [the
procedure performed by Dr. Wharton] . . . in non-emergent patients . . .
without on-site cardiothoracic surgical backup.” In addition to alleging a
variety of direct negligence theories against Exeter based upon permitting
Smith’s surgery to take place at its facilities, the writ can also fairly be read to
assert a claim against Exeter for negligent supervision of Dr. Wharton. Cf.
Robbins v. Seekamp, 122 N.H. 318, 322 (1982) (plaintiff’s failure to use words
5
“products liability” in pleadings did not preclude claim for negligent design and
manufacture where language tracked statute supplying cause of action).
The basis for a claim of negligent employment or supervision
brought against an employer where the employee harms a third
party is not the vicarious liability of the doctrine of respondeat
superior, but a separate theory of employer liability. Thus, claims
for negligent hiring, training and supervision encompass direct
liability as a result of the misconduct of the employee.
14 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire Practice, Local Government Law § 1041, at 297
(1995); see Cutter v. Town of Farmington, 126 N.H. 836, 840 (1985).
Because Count VII alleges one or several bases for direct fault uniquely
attributed to Exeter, it does not constitute the same claim asserted against Dr.
Wharton and, accordingly, is not a “claim against an insurer,” RSA 404-B:12, I.
See Elliot, 154 N.H. at 577 (holding that two claims for medical negligence,
though overlapping, were not the same claim where both hospitals were
charged with negligence during and after baby’s delivery but only one hospital
was charged with negligent pre-natal care). NHIGA is therefore “obligated to
the extent of the covered claim[],” RSA 404-B:8, I(a), as Exeter’s “deemed . . .
insurer,” RSA 404-B:8, I(b), in “that amount of each covered claim which is less
than $300,000,” RSA 404-B:8, I(a). Indeed, NHIGA’s argument that Exeter
owed to Smith a non-delegable duty would, if anything, support this
conclusion.
We do not reach NHIGA’s remaining arguments, concerning the trial
court’s finding that Dr. Wharton was an independent contractor, because an
employer is subject to direct liability for the negligent selection, instruction or
supervision of both agents and independent contractors. See Groff, 148 N.H.
at 336; Herman v. Monadnock PR-24 Training Council, 147 N.H. 754, 758-59
(2002).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6