THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Utilities Commission
No. 2008-897
APPEAL OF STONYFIELD FARM, INC. & a.
(New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission)
Argued: June 16, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 5, 2009
Sheehan Phinney Bass & Green, P.A., of Manchester (Edward A. Haffer
on the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Wilbur A.
Glahn, III & a. on the brief, and Mr. Glahn orally), and Robert A. Bersak and
Linda T. Landis, of Manchester, on the brief, for the respondent.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (K. Allen Brooks, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Meredith A. Hatfield, consumer advocate, on the brief, for the Office of
Consumer Advocate, as amicus curiae.
Backus, Myer and Solomon, of Manchester (Robert A. Backus on the
joint brief), for Campaign of Ratepayers’ Rights, as amicus curiae.
Arthur B. Cunningham, of Hopkinton, on the joint brief, for Clean Water
Action, New Hampshire Sierra Club and Union of Concerned Scientists, as
amici curiae.
Melissa A. Hoffer and Kristine E. Kraushaar, of Concord, on the joint
brief, for Conservation Law Foundation, as amicus curiae.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Ronald J. Lajoie on the
joint brief), for Resident’s Environmental Action Committee for Health, as
amicus curiae.
Orr & Reno, PA, of Concord (Douglas L. Patch on the brief), for
TransCanada Hydro Northeast, Inc., as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, Stonyfield Farm, Inc., H & L Instruments,
LLC, and Great American Dining, Inc., appeal a decision of the New Hampshire
Public Utilities Commission (PUC) ruling that it lacks authority to determine
whether installing certain technology at the Merrimack Station belonging to the
respondent, Public Service Company of New Hampshire (PSNH), is in the public
interest. See RSA 369-B:3-a (Supp. 2008). We dismiss the appeal.
I. Background
PSNH, the state’s largest public utility, has historically provided electric
generation, transmission and distribution services to a majority of New
Hampshire residents. Appeal of Pinetree Power, 152 N.H. 92, 93 (2005). The
instant matter concerns installing a wet flue gas desulphurization system,
commonly known as “scrubber technology,” at Merrimack Station in Bow to
reduce the facility’s mercury emissions. Merrimack Station, which burns coal
to produce electricity, is one of PSNH’s fossil fuel generation assets. See RSA
369-B:3-a.
In June 2006, the legislature enacted the Mercury Emissions Program,
see RSA 125-O:11-:18 (Supp. 2008), to reduce “mercury emissions at the coal-
2
burning electric power plants in the state as soon as possible.” RSA 125-O:11,
I. The program is intended to “prevent, at a minimum, 80 percent of the
aggregated mercury content of the coal burned at these plants from being
emitted into the air by no later than the year 2013.” Id.
To accomplish this objective, the legislation specifically requires PSNH to
install “the best known commercially available technology . . . at Merrimack
Station,” which the New Hampshire Department of Environmental Services
(DES) has determined is the scrubber technology. Id.; RSA 125-O:11, II. DES
has determined that this technology “best balances the procurement,
installation, operation and plant efficiency costs with the projected reductions
in mercury and other pollutants from the flue gas streams of Merrimack
[Station].” RSA 125-O:11, II. According to the legislature, installing the
scrubber technology “is in the public interest of the citizens of New Hampshire
and the customers of [PSNH].” RSA 125-O:11, VI; see RSA 125-O:12, I.
To ensure that PSNH makes “an ongoing and steadfast effort . . . to
implement practicable technological or operational solutions to achieve
significant mercury reductions” even before the scrubber technology is
constructed and installed, the legislature has provided PSNH with certain
economic performance incentives administered by DES. RSA 125-O:11, IV; see
RSA 125-O:16. The legislature has stated that the mercury emission reduction
requirements set forth in RSA 125-O:11-:18 “represent a careful, thoughtful
balancing of cost, benefits, and technological feasibility” that should be viewed
“as an integrated strategy of non-severable components.” RSA 125-O:11, VIII.
To comply with the Mercury Emissions Program, PSNH must install the
scrubber technology and have it operational at Merrimack Station by July 1,
2013. See RSA 125-O:11, I. Meeting “this requirement,” however, “is
contingent upon obtaining all necessary permits and approvals” from the
pertinent regulatory agencies. RSA 125-O:13, I. PSNH must report to the
legislature annually regarding its installation of the scrubber technology,
including “any updated cost information.” RSA 125-O:13, IX. Under RSA 125-
O:18, PSNH “shall recover all prudent costs” of installing the scrubber
technology “in a manner approved by the [PUC].” Recovery of these costs “shall
be . . . via . . . [PSNH’s] default service charge.” RSA 125-O:18.
In August 2008, the PUC learned from a securities and exchange report
filed by PSNH’s parent company that the cost of installing this technology had
risen from $250 million to $457 million. Thereafter, the PUC directed PSNH to
file “a comprehensive status report on its installation plans,” including “a
detailed cost estimate for the project, an analysis of the anticipated effect of the
project on energy service rates, and an analysis of the effect on energy service
rates if Merrimack Station were not in the mix of fossil and hydro facilities
operated in New Hampshire.” See RSA 365:5, :19 (1995). Noting a potential
3
conflict between the legislature’s express finding that installing scrubber
technology at Merrimack Station is “in the public interest of the citizens of New
Hampshire and the customers of [PSNH],” RSA 125-O:11, VI, and RSA 369-
B:3-a, which provides that PSNH may modify its fossil and hydro generation
assets only if the PUC finds that it is “in the public interest of retail customers
of PSNH to do so,” the PUC also directed PSNH to file a legal memorandum
about the extent of the PUC’s authority with respect to the scrubber project.
The PUC invited the New Hampshire Office of the Consumer Advocate to do the
same.
In September 2008, the PUC decided “that, as a result of the
Legislature’s mandate that [PSNH] . . . install scrubber technology by a date
certain, and its finding pursuant to RSA 125-O:11 that such installation . . . is
in the public interest . . . , the [PUC] lacks the authority to make a
determination pursuant to RSA 369-B:3-a as to whether this particular
modification is in the public interest.” The PUC ruled that its authority was
“limited to determining at a later time the prudence of the costs of complying
with the requirements of RSA 125-O:11-18 and the manner of recovery for
prudent costs.” See RSA 125-O:18.
After the PUC issued its order, the petitioners, whom the PUC had
neither directed nor invited to participate in its effort to determine its authority
over the scrubber project, moved for a rehearing, asserting standing as
commercial ratepayers. PSNH objected. The PUC ruled, however, that the
petitioners did have standing:
The Commercial Ratepayers . . . may be affected financially by
changes in PSNH’s default energy service rate either as customers
taking default energy service, or as customers of competitive
electric suppliers. The electric supply market in PSNH’s service
territory is influenced by PSNH’s default service rate because that
rate is the backstop for all other competitive offerings. If PSNH’s
default service rate increases, competitive offerings may also
increase.
The PUC denied the motion.
II. Discussion
A. Standard of Review
A party seeking to set aside an order of the PUC has the burden of
demonstrating that the order is contrary to law or, by a clear preponderance of
the evidence, that the order is unjust or unreasonable. RSA 541:13 (2007); see
Appeal of Verizon New England, 153 N.H. 50, 56 (2005). Findings of fact by the
4
PUC are presumed prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13; see
Verizon, 153 N.H. at 56.
B. Standing
PSNH argues that we should dismiss this appeal because the petitioners
lack standing to bring it because the injury they allege, future increased
electrical costs as a result of the scrubber project, is neither immediate nor
direct. See Appeal of Campaign for Ratepayers Rights, 142 N.H. 629, 632
(1998). The petitioners counter that they have standing: “As ratepayers for
electricity generated by [PSNH], [they] will be directly affected by the materially
increased costs of installation of scrubber technology at Merrimack Station,
and by the [PUC’s] Order.”
A party’s standing is a question of subject matter jurisdiction, which may
be addressed at any time. Libertarian Party of N.H. v. Sec’y of State, 158 N.H.
194, 195 (2008). To have standing to appeal an administrative agency decision
to this court, a party must demonstrate that his rights “may be directly affected
by the decision, or in other words, that he has suffered or will suffer an injury
in fact.” Appeal of Richards, 134 N.H. 148, 154 (quotations and citations
omitted), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 899 (1991); see RSA 541:3 (2007).
In Appeal of Richards, we addressed in depth the issue of standing to
appeal a PUC decision. In that case, the petitioners were ratepayers, who
challenged the PUC’s decision to approve a rate plan. Appeal of Richards, 134
N.H. at 151. They argued that because “the rate increases that will be imposed
upon them as a result of the PUC’s approval of the rate plan constitute[d] an
injury in fact,” they had standing to appeal the PUC’s decision. Id. at 156
(quotation omitted). We agreed that this “direct economic injury” was sufficient
to confer standing upon the ratepayers. Id. at 156-57. We stated: “Courts in
other jurisdictions have held that ratepayers are directly affected by rate
decisions and, thus, have standing to challenge them.” Id. at 156.
In contrast, the appeal in Appeal of Campaign for Ratepayers Rights did
not concern a rate plan. In that case, we held that the ratepayers lacked
standing to appeal the PUC’s decision to approve special contracts between
PSNH and certain industrial customers. Appeal of Campaign for Ratepayers
Rights, 142 N.H. at 632. We concluded that the ratepayers lacked standing
because they did not suffer any immediate or direct injury. Id. “[A]ny potential
injury would arise only through increased rates imposed during a subsequent
ratesetting proceeding.” Id.
The appeal in this case, like the appeal in Appeal of Campaign for
Ratepayers Rights, is not an appeal of a rate plan. It concerns the PUC’s
interpretation of statutes that are unrelated to a rate plan. Here, as in Appeal
5
of Campaign for Ratepayers Rights, any potential injury the petitioners may
suffer would arise only in a subsequent rate setting proceeding. See RSA 125-
O:18 (Supp. 2008) (PSNH “shall be allowed to recover all prudent costs” of
installing the scrubber technology “in a manner approved by the [PUC],” and
recovery of these costs “shall be . . . via . . . [PSNH’s] default service charge”).
Such future harm is insufficient, as a matter of law, to confer standing upon
the petitioners to appeal the PUC’s decision. Accordingly, we dismiss the
appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, J., concurred.
6