THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2008-011
SUZANNE ORR & a.
v.
DAVID A. GOODWIN & a.
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 15, 2008
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Laurie A. Lacoste on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth
(William G. Scott on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Patrick C. McHugh and
Matthew Johnson on the brief), for the New Hampshire Association of Realtors,
as amicus curiae.
GALWAY, J. The plaintiffs, Suzanne Orr and Nelson Bolstridge, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (Houran, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendants, David A. Goodwin, Ann Goodwin, Aaron Goodwin and Kylie
Goodwin. We affirm.
The parties do not dispute the relevant background facts. In October
2004, the parties executed a sales agreement in which the defendants agreed to
purchase real and personal property in Madbury from the plaintiffs for
$1,020,000. Upon execution of the agreement, the defendants paid a deposit of
$10,000. The parties’ sales agreement contained a clause titled “Liquidated
Damages,” which stated: “If the Buyer shall default in the performance of their
[sic] obligation under this agreement, the amount of the deposit may, at the
option of the Seller, become the property of the Seller as reasonable.” In
February 2005, an addendum was executed confirming that the defendants
had paid an additional $15,000 as a deposit. The addendum also provided
that the sale was to close by October 15, 2005.
In October 2005, the defendants informed the plaintiffs that they were
not able to sell their home and, therefore, could not afford to purchase the
plaintiffs’ property. The plaintiffs retained the $25,000 deposit and it appears
that there was virtually no further contact between the parties until early 2007.
Despite retaining the deposit, the plaintiffs instituted this suit in
February 2007 to recover various damages, including carrying costs on the
Madbury property and costs incurred in purchasing and carrying other
property, as a result of the defendants’ failure to consummate their agreement.
The defendants moved for summary judgment, which the trial court granted.
After their motion for reconsideration was denied, the plaintiffs filed this
appeal.
When we review a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Carter v. Concord Gen.
Mut. Ins. Co., 155 N.H. 515, 517 (2007). If our review of the evidence does not
reveal any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiffs first contend that the trial court erred in
concluding that the liquidated damages clause of the parties’ contract was
enforceable. Interpretation of the parties’ written agreement is a question of
law, which we review de novo. Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs.,
155 N.H. 368, 373 (2007). When interpreting a written agreement, we give the
language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the
circumstances and the context in which the agreement was negotiated, and
reading the document as a whole. Id.
According to the plaintiffs, the liquidated damages clause fails two of the
three criteria for a valid liquidated damages provision and, therefore, cannot be
enforced against them. Before a liquidated damages clause will be enforced,
2
three conditions must be met: (1) the damages anticipated as a result of the
breach are uncertain in amount or difficult to prove; (2) the parties intended to
liquidate damages in advance; and (3) the amount agreed upon must be
reasonable and not greatly disproportionate to the presumable loss or injury.
Shallow Brook Assoc’s v. Dube, 135 N.H. 40, 46 (1991). The plaintiffs concede
that the damages were uncertain in amount. Accordingly, the first factor is
met.
As to the second factor, the plaintiffs contend that it was not their
intention or belief that “their damages would be limited to the $25,000.00
deposit.” The amount of damages, however, is not at issue in considering this
factor. The relevant consideration is whether there is evidence that the parties
intended to liquidate their damages in advance. Here, the contract contains a
clause specifically titled “Liquidated Damages,” which initially demonstrates an
intent to liquidate damages. The plaintiffs contend, however, that because the
clause does not use the term “liquidated damages” outside the title, it is
insufficient to demonstrate an intent to provide for such damages. At oral
argument, the plaintiffs also contended that the term “reasonable” as used in
the clause applies to the term “property,” and thus does not demonstrate an
intent to define liquidated damages. We are not persuaded by either argument.
Although the term “liquidated damages” appears only in the title, the
language of the clause defines how damages are handled by delineating the
rights of the sellers relative to the buyers’ deposit in the event of default, a
result that would not change had the term been repeated in the body of the
clause. Further, to interpret the clause as suggested by the plaintiffs would
allow them to retain the deposit as “reasonable property.” The plaintiffs,
however, do not indicate what the term “reasonable property” means. The
interpretation advanced by the defendants, in contrast, regards the term
“reasonable” as defining the liquidated damages referenced in the title. We
believe the defendants’ interpretation to be sounder and in line with the
apparent intent of the clause. Given the title of the clause and the rights it
defines, we conclude that the clause was intended to provide for liquidated
damages and, therefore, that this provision evinces an intent by the parties to
liquidate damages in advance. See id. Therefore, the second factor has been
met.
“The third prong of the test requires that the amount stipulated was a
reasonable one, that is to say, not greatly disproportionate to the presumable
loss or injury.” Id. at 47 (quotation omitted). In determining whether the
stipulated amount is reasonable, “[o]ur function on appeal is to determine
whether a reasonable person could have arrived at the same determination as
the trial court, based on the evidence, and we will not upset the trial court’s
finding as long as it is substantiated by the record and is not erroneous as a
matter of law.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Thus, it is not enough that we might
3
have ruled differently had we been asked to decide this question in the first
instance. Rather we must affirm the trial court’s finding unless it is
unsupported by the evidence.” Id.
While we have stated that the relevant consideration is whether the
amount stipulated is not disproportionate to the presumable loss, we have also
stated that it is proper to look at the actual damages suffered in determining
whether the amount is reasonable. Id. at 47-48. Therefore, we have adopted a
two-part test for assessing the reasonableness of the amount stipulated
whereby we “first judge whether the provision was a reasonable estimate of
difficult-to-ascertain damage at the time the parties agreed to it.” Id. at 48
(quotation omitted). If it is a reasonable estimate, we must then conduct a
retrospective appraisal of the liquidated damages provision, and if the actual
damages turn out to be easily ascertainable, we must then consider whether
the stipulated sum is unreasonable and grossly disproportionate to the actual
damages from a breach. Id. at 48-49. If so, the liquidated damages provision
will be deemed unenforceable as a penalty, and the aggrieved party will be
awarded no more than the actual damages. Id. at 49. Thus, “even if the
liquidated sum is reasonable in light of the anticipated or presumable loss, the
provision will not be enforced if the actual loss to the party is minimal and easy
to prove.” Id. at 48; see also Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 356 comment
b at 157-58 (1981). As the parties alleging that the liquidated damages
amount is unreasonable, the plaintiffs bear the burden of proof. Dube, 135
N.H at 50.
In conducting the above analysis, we note that in a land sale contract the
proper measure of damages is the seller’s loss of bargain; that is, the difference
between the contract price and the actual value of the real estate at the time of
the breach. Id. at 49. Additionally, while, generally, damages may be
recovered for those harms that are reasonably foreseeable at the time the
parties entered into the contract, see Indep. Mechanical Contractors v. Gordon
T. Burke & Sons, 138 N.H. 110, 114 (1993), much of the damages claimed by
the plaintiffs arise from costs associated with various transactions related to
other properties, and undertaken by the plaintiffs months after the parties here
signed their agreement. Because those costs were not reasonably foreseeable
at the time the contract was made, we do not consider those alleged damages
in determining whether the liquidated damages clause is reasonable.
Turning to the first consideration, we note, as we did in Dube, that no
evidence was presented to suggest that the liquidated damages provision was
an unreasonable estimate of difficult-to-ascertain damages at the time the
parties agreed to it, see Dube, 135 N.H. at 49; nor do the plaintiffs argue that
the provision was an unreasonable estimate. Thus, the first consideration is
satisfied.
4
Second, the plaintiffs did not present evidence about the actual value of
the real estate at the time of the breach. Thus, the plaintiffs did not
demonstrate that their actual damages are easily ascertainable. Also, the
plaintiffs’ response to interrogatories state that the property had since been re-
listed for approximately $20,000 less than the amount the defendants had
offered to pay, indicating that any actual loss of bargain damages are not
grossly disproportionate to the liquidated damages amount.
Furthermore, as stated above, the basis upon which a liquidated
damages clause may be invalidated under this consideration is if it is excessive
or punitive. Id. We are not aware of, and the plaintiffs do not point to, any
authority supporting their proposition that a liquidated damages clause ought
to be invalidated as being insufficient, particularly where the liquidated
damages are retained only at the option of the injured party. Because the
plaintiffs did not demonstrate that their damages were easily ascertainable at
the time the contract was made or breached, and because the amount at issue
is not a penalty or grossly disproportionate to any actual loss from the breach,
we conclude that the third factor has been satisfied. Accordingly, the trial
court did not err in upholding the liquidated damages provision.
The plaintiffs contend that even if the liquidated damages provision is
valid, it does not limit them to receiving the liquidated damages as their sole
and exclusive remedy. This is so because, according to the plaintiffs, the
clause does not define liquidated damages as the sole available remedy, and
their retention of the liquidated damages does not bar a suit for their actual
damages. The trial court concluded that even if there was a genuine dispute
over the exclusivity of the liquidated damages remedy, it was immaterial
because the plaintiffs’ retention of the deposit as liquidated damages
constituted an election of remedies.
We are not aware of, and the parties do not point to, any case in New
Hampshire directly addressing this issue. Other courts have found that the
designation of a deposit as “liquidated damages” evidences the parties’
intention to limit the seller’s recovery to the stipulated amount. Annotation,
Provision in Land Contract for Liquidated Damages upon Default of Purchaser
as Affecting Right of Vendor to Maintain Action for Damages for Breach of
Contract, 39 A.L.R.5th 33, 54-55 (1996). Moreover, the absence of a provision
expressly permitting the recovery of actual damages has been held to prevent a
seller from pursuing such a remedy. Id. at 58-61. There are, however,
instances where courts have found that use of permissive terms, such as
“option,” permit a seller to sue for actual damages despite the existence of a
valid liquidated damages provision. Id. at 67-69. Likewise, there are courts
that have permitted a non-breaching party to retain liquidated damages and
then to pursue an additional claim for actual damages, even in the absence of
permissive language. Id. at 77-79. We are persuaded that the rule most in line
5
with our jurisprudence is that liquidated damages and actual damages are,
absent express language permitting recovery of both, mutually exclusive
remedies, and that where an election is permitted, the election of one remedy
bars pursuit of the other.
In General Linen Services, Inc. v. Franconia Investment Associates, L.P.,
150 N.H. 595, 599-600 (2004), we concluded that because a provision for
liquidated damages was unenforceable, the plaintiff was entitled to recover
actual damages. Thus, the plaintiff could seek actual damages only because
liquidated damages were unavailable. We reached a similar conclusion in
Technical Aid Corp. v. Allen, 134 N.H. 1, 22-23 (1991). These decisions
indicate that the right to recover liquidated damages and the right to recover
actual damages are mutually exclusive remedies. This conclusion comports
with the general purpose of a liquidated damages provision to eliminate the
right and responsibility of a plaintiff to prove actual damages. 24 R. Lord,
Williston on Contracts § 65:31, at 359-60 (4th ed. 2002). Thus, although the
clause does not specifically define liquidated damages as the plaintiffs’ sole
remedy, when the plaintiffs availed themselves of it, they foreclosed their
pursuit of actual damages. To conclude otherwise would permit recovery of
both liquidated and actual damages, a result contrary to the purpose of a
liquidated damages clause and decisions of this court.
The plaintiffs contend that any “mistake” they may have made in
retaining the deposit as liquidated damages should not operate to bar them
from pursuing their actual damages. The trial court, relying upon the
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 378, at 228 (1981), concluded that the
plaintiffs’ election of liquidated damages was final. The plaintiffs argue, based
upon the same provision of the Restatement, that because the defendants have
not materially changed their position based upon their election and because
their election was made with ignorance of material facts, they are not precluded
from seeking their actual damages. Assuming for purposes of this opinion that
the Restatement applies, we disagree.
First, the plaintiffs do not allege any material facts of which they were
ignorant in making their election. They allege only that they interpreted the
contract to permit recovery of liquidated damages and actual damages. As
such, we do not find this argument availing.
The plaintiffs’ argument that they are not bound by their election
because there has been no material change by the defendants is in accord with
general principles of contract law that when a party has a choice of remedy and
elects one, he or she is not bound by his or her first choice in some instances.
See id.; see also 13 R. Lord, Williston on Contracts § 39:34, at 650 (4th ed.
2000). The electing party, however, will be bound by his or her choice when
there has been justifiable reliance or a material change by the other party such
6
that a new selection would be unfairly prejudicial. 13 R. Lord, Williston on
Contracts § 39:34, at 650; 12 A. Corbin, Corbin on Contracts § 1220, at 495,
503-04 (Interim ed. 2002). According to the Restatement, “[a] change of
position is ‘material’ within the meaning of this Section if it is such that in all
the circumstances a shift in remedies would be unjust.” Restatement (Second)
of Contracts § 378 comment a at 228.
The trial court concluded that the plaintiffs’ election prevented them from
pursuing a claim for their actual damages. Although the trial court did not
specifically find that permitting the plaintiffs to seek a shift in remedies would
be unjust, we assume that it made all subsidiary findings necessary to support
its ruling that the plaintiffs are precluded from pursuing a claim for their
actual damages. See N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Mottolo, 155 N.H. 57, 63
(2007). Here, the trial court had evidence that the plaintiffs retained the
deposit, an act indicating that they had elected the liquidated damages as their
remedy and had, therefore, opted not to pursue a claim for their actual
damages. Further, the plaintiffs retained the deposit, without communication
to the defendants, for nearly a year and a half before instituting this suit.
Indeed, the plaintiffs have never indicated that they would return the
liquidated damages prior to seeking to recover their alleged actual damages.
Thus, the defendants have been deprived of the use of $25,000 for a
substantial time without any indication that it might be returned and the
plaintiffs have had the benefit of the money without any offer to return it prior
to seeking additional damages. Under these circumstances, we conclude that
the trial court did not err in determining that the plaintiffs’ election was final,
precluding a claim for their actual damages.
Finally, the plaintiffs contend that the parties’ contract should be
construed against the defendants because the parties had unequal bargaining
power, and because the defendants did not disclose a material contingency.
Based upon the record before us, we are not persuaded by the plaintiffs’
arguments, nor are we convinced that they have any impact on the validity or
enforceability of the parties’ contract and its liquidated damages clause.
Accordingly, because the parties’ liquidated damages clause is valid, and
because the plaintiffs are bound by their election of the liquidated damages
pursuant to that clause, we hold that the trial court did not err in granting
summary judgment to the defendants.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ, concurred.
7