THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Employment Security
No. 2008-412
APPEAL OF JULIE MOTUZAS
(New Hampshire Department of Employment Security)
Argued: April 7, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 1, 2009
Franklin Pierce Law Center Civil Practice Clinic, of Concord (Mary
Pilkington-Casey and Peter S. Wright, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Wright orally),
for the petitioner.
Littler Mendelson, P.C., of Boston, Massachusetts (Christopher B.
Kaczmarek on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Julie Motuzas, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Department of Employment Security Appeal Tribunal
(tribunal), which found that she was terminated by the respondent, Sam’s
East, Inc. (Sam’s Club), for misconduct. On appeal, Motuzas argues that the
tribunal based its decision upon impermissible grounds and violated her due
process rights. We reverse.
The record supports the following facts. On October 3, 2005, an
unidentified woman entered the Sam’s Club store in Hudson and stole two 32-
inch televisions together valued at approximately $3000. According to Sam’s
Club, the same woman had been defrauding Sam’s Club stores throughout the
northeast. The woman, who was not a member of Sam’s Club, entered the
store empty handed. She proceeded to the sales floor, took a bag of dog food,
and went to the membership services desk, where Motuzas was working as an
associate. The woman told Motuzas that she would like to return the dog food.
Store policy requires the customer have a door slip to make a return.
Door slips are given to customers as they enter a store with merchandise to
return, and serve to notify membership service associates that the customer
actually brought the item into the store. The policy also requires that a
manager become involved in a return transaction when a customer does not
have a door slip or a receipt, and, in the absence of a receipt, that refunds be
issued on gift cards.
Here, because the woman did not have a door slip, Motuzas directed her
to the entrance greeter, who gave her a slip. The woman then gave Motuzas a
crumpled partial receipt and asked for a cash refund for five bags of dog food.
She told Motuzas that she had bought five bags that were spoiled, and that she
had called the manager, Steve Flaherty, the day before to ask for a refund. The
woman said that Flaherty instructed her to bring in the unopened bag, and
that she could get a cash refund for all five. Believing that Flaherty had
authorized the transaction, Motuzas began processing a cash refund. To do so,
however, she had to call a supervisor, who performed a “key flick” and entered
a code that authorized the cash transaction. The woman then told the
supervisor that she had seen children stealing DVDs, causing the supervisor to
leave and investigate. Motuzas finished the transaction and gave the woman
$163.68 in cash.
The woman then returned to the sales floor, loaded two 32-inch
televisions onto a flatbed cart, and proceeded to the exit without paying. The
security footage, which did not contain any audio, showed that the exit greeter
stopped the woman, who motioned toward the membership services desk. The
greeter looked over toward the desk and then let the woman leave. A Sam’s
Club witness testified at the hearing that the greeter told investigators that
Motuzas indicated the woman was free to leave with the televisions. As the
woman exited the store, a manager, who was helping another customer carry
out a large purchase, again asked the woman if she had a receipt. The
manager testified that Motuzas yelled over “she’s all set,” and that he let her
exit with the televisions.
After helping the other customer load the purchase into a car, the
manager testified that he returned to the membership desk and directly asked
Motuzas if the woman had paid for the televisions, and that Motuzas said she
had. Security footage, however, clearly showed that the manager spoke with a
different associate at the desk, and that Motuzas was helping another
customer the entire time he was at the desk talking to the other associate.
A later audit revealed that two televisions were missing, and an
investigation ensued. During the investigation, Sam’s Club learned that
2
Motuzas had helped the suspect with the dog food refund, and believed that
she had also helped the woman steal the televisions. Jacqueline Bell, the
regional loss prevention representative, interviewed Motuzas, who remembered
the dog food refund, but could not recall anything concerning the televisions.
Sam’s Club then terminated Motuzas’ employment. On the exit interview form,
a box was checked indicating that Motuzas was terminated for “Gross
Misconduct – Integrity Issue (Theft, Violent Act, Dishonesty, Misappropriation
of Company Assets).” The form specifically stated that she was terminated for
“failure to follow proper refund policy. Not getting mngmt approval—resulting
in $3000 + loss.”
Following her termination, Motuzas applied for unemployment benefits,
stating: “I got accused of letting a member go out the door without paying [for]
something when I did not.” Although Sam’s Club responded that Motuzas had
performed an improper refund and helped a woman leave the store with
televisions, causing a $3000 loss, it provided no documentation or evidence.
The certifying officer therefore granted Motuzas’ request for benefits. Sam’s
Club then appealed to the tribunal, stating: “We wish to appeal the
determination based on the following. The claimant was discharged for failing
to protect the employers [sic] assets which resulted in a $3000.00 loss to
employer.”
After a hearing, the tribunal found that Motuzas had performed an
improper refund and had assisted the woman in leaving with the televisions.
The tribunal therefore reversed the decision of the certifying officer, and
required Motuzas to reimburse the State for $1816 in overpaid benefits.
Motuzas filed a motion to reopen the matter because the tribunal did not view
the security tapes, but rather relied upon the testimony of Sam’s Club
witnesses. The motion was granted for the limited purpose of allowing
introduction of the videotapes. After the hearing, to which Sam’s Club brought
only an edited copy of the security footage, the tribunal issued a decision. A
third hearing was required, however, because the tribunal simply retyped its
prior decision without any additional findings concerning the video. At that
hearing, the tribunal viewed the unedited footage in its entirety, and took
additional comments from the parties. Despite the fact that the footage directly
contradicted the testimony of some of the store’s witnesses, the tribunal
nonetheless denied Motuzas benefits. Motuzas appealed the decision to the
New Hampshire Department of Employment Security Appellate Board (board).
The board found that Motuzas had been prejudiced by the tribunal’s
consideration of an additional and irrelevant theft by the same woman three
days later, as well as by the fact that the tribunal went beyond the limited
purpose for reopening by taking new evidence in addition to viewing the
security tapes. The board therefore vacated the decision and remanded to the
tribunal for a fourth hearing to be held de novo.
3
After the de novo hearing, the tribunal found that there was absolutely
no evidence supporting the allegation that Motuzas helped the woman steal the
televisions. It did, however, conclude that the improper refund alone
constituted the type of misconduct warranting denial of benefits under Appeal
of New Hampshire Sweepstakes Commission, 130 N.H. 659, 664 (1988)
(holding that single instance of misconduct is sufficient to deny benefits if it is
“a deliberate violation of a company rule reasonably designed to protect the
legitimate interests of the employer”). Thus, although the tribunal found that
Motuzas had nothing to do with the television theft, it nonetheless reversed the
determination of the certifying officer, and required Motuzas to repay $1816 in
overpaid benefits. Her appeal to the board and motion for reconsideration were
denied; this appeal followed.
On appeal, Motuzas argues that the tribunal erred in: (1) interjecting
impermissible grounds for finding misconduct; (2) finding she acted in willful
disregard of her employer’s best interests; and (3) not giving her adequate
notice as to the grounds for her termination, thereby violating her due process
rights.
Our review of the tribunal’s decision is confined to the record and we will
not substitute our judgment for that of the tribunal as to the weight of the
evidence on questions of fact. RSA 282-A:67, IV, V (1999). We will, however,
reverse, modify or remand the decision for further proceedings if the
substantial rights of the petitioner were prejudiced because the administrative
findings, inferences, or conclusions were “unauthorized, affected by an error of
law, or clearly erroneous in view of all the evidence presented.” Appeal of
Kaplan, 153 N.H. 296, 298 (2006); see RSA 282-A:67, V.
New Hampshire’s unemployment compensation system is predicated
upon benefits being paid to those who become unemployed through no fault of
their own. Appeal of Lakeview NeuroRehabilitation Ctr., 150 N.H. 205, 208
(2003). A person is ineligible for benefits if she is “discharged for misconduct
connected with [her] work, if so found by the commissioner.” RSA 282-A:32,
I(b) (Supp. 2008). Sam’s Club argues that it terminated Motuzas for
misconduct, and that benefits should therefore be denied.
We first address Motuzas’ argument that the tribunal substituted an
impermissible justification for denying benefits. In support of her argument,
Motuzas relies upon Smith v. Adams, 118 N.H. 48 (1978). In Smith, an
employee missed three days of work because his wife was sick; his employer
terminated him, stating that he had quit voluntarily by reason of a three-day
unexplained absence. Smith, 118 N.H. at 49. The tribunal and trial court both
upheld the denial of benefits because of the employee’s excessive absenteeism,
citing incidents other than the three-day absence. Id. at 50. On appeal, we
noted that the tribunal has some discretion to determine whether an employee
was discharged for misconduct. Id. at 51; see RSA 282-A:32, I(b). We held,
4
however, that the “inquiry into possible misconduct may not be conducted in
disregard of the stated and conceded reason for the termination of an
employment relationship.” Smith, 118 N.H. at 51.
Motuzas argues that Sam’s Club saw the improper dog food refund as a
connection between her and the woman, but not as a separate incident of
misconduct justifying termination. Rather, Sam’s Club terminated her solely
because of its mistaken belief that she had been complicit in the loss of the
televisions, and would not in fact have done so based upon the refund alone.
Sam’s Club responds that it terminated Motuzas for both the improper refund
and the television incident. Thus, it argues, the tribunal did not base the
denial of benefits upon a justification other than that for which Motuzas was
actually terminated.
Given the parties’ disagreement concerning the reason for termination,
we must review the record to determine whether a reasonable person could
have found that Sam’s Club terminated Motuzas on two separate grounds. See
Appeal of Kelly, 129 N.H. 462, 465 (1987). After a review of the record, we are
not persuaded that Sam’s Club used the improper return as independent
grounds for Motuzas’ termination. The record clearly indicates that Motuzas
was discharged because of her perceived complicity in the television theft.
Indeed, Sam’s Club operated under such a theory until it responded to
Motuzas’ closing statements at the final de novo hearing. As the tribunal
found, however, there was no evidence that Motuzas was involved in the
television theft. After a review of the record, we cannot help but reach the
same conclusion.
Although the exit interview form references the improper refund, it
ultimately states that Motuzas was fired for the $3000 loss. When Sam’s Club
appealed the certifying officer’s decision, it stated that Motuzas “was
discharged for failing to protect the employers [sic] assets which resulted in a
$3000.00 loss to employer.” When asked by the tribunal at the first hearing
why Motuzas was dismissed, Bell stated: “Basically, we lost a couple of
televisions and she was primarily involved in the process that the company
puts in place in order to prevent that from happening and by not following the
procedures.” When asked what Motuzas was told when she was terminated,
Bell stated: “[I]f the policies had been followed, if a member of management
had been called over, if the policies at the door had been handled properly . . .
we wouldn’t have lost those televisions. . . . [B]y her not following policy and
her admittance of not following policy, we lost over $3,000 . . . .”
At the second hearing, which the tribunal held to view the security
footage, Motuzas stated: “[W]hen I was told that I was let go it was from doing
an improper refund involving a $3,000 loss, which the refund clearly shows
that I only did a refund for dog food. It was nothing involved with TVs.” At the
third hearing, which the tribunal held to view the unedited footage, she again
5
stated that she was told she was discharged for the television loss, and argued
that she had nothing to do with that incident. In response, Bell stated that she
was fired because her failure to follow policy “resulted in a $3,000 loss, which
was those two TVs on this date.”
At the final de novo hearing, Bell was again asked why Motuzas was
terminated. She testified that Motuzas was discharged because “steps were not
taken [to protect assets], there was someone that was able to exit our building
with two televisions, and there were other ample times, there were
circumstances in which there could have been an intervention in that process
of her walking out of the building with two televisions . . . .” Bell also testified
that store policy was to terminate cashiers causing a loss of more than $500.
Although that policy did not apply to Motuzas as a membership services
associate, Bell used it as a comparison to demonstrate why the degree of loss
in this case merited termination for misconduct. Because it was clear that
Sam’s Club terminated Motuzas because it believed her actions resulted in the
loss of the televisions, the tribunal’s inquiry should have been limited to the
theft of the televisions. See Smith, 118 N.H. at 51.
Indeed, in closing, Sam’s Club stated: “[T]hrough a combination of
written documentation, testimony under oath today, and the videotape
testimony . . . Sam’s Club has established that Ms. Motuzas was terminated for
violating company policies that led directly to a loss of in excess of $3,000
. . . .” Motuzas then argued that there was no evidence she had participated
in the theft, and that the improper return by itself was not the type of single,
deliberate incident that justifies denial of benefits for misconduct. It was only
then, at the close of the fourth tribunal hearing, that Sam’s Club argued two
distinct offenses occurred.
In support of its argument that Motuzas was in fact terminated for the
refund, and thus that the two incidents were separate grounds for termination,
Sam’s Club points out that Motuzas testified that she believed she was
“terminated for an improper refund.” Reviewing her testimony in context,
however, reveals that Motuzas believed she was terminated for an improper
refund “that resulted in the loss of $3,000,” not a loss of $163.68. In fact, that
is precisely what her exit form states.
Because we reverse based upon Motuzas’ first argument, we need not
address her remaining arguments.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6