THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-499
MARCELLA MCGRATH
v.
SNH DEVELOPMENT, INC. & a.
Argued: February 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2009
Fernald, Taft, Falby & Little, P.A., of Peterborough (Richard L.
Pennington on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas Quarles, Jr.
and Leigh S. Willey on the brief, and Mr. Quarles orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Marcella McGrath, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendants, SNH Development, Inc. and John Doe, an unnamed individual.
We affirm.
I
The undisputed facts are as follows. On February 20, 2004, the plaintiff
was snowboarding at the Crotched Mountain Ski Area when she was involved
in a collision with a snowmobile operated by John Doe, an employee of the ski
area. Crotched Mountain Ski Area is owned and operated by SNH
Development, Inc., a subsidiary of Peak Resorts, Inc.
Prior to this incident, the plaintiff, a season pass holder, was required to
sign two separate documents in order to obtain her pass (the agreements). The
first, an application for the pass, states:
I understand and accept the fact that alpine skiing in its various
forms is a hazardous sport, and I realize that injuries are a
common occurrence. I agree, as a condition of being allowed to
use the ski area facility, that I freely accept and voluntarily assume
all risks of personal injury or death or property damage, and
release Crotched Mountain its owners and its agents, employees,
directors, officers and shareholders from any and all liability for
personal injury or property damage which results in any way from
negligence, conditions on or about the premises, the operations of
the ski area including, but not limited to, grooming, snow making,
ski lift operations, actions or omissions of employees or agents of
the area, or my participation in skiing, accepting myself the full
responsibility.
The second document, a “Liability Release Agreement,” contains language
identical to the application in all material respects, again providing, “I agree, as
a condition of being allowed to use the area facility, that I . . . release Peak
Resorts, Inc., . . . from any and all liability for personal injury . . . which results
in any way from negligence . . . .”
The plaintiff subsequently filed a negligence action against the
defendants. The defendants moved for summary judgment, arguing that the
agreements, signed by the plaintiff, are valid and enforceable exculpatory
contracts. The trial court granted the motion. After her motion for
reconsideration was denied, the plaintiff filed this appeal.
When we review a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Orr v. Goodwin, 157 N.H.
511, 513 (2008). “We will affirm if the evidence reveals no genuine issue of
material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law.” Dean v. MacDonald, 147 N.H. 263, 266 (2001) (quotation omitted). We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
Although New Hampshire law generally prohibits exculpatory
contracts, we will enforce them if: (1) they do not violate public
policy; (2) the plaintiff understood the import of the agreement or a
2
reasonable person in his position would have understood the
import of the agreement; and (3) the plaintiff’s claims were within
the contemplation of the parties when they executed the contract.
Id. at 266-67.
On appeal, the plaintiff asserts that the application and liability release
agreement are unenforceable because: (1) they violate public policy; (2) the
parties did not contemplate the negligent operation of a snowmobile when the
contracts were executed; and (3) as a matter of law, a release should be limited
in application to the ordinary risks inherent to the sport or sports in question.
We address each argument in turn.
II
The plaintiff first asserts that the ski pass application and liability
release agreement are unenforceable because they violate public policy. “A
defendant seeking to avoid liability must show that an exculpatory agreement
does not contravene public policy; i.e., that no special relationship existed
between the parties and that there was no other disparity in bargaining power.”
Barnes v. N.H. Karting Assoc., 128 N.H. 102, 106 (1986). We have found an
agreement to be against public policy if, among other things, it is injurious to
the interests of the public, violates some public statute, or tends to interfere
with the public welfare or safety. Harper v. Healthsource New Hampshire, 140
N.H. 770, 775 (1996).
The plaintiff argues that, “[p]ublic policy is clearly offended by the notion
that [the] Defendants would be relieved from public safety laws enacted
pertaining to snowmobiles,” namely, RSA chapter 215-C (Supp. 2008), by
virtue of an exculpatory contract. The plaintiff notes that, under RSA chapter
215-C, it is unlawful to operate a snowmobile so as to endanger any person,
RSA 215-C:8, IV, and, further, a snowmobile “shall yield the right of way to any
person on . . . skis,” RSA 215-C:49, XII. The plaintiff alleges these provisions
were violated, and it would be against public policy to “relieve” the defendants
of these statutory requirements. The defendants, however, argue that RSA
chapter 215-C does not apply to the operation of snowmobiles on private
property, and, thus, the statute has no bearing on the enforcement of the
agreements.
Assuming, without deciding, that RSA chapter 215-C applies to the
operation of snowmobiles on privately owned land, we disagree that the
agreements relieve the defendants of any responsibility under the statute. The
plaintiff’s waiver of negligence claims in the agreements has no effect upon the
enforcement of the statute. See RSA 215-C:32 (enforcement), :34 (penalties for
violation). Indeed, it is the State that is charged with enforcing this statute,
3
and it is free to pursue the alleged violations, notwithstanding the plaintiff’s
waiver. The fact that an exculpatory agreement waives the right to bring a
negligence action arising out of an activity that is regulated by statute is not
determinative of a public policy violation. As is the case here, the interests of
the public are protected by the State’s ability to enforce the statute.
Irrespective of the statute, the plaintiff has voluntarily agreed not to hold the
ski area, or its employees, liable for injuries resulting from negligence so that
she may obtain a season ski pass. Therefore, we conclude the agreements do
not contravene public policy as injurious to the interests of the public, violative
of a public statute or interfering with the public welfare.
The plaintiff also argues that the agreements violate public policy
because she had a special relationship with the defendants. The plaintiff
contends that both the statutory duty to yield under RSA 215-C:49, XII and the
ski area’s status as an area of public accommodation created this special
relationship. We disagree. In Barnes, we stated that a special relationship
exists “[w]here the defendant is a common carrier, innkeeper or public utility,
or is otherwise charged with a duty of public service.” Barnes, 128 N.H. at
106. With respect to RSA chapter 215-C, the plaintiff does not point to, nor are
we aware of, any support for her proposition that this statute creates a special
relationship between the parties by virtue of its application. While the statute
does impose certain restrictions on the operation of a snowmobile, we disagree
that the statutory duty to yield is equivalent to being charged with a duty of
public service.
Likewise, the fact that the ski area is available for public use is not
dispositive of a special relationship. See id. at 108. In Barnes, we examined
the exculpatory contract between an Enduro kart racing facility and a driver
injured while racing on the track. Id. at 104-05. In determining that the
applicable release did not violate public policy, we held, “Although the
defendants serve a segment of the public, we cannot say that Enduro kart
racing is affected with a public interest. Provision of racing facilities is not a
service of great importance to the public, nor is racing a matter of practical
necessity.” Id. at 108. We likewise cannot say that the recreational activity of
snowboarding is of such great importance or necessity to the public that it
creates a special relationship between the ski area and the plaintiff.
Moreover, we disagree that there was a disparity in bargaining power
because she was required to sign the agreements before obtaining her season
pass. Where there is a disparity in bargaining power, the plaintiff may not be
deemed to have freely chosen to enter into the contract. Id. at 107.
The disparity in bargaining power may arise from the defendant’s
monopoly of a particular field of service, from the generality of use
of contract clauses insisting upon assumption of risk by all those
4
engaged in such a field, so that the plaintiff has no alternative
possibility of obtaining the service without the clause; or it may
arise from the exigencies of the needs of the plaintiff himself, which
leave him no reasonable alternative to the acceptance of the offered
terms.
Id. (quotations omitted). Here, we do not find any substantial disparity in
bargaining power. See id. at 108. Although the plaintiff was required to sign
the application and liability release agreement before obtaining her pass, she
was under no physical or economic compulsion to do so. Id. Further, the
defendants’ service is not an essential service, so there was no advantage in
bargaining strength in that regard. Id. We therefore conclude there is no
disparity in bargaining power, and the agreements do not violate public policy.
III
The plaintiff next asserts that the agreements are not enforceable
because the parties did not contemplate a liability release from negligence
involving the operation of a snowmobile. In order to uphold an exculpatory
contract, the plaintiff’s claims must have been within the contemplation of the
parties at the time of the execution of the agreement. Id. at 107. However, the
parties need not have contemplated the precise occurrence that resulted in the
plaintiff’s injuries, and may adopt language that covers a broad range of
accidents. Id.
To determine the scope of the application and liability release agreement,
we examine its language. Dean, 147 N.H. at 267. “In interpreting a release, we
give the language used by the parties its common meaning and give the
contract itself the meaning that would be attached to it by a reasonable
person.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). “As long as the language of the
release clearly and specifically indicates the intent to release the defendant
from liability for personal injury caused by the defendant’s negligence, the
agreement will be upheld.” Id. (quotation omitted). We strictly construe
exculpatory contracts against the defendant. Id.
The plaintiff asserts that a reasonable person would not understand the
agreements to apply to negligent operation of a snowmobile because neither
makes reference to a snowmobile or states that it would relieve the defendants
from the duty to safely operate snowmobiles. We disagree. The ski pass
application signed by the plaintiff clearly states: “I freely accept and voluntarily
assume all risks of personal injury . . . and release Crotched Mountain . . .
from any and all liability for personal injury or property damage which results
in any way from negligence . . . .” (Emphases added.) The liability release
agreement mirrors this language, releasing the defendants from “any and all
liability for personal injury, death or property damage which results in any way
5
from negligence.” While the application and liability release agreement do not
specifically make reference to injuries arising from the negligent operation of a
snowmobile, the language of these agreements clearly and specifically indicates
the intent to release the defendants from liability for personal injury caused by
the defendants’ negligence, which is all that is required. Id. Further, we
conclude that the plaintiff’s claim falls within the terms of the two agreements.
The plaintiff sustained injuries while using the ski area because of the alleged
negligent act of the defendant’s employee. See id. at 268.
Although making no specific argument in this regard, the plaintiff
appears to use the formatting of the agreements to support her claim that a
reasonable person would not have contemplated the agreements applied to a
collision with a snowmobile. However, upon our review of the agreements, we
conclude that neither the font nor the formatting obscured the exculpatory
clause contained in the agreements such that a reasonable person would not
be aware of its application. Cf. Wright v. Loon Mt. Recreation Corp., 140 N.H.
166, 170 (1995) (finding structure and organization of the contract did obscure
exculpatory clauses).
The plaintiff further challenges “whether the Defendants themselves
contemplated [that] the release” would apply to negligence involving a
snowmobile. However, “[w]e judge the intent of the parties by objective criteria
rather than the unmanifested states of mind of the parties.” Dean, 147 N.H. at
267 (quotation omitted). Indeed, the defendants are not required to “have
contemplated the precise occurrence that caused the plaintiff’s injuries”
provided the language of the agreements “cover[s] a broad range of accidents”
involving negligence on their part. Id. Therefore, whether the defendants
contemplated this precise occurrence is not dispositive.
IV
The plaintiff argues that the agreements should only be enforceable
against the ordinary risks inherent to the sports of skiing and snowboarding.
We disagree. While we have previously limited certain exculpatory contracts to
the inherent risks of the activity at issue, we did so based upon the language of
that specific release. See Wright, 140 N.H. at 170; Audley v. Melton, 138 N.H.
416, 418-19 (1994). In Wright, the exculpatory contract detailed the risks
involved with horseback riding, including those related to the selection of the
injured party’s horse and the “use of this animal.” Wright, 140 N.H. at 171.
The clause concluded with: “I therefore release the defendant from ANY AND
ALL LIABILITY FOR PERSONAL INJURY TO MYSELF RESULTING FROM THE
NEGLIGENCE OF THE DEFENDANT TO INCLUDE NEGLIGENCE IN
SELECTION, ADJUSTMENT OR ANY MAINTENANCE OF ANY HORSE.” Id. at
170 (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted). We concluded that the meaning
of this clause was “less than clear,” because “[t]he paragraphs preceding the
6
exculpatory clause emphasize the inherent risks of horseback riding. Because
the exculpatory clause is prefaced by the term ‘therefore,’ a reasonable person
might understand its language to relate to the inherent dangers of horseback
riding and liability for injuries that occur for that reason.” Id. (quotation
omitted). We found this language was “further clouded by the qualifying
language that follows,” and ultimately concluded that the contract “lack[ed] a
straightforward statement of the defendant’s intent to avoid liability for its
failure to use reasonable care in any way.” Id. at 170, 171-72.
In Audley, the exculpatory contract recognized certain inherent risks
associated with working with wild animals, and then promised to hold the
defendant “free of any or all liability.” Audley, 138 N.H. at 417 (quotation
omitted). We concluded that this language did not effectively release the
defendant from liability based upon his own negligence because the contract
failed to clearly state the defendant was not responsible for the consequences
of his own negligence. Id. at 419. We further stated, “The release fails in this
respect not because it neglects to use the word ‘negligence’ or any other special
terms; instead, it fails because no particular attention is called to the notion of
releasing the defendant from liability for his own negligence.” Id.
Here, there is no such ambiguity. Unlike the exculpatory clauses in both
Wright and Audley, the agreements here clearly release the defendants from
any liability relating to the negligence of its employees or the operation of the
ski area. There is no qualifying language or other provision obscuring the
defendants’ intent. Nor is there any ambiguity in the language used. We
therefore conclude that a reasonable person would have contemplated that the
agreements released the defendants from any negligence, not just from
negligence inherent to the sports of skiing and snowboarding.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
7