THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord District Court
No. 2008-917
CHRISTOPHER LALLY
v.
LAUREN FLIEDER
Submitted: September 24, 2009
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2009
Christopher Lally, by brief, pro se.
Lauren Flieder, pro se, filed no brief.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Christopher Lally, appeals the Concord District
Court’s (Boyle, J.) dismissal of his RSA chapter 540-A action against the
defendant, Lauren Flieder. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Lally rented an apartment from
Flieder as a month-to-month tenant for approximately two years. The parties
did not have a written lease agreement. In June 2008, the parties agreed that
Lally’s tenancy would terminate at the end of August. On July 31, 2008, Lally
paid rent for the month of August but told Flieder that he was not moving until
the following summer. That same day, Flieder served Lally with an eviction
notice requiring that he vacate the apartment on or before August 31, 2008.
Lally, however, remained in the apartment through the end of August. On
September 2, 2008, Flieder filed an action with the trial court seeking unpaid
rent and a writ of possession. Six days later, Flieder terminated the cable
television service to Lally’s apartment. Lally wrote a letter to Flieder requesting
that she restore the cable television service. After Flieder failed to do so, Lally
filed a petition with the trial court pursuant to RSA chapter 540-A.
On September 24, 2008, the trial court held a hearing on Lally’s request
for relief and Flieder’s petition for a writ of possession. At the hearing, Flieder
testified that after speaking with the cable provider, she learned that Lally’s
apartment was receiving cable television through an illegal connection. Upon
discovering this information, she disconnected a wire supplying cable to Lally’s
apartment. Lally argued that the termination of the cable connection was
designed to carry out a self-help eviction. The trial court granted Flieder’s
petition for a writ of possession and dismissed Lally’s action, ruling that cable
television is not a protected utility under RSA 540-A:3, I.
On appeal, Lally first argues that the trial court erred by ruling that
cable television service is not a protected utility service for purposes of RSA
540-A:3, I. Second, he contends that Flieder attempted to unlawfully evict him
in violation of RSA 540-A:2. A third issue regarding an alleged violation of the
right to quiet enjoyment under RSA 540-A:2 is raised in the notice of appeal
but not briefed, and therefore we deem it waived. See In re Estate of King, 149
N.H. 226, 230 (2003).
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). We are the final arbiter of
the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered
as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to
modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will
neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did
not see fit to include. Id.
RSA 540-A:3, I, provides:
No landlord shall willfully cause, directly or indirectly, the
interruption or termination of any utility service being
supplied to the tenant including, but not limited to water,
heat, light, electricity, gas, telephone, sewerage, elevator or
refrigeration, whether or not the utility service is under the
control of the landlord, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs are in
process or during temporary emergencies.
RSA 540-A:3, I.
2
“We have said that where the phrase ‘including, but not limited to’ is
used in a statute, the application of that statute is limited to the types of items
particularized therein.” State v. Njogu, 156 N.H. 551, 553 (2007). Thus, read
in the context of the statute as a whole, the plain and unambiguous language
of RSA 540-A:3, I, protects “any utility service” that is comparable to those
services it has specified. The specified utility services in RSA 540-A:3, I, all
pertain to the habitability of a dwelling or a person’s well-being. Modern cable
television also pertains to the habitability of a dwelling and a person’s well-
being. Indeed, many people access essential telephone service, the Internet,
news information and entertainment by way of cable. Thus, the unlawful
termination of a tenant’s cable television service would be a means of
accomplishing a self-help eviction — the very evil the legislature meant to
deter. The legislative history supports the conclusion that RSA 540-A:3, I, was
intended to prevent landlords from engaging in self-help tactics. At a hearing,
the Senate Public Works Committee considered testimony that a landlord
seeking to evict a tenant would “do things such as turn off the heat, electricity
or other utilities.” Moreover, the New Hampshire House Journal indicates:
“This bill is needed because of the abuse of a landlord to his tenants in evicting
the person without giving proper