THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2008-429
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WILLIAM DALLING
Argued: June 11, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 4, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Julia M. Nye, public defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
HICKS, J. Following his conviction for possession of a controlled
substance, see RSA 318-B:2 (2004) (amended 2008), :26 (Supp. 2008), the
defendant, William Dalling, appeals a ruling of the Superior Court (Vaughan,
J.) denying his motion to suppress. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In July 2007, staff at the
Veteran’s Hospital in White River Junction, Vermont, contacted Officer
Kenneth May of the Enfield Police Department regarding an assault victim,
Alison Ferm, in their care. Officer May spoke with Ferm, who revealed that the
defendant, Ferm’s live-in boyfriend, caused her injuries by punching her in the
face during a domestic dispute. Ferm also revealed that the defendant
repeatedly cooked, and recently smoked, crack cocaine at her residence.
According to Ferm, the defendant manufactured crack cocaine in a room above
Ferm’s garage to which he had exclusive access.
Ferm discussed the altercation in detail with Officer May. She noted
that, soon after the assault, the defendant left Ferm’s house with a number of
boxes filled with items such as “overnight clothes”; that the defendant planned
to return the next day; and that the defendant had indicated that their
relationship was over. Furthermore, Ferm speculated that the defendant had
removed “everything illegal” from her house; although the defendant had
warned Ferm not to call the police, Ferm said the defendant “knew” she would
anyway.
That same day, Officer May applied for a search warrant of Ferm’s house.
In the supporting affidavit, Officer May described his conversation with Ferm.
He recounted the altercation and specifically noted Ferm’s allegations, based
upon first-hand knowledge, that the defendant cooked and smoked crack
cocaine at Ferm’s house. He also explained in the affidavit that, based upon
his expertise, drug users who manufacture crack cocaine tend to keep their
cooking utensils where they live; these utensils are often caked with cocaine
residue. On the typed affidavit, Officer May included a handwritten annotation
saying, “Ferm indicated that she thinks Dalling may hav[e] taken the cocaine
[f]rom the residence.”
A district court judge issued a warrant, and Officer May and other
members of the Enfield Police Department executed it that night. While
searching the household, the police seized a variety of drug-related
paraphernalia, some of which later tested positive for cocaine residue. Aside
from the cocaine residue, they did not find any drugs. Prior to trial, the
defendant moved to suppress evidence seized during the search. The trial
court denied this motion after a hearing.
On appeal, the defendant contends first that the supporting affidavit did
not establish probable cause on its face, and second that Officer May made
material misrepresentations in the affidavit by intentionally or recklessly
omitting relevant information, in violation of Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution.
The defendant does not assert violations of his rights under the Fourth
Amendment of the Federal Constitution. Thus, we analyze the defendant’s
claims solely under the State Constitution.
2
We review the trial court’s order de novo, except with respect to any
controlling factual findings. State v. Zwicker, 151 N.H. 179, 185 (2004).
Nevertheless, we afford much deference to a magistrate’s determination of
probable cause and will not invalidate warrants by reading the evidence in a
hypertechnical sense. Id. Instead, we review the affidavit in a common-sense
manner, and determine close cases “by the preference to be accorded to
warrants.” State v. Kirsch, 139 N.H. 647, 650 (1995) (quotation omitted).
We hold that an impartial magistrate could find probable cause based
upon the affidavit. The affidavit recounted Ferm’s recent first-hand
observations of the defendant’s drug use. Ferm’s observations included details
regarding the defendant’s method of crack cocaine manufacture. See Zwicker,
151 N.H. at 186 (noting that level of detail bears upon determinations of
probable cause). Furthermore, Officer May explained in the affidavit how his
professional experience corroborated Ferm’s observations of crack cocaine
manufacture. See State v. Hazen, 131 N.H. 196, 200 (1988) (describing police
corroboration as an indication of an informant’s reliability). Because the
affidavit supported the conclusion that the defendant manufactured and
recently used crack cocaine at Ferm’s residence, there was a “substantial
likelihood” based upon the totality of the circumstances that a search of Ferm’s
residence would reveal evidence that the defendant possessed cocaine.
Zwicker, 151 N.H. at 185.
The defendant contends that Officer May’s handwritten annotation,
referencing Ferm’s suspicion that the defendant removed cocaine from the
premises, defeats a finding of probable cause. We disagree. This note does not
posit that the defendant also removed the utensils to cook crack cocaine.
Because such utensils often contain cocaine residue, as the affidavit noted,
there still remained a substantial likelihood that the police would discover
evidence of the commission of a crime upon a search.
The defendant also argues that Officer May recklessly or intentionally
made material misrepresentations in the affidavit by omitting relevant
information. If so, evidence gained pursuant to the search warrant is generally
suppressed. State v. Spero, 117 N.H. 199, 206 (1977). Omissions are material
when the inclusion of omitted information in an affidavit would defeat a
magistrate’s finding of probable cause. State v. Wilkinson, 136 N.H. 170, 174
(1992). However, “[t]he mere possibility that an item of undisclosed
information might have helped the defendant does not . . . require[] that it be
disclosed in an affidavit for a search warrant.” State v. Gubitosi, 151 N.H. 764,
769 (2005) (quotation omitted).
The defendant contends that Officer May omitted Ferm’s belief that the
defendant removed “everything illegal,” as opposed to just “cocaine.” The
defendant further argues that Officer May omitted two facts supporting this
3
belief: that the defendant left Ferm’s residence with personal items, and that he
“knew” that Ferm would contact the police. Had Ferm seen the defendant
remove contraband first-hand or heard the defendant say he planned to remove
contraband, and had Officer May omitted this information, this would be a
more difficult case. However, the relevant facts do not directly support Ferm’s
belief.
In order to support probable cause to search a residence, affidavits must
establish a sufficient nexus between the illicit objects and the place to be
searched. State v. Silvestri, 136 N.H. 522, 527-28 (1992). In the instant case,
the affidavit establishes a nexus between the drug paraphernalia sought and
Ferm’s residence. The defendant in essence argues that Ferm’s belief that the
defendant removed all illegal items, if included in the affidavit, would have
defeated this nexus. However, the evidence supporting Ferm’s belief – that the
defendant feared Ferm contacting the police and left with some of his
belongings – is insufficient by itself to defeat an otherwise ample showing of
probable cause.
The magistrate could still have found probable cause even if the omitted
information had been included in the affidavit. He could have done so by
finding that Ferm’s belief was mere speculation or that there was a substantial
likelihood that even if the defendant did remove some incriminating objects
from Ferm’s residence, others remained.
We hold that the omissions are immaterial, and we therefore need not
consider whether they were recklessly or intentionally made.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
4