THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-392
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHARLES COOK
Argued: March 18, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 15, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Jeffco, Starbranch & Soldati, of Portsmouth (Lincoln T. Soldati on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Charles Cook, appeals from a jury verdict
in Superior Court (Smukler, J.) convicting him of one count of aggravated
felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2, III (Supp. 2008), and one count of
simple assault, see RSA 631:2-a, I(a) (2007). On appeal, the defendant argues
that the trial court erred in denying his motion in limine to exclude evidence of
similar conduct in Pennsylvania and in denying his motion to dismiss the
misdemeanor simple assault charge. We reverse and remand.
The record reveals the following facts. The defendant was indicted on
two charges: aggravated felonious sexual assault and simple assault. The
former indictment alleged that between December 27, 1998, and December 26,
2002, the defendant engaged in a pattern of touching M.C.’s breast, for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification, when she was less than thirteen
years old. The latter indictment alleged that within the same time frame, the
defendant caused unprivileged physical contact to M.C. by one single act of
putting his tongue in her mouth. M.C. is the defendant’s granddaughter.
Before trial, the defendant filed a motion in limine seeking to exclude
prior bad acts pursuant to New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b). The
defendant faced charges in Pennsylvania of aggravated indecent assault,
indecent assault, and corruption of minors arising out of similar acts during
the same time period and involving the same victim. In addition to touching
M.C.’s breasts and kissing, however, the Pennsylvania acts also included digital
vaginal penetration. The trial court, pursuant to a Rule 404(b) analysis,
admitted the Pennsylvania acts that were the same as those alleged in the
pattern indictment—i.e., touching M.C.’s breasts. The trial court found the
evidence admissible to show the defendant’s intent to commit a pattern of
sexual assault. The trial court, however, excluded evidence of digital
penetration.
At trial, M.C. testified that in 1998, when she was nine years old, she
lived in Belmont with her mother and step-father. The defendant lived in
Pennsylvania, but would visit often. During these visits he would tuck her into
bed at night and touch her breasts and kiss her using his tongue. M.C. also
testified that she would visit the defendant in Pennsylvania and the same acts
would occur while they were on four-wheelers. M.C. testified that when she
would go out on trails with the defendant, the defendant would stop the four-
wheeler and put his hand down her shirt and touch her breasts. Following her
testimony about the Pennsylvania incidents, the defendant requested a limiting
instruction. The trial court instructed the jury that it could only consider the
Pennsylvania acts for the limited purpose of “determining whether the State
has or has not proved the Defendant’s intent to engage in a pattern.”
At the close of the State’s case, and again at the close of the evidence, the
defendant moved to dismiss the simple assault charge, arguing that the statute
of limitations had expired. The trial court took the matter under advisement,
and later denied the motion.
At the close of all the evidence, the trial court gave the following
instruction to the jury as to the Pennsylvania acts:
Some evidence was introduced for a limited purpose. In particular,
the State has offered evidence of other acts by the Defendant
2
toward [M.C.] for which [he] has not been charged. If you find
such evidence to be credible, you may consider it only for the
limited purpose of determining whether the Defendant had the
intent to engage in a pattern of aggravated felonious sexual assault
as charged.
The jury returned verdicts of guilty on both charges. On appeal, the
defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) admitting the Pennsylvania
acts and its instruction to the jury; and (2) denying his motion to dismiss the
simple assault charge.
We first address whether admission of the Pennsylvania acts pursuant to
Rule 404(b) was error. Although the defendant characterizes this issue as
plain error, see State v. Sideris, 157 N.H. 258, 264 (2008), the State correctly
points out that the defendant timely objected at trial. The issue was thus
preserved for appeal and the plain error rule is inapplicable.
Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
The purpose of Rule 404(b) is to ensure that the defendant is tried on the
merits of the crime as charged and to prevent a conviction based upon evidence
of other crimes or wrongs. State v. Beltran, 153 N.H. 643, 647 (2006). We
have established a three-part test for the admissibility of evidence under Rule
404(b): (1) the evidence must be relevant for a purpose other than proving the
defendant’s character or disposition; (2) there must be clear proof that the
defendant committed the act; and (3) the probative value of the evidence must
not be substantially outweighed by its prejudice to the defendant. Id. The
party offering the evidence bears the burden of demonstrating the admissibility
of prior bad acts. Id. We review the trial court’s ruling for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, and will reverse only if it was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of the defendant’s case. Id.
Here, as to the first prong, the trial court found that the evidence was
relevant for the limited purpose of showing the defendant’s intent to commit a
pattern of sexual assault. The trial court stated: “[T]he state has the burden of
proving more than the defendant’s intent to commit each individual act of
felonious sexual assault, it must also prove that the defendant had the intent
to engage in a pattern.” The trial court thus found that the State met its
3
burden to prove the Pennsylvania acts were offered for a purpose other than to
show the defendant acted in conformity therewith. As to the second prong, the
trial court conducted a clear proof inquiry and found that the State had
sustained its burden. As to the last prong, the trial court found: “[E]vidence of
those Pennsylvania acts is highly probative of the defendant’s intent to engage
in a pattern—an element of the crime that the state is required to prove beyond
a reasonable doubt.” Moreover, it found: “The charged conduct here involves a
pattern of assaults; therefore, the introduction of similar conduct occurring at
the same time in a different place would not be surprising nor unduly
prejudicial.” The trial court concluded that “the danger of unfair prejudice can
be addressed by a limiting instruction.”
The defendant argues, and the State candidly concedes, that it was error
for the trial court to admit this evidence for the purpose of proving the
defendant’s intent to commit a pattern of sexual assault. The parties agree
that the State need not prove the defendant had the intent to commit a pattern
of sexual assault. The defendant argues the trial court erred in so instructing
the jury. Indeed, RSA 632-A:2, III provides, in pertinent part: “The mental
state applicable to the underlying acts of sexual assault need not be shown
with respect to the element of engaging in a pattern of sexual assault.” Thus,
although the State had to prove the mental state applicable to sexual assault, it
did not need to prove an additional mental state to prove the pattern element.
It was therefore error for the trial court to admit the Pennsylvania acts to prove
intent, an issue not in dispute. See State v. Kirsch, 139 N.H. 647, 654 (1995)
(“To meet the relevancy requirement, the other bad acts evidence must have
some direct bearing on an issue actually in dispute . . . .”).
The State, however, argues that although the Pennsylvania acts were
admitted for the wrong purpose, the trial court’s decision to admit them was
not error because the evidence was relevant and admissible for another
purpose—to explain why M.C. delayed disclosing the facts of the charged
conduct.
“We will not reverse a trial court decision . . . when it reaches the correct
result and valid alternative grounds exist to reach that result.” State v. Berry,
148 N.H. 88, 91 (2002). We thus address whether the Pennsylvania acts were
admissible for the purpose of explaining M.C.’s delayed disclosure. In doing so,
we first address whether the evidence was relevant for this purpose. See
Beltran, 153 N.H. at 647.
The State may introduce evidence to explain a sexual assault victim’s
behavior. See State v. Cressey, 137 N.H. 402, 411 (1993). “We have recognized
in recent years that victims of sexual assaults may not immediately disclose
them.” State v. Woodard, 146 N.H. 221, 226 (2001). “When children are
victims, they may not be aware of the wrongful nature of the conduct; other
4
victims may wish to forget the assault, or fear reprisals or disbelief if they
report.” Id. We have thus found evidence explaining delay in disclosure to be
admissible. Id. (finding introduction of prior disclosures admissible to explain
delay); State v. Dupont, 149 N.H. 70, 82 (2003) (holding admissible evidence
that defendant threatened to kill himself if victim disclosed sexual assault as
explanation for delay in disclosure); Berry, 148 N.H. at 91 (holding physical
abuse of victim admissible to explain delay in reporting sexual assaults
because victim testified she lived in constant fear).
Here, the defendant was charged with a pattern of sexual touching
occurring between December 1998 and December 2002. M.C. testified that the
defendant touched her breasts during his visits to her house in Belmont and
her visits to his residence in Pennsylvania. M.C. testified that she first
disclosed the charged acts to her mother in the spring of 2003, while driving to
the defendant’s house in Pennsylvania, and that the abuse ended then. Thus,
any delay in disclosure is between when the acts allegedly first occurred in
1998 and when M.C. disclosed in 2003. During this period, M.C. lived with her
mother and not with the defendant. She did not testify that she delayed
disclosing because she lived in fear as a result of the constant abuse, making
the Pennsylvania acts relevant. See Berry, 148 N.H. at 91. Moreover, M.C.’s
delay in reporting until 2003 was never questioned at trial. Instead, the
evidence showed that M.C. disclosed the acts multiple times, but no one
reported them to the police. We conclude that, based upon the evidence at
trial, the Pennsylvania acts are irrelevant to show any delay in disclosure.
Because this evidence is not relevant, it does not meet the first prong of the
Rule 404(b) test, and thus is not admissible on alternative grounds. See id.
Alternatively, the State argues that any error was harmless. The
harmless error standard is succinctly stated as follows:
In determining the gravity of an error, this court asks whether it
can be said beyond a reasonable doubt that the inadmissible
evidence did not affect the verdict. The evaluation of whether this
standard has been achieved involves consideration of the
alternative evidence presented at trial and of the character of the
inadmissible evidence itself. An error may be harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt
is of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight and if the
inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in
relation to the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt.
State v. Enderson, 148 N.H. 252, 255 (2002). The State bears the burden of
proving harmless error. Id.
5
Viewing the evidence in this case in its entirety, we cannot conclude
beyond a reasonable doubt that the inadmissible evidence did not affect the
jury’s decision to convict. The defendant was charged with committing a
pattern of sexual assault, requiring the State to prove that the charged sexual
assault occurred more than once. See RSA 632-A:1, I-c (Supp. 2008) (“pattern”
is defined as more than once over a period of between two months and five
years). M.C. testified that the defendant, on more than four occasions—
including once during a Christmas holiday and once during an Easter
holiday—touched her breast and put his tongue in her mouth while tucking
her into bed at her home in Belmont. She then testified that these same acts
occurred during “four-wheeler” rides at the defendant’s home in Pennsylvania.
M.C. testified that in Pennsylvania “we would go out on one of the trails or
something like that and he would stop the four-wheeler and that’s when he
would put his hand down my shirt and touch my breasts.” She testified that
she visited Pennsylvania “often” and the touching occurred “every time” she
visited. Throughout the trial, witnesses continued to reference M.C.’s visits to
Pennsylvania, including her reporting of the offenses to the Pennsylvania State
Police. During closing argument, the State mentioned the Pennsylvania acts
twice. Because the inadmissible evidence was intertwined with the alternative
admissible evidence at trial, we cannot conclude that it was inconsequential.
M.C.’s testimony was the only evidence of the charged acts. Although
her testimony does not need to be corroborated, see RSA 632-A:6, I (2007), the
alternative evidence here was not of an “overwhelming nature, quantity or
weight,” and thus amplified the importance of the Pennsylvania acts. Compare
State v. Connor, 156 N.H. 544, 549 (2007) (inadmissible fingerprint verification
testimony not harmless error because fingerprint was critical piece of evidence),
with State v. Wall, 154 N.H. 237, 245 (2006) (even if State Laboratory’s test was
inadmissible, error was harmless because the properly admitted evidence of the
defendant’s intoxication included a report of the blood alcohol content and
testimony of two officers). As a result, the trial court’s error had the potential
to substantially prejudice the defendant.
Indeed, we have stated that “some acts have a great emotional impact
upon a jury and have greater potential for appealing to a juror’s sense of
resentment or outrage.” State v. Marti, 140 N.H. 692, 695 (1996). In Marti,
the trial court admitted testimony by the victim of prior uncharged sexual
assaults perpetrated by the defendant. Id. We stated that many of the
assaults “were identical to the charged crime,” which, “[b]y its nature . . . is
precisely the sort of evidence that could create an undue tendency to induce a
decision against the defendant on some improper basis, for it effectively
obscured the charged offense and may have tempted the jury to condemn the
defendant for uncharged acts.” Id. (quotation, citation and brackets omitted).
We concluded that, similar to here, the character of the inadmissible evidence
prevented us from saying that the error was harmless. Id.; see State v.
6
Montgomery, 144 N.H. 205, 210 (1999) (“Given the character of the improper
evidence and the gravity of its potential prejudicial impact, we cannot say that
the trial court’s admission of uncharged acts of sexual assault was harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt.”). Therefore, admission of the Pennsylvania acts
was not harmless error; accordingly, the defendant’s convictions are reversed.
The State contends that the trial court’s limiting instruction “actually
worked in the defendant’s favor by imposing an additional and unnecessary
evidentiary requirement upon the State.” Because of the prejudicial impact of
the inadmissible evidence, however, the additional burden that the jury
instruction created does not render harmless the error in admitting the
Pennsylvania acts.
We next address the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred in
failing to dismiss the misdemeanor charge. The defendant argues that the
State had the burden to prove that the misdemeanor charge was brought
within the applicable statute of limitations or that the tolling provision applied.
See RSA 625:8, I(c), VI(a) (Supp. 2008). He argues that the statute of
limitations became an element of the offense that the State had the burden to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt. Although we reverse on the defendant’s first
argument, we still address this argument. See State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666,
673 (2005) (“[W]e must decide this issue because . . . the Double Jeopardy
Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions would preclude a remand for a
new trial.”).
A statute of limitations claim is a defense that the defendant must
assert. RSA 625:11, III(d) (2007); see State v. Weeks, 137 N.H. 687, 693
(1993), abrogated on other grounds by State v. Knickerbocker, 152 N.H. 467,
470 (2005); see also United States v. Cook, 84 U.S. 168, 179-80 (1872); United
States v. Titterington, 374 F.3d 453, 457 (6th Cir. 2004) (stating that Cook is
still good law). As a result, the defendant must raise the claim prior to trial. “If
a defendant intends to claim any defense specified by the Criminal Code, a
notice of such intention setting forth the grounds therefor shall be filed with
the Court . . . in accordance with the time limitations in Rule 98 . . . .” Super.
Ct. R. 101; see Super. Ct. R. 98(B)(1) (requiring notice of defense within thirty
days after entry of not guilty plea). Once the defendant timely asserts his
statute of limitations claim and “evidence pertaining to the statute of
limitations is admitted at trial,” it becomes an element of the offense. Weeks,
137 N.H. at 693; see RSA 625:11, III(d) (“element of an offense” includes “such
a result of conduct as . . . [n]egatives a defense under the statute of
limitations”); RSA 626:7, I(a) (2007) (“When evidence is admitted on a matter
declared by this code to be . . . [a] defense, the state must disprove such
defense beyond a reasonable doubt.”).
7
Here, the defendant did not file a statute of limitations claim prior to
trial. Instead, the defendant raised the issue for the first time at the close of
the State’s case. “[S]uch a proceeding would deprive the prosecutor of the right
to reply or give evidence, as the case may be . . . .” Cook, 84 U.S. at 179.
Thus, the statute of limitations did not become an element of the offense under
RSA 625:11, III(d), and the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s
motion to dismiss. See Super. Ct. R. 101 (“If the defendant fails to comply with
this rule, the Court may exclude any testimony relating to such defense or
make such other order as the interest of justice requires.”).
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8