THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-399
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAMIEN K. YOUNG
Argued: September 10, 2009
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti on the brief and orally), for
the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Damien K. Young, appeals his
convictions for one count of attempted murder, RSA 630:1-a (2007); RSA 629:1
(2007), two counts of first degree assault, RSA 631:1, I(b) (2007), and one
count of felon in possession of a firearm, RSA 159:3 (2002). He also appeals
his sentences on two of the convictions. He argues that the Superior Court
(Barry, J.) erred by: (1) denying his motion to sever the felon in possession
charge; (2) denying his motion to dismiss the charges and for a directed verdict
based upon insufficient evidence; and (3) imposing consecutive sentences for
the attempted murder conviction and assault conviction regarding the same
victim. We affirm the convictions, vacate the consecutive sentences for first
degree assault and attempted murder on the same victim, and remand.
I
The jury could have found the following facts. In the early morning
hours of March 11, 2006, the defendant, along with another man, Ian
Maranda, approached a car parked at a local restaurant in Manchester and
fired multiple gunshots into the car. Two of the three men inside the car,
Nathaniel Addo-Gyang and Anthony White, were seriously injured, but
survived. The defendant held a grudge against Addo-Gyang because he
believed that the victim had stabbed him years earlier. At some point during
the evening before the shooting, the defendant had encountered Addo-Gyang at
a local establishment and later arranged for his friends to follow Addo-Gyang in
their car so they could report his location to the defendant and Maranda. Once
the car in which Addo-Gyang was a rear-seat passenger parked at the
restaurant, the defendant and Maranda parked nearby, approached the parked
car, and began shooting into the rear and side of the vehicle. When they
finished, the defendant threw his gun under a nearby vehicle but then retrieved
it, after which both men fled.
The defendant was indicted on two counts of attempted murder, two
counts of first degree assault, and one count of being a felon in possession of a
firearm. After a consolidated trial, the jury acquitted the defendant on one
count of attempted murder but convicted him on the remaining charges. This
appeal followed.
II
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred by denying his
motion to sever the felon in possession of a firearm count from the other
charges. He contends that he suffered undue prejudice because the jury was
exposed to highly prejudicial evidence of his prior felony convictions that
otherwise could not have been introduced into evidence in a separate trial for
assault and attempted murder.
“We will uphold the trial court’s decision not to sever cases unless we
conclude that the decision constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion.”
State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118, 120 (2003). Accordingly, “[a] defendant must
demonstrate that [an adverse severance] ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Certain procedural facts provide a necessary backdrop to the trial court’s
denial of the defendant’s motion to sever. The record demonstrates that the
defendant had agreed at a pretrial conference to stipulate to his convicted felon
2
status, an element of the firearm charge, see RSA 159:3. On the morning of
the first day of trial, a disagreement arose about the nature of the intended
stipulation. Specifically, the defendant requested that the trial court not read
it to the jury so that they would not learn of his status as a convicted felon. He
argued that his felon status would prejudice the jury’s ability to reach a fair
verdict on the assault and attempted murder charges. Rather, he wanted the
scope of the firearm charge before the jury to be limited solely to whether he
knowingly possessed a firearm.
Both the State and the trial court raised concerns about the defendant’s
request to withhold the stipulation from the jury. After further colloquy, during
which the trial court offered several options to the defendant, the defendant
ultimately withdrew his stipulation and sought to sever the firearm charge.
The trial court denied the motion to sever, and the consolidated trial
proceeded.
The State argues that the trial court’s decision to deny the defendant’s
motion to sever should be affirmed because his motion was untimely under
Superior Court Rule 98-F. We agree.
Motions to sever must be filed “not less than forty-five (45) calendar days
prior to the scheduled jury selection date or within such other time in advance
of trial as the Court may order for good cause shown or may provide for in a
pretrial scheduling order.” Super. Ct. R. 98-F. The defendant sought to sever
the firearm charge on the morning of trial without offering any good cause
whatsoever for his noncompliance with Rule 98-F. The colloquy in the
transcript indicates that sometime before trial, the defendant had agreed to
stipulate to his felon status. The defendant makes no argument, however, that
the parties and the court also had agreed before trial to the procedure of
accepting his stipulation without reading it to the jury. On the morning of
trial, the trial court refused the defendant’s suggested procedure, and he
offered no justification for his noncompliance with the forty-five day time limit
of Rule 98-F. Indeed, when the State raised Rule 98-F on appeal in its
responsive brief, the defendant offered no counter argument by way of a reply
brief or during oral argument to justify or excuse his noncompliance.
Accordingly, we cannot say that the trial court committed an unsustainable
exercise of discretion in denying the defendant’s motion to sever, sought for the
first time on the morning of trial. Any resulting prejudice to the defendant was
directly attributable to his unexplained delay in seeking severance in a timely
manner.
To the extent the defendant argues that the trial court was obligated to
accept his stipulation without reading it to the jury, we reject his argument.
The defendant contends that in State v. Cardin, 129 N.H. 137 (1987), we
“allowed the defendant in a driving while intoxicated (subsequent) prosecution
3
to stipulate to his prior record without putting evidence of the prior record
before the jury.” Cardin, however, is readily distinguishable because that
defendant’s stipulation to the prior DWI conviction was relevant only to
enhanced sentencing and was not part of the essential elements of the crime
charged. Cardin, 129 N.H. at 139. We reasoned, “since the prior conviction is
relevant only to sentencing, and the defendant has stipulated to its validity, the
jury has no need to know of it.” Id.
By contrast, the defendant’s status as a convicted felon is what rendered
his gun possession illegal. Thus, unlike in Cardin, the defendant’s stipulation
in this case pertained to an essential element of the firearm charge. Indeed,
the defendant admitted before the trial court that reading a stipulation of an
essential element of a crime to the jury is normal procedure. Yet, on the
morning of trial, he requested a novel procedure and, on appeal, he cites no
cases demonstrating that the trial court was required to or ought to have
accepted it. Because he did not develop his argument beyond citing Cardin, we
need not address it any further. See In re Kotey M., 158 N.H. 358, 361 (2009)
(court declined to review undeveloped argument).
III
The defendant next argues that the State failed to present sufficient
evidence to support each of his convictions. More specifically, he argues that
the evidence was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was
one of the shooters, that he possessed a firearm on the evening of the shooting,
or that he inflicted injury on either victim. The State contends, however, that
the defendant preserved a sufficiency challenge only to his first degree assault
convictions based upon his assertion that the evidence failed to demonstrate
that any bullets he fired actually injured the victims. The State also contends
that the evidence was sufficient for the jury to convict the defendant on each
charge as either a principal or an accomplice, as the indictments alleged.
We assume without deciding that the defendant preserved his sufficiency
challenges in the trial court. We, however, agree with the State that under
either principal or accomplice liability, sufficient evidence was presented for a
rational juror to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant
committed the crimes of attempted murder on Addo-Gyang, first degree assault
on both Addo-Gyang and White, and felon in possession of a firearm.
Our standard for review in this area is well established:
To prevail in a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant bears the burden of proving that no rational trier of
fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State,
could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In reviewing
4
the evidence, we examine each evidentiary item in the context of
all the evidence, not in isolation. Circumstantial evidence may be
sufficient to support a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt. Further, the trier may draw reasonable inferences from
facts proved and also inferences from facts found as a result of
other inferences, provided they can be reasonably drawn
therefrom.
State v. Crie, 154 N.H. 403, 406 (2006) (citations omitted).
To prove attempted murder, the State is required to submit sufficient
evidence that a person took a substantial step toward killing another with the
purpose of accomplishing the killing. RSA 630:1-a; RSA 629:1. The attempted
murder indictment here alleged that the defendant acted in concert with
Maranda, and with the purpose of causing the death of Addo-Gyang, when he
pointed and discharged a firearm into the vehicle Addo-Gyang occupied under
circumstances the defendant believed constituted a substantial step towards
killing Addo-Gyang. Thus, the defendant was charged as both a principal and
an accomplice. See State v. Munson, 146 N.H 712, 716 (2001). To prove
accomplice liability, the State was required to submit sufficient evidence that:
“(1) the accomplice had the purpose to make the crime succeed; (2) the
accomplice’s acts solicited, aided or attempted to aid another in committing the
offense; and (3) . . . the accomplice shared the requisite mental state for the
offense.” State v. Duran, 158 N.H. 146, 151 (2008).
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
that it was sufficient for a rational juror to find beyond a reasonable doubt that
the defendant committed the crime of attempted murder against Addo-Gyang,
either as a principal or as an accomplice. Numerous witnesses, including the
two victims, testified about the history between the defendant and Addo-Gyang
and the events surrounding the shooting. The defendant held a long-time
grudge against Addo-Gyang because the defendant believed that Addo-Gyang
had stabbed him in a fight years earlier. On the evening of the shooting, the
two saw one another at a local establishment and had a brief hostile exchange,
where the defendant made a threatening gesture toward Addo-Gyang. Addo-
Gyang left with his friends, including White, the other victim. The defendant
and Maranda also drove away with a friend.
The defendant and Maranda used a cell phone to call a group of female
friends traveling in a different car. They instructed the women to follow Addo-
Gyang and inform them of his location. The women did so and kept in
constant telephone contact with the two men. En route, the women pulled up
behind the victims’ car at a gas station, where one woman got out and
confirmed that Addo-Gyang was a rear-seat passenger, then returned to her
car. Ultimately, the women followed the victims to a local restaurant where
5
they both parked. The defendant and Maranda instructed their driver to drop
them off in a nearby alley, and she complied. The men alit from the car with
guns at their sides, and Maranda told the friend to leave immediately. The two
men walked over to the parked car occupied by Addo-Gyang, White and
another man, then fired multiple gunshots, aiming toward the back and side of
the vehicle. Both Addo-Gyang and White were struck, and Addo-Gyang
suffered approximately nine gunshot wounds. The defendant threw his gun
under a nearby car, retrieved it, and then fled.
The defendant advances numerous challenges to certain aspects of the
evidence. In particular, he argues that “the State’s witnesses simply couldn’t
put a firearm in [his] hand, couldn’t identify the number of shooters, couldn’t
identify the number of guns used, and couldn’t identify [his] location during
the shooting.” To support these attacks on the evidence, he points to
inconsistencies in the testimony of certain witnesses between their direct and
cross-examinations, and among various witnesses’ direct testimony. In the
end, however, a “[c]ommon sense evaluation of the credibility of witnesses . . .
is [within] the province and obligation of the jury.” State v. Huard, 138 N.H.
256, 259 (1994). Witness testimony supports all the facts outlined above,
including that the defendant and Maranda possessed guns that evening,
tracked the car occupied by Addo-Gyang, took aim at multiple targets on the
car where people would be expected to be located, and together discharged
numerous gunshots with the intention of killing Addo-Gyang. Even if the
evidence failed to establish that any bullet fired by the defendant actually
struck Addo-Gyang, a rational juror could have convicted him of attempted
murder under the facts outlined above as either a principal or an accomplice
because actual injury is not an element of the crime.
We turn to the first degree assault indictments involving the two victims,
Addo-Gyang and White, both of whom occupied the targeted vehicle. To prove
first degree assault under RSA 631:1, I(b), the State is required to submit
sufficient evidence that a defendant purposely or knowingly caused bodily
injury to another by means of a deadly weapon, see RSA 625:11, V (2007)
(defining deadly weapon). The assault indictments alleged that the defendant,
acting in concert with the other shooter, knowingly caused bodily injury to
each victim by discharging a firearm at the vehicle they occupied and causing
numerous gunshot wounds. The assault indictments, therefore, also charged
the defendant as both a principal and an accomplice. Thus, while proof that
each victim incurred bodily injury was necessary to secure the first degree
assault convictions, evidence supporting each element of accomplice liability
also would be sufficient to support the convictions against the defendant.
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
that it was sufficient for a rational juror to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt
that: (1) the defendant had the purpose to inflict bodily injury on each victim;
6
(2) he committed acts that aided the commission of the assaults; and (3) he
committed these acts knowing that the victims would incur bodily injury. See
Duran, 158 N.H. at 151 (outlining elements of accomplice liability). Even if
none of the defendant’s bullets actually hit either victim, the evidence was
sufficient to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that his purposeful acts were
intended to, and actually did, aid the other shooter in accomplishing the first
degree assaults on each victim. Cf. State v. Merritt, 143 N.H. 714, 718 (1999)
(accomplice liability requires proof that the defendant intended to, and actually
did, aid the primary actor).
We briefly turn to the firearm charge. To secure a conviction for felon in
possession of a firearm, the State must prove that: (1) the defendant knowingly
owned, possessed or controlled a firearm; and (2) he was previously convicted
of a felony. RSA 159:3, I; State v. Stratton, 132 N.H. 451, 457 (1989). The
indictment alleged that the defendant knowingly possessed a firearm after
having been convicted of several felonies in Massachusetts in 2004. The State
submitted evidence of his criminal history that identified the felony convictions.
Moreover, despite the questions of credibility raised by the defendant, several
witnesses testified that they actually saw the defendant holding a gun that
evening, or saw him extend his arm like he was holding a gun and witnessed
muzzle flashes coming from the location where a gun would be located in his
hand. Therefore, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State,
a rational jury could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant,
a convicted felon, unlawfully possessed a firearm that evening.
IV
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by imposing
consecutive sentences on the assault and attempted murder convictions
regarding the same victim. He contends that the consecutive sentences violate
both the common law doctrine of merger and the constitutional prohibition
against double jeopardy. The State argues that imposition of consecutive
sentences does not violate the doctrine of merger because each of the ten
bullets fired into the car comprises a separate criminal act. Because we agree
with the defendant’s merger argument, we need not address the constitutional
claim.
Our jurisprudence on the common law doctrine of merger is limited. See
State v. Higgins, 149 N.H. 290, 302 (2003) (declining to address merger
argument as either cursory in nature or wholly lacking in merit); State v.
Naughton, 139 N.H. 73, 76 (1994) (information for unlawful transporting and
information for attempting to unlawfully dispose of solid waste for same load of
debris did not violate doctrine of merger); Lord v. The State, 18 N.H. 173, 178
(1846) (noting that lesser offense merges into greater offense when the greater
offense has been committed). Other jurisdictions, however, have more fully
7
explored and developed the doctrine of merger. See, e.g., Ludy v. State, 658
S.E.2d 745 (Ga. 2008); People v. Williams, 892 N.E.2d 620 (Ill. App. Ct. 2008);
Com. v. Anderson, 650 A.2d 20 (Pa. 1994). In fact, some states have adopted
legislation circumscribing the scope of merging criminal convictions. See, e.g.,
State v. Cabrales, 886 N.E.2d 181, 187 (Ohio 2008) (state statute regarding
“allied offenses” essentially codified judicial merger); State v. Gonzales-
Gutierrez, 171 P.3d 384, 391-92 (Or. Ct. App. 2007) (merger statute regarding
multiple inchoate crimes designed for the commission of a single crime), review
denied, 179 P.3d 672 (Or. 2008). The parties’ limited briefing on merger,
however, gives us no cause to move beyond our own extrapolation of the
doctrine in Naughton, 139 N.H. at 76.
While a single transaction can give rise to multiple, distinct offenses,
crimes will merge only where the identical criminal act constitutes both
offenses. See Naughton, 139 N.H. at 76. We first must determine whether the
crimes as charged are based upon identical criminal conduct or activity. See
id. If so, we next examine the underlying criminal statutes to discern whether
the legislature intended that the single transaction give rise to multiple,
distinct offenses. Id. In particular, we examine whether the statutes specify
different unlawful activity. See id.
The indictments at issue charged the defendant with the identical
criminal activity; namely, intentionally discharging a firearm into the vehicle
occupied by Addo-Gyang. In the first degree assault indictment, the State
alleged that the defendant
in concert with Ian Maranda, . . . knowingly caused bodily
injury to Nathaniel Addo[-]Gyang by means of a deadly
weapon, a firearm, by discharging the firearm at the vehicle
where he was seated, thereby causing numerous gunshot
wounds.
(Emphasis added.) In the attempted murder indictment, the State alleged that
the defendant
with the purpose to cause the death of Nathaniel Addo-
Gyang, . . . in concert with Ian Maranda, pointed and
discharged a firearm, a deadly weapon, into a vehicle
occupied by Nathaniel Addo-Gyang, said acts under the
circumstances as he believed them to be constituted a
substantial step towards the commission of the crime.
(Emphasis added.) We acknowledge that the indictments allege different mens
reas and consequences of intentional conduct. Specifically, the assault charge
alleges that the defendant knowingly caused bodily injury (multiple gunshot
8
wounds), whereas the attempted murder charge alleges that he had the
purpose to cause the death of Addo-Gyang when he took a substantial step
toward the commission of the crime. Obviously, attempted murder, as an
inchoate crime, does not require that bodily injury actually occur to support a
conviction based upon the substantial step taken to achieve the killing.
Merger, however, focuses upon whether the criminal charges are based upon
the identical criminal act or transaction, not the result itself. Here, the
indictments both charged the defendant with the identical unlawful act of
intentionally discharging a firearm into a car occupied by Addo-Gyang.
We reject the State’s argument that the indictments were based upon
different criminal acts of violence. The State seeks to isolate each of the ten
bullets that were collectively discharged by the shooters as separate criminal
acts. According to the State, one of the bullets hit a victim other than Addo-
Gyang and two lodged in a first aid kit. Thus, it argues, any single bullet could
have satisfied the substantial step alleged in the attempted murder indictment,
whereas the bullets that did not hit Addo-Gyang could not support the bodily
injury element alleged in the assault indictment. This may be true, but, under
Naughton, we look to how the State actually charged the defendant. Id. The
State does not provide any authority to justify varying from this approach.
Accordingly, because both indictments alleged the defendant’s discharge of the
firearm as a single criminal transaction, we conclude that they were based
upon identical criminal activity.
Next, we must determine whether the legislature intended for a single
criminal act or transaction to give rise to distinct offenses of first degree assault
and attempted murder. See id. In so doing, under the doctrine of merger we
focus upon the particular unlawful activity that is proscribed by the statutes.
See id. The statutory provision for first degree assault, under which the
defendant was charged, proscribes a person from purposely or knowingly
causing bodily injury to another by means of a deadly weapon, RSA 631:1, I(b).
The statutory provision for attempted murder, under which the defendant was
charged, proscribes a person from taking a substantial step toward causing
another’s death with the purpose of killing that person, RSA 630:1-a; RSA
629:1. Intentionally trying to kill a person and knowingly inflicting bodily
injury on that same person do not constitute two distinct criminal activities
when the identical criminal conduct is the basis of both charges. We conclude
that the legislature did not intend for identical criminal conduct to give rise to
distinct charges for first degree assault and attempted murder.
We emphasize that the State did not distinguish among the bullets fired
by the defendant when charging him with assault and attempted murder. In
other words, the indictments did not charge the defendant with first degree
assault based upon the bullets that actually hit Addo-Gyang, while charging
him with attempted murder based upon the bullets that were shot at Addo-
9
Gyang but missed. Rather, the same shooting activity was the basis of both
indictments. Further, the criminal activity of attempted murder identified in
this case subsumes the criminal activity of seeking to cause bodily injury to
that same person with the same conduct. Accordingly, under the
circumstances of this case, we conclude that the trial court erred by imposing
consecutive sentences for the first degree assault and attempted murder
convictions regarding the same victim. We vacate the sentences and remand
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part; remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
10