THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack County Probate Court
No. 2008-331
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF PAUL T. WILLIAMS
Argued: March 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2009
Diane Williams Galebach, by brief and orally, pro se.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Portsmouth (David
Wolowitz and Andrea L. Daly on the brief, and Mr. Wolowitz orally), for the
appellees.
BRODERICK, C.J. The appellant, Diane Williams Galebach, appeals
orders of the Merrimack County Probate Court (King, J.), which, among other
things, established a guardianship over her brother, Paul T. Williams. See RSA
ch. 464-A (2004 & Supp. 2008). We dismiss her appeal.
The record supports the following. Paul Williams was born in 1973 and
is the second youngest of fifteen children. He lived with his parents until
sometime in 2006, when they became unable to care for him. Williams then
lived with different siblings in order to determine if any of the living
arrangements was a good fit. The appellees, Mary Vicinanzo and Margaret
Pince, are two of Williams’ older siblings. Both have large families and live next
to each other in Concord. Williams has consistently expressed a strong
preference to live with both families and to have Vicinanzo and Pince appointed
as his co-guardians.
In November 2007, Vicinanzo and Pince filed a petition for guardianship
of an incapacitated person. Galebach filed a cross-petition for limited
guardianship, requesting that her brother’s guardianship be limited in scope.
She did not challenge, however, the need for a guardianship, nor did she
oppose the appointment of her sisters as co-guardians. Galebach’s cross-
petition made a request for discovery before any guardianship was authorized.
She also filed a motion for appointment of a guardian ad litem (GAL) for her
brother, served requests for interrogatories and production of documents on
Pince, and served a notice of deposition on her father. Vicinanzo and Pince
moved to strike the discovery requests on the grounds that they were
“inappropriate . . . oppressive and unduly burdensome . . . and largely focused
on [Galebach’s] personal issues with their family and their religious interests.”
Following a preliminary hearing in March 2008, the probate court denied
Galebach’s motion to appoint a GAL, and granted the sisters’ motion to strike
discovery. The probate court reasoned that while Probate Court Rule 36
contemplates discovery by adverse parties, the parties before it did not dispute
the need for a guardianship or the proper persons to serve in that capacity, and
found that “the discovery sought is not reasonable and will serve only to
further delay a final resolution to the case.” Further, the court determined that
Galebach would be allowed to participate in the final hearing, to examine
witnesses, and to introduce evidence on relevant issues, but that neither
discovery nor the hearing could be used “as a forum to air out family disputes
which have been ongoing for several years.”
Prior to the final guardianship hearing in April 2008, Galebach filed a
motion for a limited guardianship over her brother, reiterating the statements
of her earlier cross-petition. She also informed the probate court that she
would be unable to attend the final hearing due to an out-of-state trip.
Subsequent to the April 8, 2008 final guardianship hearing, at which Williams
was present and represented by counsel, the probate court appointed
Vicinanzo and Pince as co-guardians over his person, and denied Galebach’s
motion for limitations, stating:
The purpose of this order is to address the Motion for
Limitations on Guardianship filed by Mrs. Galebach. In her
motion, Mrs. Galebach asks the court to allow Paul to retain the
right to make decisions concerning four specific issues. . . .
[C]ounsel for [Vicinanzo and Pince] and counsel for Paul Williams
addressed the issues raised by Mrs. Galebach during the course of
the final hearing.
The court had an opportunity during the course of the
hearing to observe the credibility and demeanor of the petitioners
as well as Paul Williams, and to see the interaction between Paul,
the petitioners, and several other family members. Having
2
considered the issues raised in the motion in light of the evidence
presented, the court is not going to limit the guardians’ powers
beyond the findings and orders contained in the Guardian over the
Person Order issued this date. The court is convinced that the
guardians well understand their obligations as Paul’s guardians
and that they will allow their brother the greatest amount of
personal freedom and civil liberties consistent with his mental and
physical limitations. The motion for limitations is therefore
DENIED, subject to Paul retaining all rights that he has under the
guardianship order and RSA Ch. 464-A.
On appeal, Galebach contends that the probate court failed “to protect
and give value to . . . Williams’s rights.” Terming herself an “Interested Party,”
Galebach argues that the probate court erred in: (1) refusing to limit the
guardianship; (2) denying discovery; (3) refusing to appoint a GAL; and (4)
violating the ward’s “rights to due process, free exercise of religion, and
associational rights of speech and self-expression” under the United States and
New Hampshire Constitutions. Vicinanzo and Pince seek to dismiss Galebach’s
appeal, contending that she lacks standing to appeal because she is not an
aggrieved person within the scope of RSA 567-A:1 (2007).
In response to the contention that she lacks standing to pursue this
appeal, Galebach states that she “participated as an [i]nterested [person] in the
[probate court],” and “made motions that were addressed on the merits, in the
course of . . . seeking to preserve [her brother’s] rights and seeking due process
and discovery for his benefit.” She contends that because her sisters did not
challenge her standing in the probate court, they have waived their right to do
so now. We disagree.
RSA 464-A:4, I, provides that “[a]ny . . . interested person . . . may file a
verified petition for finding of incapacity and appointment of a guardian.” RSA
464-A:2, XIII defines “Interested person” as “any adult who has an interest in
the welfare of the person to be protected under this chapter.” We do not
question that Galebach was an “interested person” in these proceedings and
had the right to file her petition for a limited guardianship over her brother.
Given her status as an interested person, she had the right to participate fully
in the probate court proceedings. That she was an interested person, however,
does not necessarily mean that she was “a person . . . aggrieved” by the probate
court’s guardianship order, thereby giving her standing to appeal under RSA
567-A:1. Consequently, the appellees have not waived their right to challenge
her standing to appeal the guardianship order. Moreover, even if the appellees
had not challenged Galebach’s standing, we could raise the issue sua sponte.
See Libertarian Party of N.H., 158 N.H. 194, 195 (2008).
3
Whether a party has standing presents a question of subject matter
jurisdiction, which may be addressed at any time. Id. In this case, the answer
to that question turns on our interpretation of the relevant statutes.
“We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in
the words of the statute. When construing the statute’s meaning, we first
examine its language, and where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to words used. If the language used is clear and unambiguous, we
will not look beyond the language of the statute to discern legislative intent.
We will, however, construe all parts of the statute together to effectuate its
overall purpose and to avoid an absurd or unjust result.” Garand v. Town of
Exeter, 159 N.H. ___, ___ (decided July 31, 2009) (quotation omitted). Further,
“[t]he legislature is not presumed to waste words or enact redundant provisions
and whenever possible, every word of a statute should be given effect. We also
presume that the legislature does not enact unnecessary and duplicative
provisions[, and] we interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation.” Id. at ___ (quotations and citations omitted).
Finally, “[w]e acknowledge that the legislature’s choice of language is deemed to
be meaningful, and that we generally assume that whenever the legislature
enacts a provision, it has in mind previous statutes relating to the same
subject matter. Therefore, unless the context indicates otherwise, words or
phrases in a provision that were used in a prior act pertaining to the same
subject matter will be construed in the same sense. Conversely, where the
legislature uses different language in related statutes, we assume that the
legislature intended something different.” State Employees Assoc. of N.H. v.
N.H. Div. of Personnel, 158 N.H. 338, 345 (2009) (quotations, citations, and
brackets omitted; emphasis added).
As earlier noted, RSA 464-A:4, I, governs standing to file a petition for
guardianship and provides that “[a]ny . . . interested person . . . may file a
verified petition for finding of incapacity and appointment of a guardian.” RSA
464-A:47 mandates that appeals from guardianship orders are to this court
under RSA chapter 567-A (2007). RSA 567-A:1 governs who has standing to
appeal a probate court’s guardianship order: “A person who is aggrieved by a
decree, order, appointment, grant or denial of a judge of probate which may
conclude that person’s interest in a matter before the court may appeal
therefrom to the supreme court on questions of law in accordance with rules of
the supreme court.” Consequently, we consider RSA 464-A:4, I, and RSA 567-
A:1, to be “related” for the purpose of our statutory analysis.
RSA chapter 567-A does not further define the phrase “a person . . .
aggrieved.” While we have previously adopted varied constructions of the
phrase under different circumstances, we have not previously examined the
phrase within the context of a guardianship over an adult. In Hutchins v.
Brown, 77 N.H. 105 (1913), we addressed the nearly identically worded
predecessor statute to RSA 567-A:1, but in connection with the guardianship of
4
a minor. In affirming the superior court’s dismissal of an uncle’s appeal of the
probate court’s appointment of an estate’s administrator as guardian of his two
minor nephews, we stated:
Generally, it may be said that one cannot be aggrieved by a
decision unless he has some private right which is affected
thereby. . . .
. . . .
. . . As the [appointment of the guardian] does not relate to
any property interest of the appellant in a personal or
representative capacity, and as he has not alleged any facts
establishing a legal right to the appointment, it does not appear
that any legal interest or right of his is affected, and the appeal
cannot be maintained.
Id. at 106-07 (quotation omitted); see Leonard v. Fahey, 87 N.H. 170, 172
(1934) (same). Significantly, the statute governing the guardianship of a minor
at that time contained no corresponding language concerning standing, see PS
ch. 178 (1901). The “interested person” language of RSA 464-A:2, XIII and RSA
464-A:4, I, was not at issue in Hutchins, and, in fact, was not added to the
statute concerning the guardianship of an adult until sixty-five years later, see
Laws 1978, ch. 370. Consequently, while Hutchins may prove to be helpful in
determining Galebach’s standing to appeal, it is not dispositive.
In considering whether Galebach is “a person . . . aggrieved” under RSA
567-A:1, within the interplay of that statute and RSA chapter 464-A, we must
first look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the term “aggrieved.” The
pertinent definition of “aggrieved” is “having a grievance; specif[ically] :
suffering from an infringement or denial of legal rights.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 41 (unabridged ed. 2002). It is not disputed that
Galebach was an “interested person” under RSA chapter 464-A, and had the
statutory right to file her petition in the probate court for a limited
guardianship. The court’s denial of her requested limitations is not
equivalent, however, to a denial of her legal rights.
Additionally, we look to the guardianship statute in order to effectuate its
overall purpose. RSA 464-A:1 makes clear that the purposes of RSA chapter
464-A include “promot[ing] and protect[ing] the well-being of the proposed ward
in involuntarily imposed protective proceedings” and “provid[ing] procedural
and substantive safeguards for civil liberties and property rights of a proposed
ward.” (Emphases added.) As such, the focus of the statutory protections is
clearly upon Williams, and not Galebach. Consistent with that focus, RSA
464-A:6, I, provides that a proposed ward has an “absolute and unconditional”
right to legal counsel. The legislature’s overriding concern for the protection of
5
the proposed ward’s rights must, therefore, be paramount in our construction
of the statute. In the present case, we see nothing to indicate that the probate
court’s orders have caused Galebach to suffer a legal injury for which either
RSA chapter 464-A or RSA 567-A:1 provide protection, or that her rights have
been or will be directly affected. Cf. Libertarian Party of N.H., 158 N.H. at 195
(in evaluating whether a party has standing, we focus on whether the party has
suffered a legal injury against which the law was designed to protect).
We believe that when the legislature expressly authorized that “[a]ny
. . . interested person, or any individual in his or her own behalf,” RSA 464-A:4,
I, could file a petition for a guardianship over an incapacitated person, it did so
to promote the broadest possible protection for a proposed ward by granting
generous standing to any adult with an interest in the proposed ward’s welfare.
However, with regard to standing to pursue an appeal from a probate court’s
guardianship decision under RSA 567-A:1, the legislature used a different,
more limited phrase — “a person who is aggrieved.” Assuming that the
legislature’s use of a different phrase reasonably signals a different meaning,
we believe that the legislature intended a more limited standing at the appellate
level to those persons actually aggrieved by a probate court’s guardianship
decision. See State Employees Assoc. of N.H., 158 N.H. at 345 (“where the
legislature uses different language in related statutes, we assume that the
legislature intended something different” (quotation omitted)).
Having concluded that the legislature intended the phrase “a person who
is aggrieved” to mean something more limited than any adult with an interest
in the welfare of the proposed adult ward, we turn our attention to examining
its intended limits. Here, Galebach, as an interested person, filed a petition for
a limited guardianship over her brother. Had the probate court either denied
the guardianship or granted lesser protections than what she had sought, she
would be “a person . . . aggrieved” under RSA 567-A:1 and have standing to
appeal. In either circumstance, the protections she sought for her brother
would not have been granted. Her status as an aggrieved person would flow,
not from any denial of her own rights, but from the denial of protections sought
for the proposed ward.
Further, we do not question that the person whose interests are
protected under the guardianship statute — the proposed ward — could appeal
the imposition of a guardianship as an aggrieved person, whether a
guardianship petition was granted in full or not. Given the legislature’s
concern for safeguarding the civil liberties and property rights of the proposed
ward, see RSA 464-A:1, an involuntarily imposed guardianship might impose
greater protections than necessary. As provided for by RSA 464-A:6, I,
Williams’ rights, including his right to appeal any legal error by the probate
court, were adequately protected by his absolute right to counsel. Pursuant to
Supreme Court Rule 32-A, Williams’ counsel had the responsibility to pursue
6
an appeal of the probate court’s guardianship decision if Williams so desired,
even if counsel determined that such an appeal would be frivolous.
Thus, while we conclude that there is broad standing for any interested
person to petition for the appointment of a guardian under RSA 464-A:4, I, the
same is not true with regard to an interested person’s ability to appeal when
that person either opposes or seeks to limit a guardianship. In either case, the
right of appeal would rest with the proposed ward — here, Williams — as the
proposed ward would be aggrieved by a guardianship that he did not want or
that imposed greater protections than necessary. The legislature provided for
that by guaranteeing counsel for the proposed ward in such proceedings.
In her cross-petition, Galebach neither challenged Williams’ need for a
limited guardianship, nor opposed her sisters as the co-guardians. Although
she contends that the probate court imposed greater protections on her brother
than she requested, the right of appeal in this case rests with her brother, who
was represented by counsel, and not Galebach. Here, only Williams has the
right to appeal the imposition of the guardianship or the specific protections;
Vicinanzo, Pince, and Galebach would have the right to appeal if the
guardianship were not granted, or if the probate court had imposed fewer
restrictions on the ward’s liberties than those requested in the petition.
We have not previously defined the phrase in RSA 567-A:1 — “a person
who is aggrieved” — within the context of an appeal pursuant to RSA chapter
464-A, and we need not define its exact parameters here. We simply hold that
pursuant to the statutory scheme, the appellant, an interested person under
RSA 464-A:4, I, who did not contest either the need for a guardianship over her
brother or the proposed guardians, but who unsuccessfully petitioned to place
certain limitations on the guardianship over her brother, is not “a person who
is aggrieved” under RSA 567-A:1 and does not have standing to pursue an
appeal in this case.
In her brief, Galebach argues that she is a person aggrieved because she
“acted in a representative capacity” for her brother in the probate court. In her
reply brief, she adds that she “filed three substantive motions and served three
discovery requests . . . in a representative capacity for [her brother’s] rights.”
To the extent that Galebach intended her argument to refer to providing legal
representation for her brother, as inferred by Vicinanzo and Pince at oral
argument, we disagree. Pursuant to RSA 464-A:6, Williams was fully
represented in the probate court by counsel. Even assuming that Galebach
could have acted in a representative capacity for her brother, as either his
counsel, see RSA 311:1 (2005) (“A party in any cause or proceeding
. . . may be represented by any citizen of good character.”), or as a GAL if
appointed, we underscore that she acted as neither in this case.
7
We also disagree with Galebach’s contention that, as Williams’ sister, she
is a person aggrieved with standing to appeal because she holds a “private
right” of her brother “in a representative capacity as his closest relative in the
proceeding.” In support of her contention, Galebach first relies upon the
following passage:
A person is aggrieved when he has some private right which
is affected by the decision of the probate court, and this private
right may be held in a representative capacity.
10 C. DeGrandpre, New Hampshire Practice, Probate Law and Procedure § 13-
3(a), at 120 (3d ed. 2001). In support of the statement in his treatise,
DeGrandpre cites to Hutchins v. Brown. While the Hutchins case supports
DeGrandpre’s statement, we do not view the case as supportive of Galebach’s
argument.
As previously mentioned, Hutchins v. Brown involved a probate court’s
appointment of the administrator of a decedent’s estate, as guardian of the
decedent’s two minor sons. Hutchins, the minors’ paternal uncle, had
unsuccessfully petitioned for his own appointment as guardian. Hutchins
appealed to the superior court, which granted the administrator’s motion to
dismiss. Hutchins, 77 N.H. at 105-06. We affirmed the superior court on the
grounds that Hutchins had no right, under the nearly identically worded
predecessor statute to RSA 567-A:1, to maintain an appeal. Id. at 108.
Specifically, we stated: “Generally, it may be said that one cannot be aggrieved
by a decision unless he has some private right which is affected thereby.” Id.
at 106 (quotation omitted). We noted further that “an executor named in a will
has an interest in his representative capacity sufficient to maintain an appeal
from a decree disallowing the will,” and “[a] foreign administrator may appeal
from the appointment of an administrator in this state,” id. at 107. Further (as
noted by DeGrandpre in his treatise), “[i]n short, there is a right of appeal when
the rights affected are held in a representative capacity,” id. We concluded:
The plaintiff, as the uncle of the minors, is properly deeply
interested in their welfare, but his interest is that of affection and
friendship. His interest in the [appointment of the guardian]
arising therefrom is natural and proper; but not being of a
pecuniary nature or resting upon a personal right, he is not a
person legally aggrieved.
Id. at 107-08.
Hutchins had no representative capacity of a private right and, thus, no
standing to appeal the probate court appointment of the administrator as
guardian. While Galebach’s reliance upon DeGrandpre’s treatise, with its
8
reference to Hutchins v. Brown, might have merit in a will contest if she were
the executor of Williams’ estate, that is not the case here.
Citing In re Estate of Kelly, 130 N.H. 773 (1988), Galebach next argues
that her “close blood relationship” to Williams, as his sister, satisfies the
representative capacity standing requirement. We believe that her reliance
upon Estate of Kelly is misplaced. In Estate of Kelly, which did not concern
RSA chapter 464-A, the first issue raised was whether the petitioners,
grandchildren of the decedent, had standing to appeal the probate court’s
decision in a will contest under RSA 567-A:1. The decedent had left $10,000 in
a testamentary trust to be distributed to her grandchildren when the last of
them reached the age of thirty-five. Estate of Kelly, 130 N.H. at 775. We
stated:
The general rule is that an aggrieved person under [RSA 567-
A:1] is one who has a direct pecuniary interest in the estate of the
testator which will be impaired if the instrument in question is
held to be a valid will. Furthermore, the interest which the person
must possess is such that if he prevails in the contest he will be
entitled to a distributive share in the testator’s estate. In other
words, a will contestant must generally have some direct legal or
equitable interest in the decedent’s estate.
Generally, persons who have a direct legal or equitable
interest in the estate are heirs, creditors or legatees under a prior
will. The term heir applies to those who take by reason of blood
relationship or persons who would take the estate under the
statute of distribution. RSA 561:1, which provides for intestate
distribution, and RSA 21:20, which defines “issue” as all “lawful
lineal descendants of an ancestor,” make it clear that petitioners
are heirs.
We conclude that the petitioners are heirs, and that their
pecuniary interests under the will are affected by the order of the
probate court. We therefore hold that they have standing to
appeal.
Id. at 777-78 (quotations, citations, brackets, and ellipses omitted). The
petitioners in Estate of Kelly were accorded standing not because they had a
“close blood relationship” with the decedent, as argued by Galebach. Instead,
they were accorded standing because, as persons who would take the
decedent’s estate under the statute of distribution, they had a direct pecuniary
interest in the estate, and that interest would be impaired if the will in question
were held to be valid. In the instant case, none of those factors applies to
Galebach.
9
That an “interested person” has standing to bring a petition to limit the
scope of a proposed guardianship, but does not necessarily have standing to
appeal a probate court’s grant of a guardianship with greater protections than
requested, is, we believe, consistent with that section of RSA chapter 464-A
concerning the termination of a guardianship. Pursuant to RSA 464-A:40,
either the “ward or any person interested in the ward’s welfare may, at any
time, file a motion for the termination of the guardianship.” As with RSA 464-
A:4, RSA 464-A:40 provides for broad standing to commence proceedings
designed to protect the ward by removing limitations on the ward’s rights. At
the termination hearing, conducted in a manner similar to that of the
guardianship hearing and with the ward’s rights protected by counsel, the
burden is on the guardian to prove that the grounds for the appointment of the
guardian continue to exist, see RSA 464-A:40, II(c). If the probate court denies
the petition for termination, the right of appeal lies with the ward. It does not
lie with the person interested, as that person has not suffered a legal injury
against which RSA chapter 464-A was designed to protect, and that person’s
own rights have not been directly affected. If the probate court grants the
petition, the right of appeal lies with the guardian — the person who, the
probate court ruled, had not carried the burden of proof.
We also believe our holding today is consistent with our related cases. In
Green v. Foster, 104 N.H. 287 (1962), the plaintiff, a sister-in-law of the
decedent, sought to set aside the probate of the decedent’s will on the grounds
of incompetency, undue influence, and fraud. The plaintiff was not an heir but
had received a legacy under the will; the allowance of the will confirmed her
legacy. In dismissing the plaintiff’s appeal and affirming the superior court’s
decision that she was not a proper party to contest the will, we relied on the
nearly identically worded predecessor statute to RSA 567-A:1 and stated:
The general rule is that an aggrieved person under statutes
similar to RSA 567:1 is one who has a direct pecuniary interest in
the estate of the alleged testator which will be defeated or impaired
if the instrument in question is held to be a valid will. This general
definition is neither complete nor comprehensive since there are
other parties who may be allowed to appeal providing they have an
official or public duty to do so even though they may not have any
direct or pecuniary interest in the estate as such.
. . . The contestant not being an heir or a creditor, or a
legatee under a prior will, and having no official or public duty in
connection with the administration of the estate cannot be
considered an aggrieved person under the governing statute . . . .
The probate appeal statute is more restrictive than other
statutes allowing appeals, presumably because there is a public
policy in favor of securing the orderly and expeditious settlement of
10
estates. The probate appeal statute . . . also expresses a policy
against will contests except by those who can show a direct
interest, private or public, which will be adversely affected if the
will is allowed.
Green, 104 N.H. at 288-89 (quotation, citations, and ellipsis omitted); see also
Bryant v. Allen, 6 N.H. 116, 118 (1833) (plaintiff, with interest in decedent’s
real estate, entitled to appeal allowance of administrator’s accounting by
probate court: “every person, whose rights may be affected by the decree, may
be considered as so aggrieved as to entitle him to appeal”); Shirley v. Healds, 34
N.H. 407, 412 (1857) (executor named in decedent’s last will and testament
entitled to appeal probate court’s disallowance of the will: “It would be quite
remarkable if a person were made liable to punishment for not doing what he
had not sufficient interest to give him a legal right to do.”); Bennett v.
Tuftonborough, 72 N.H. 63, 64 (1903) (“Generally, it may be said that one
cannot be legally aggrieved by a decision unless he has some private right
which is affected thereby.”); Worthen v. Railroad, 77 N.H. 520, 520-21 (1915)
(in wrongful death action brought by estate’s administrator, appointed for sole
purpose of bringing suit, defendant railroad not entitled to appeal probate
court decree appointing administrator).
Having determined that Galebach lacks standing to appeal in this case,
we need not address her other arguments.
Appeal dismissed.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; DALIANIS, J., concurred specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. I concur in the result the majority
reaches. I write separately, however, because I believe that this appeal is
resolved by applying RSA 21:2 (2000), and because, in my view, the majority
has decided issues that are not squarely before us.
RSA 21:2 governs our statutory interpretation. It provides: “Words and
phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language; but technical words and phrases, and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, shall be construed and
understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.”
RSA 567-A:1 (2007) provides: “A person who is aggrieved by a decree,
order, appointment, grant or denial of a judge of probate which may conclude
that person’s interest in a matter before the court may appeal therefrom to the
supreme court on questions of law in accordance with rules of the supreme
court.” Our construction of the phrase “person . . . aggrieved” is well-settled
and long-standing. See, e.g., Johnson v. Town of Wolfeboro Planning Bd., 157
N.H. 94, 99 (2007) (to be a “person[ ] aggrieved” under RSA 677:15 (2008), “a
11
litigant must have a direct definite interest in the outcome of the proceedings”);
In re Estate of Kelly, 130 N.H. 773, 777 (1988) (to be a “person . . . aggrieved”
under RSA 567-A:1, in the context of a will contest, a person must have a
“direct pecuniary interest” in the testator’s estate (quotation omitted));
Hutchins v. Brown, 77 N.H. 105, 106 (1913) (to be a “person . . . aggrieved”
under predecessor to RSA 567-A:1, in the context of proceeding to appoint
guardian for minor child, person must have “some private right which is
affected thereby” (quotation and brackets omitted)); cf. Appeal of Richards, 134
N.H. 148, 154 (to be a person “directly affected” by an administrative agency
decision and, thus, to have standing under RSA 541:3 (2007) to appeal that
decision, person must show that “he has suffered or will suffer an injury in
fact” (quotation omitted)), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 899 (1991); Weeks Restaurant
Corp. v. City of Dover, 119 N.H. 541, 543 (1979) (“There is no significant
distinction between ‘persons directly affected,’ and ‘persons aggrieved.’”
(citations omitted)). “[T]he legislature is presumed to know the meaning of the
words it chooses and to use those words advisedly.” State v. Njogu, 156 N.H.
551, 554 (2007).
Applying this well-settled definition of “person . . . aggrieved” to the
present case, I agree with the majority that the appellant, Diane Williams
Galebach, has failed to demonstrate that she has a direct, definite interest in
the guardianship proceedings concerning her brother. Accordingly, she is not
a “person . . . aggrieved” within the meaning of RSA 567-A:1, and, thus, lacks
standing to pursue this appeal.
In my opinion, the majority addresses issues that are not before us. For
instance, the majority states: “Had the probate court either denied the
[appellant’s] petition or granted lesser protections than what she had sought,
she would be ‘a person . . . aggrieved’ under RSA 567-A:1 and have standing to
appeal.” Similarly, the majority states: “[W]e do not question that the person
whose interests are protected under the guardianship statute -- the proposed
ward -- could appeal the imposition of a guardianship as an aggrieved person,
whether a guardianship petition was granted in full or not.” Additionally, the
majority rules that the ward’s siblings “would have the right to appeal if the
guardianship were not granted, or if the probate court imposed fewer
restrictions on the ward’s liberties than those requested in the petition.” The
majority also construes RSA 464-A:40 (2004), which governs the termination of
a guardianship, a provision that is not at issue in this appeal. As these issues
are not before us, I believe we should not yet opine upon them. “This court
. . . decides actual cases, not hypothetical ones.” In the Matter of Jacobson &
Tierney, 150 N.H. 513, 519 (2004) (Nadeau, J., dissenting).
12