THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-079
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ERIC TYLER
Argued: April 16, 2009
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Peter Hinckley, assistant attorney
general, on the brief, and Elizabeth J. Baker, assistant attorney general, orally),
for the State.
Alexander E. Roth, public defender, of Dover, on the brief and orally, for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. Following a conviction for one count of simple assault, see
RSA 631:2-a (2007), the defendant, Eric Tyler, appeals a ruling of the Superior
Court (Nadeau, J.) denying a jury instruction explaining his prior acquittal on
three related counts of simple assault. We affirm.
The record supports the following. Officer Robert Kelley of the Sandown
Police Department responded to a domestic disturbance call at the defendant’s
residence the afternoon of June 13, 2006. He observed a red mark on the
defendant’s hand and wax on his forearm. He further observed that the victim,
the defendant’s girlfriend, was upset and had wax on the side of her face and
on her body. The defendant explained to Officer Kelley that they had been
arguing. The argument appears to have begun the night before, when the
defendant returned from the store with beer instead of milk. It continued the
next day culminating in the victim’s call to the police after the defendant
allegedly threw hot wax on her.
Officer Kelley arrested the defendant and charged him with four counts
of simple assault: two for striking the victim with soda cans; one for striking
her with a souvenir bat; and one for throwing hot wax. After a bench trial, the
Derry District Court (Ryan, J.) convicted the defendant only for throwing hot
wax. The defendant appealed to the superior court for a de novo jury trial. See
RSA 599:1 (Supp. 2008). Prior to trial, the State and defense agreed that
testimony regarding the circumstances leading up to the alleged wax throwing,
including the alleged assaults for which the defendant was acquitted, would be
admissible.
The State called the victim as its first witness. She testified to how the
argument began and progressed, including a detailed description of being
struck with a wooden, souvenir bat and having two full soda cans strike her
back. She further testified that, shortly before she called the police, the
defendant grabbed two votive candles which had been burning all day and
“threw the wax at [her] and then . . . smashed the two [candles] together.” On
cross-examination, the defense briefly revisited her testimony regarding the
soda cans and the souvenir bat.
After excusing the victim, the court gave the following jury instruction:
You have heard testimony regarding assaults that allegedly were
committed by the defendant that are different from and happened
previous to the assault for which he stands accused.
The only charge for your consideration is whether or not Eric
Tyler committed the crime of simple assault in that on June 13th,
2006, he knowingly caused unprivileged physical contact to [the
victim] by throwing hot wax on her. You are not to consider the
other alleged assaults in reaching a decision on whether or not he
is guilty or not guilty of this offense, and you may not speculate or
guess as to why it is that this is the one charge before you.
After Officer Kelley testified to his observations, the defendant testified to
his version of the argument and the alleged assaults. Although he agreed with
the victim as to how the argument began, he disputed how each alleged assault
occurred and whether he was the aggressor. On cross-examination, the State
2
impeached the defendant several times by referencing his testimony “in a prior
proceeding about this case.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that “[t]he trial court erred when it
denied [his] request that the jury be informed that he had previously been
acquitted of [committing the] prior bad acts about which evidence was admitted
at trial.”
Whether a particular jury instruction is necessary and the scope and
wording of jury instructions are both within the sound discretion of the trial
court, and we review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Drake, 155 N.H. 169, 172 (2007).
We interpret jury instructions as a reasonable juror would have understood
them. State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003). To show that the trial court’s
decision is unsustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001).
As a preliminary matter, we note that the parties do not dispute the
admissibility of the prior acquitted assaults. See, e.g., Dowling v. United
States, 493 U.S. 342 (1990). We express no opinion on the matter.
We begin by addressing the defendant’s argument urging us to adopt the
rule of Kinney v. People, 187 P.3d 548, 557 (Colo. 2008), and require an
acquittal instruction when the “evidence presented at trial about the prior act
indicates that the jury has likely learned or concluded that the defendant was
tried for the prior act and may be speculating as to the defendant’s guilt or
innocence in that prior trial.” Kinney’s rule is simply one articulation of the
discretionary standard already governing the administration of jury
instructions in New Hampshire. See Kinney, 187 P.3d at 557 (holding trial
court should evaluate case-by-case). While Kinney and similar cases may
prove instructive upon the limits of the trial court’s discretion, we see no need
to fetter that discretion with a rigid rule. It suffices to note here that the trial
court’s ruling was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Provided that limiting instructions are “clear and unambiguous,” State v.
White, 155 N.H. 119, 128 (2007), we credit their ability to guide the jury’s
proper use of evidence. See N.H. R. Ev. 105; see also, e.g., State v. Beltran,
153 N.H. 643, 652 (2006); State v. Dean, 129 N.H. 744, 750 (1987). The plain
language of the trial court’s instruction belies the defendant’s contention that
the court “left the impression that [he] had either already been convicted of the
other alleged assaults or that he had yet to be tried on those alleged assaults.”
That language, and particularly the final sentence, precluded any speculation
about the effect of the other alleged assaults upon the single charge before
them or the fact that only one charge of simple assault was at issue. The court
3
simply did nothing to suggest to the jury that the defendant had been or would
be tried for the other alleged assaults, and concluding otherwise on these facts
would impermissibly contravene the well-established presumption that jurors
follow instructions. See State v. Cosme, 157 N.H. 40, 46 (2008).
The defendant further contends that the failure to give an acquittal
instruction prejudiced his defense in light of his impeachment with testimony
from a prior proceeding. We disagree. As discussed above, the jury
presumably followed the original limiting instruction. In the absence of other
circumstances, see, e.g., Kinney, 187 P.3d at 558 (deliberating jury sent note
requesting previous trial transcripts), the State’s mention of prior proceedings
is insufficient to infer prejudice. Cf. State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 671, 675 (2002) (no
mistrial where testifying officer “made vague and ambiguous references to the
suppression hearing” and revealed no information about what transpired at the
hearing, its substance or its outcome).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
4