THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2008-829
MICHELLE HEMENWAY
v.
EDMUND J. HEMENWAY, JR.
Argued: October 8, 2009
Opinion Issued: January 29, 2010
Nixon, Raiche, Vogelman, Barry & Slawsky, P.A., of Manchester (Kirk C.
Simoneau and David L. Nixon on the brief, and Mr. Simoneau orally), and
Wendy Guthro, of Burlington, Massachusetts, on the brief, for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Edmund J. Hemenway, Jr., appeals a final
order of protection issued by the Derry Family Division (Moore, J.), arguing
that the trial court lacked subject matter and personal jurisdiction. We affirm
in part and reverse in part and remand.
The record reveals the following facts. The plaintiff, Michelle Hemenway,
and the defendant were married and have four children. They had lived
together in Florida until July 16, 2008, when the wife left Florida with their
children and moved to New Hampshire. They reached a mediated divorce
settlement in Florida on May 14, 2009.
At the beginning of August 2008, the wife applied for, and received, a
temporary restraining order against her husband in Massachusetts. In late
August, the wife filed a domestic violence petition pursuant to RSA chapter
173-B in the Derry Family Division and obtained a temporary restraining order
against him. In her petition, the wife alleged that he committed two acts of
criminal threatening, to wit, on July 16, 2008, in Florida, he “became verbally
abusive and threatened” her and their children, and, on August 2, 2008, he
threatened her at her parents’ house in Dracut, Massachusetts.
The family division held a hearing on the petition. The husband did not
appear but instead through counsel filed a special appearance to contest
jurisdiction. The family division found that it had jurisdiction, and concluded
that the two incidents constituted criminal threatening and therefore domestic
abuse. The family division issued a final protective order prohibiting the
husband from threatening or abusing his wife or her family members,
contacting her absent special authorization by the family division, coming
within a certain distance of her, going to her home or workplace, or taking,
converting or damaging her property. The family division also ordered the
husband to “relinquish all deadly weapons as defined in RSA 625:11, V which
may have been used, intended to be used, threatened to be used, or could be
used incident to the abuse,” “all concealed weapons permits and hunting
licenses,” and prohibited the husband from “purchasing . . . any firearms or
ammunition during the pendency of this order.” Finally, the family division
awarded custody of the children to the wife, and prohibited visitation with the
husband pending further hearing. The husband moved to reconsider, which
the family division denied. This appeal followed.
The husband argues that the family division lacked subject matter
jurisdiction over him because the incidents alleged in the petition occurred in
Massachusetts and Florida. He also contends that the family division lacked
personal jurisdiction over him under our long-arm statute, RSA 510:4 (1997),
and under the Due Process Clause of the Federal Constitution. The wife
argues that we should follow other jurisdictions and hold that a protective
order that does not impose affirmative obligations on a defendant is valid even
absent personal jurisdiction. Alternatively, she argues that the family division
had personal jurisdiction over the husband because he flew to Manchester-
Boston Regional Airport and, while she was in New Hampshire, made
threatening telephone calls and wrote her a threatening letter. She also
contends that RSA chapter 173-B, by its plain language, provided subject
matter jurisdiction over the petition.
2
I. Subject Matter Jurisdiction
We first consider the husband’s argument that the family division lacked
subject matter jurisdiction. Specifically, he argues that, because RSA 173-B:1
uses the definition of criminal threatening found in the Criminal Code, RSA
173-B:1 also incorporates the territorial jurisdiction restrictions of the Criminal
Code. See RSA 625:4 (2007) (outlining territorial jurisdiction of Criminal
Code); RSA 631:4 (defining criminal threatening). He contends that, had the
legislature intended to grant subject matter jurisdiction to the family division
over abuse that occurs outside of New Hampshire, it would have done so
explicitly. The wife relies upon the plain language of RSA 173-B:2, II.
Subject matter jurisdiction is “[j]urisdiction over the nature of the case
and the type of relief sought; the extent to which a court can rule on the
conduct of persons or the status of things.” Black’s Law Dictionary 931 (9th ed.
2009). In other words, “[s]ubject matter jurisdiction is a tribunal’s authority to
adjudicate the type of controversy involved in the action.” Shoop v. Kittitas
County, 30 P.3d 529, 532 (Wash. Ct. App. 2001), aff’d on other grounds, 65
P.3d 1194 (Wash. 2003). By contrast, “[t]erritorial jurisdiction describes the
concept that only when an offense is committed within the boundaries of the
court’s jurisdictional geographic territory . . . may the case be tried in that
state.” West v. State, 797 A.2d 1278, 1282 (Md. 2002). Absent subject matter
jurisdiction, a court order is void. In the Matter of Goulart & Goulart, 158 N.H.
328, 332 (2009). A party may challenge subject matter jurisdiction “at any
time during the proceeding, including on appeal,” and may not waive it. Close
v. Fisette, 146 N.H. 480, 483 (2001).
To determine whether the family division had subject matter jurisdiction
over the wife’s petition, we interpret RSA chapter 173-B and RSA 490-D:2,
which delineates the jurisdiction of the family division. When undertaking
statutory construction, “we first examine the language found in the statute and
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used.”
Appeal of Garrison Place, 159 N.H. __, __ (decided December 16, 2009)
(brackets and quotation omitted). “When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond [it] for further indications of legislative
intent.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Courts can neither ignore the plain language
of the legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not see fit to include.”
Appeal of Astro Spectacular, 138 N.H. 298, 300 (1994) (quotation omitted).
“We construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall purpose and
avoid an absurd or unjust result.” Residents Defending Their Homes v. Lone
Pine Hunters’ Club, 155 N.H. 486, 488 (2007) (quotation omitted).
The plain language of RSA 173-B:2, IV and RSA 490-D:2, VI granted
subject matter jurisdiction to the family division. RSA 173-B:2, IV states that
the family division has “jurisdiction over domestic violence cases.” See RSA
3
490-D:2, VI (Supp. 2009) (granting exclusive jurisdiction over “[a]ctions under
RSA 173-B, relating to protection of persons from domestic violence except for
concurrent jurisdiction with the superior and district courts to enter temporary
protective orders under RSA 173-B:4”). RSA 173-B:3, I, provides that “[a]ny
person may seek relief pursuant to RSA 173-B:5 by filing a petition, in the
county or district where the [wife or husband] resides, alleging abuse by the
[husband].” Moreover, a person who “has left the household or premises to
avoid further abuse” may “commence proceedings . . . in the county or district
where [he or she] temporarily resides.” RSA 173-B:2, II. “The fundamental
logic of that statutory provision is unassailable: a victim of domestic abuse who
seeks a place of refuge must be able to engage the protections of the law of the
jurisdiction in which she is sheltered.” Shah v. Shah, 875 A.2d 931, 937 (N.J.
2005).
We disagree with the husband’s argument that the family division lacked
subject matter jurisdiction because RSA 173-B:1 incorporates the definition of
criminal threatening found in RSA 631:4. In light of the purpose of RSA
chapter 173-B, and the distinction between proceedings under that chapter
and criminal prosecutions, we find that RSA chapter 173-B does not include
the territorial jurisdiction limitations of the Criminal Code. “RSA chapter 173-
B was enacted with the intent to preserve and protect the safety of the family
unit for all family or household members by entitling victims of domestic
violence to immediate and effective police protection and judicial relief.”
McNair v. McNair, 151 N.H. 343, 351 (2004) (quotations omitted). Accordingly,
RSA 173-B:5, I, permits the family division to “grant such relief as is necessary
to bring about a cessation of abuse” where the plaintiff demonstrates by a
preponderance of evidence that “the defendant represents a credible threat to
[his or her] safety.” Because the purpose of such proceedings is to protect the
victim from further abuse, and not to punish the abuser, such a finding results
in a protective order, but not necessarily a criminal prosecution. As a result,
the rules of evidence are relaxed during proceedings under RSA chapter 173-B.
See RSA 173-B:3, IV. To read RSA 173-B:1 to incorporate the territorial
limitations of the Criminal Code would lead to unjust and absurd results, and
we decline to do so. See Lone Pine Hunters’ Club, 155 N.H. at 488.
II. Personal Jurisdiction
We next consider the husband’s argument that the family division lacked
personal jurisdiction. “[T]he plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating facts
sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over the defendant.” Chick v. C & F
Enters., 156 N.H. 556, 557 (2007) (quotation omitted). We utilize a two-part
test to determine whether the wife has met her burden. Id. “First, the State’s
long-arm statute must authorize such jurisdiction. Second, the requirements
of the federal Due Process Clause must be satisfied.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Our long-arm statute provides that New Hampshire courts have personal
4
jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant “who, in person or through an agent,
transacts any business within the state, commits a tortious act within this
state, or has the ownership, use, or possession of any real or personal property
situated in this state . . . as to any cause of action arising from or growing out
of the acts enumerated above.” RSA 510:4, I. “Pursuant to the Federal Due
Process Clause, a court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident
[husband] if the [husband] has minimum contacts with the forum, such that
the maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions of fair play and
substantial justice.” Vt. Wholesale Bldg. Prods. v. J.W. Jones Lumber Co., 154
N.H. 625, 628 (2006) (quotation omitted). “[W]e construe the State’s long-arm
statute as permitting the exercise of jurisdiction to the extent permissible
under the Federal Due Process Clause.” Id.
We first address the wife’s argument that the family division had
personal jurisdiction because the husband flew to Manchester-Boston Regional
Airport, made threatening telephone calls and mailed her a threatening letter
while she was in New Hampshire. The wife, in her petition, alleged only that
the husband threatened her in Florida and Massachusetts, and made no
reference to threatening telephone calls or letters in New Hampshire. Although
she alleged in the petition that friends warned her that her husband was
coming to New Hampshire, the family division struck that allegation. Indeed,
the family division correctly prohibited the wife from introducing additional
instances of abuse not contained in the domestic violence petition.
“[T]he allegations in a domestic violence petition set the contours of the
hearing contest.” South v. McCabe, 156 N.H. 797, 799 (2008) (quotation and
brackets omitted). Under RSA 173-B:3, the defendant must “be supplied with
the factual allegations against him in advance of the hearing on the petition,”
and the plaintiff may amend or supplement her domestic violence petition “only
if the defendant is provided an opportunity prior to the hearing to respond to
the supplemental or amended petition.” Id. The family division “should not
admit evidence on unnoticed charges,” and cannot base a finding of domestic
abuse on allegations not included in the petition. Id. (quotation omitted); In
the Matter of Aldrich & Gauthier, 156 N.H. 33, 35 (2007); Comer v. Tracey, 156
N.H. 241, 246 (2007). Because it would be error to rely on allegations not
contained in the petition and considered by the family division, we conclude
that, on the record before us, the wife has failed to “demonstrate facts
sufficient to establish personal jurisdiction over the defendant.” Chick, 156
N.H. at 557 (quotation omitted). Therefore, we need not consider “whether the
exercise of personal jurisdiction over the [husband] would fall within the
minimum contacts standard required by the due process clause of the United
States Constitution.” Caplan v. Donovan, 879 N.E.2d 117, 122 (Mass.), cert.
denied, 128 S. Ct. 2088 (2008). However, this “conclusion . . . does not end
the inquiry.” Id.
5
Courts in several states that have considered the validity of a protective
order granted without personal jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant have
applied an exception to the personal jurisdiction requirement. See, e.g.,
Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 119; Bartsch v. Bartsch, 636 N.W.2d 3, 6 (Iowa 2001).
These courts reason that an order that prohibits abuse but does not require
affirmative action by a defendant is valid even without personal jurisdiction.
See, e.g., Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 119; Shah, 875 A.2d at 942. But see T.L. v.
W.L., 820 A.2d 506, 514-16 (Del. Fam. Ct. 2003); Beker v. Johnson, 937 So. 2d
1128, 1130-31 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2006).
In Pennoyer v. Neff, 95 U.S. 714, 734-35 (1877), overruled in part on
other grounds by Shaffer v. Heitner, 433 U.S. 186, 205-06 (1975), the United
States Supreme Court stated that:
The jurisdiction which every State possesses, to determine the civil
status and capacities of all its inhabitants involves authority to prescribe
the conditions on which proceedings affecting them may be commenced
and carried on within its territory. The State, for example, has absolute
right to prescribe the conditions upon which the marriage relation
between its own citizens shall be created, and the causes for which it
may be dissolved. One of the parties guilty of acts for which, by the law
of the State, a dissolution may be granted, may have removed to a State
where no dissolution is permitted. The complaining party would,
therefore, fail if a divorce were sought in the State of the defendant; and
if application could not be made to the tribunals of the complainant’s
domicile in such case, . . . the injured citizen would be without redress.
Similarly, in Williams v. North Carolina, 317 U.S. 287, 298-99 (1942), the
Supreme Court determined that:
Domicil creates a relationship to the state which is adequate for
numerous exercises of state power. Each state as a sovereign has a
rightful and legitimate concern in the marital status of persons domiciled
within its borders. The marriage relation creates problems of large social
importance. Protection of offspring, property interests, and the
enforcement of marital responsibilities are but a few of commanding
problems in the field of domestic relations with which the state must
deal. Thus it is plain that each state, by virtue of its command over its
domiciliaries and its large interest in the institution of marriage, can
alter within its own borders the marriage status of the spouse domiciled
there, even though the other spouse is absent. There is no constitutional
barrier if the form and nature of the substituted service meet the
requirements of due process.
6
(Citations omitted.) Thus, “a court may adjudicate matters involving the status
of the relationship between multiple parties even where personal jurisdiction
over all of the parties is not established,” and “a State court may grant a
divorce to a spouse domiciled within that State without violating the due
process rights of an absent spouse over whom it does not have jurisdiction.”
Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 122; see Bartsch, 636 N.W.2d at 9 (noting that child
custody determinations are also frequently exempt from personal jurisdiction
requirements).
A protective order which “prohibits the defendant from abusing the
plaintiff and orders him to have no contact with and to stay away from her . . .
serves a role analogous to custody or marital determinations, except that the
order focuses on the plaintiff’s protected status rather than [the plaintiff’s]
marital or parental status.” Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 123; see also Bartsch, 636
N.W.2d at 10. Accordingly, an order that prohibits abuse but does not “impose
any personal obligations on a defendant” is valid even without personal
jurisdiction over the defendant. Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 124; see Shah, 875
A.2d at 942; Bartsch, 636 N.W.2d at 10; Spencer v. Spencer, 191 S.W.3d 14,
19 (Ky. Ct. App. 2006).
A protective order “prohibit[s] acts of domestic violence,” providing “the
victim with the very protection the law specifically allows,” while preventing
“the defendant from engaging in behavior already specifically outlawed.” Shah,
875 A.2d at 939. A contrary ruling would present a domestic violence victim
with two “unpalatable choices . . . either to . . . return to the State in which the
abuse occurred . . . or, alternatively, to wait for the abuser to follow the victim
to [New Hampshire] and, in the event of a new incident of abuse, seek an order
from a [New Hampshire] court.” Caplan, 879 N.E.2d at 123. Such a result is
at odds with the purpose of RSA chapter 173-B and New Hampshire’s “strong
interest in providing protection to victims of domestic violence within this
State.” McNair, 151 N.H. at 351; see also State v. Kidder, 150 N.H. 600, 603
(2004) (“It is the public policy of this state to prevent and deter domestic
violence through equal enforcement of the criminal laws and the provision of
judicial relief for domestic violence victims.” (quotation omitted)).
Accordingly, we affirm the family division’s final protective order to the
extent that it protects the wife from abuse, but reverse to the extent that the
order requires affirmative action from the defendant. We remand to allow the
trial court to modify its order in accordance with the opinion.
Affirmed in part;
reversed in part; and
remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7