THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-391
TOWN OF CANAAN & a.
v.
SECRETARY OF STATE
Argued: October 8, 2008
Opinion Issued: October 29, 2008
New Hampshire Legal Rights Foundation, of Mont Vernon (William L.
O'Brien on the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (James W. Kennedy, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, who are various towns, legislators,
candidates, voters and public officials, appeal an order of the Superior Court
(Conboy, J.) denying their request to declare that the New Hampshire House of
Representatives’ current apportionment of districts is unconstitutional and to
enjoin the 2008 primary and general elections. We affirm.
The record supports the following relevant facts. New Hampshire’s
legislative districts were twice reapportioned since the federal decennial census
in 2000. This court reapportioned first in 2002. See Below v. Secretary of
State, 148 N.H. 1, 3 (2002); Burling v. Speaker of the House, 148 N.H. 143,
144 (2002). The legislature enacted the second in 2004, amending the 2002
plan. See Petition of Below, 151 N.H. 135, 137 (2004) (Below II). The instant
action seeks a third redistricting.
In Below and Burling, we undertook, albeit reluctantly, redistricting for
New Hampshire’s Senate and House of Representatives following the
legislature’s failure to discharge its constitutional duty to do so based upon the
2000 census. See Below, 148 N.H. at 4 (failure to override veto of Senate Bill 1
regarding senate redistricting); Burling, 148 N.H. at 145 (failure to override veto
of House Bill 420 regarding house redistricting). In order to bring the
reapportionment schemes into constitutional compliance, we developed
legislative districts guided by the “one person/one vote” standard. Below, 148
N.H. at 5-9; Burling, 148 N.H. at 146-50. We did so based upon the 2000
census because the sole constitutional “yardstick [was] the last general census
of the inhabitants of the state taken by authority of the United States or of this
state.” Below, 148 N.H. at 10 (quotation omitted); see also Burling, 148 N.H. at
152.
In Below II, we upheld reapportionment legislation enacted subsequent
to the court-ordered 2002 plan because “the [legislature’s] duty and the power
to act under [Part II, Articles 9, 11 and 26] continue until the power is
exercised and discharged,” Below II, 151 N.H. at 148 (quotation and ellipsis
omitted), given “the purpose and intent of requiring decennial reapportionment
. . . to ensure substantially equal representation based upon population,” id. at
147. Nevertheless, we cautioned that the legislature lacked absolute discretion
to delay post-census redistricting. Taken to the extreme, the legislature could
“redistrict nine years after one federal decennial census . . . [and] again in only
one or two years following the next census [which] would impair the need for
stability and continuity in . . . the legislative system.” Id. at 148 (quotation
omitted).
The legislation reviewed in Below II was a permissible exercise of
constitutional reapportionment authority, however, because the legislature
began considering the new scheme after our holdings in Below and Burling and
prior to the 2004 election. Id. at 149. Had it waited until the next session, we
intimated that the legislature “might well have been precluded from [enacting
redistricting legislation] at a future session.” Id. Finally, we held that “once
the legislature has fulfilled its constitutional obligation to reapportion based
upon the decennial census figures, it has no constitutional authority to make
another apportionment until after the next federal census.” Id. at 148.
Constitutional Amendment Concurrent Resolution 41 (CACR 41) was put
to New Hampshire voters on November 7, 2006, following its adoption by the
legislature. CACR 41 reintroduced “floterial” districts to the legislative
landscape. As the voter guide explained:
2
The Constitution does not guarantee that each town or ward
having enough inhabitants to entitle it to one representative seat in
the Legislature shall have its own district. The Constitution
permits the Legislature to form multi-town and multi-ward
districts for electing state representatives, but does not expressly
permit or prohibit the Legislature to form so-called “floterial” or at-
large districts using excess inhabitants from one district to create a
representative seat in those towns and wards that do not have
enough inhabitants to form a district.
. . . .
[If adopted, t]his amendment will allow the legislature to
create districts in the same manner that districts were drawn prior
to 2002. It will increase the total number of districts and therefore
increase the probability that the people of a town will be
represented by a member of their own community.
Each town or ward having enough inhabitants to entitle it to
one or more representative seats in the Legislature shall be
guaranteed its own district for the purposes of electing one or more
representatives, unless such action prevented a neighboring town
from being included in a single-representative district before it is
part of a floterial district. Where a town, ward or unincorporated
place does not have enough inhabitants necessary for a
representative seat, the Legislature shall form multi-town or multi-
ward districts, to qualify for one or more representative seats.
Excess population in one or more contiguous districts may be
combined to allow for additional at-large or floterial
representatives.
CACR 41 is likely a response to our decision in Burling, where we
declined to employ “floterial” redistricting schemes within the 2002 court-
ordered reapportionment. The voters adopted CACR 41 and, as a result, Part
II, Article 11 of the State Constitution now reads:
When the population of any town or ward, according to the last
federal census, is within a reasonable deviation from the ideal
population for one or more representative seats the town or ward
shall have its own district of one or more representative seats. The
apportionment shall not deny any other town or ward membership
in one non-floterial representative district. When any town, ward,
or unincorporated place has fewer than the number of inhabitants
necessary to entitle it to one representative, the legislature shall
form those towns, wards, or unincorporated places into
3
representative districts which contain a sufficient number of
inhabitants to entitle each district so formed to one or more
representatives for the entire district. In forming the districts, the
boundaries of towns, wards, and unincorporated places shall be
preserved and contiguous. The excess number of inhabitants of a
district may be added to the excess number of inhabitants of other
districts to form at-large or floterial districts conforming to
acceptable deviations. The legislature shall form the representative
districts at the regular session following every decennial federal
census.
N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 11.
On May 5, 2008, the petitioners filed this action seeking a declaration
that RSA 662:5 (2008), the statute currently governing district apportionment
for the New Hampshire House of Representatives, is unconstitutional because
Part II, Article 11 as amended requires the legislature to redistrict the state’s
representative districts prior to the 2008 primary and general elections. The
petitioners also sought to enjoin the 2008 elections. They contend that the
passage of CACR 41 requires that the New Hampshire House of
Representatives undergo immediate redistricting. The trial court denied the
petitioners’ requests for declaratory and injunctive relief.
In reaching its disposition, the trial court assumed that the statutory
redistricting scheme within RSA 662:5 does not comply with the amended
language of Part II, Article 11. It concluded, however, that Part II, Article 11
“plainly and unambiguously establish[es] that the mandated redistricting take
place at the regular legislative session following the next [federal] decennial
census.”
The court noted that past constitutional amendments expressly provided
for redistricting upon passage but that Part II, Article 11 does not. It also cited
one legislator’s post-adoption comments explaining that CACR 41 required no
immediate reapportionment. Finally, the trial court reasoned that our decision
in Below II supported its conclusion given that “[t]he policy and practice in New
Hampshire has been to create legislative districts once every ten years based
upon the federal census.” Below II, 151 N.H. at 145.
On appeal, the petitioners argue that by adopting the amendment to Part
II, Article 11, voters expressed a clear intent to require immediate redistricting.
They assert that the trial court’s order results in a “complete denial [of] the
[p]etitioners[’] . . . fundamental rights of voting, representation and candidacy”
and that these impingements require an immediate remedy.
4
In support of their argument, the petitioners maintain that the voter
guide’s failure to inform voters that the amendment would not be applied to
existing districts upon adoption means that voters “would not have known or .
. . assumed that their constitutional direction . . . was not effective when the
amendment was adopted . . . but only . . . years later.” They further contend
that the trial court impermissibly read words into the final sentence of the
amended language and unreasonably ascertained voter intent by considering
the language of prior constitutional amendments and relying upon post-
adoption legislative statements.
We review the trial court’s construction of constitutional provisions de
novo as “the final arbiter of State constitutional disputes.” Below II, 151 N.H.
at 139; see also State v. MacElman, 154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006). “To interpret
the meaning of [a constitutional] provision, we examine its purpose and intent.”
Opinion of the Justices (Voting Age In Primaries), 157 N.H. 265, 268 (2008).
“In so doing, we will give the words in question the meaning they must be
presumed to have had to the electorate when the vote was cast.” Id. (quotation
omitted). “The language used by the people in the great paramount law which
controls the legislature as well as the people, is to be always understood and
explained in that sense in which it was used at the time when the constitution
and the laws were adopted.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Contrary to the parties’ assertions, we find nothing in the voter guide’s
explanation of CACR 41 that assists us in deciding the issue. Apart from the
proposed new constitutional text, the voter guide is silent as to when the
legislature would conduct the next reapportionment. Accordingly, we turn to
the language of the constitutional text itself.
We are not persuaded that CACR 41 was intended to compel an
immediate reapportionment following its adoption by voters. Rather, the
petitioners’ construction of Part II, Article 11 is belied by the provision’s plain
language. Article 11, as amended, is a clear mandate and a grant of authority,
see Below II, 151 N.H. at 146-47, which requires the legislature to form
“representative districts at the regular session following every decennial federal
census.” N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 11. The plain meaning requires
reapportionment each decade at the regular session following the federal
census. See id.; cf. Below II, 151 N.H. at 146. Immediate reapportionment is
therefore unnecessary because the next federal decennial census will not be
conducted until 2010. See 13 U.S.C. § 141(a) (2000).
We reject the contention that our construction “violate[s] the essential
right to vote freely for the candidate of one’s choice.” Decennial
reapportionment is a “rational approach to readjustment of legislative
representation,” Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 583 (1964), and “compliance
with such an approach . . . clearly meet[s] the minimal requirements for
5
maintaining a reasonably current scheme of legislative representation,” id. at
583-84, while recognizing “the need for stability and continuity in the
organization of the legislative system,” Below II, 151 N.H. at 148 (quotation
omitted).
Our review of League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry, 548
U.S. 399 (2006), relied upon by the petitioners, reveals nothing instructive
upon the issues presented. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the order of
the trial court.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and GALWAY, JJ.,
concurred.
6