THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-616
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RAYMOND K. FOURNIER
Argued: January 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: March 19, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, public defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for
the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from an order of the
Superior Court (Barry, J.) denying the defendant, Raymond Fournier’s, motion
to dismiss the petition for his involuntary civil commitment as a sexually
violent predator. See Sup. Ct. R. 8. We vacate and remand.
This is the second interlocutory transfer stemming from the State’s
petition to have the defendant found a sexually violent predator. State v.
Fournier, 158 N.H. ___ (decided January 8, 2009). For purposes of this appeal,
we take the facts as presented in the interlocutory transfer statement and its
appendices. In the Matter of Gendron & Plaistek, 157 N.H. 314, 315 (2008).
On March 17, 1994, the defendant pled guilty to seven counts of aggravated
felonious sexual assault. He was sentenced to five to fifteen years in the New
Hampshire State Prison, and was due to be released on June 16, 2008.
Because the defendant had been convicted of a sexually violent offense,
he is eligible to be involuntarily committed as a sexually violent predator
pursuant to RSA chapter 135-E (Supp. 2008). Under this chapter, a sexually
violent predator is defined as a person who has been convicted of a sexually
violent offense, “[s]uffers from a mental abnormality or personality disorder
that makes the person likely to engage in acts of sexual violence if not confined
in a secure facility for long-term control, care, and treatment,” and is not
eligible for involuntary admission under RSA chapter 135-C or RSA chapter
171-B. RSA 135-E:2, XII.
A person found to be a sexually violent predator is involuntarily
committed and held at the secure psychiatric unit at the New Hampshire State
Prison for a period of up to five years following the expiration of his
incarcerative sentence. RSA 135-E:11, II. The State may petition to renew the
committal order for an additional period of up to five years. RSA 135-E:12.
The statute places no limitation on the number of times the State may petition
to renew the committal order or the amount of time a person may be
involuntarily committed. This chapter, passed in 2006 and effective January 1,
2008, “applies retroactively to all persons in custody as of the effective date of
this statute who have been convicted of a sexually violent offense, as well as
prospectively.” RSA 135-E:19.
Pursuant to RSA 135-E:3, II,
[w]hen a person who has committed a sexually
violent offense is to be released from total
confinement in New Hampshire, the agency with
jurisdiction over the person shall give written
notice to the county attorney of the county where
that person was last convicted of a sexually
violent offense, or attorney general if the case was
prosecuted by the attorney general.
This written notice must be provided at least nine months prior to either the
person’s anticipated release, or any hearing regarding the person’s possible
release. RSA 135-E:3, II. The county attorney or attorney general may then
request that the multidisciplinary team (MDT), established by the department
of health and human services and consisting of licensed psychiatrists or
psychologists, see RSA 135-E:3, I, “assess and evaluate the person to
determine whether the person is a sexually violent predator.” RSA 135-E:3, III.
2
The MDT’s assessment and evaluation includes review of the person’s
institutional history and treatment record, including mental health and
medical records, the person’s criminal background, and “any other factor that
is relevant to the determination of whether such person is a sexually violent
predator.” RSA 135-E:3, V. The MDT must provide a written report as to its
findings within six months of receiving notice of the person’s anticipated
release. RSA 135-E:3, V (c).
If the MDT finds that a person meets the statutory definition of a
sexually violent predator, the county attorney or attorney general has fourteen
days within which to file a petition with the superior court “alleging that the
person is a sexually violent predator and stating facts sufficient to support
such allegation.” RSA 135-E:6. Once a petition is filed, the superior court has
ten days to make an initial finding of probable cause. RSA 135-E:7, I. Within
sixty days of this determination, or if a jury trial is elected, within sixty days of
that election, the court shall hold a trial to determine if the person is a sexually
violent predator. RSA 135-E:9, II. The State carries the burden of proving, by
clear and convincing evidence, that the person is a sexually violent predator.
RSA 135-E:11, I. The rules of evidence, the doctor-patient privilege under RSA
329:26, privileged communications under RSA 330-A:32, and other similar
statutes or rules, do not apply at trial. RSA 135-E:10, I. However, any report
by the MDT is inadmissible, as is hearsay evidence unless it falls within one of
the recognized exceptions to the hearsay rule. RSA 135-E:10, III, IV.
A person committed as a sexually violent predator may file a petition for
discharge at any time after his commitment. RSA 135-E:14. The court may
require that the county attorney or attorney general respond to the petition. Id.
It may also deny the petition without a hearing, if it determines the petition is
without merit on its face. Id.
Consistent with the terms of RSA 135-E:3 and at the request of the
State, in January 2008, an MDT team was assembled to evaluate whether the
defendant met the definition of a sexually violent predator. On March 7, 2008,
the MDT concluded that the defendant met that definition. Ten days later, on
March 17, 2008, the State petitioned the trial court to certify the defendant as
a sexually violent predator pursuant to RSA chapter 135-E. The State
requested that the trial court, “[w]ithin 10 days, find probable cause based on
the contents of the foregoing Petition that [the defendant] is a Sexually Violent
Predator” and also schedule a trial within 60 days. See RSA 135-E:7, I, :9, II.
The trial court made an initial finding of probable cause on April 28, 2008. It
does not appear that a trial on the merits was scheduled at that time.
Because no hearing was scheduled to occur before the defendant’s
incarcerative sentence expired on June 16, 2008, the State requested an
emergency probable cause hearing, which was held on June 16. See RSA 135-
3
E:7, II. At that time, the defendant moved to dismiss the petition, arguing that
the trial court no longer had jurisdiction to hear the matter because it had
failed to comply with the statutory time limits; namely, that there had not been
a probable cause determination within ten days of the filing of the petition, or a
trial on the merits within sixty days of the request for trial. In its July 3, 2008
order, the trial court concluded that the ten-day time limit set forth in RSA
135-E:7, I, and the sixty-day time limit set forth in RSA 135-E:9, II are
mandatory and had not been complied with in this case. It also concluded that
“these time limits guarantee that the Court will reach the merits of the petition
either before or shortly after the person’s incarcerative sentence expires and
thereby protect his liberty interests” and, thus, “the legislature mandated these
time limits out of liberty interest concerns.” However, despite this finding, the
trial court ultimately denied the defendant’s motion to dismiss because it found
that the defendant had not been prejudiced by the delays. The trial court
subsequently found probable cause to continue the defendant’s detention, and,
on July 10, 2008, scheduled a trial on the merits for September 2, 2008. The
defendant’s motion for reconsideration was denied on July 30, 2008.
On August 13, 2008, the trial court approved the following question for
interlocutory appeal: “Does the court’s failure to comply with mandatory time
limits divest the court of authority to act in Mr. Fournier’s case, thereby
requiring the dismissal of the petition against him?”
Because this presents a question of statutory interpretation, our review
is de novo. In re Juvenile 2007-150, 156 N.H. 800, 801 (2008). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. State v.
Gubitosi, 157 N.H. 720, 723 (2008). We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, we apply the plain and ordinary meanings to the
words used. Id. at 723-24. We construe all parts of a statute together to
effectuate its overall purpose and avoid an absurd or unjust result. Id. at 724.
RSA 135-E:7, I, provides:
When the county attorney or attorney general files
a petition seeking to have a person declared a
sexually violent predator, within 10 days of the
filing of the petition, the court shall determine
whether probable cause exists to believe that the
person named in the petition is a sexually violent
predator. If the court determines based on the
content of the petition that there is probable
cause to believe that the person is a sexually
violent predator, the court shall order that the
person remain in custody and be held in an
4
appropriate secure facility for further proceedings
in accordance with this chapter.
(Emphasis added.) RSA 135-E:9, II provides: “Within 60 days after the court’s
initial determination of probable cause, or, in cases where a jury trial has been
elected, 60 days after the election of a jury trial, the court shall conduct a trial
to determine whether the person is a sexually violent predator.” (Emphasis
added.)
The use of the word “shall” is generally regarded as a command.
McCarthy v. Wheeler, 152 N.H. 643, 645 (2005). Although not controlling, it is
significant as indicating that the legislature intended the statute to be
mandatory. In re Russell C., 120 N.H. 260, 264 (1980). “This is especially so
where the purpose of the statute is to protect private rights.” Id.
The State concedes that the time limits set forth in RSA 135-E:7, I, and
RSA 135-E:9, II are mandatory. The State further concedes that “the liberty
interests of a person against whom the State has filed a petition under the Act
are substantial, and that the Legislature certainly considered them when
enacting the time limits at issue.” However, it asserts that neither time limit
was intended to be jurisdictional because such an interpretation would thwart
the primary purpose of the Act. We disagree.
Where the legislature has not provided how its mandatory time limits are
to be enforced, we must determine the appropriate mode of enforcement.
McCarthy, 152 N.H. at 645. Our inquiry focuses upon two factors:
consideration of the statutory goals and whether the party seeking relief has
shown prejudice as a result of the statutory violation. Id.
When interpreting the goals of a statute, we have distinguished between
two types of time limits: those involving a liberty interest and those involving
“a general interest in hastening adjudicative dispositions.” Appeal of Martino,
138 N.H. 612, 615-16 (1994). “Where the legislature, out of liberty interest
concerns, has mandated time limits for holding hearings, we have held that
personal jurisdiction over a defendant is lost, absent waiver, if the case is not
heard within the statutory period.” Id. at 615. “Where the legislature has
prescribed time limits out of a general interest in hastening adjudicative
dispositions for the benefit of all parties involved, however, we have been
unwilling to treat the time limit as jurisdictional.” Id. at 616.
In Russell C., we considered RSA 169-B:14, II (Supp. 1979) and RSA
169-D:13, II (Supp. 1979), which establish the statutory time limits for the
adjudication of a juvenile as a “delinquent” or “child in need of services.”
Russell C., 120 N.H. at 263. We concluded that “[t]he prescription of
mandatory time limits on juvenile adjudicatory hearings under [these statutes]
5
is a legislative pronouncement of a child’s right to the expeditious resolution of
his alleged delinquency or ‘need for services’ rooted in his right to due process.”
Id. at 266. We further held that these time limits “effectuate a substantive
right requiring the court to forfeit jurisdiction if not complied with, unless such
noncompliance is the result of a delay caused or requested by the juvenile, in
which case he will be deemed to have waived the time limits.” Id. at 268. In
making this determination, we recognized that “it is the juvenile’s liberty
interest that triggers the need for due process safeguards.” Id.
Similarly, in McCarthy, we analyzed RSA 173-B:4, I (2002) and RSA 173-
B:3, VII (2002), which require that certain hearings occur within a specified
period of time after the filing of a domestic violence petition. McCarthy, 152
N.H. at 644-45. We again concluded that the statutory time frames were
intended to protect a defendant’s liberty interests, noting, “It hardly bears
mentioning that a restraining order restrains one’s liberty.” Id. at 646. As
such, the violation of these time frames, absent waiver by the defendant,
required that the domestic violence petition be dismissed. Id.
The express purpose of RSA chapter 135-E is to “create a civil
commitment procedure for the long-term care and treatment of sexually violent
predators.” RSA 135-E:1. It is evident that the legislature intended this
chapter to protect the public from sexually violent predators. However, its
plain language also demonstrates a concurrent legislative intent to protect the
liberty interests of the person who is subject to such involuntary commitment.
A plain reading of the language of the entire chapter indicates that the
legislature intended these proceedings to be completed prior to the expiration
of the subject’s incarcerative sentence, thus limiting any possible unnecessary
infringement on a person’s liberty. The legislature specifically enumerated time
constraints at each stage of the commitment process, including, in addition to
those at issue here, requiring that the process begin with notice to the
appropriate prosecuting authority “[a]t least 9 months prior to” the person’s
anticipated release, RSA 135-E:3, II (a), (b), and providing that the
multidisciplinary team complete its written report within six months of
receiving notice of a person’s anticipated release, RSA 135-E:3, V (c). These
and other time limits within the chapter would be rendered meaningless if the
process were intended to be drawn out beyond the person’s incarcerative
sentence, as there would be no need to begin the process nine months in
advance of the person’s anticipated release, or to maintain such an expedited
procedure leading up to trial.
Further evidence of the legislature’s intent to have this process
completed prior to the end of a defendant’s original sentence is demonstrated
by its enumeration of an “emergency” provision “[i]n the event that a person
who has been convicted of a sexually violent offense is eligible for immediate
6
release from total confinement.” RSA 135-E:4, I. This provision provides an
accelerated procedure that temporarily detains the person subject to release
and allows the county attorney or attorney general to file a petition for an
emergency hearing to determine if the person is a sexually violent predator. Id.
Under the statute, an initial probable cause hearing must be held within
twenty-four hours of the filing of a petition for an emergency hearing, excluding
weekends and holidays, during which the person remains in total confinement.
Id. If the court determines that there is probable cause to believe the person is
a sexually violent predator, the MDT must, within seventy-two hours, assess
the person, and, if it determines the person meets the statutory definition of a
sexually violent predator, provide a written report and recommendation to the
county attorney or attorney general. RSA 135-E:4, II. The prosecuting
attorney then has forty-eight hours to file a petition alleging that the person is
a sexually violent predator and stating facts sufficient to support such
allegation. RSA 135-E:4, III. If either the MDT or the prosecuting attorney fails
to comply with these time limits, the person is released. RSA 135-E:4, IV.
The legislature’s emphasis on time limits in the administration of this
emergency procedure again illustrates its overriding concern for the
expeditious resolution of a petition under this chapter and limiting the
unnecessary infringement on a person’s liberty. Further, the legislature’s use
of the term “emergency” indicates that such an expedited procedure should not
be necessary in the normal application of this statute.
In addition to the legislature’s clear intent to have these matters
completed prior to the expiration of the person’s incarcerative sentence, we
note that the legislature has explicitly stated that the time limits associated
with the emergency provision are not jurisdictional. RSA 135-E:4, IV. The
plain language of this provision demonstrates that the legislature has
recognized a distinction between time frames that are jurisdictional, and those
that are not. RSA 135-E:4, IV provides, in pertinent part:
The provisions of this section . . . are not
jurisdictional, and failure to comply with the time
limitations, which results in the release of a
person who has been convicted of a sexually
violent offense, is not dispositive of the case and
does not prevent the county attorney or attorney
general from filing a petition against a person
otherwise subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
It is a well-established canon of statutory construction that the expression of
one thing in a statute normally implies the exclusion of another. St. Joseph
Hosp. of Nashua v. Rizzo, 141 N.H. 9, 11-12 (1996). Furthermore, in
7
construing a statute, we will neither consider what the legislature might have
said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. In the Matter of Martel &
Martel, 157 N.H. 53, 58 (2008). Thus, the fact that the legislature stated only
that the time frames in RSA 135-E:4 are not jurisdictional is significant
evidence of its intent that the time limits set forth in RSA 135-E:7, I, and RSA
135-E:9, II are jurisdictional.
Further, it is also significant that a failure to comply with the non-
jurisdictional time limits established in RSA 135-E:4 results in the person’s
release, but “is not dispositive of the case.” RSA 135-E:4, IV. Through this
language, the legislature has implicitly recognized that, where the time limits
are jurisdictional, a failure to comply would result in dismissal of the petition.
The United States Supreme Court has recognized that “civil commitment
for any purpose constitutes a significant deprivation of liberty that requires due
process protection.” Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418, 425 (1979). As in
McCarthy and Russell C., we find that the mandatory time frames established
in RSA 135-E:7, I, and RSA 135-E:9, II are a legislative pronouncement of a
person’s right to have the petition against him expeditiously resolved, rooted in
his right to due process, and that they were intended to protect the person’s
substantial liberty interests. Furthermore, violation of these time limits is itself
prejudicial to the due process rights of a person subject to involuntary
commitment under this statute. See McCarthy, 152 N.H. at 646. The time
limits are therefore jurisdictional in nature.
The Supreme Court of Kansas has reached the same conclusion with
respect to the time limits included in its Sexually Violent Predator Act. See In
re Searcy, 49 P.3d 1, 10 (Kan. 2002). In that case, after being found a sexually
violent predator, Searcy appealed to the Supreme Court of Kansas, arguing
that the district court lacked jurisdiction because he had not been brought to
trial within the mandatory time period set forth in the Kansas Sexually Violent
Predator Act. Id. at 2. The applicable Kansas statute provided, in pertinent
part: “Within 60 days after the completion of any [probable cause] hearing . . .,
the court shall conduct a trial to determine whether the person is a sexually
violent predator.” Kan. Stat. Ann. § 59-29a06 (Supp. 2001); see also Searcy,
49 P.3d at 4. As in this case, the State argued that this time limit was not
jurisdictional, and, even if it was, Searcy had waived the requirement. Searcy,
49 P.3d at 4. The Kansas Supreme Court, treating this as a question of
subject matter jurisdiction, recognized, “If jurisdictional, failure to bring a
respondent to trial within 60 days of the probable cause determination would
deprive the court of jurisdiction and require the court to dismiss the action.”
Id. at 5.
The court found that “[s]trict compliance with the 60-day period . . . is
essential to the preservation of the rights of those against whom a petition has
8
been filed and a probable cause finding has been made.” Id. at 6. In arriving
at the decision that the 60-day time limit was in fact jurisdictional, the court
relied upon the legislature’s explicit determination that certain time limits
under the statute were not jurisdictional, and its failure to make the same
determination with respect to the 60-day time period. Id. It further recognized
that this language is analogous to the statutory right to speedy trial in criminal
cases, and found noteworthy the numerous other procedural protections
afforded to a respondent under the Act, such as the right to a jury trial and
counsel. Id. at 8-9. This statute has since been amended to explicitly state
that the 60-day time limit is not jurisdictional. See In re Hunt, 82 P.3d 861,
870 (Kan. Ct. App. 2004).
We recognize that other states have held that comparable time frames
are mandatory, but not jurisdictional. See, e.g., State v. Goode, 830 So. 2d
817, 828 (Fla. 2002) (per curiam); In re Care and Treatment of Donaldson, 214
S.W.3d 331, 333 (Mo. 2007) (en banc); In re Matthews, 550 S.E.2d 311, 314-15
(S.C. 2001), cert. denied, 535 U.S. 1062 (2002). However, the analytical
framework in those cases does not distinguish between time frames that are
intended to protect a liberty interest, and those that are prescribed “out of a
general interest in hastening adjudicative dispositions.” Martino, 138 N.H. at
616. Further, we note that, despite finding that these time frames are not
jurisdictional, at least some courts have concluded that dismissal for failing to
comply is still the appropriate remedy. See Goode, 830 So. 2d at 830;
Matthews, 550 S.E.2d at 314. In Goode, the trial court dismissed the action
for involuntary commitment because Goode had not been brought to trial
within the statutory thirty-day time period. Goode, 830 So. 2d at 818. The
Florida Supreme Court affirmed the dismissal, holding, “based on the
importance of the obvious liberty rights at stake, and consistent with the
Kansas act upon which Florida’s law is modeled, we agree that the Legislature
intended that there should be ‘scrupulous compliance’ with the statutory
thirty-day time limit.” Id. at 826. Similarly, in Matthews, the Supreme Court
of South Carolina held: “When the sixty day period [of time to hold a trial] has
passed, and no continuance has been granted, the proper procedure for a
respondent to follow is to file a motion to dismiss.” Matthews, 550 S.E.2d at
314.
The State argues that, rather than following our holdings in McCarthy
and Russell C., we must consider RSA chapter 135-E in light of our holdings in
Smith v. New Hampshire Board of Psychologists, 138 N.H. 548 (1994), In re
Robyn W., 124 N.H. 377 (1983), and Appeal of Martino, 138 N.H. 612 (1994).
In each of those cases we declined to find a statutory time limit jurisdictional,
concluding that such a finding would, respectively, thwart the primary purpose
of the statute, be “illogical,” or be unintended by the legislature. Smith, 138
N.H. at 551; Robyn W., 124 N.H. at 381; Martino, 138 N.H. at 616. However,
these cases are inapposite, as none of the respective statutes involved a liberty
9
interest. The statute at issue in Smith involved the failure of the New
Hampshire Board of Examiners of Psychologists to hold a hearing within the
statutorily required three months of the date of notice on a written complaint.
Smith, 138 N.H. at 550. The statute in Robyn W. involved a court’s
noncompliance with the mandatory sixty-day time limit for the issuance of a
decision in a parental rights termination proceeding. Robyn W., 124 N.H. at
380-81. Similarly, the statute at issue in Martino involved a New Hampshire
Compensation Appeals Board decision that was not issued within the
statutorily required thirty days following a hearing. Martino, 138 N.H. at 615.
Indeed, in Martino we clearly stated that there was nothing in the language or
legislative history of the statute at issue “to indicate it was designed to cure
liberty interest concerns.” Id. at 616. While these cases all involve important
interests, none involve the loss of liberty, and, thus, these statutes do not
deprive the trial court of jurisdiction when there has been non-compliance with
the enumerated time limit.
Our conclusion is also consistent with our decision in In re Christopher
K., 155 N.H. 219 (2007). In that case, the appellant, Christopher K., was
involuntarily admitted to the New Hampshire Hospital under RSA chapter 135-
C (2005) and subsequently conditionally discharged. Id. at 221. The
involuntary admission order and conditional discharge were set to expire on
May 6, 2005; however, on April 18, 2005, a petition was filed to renew the
appellant’s conditional discharge. Id. at 221. The probate court granted the
petition following a hearing on May 24, 2005. Id. at 228. On appeal, the
appellant argued that the probate court lacked jurisdiction to renew his
conditional discharge because, under RSA 135-C:39, II, the probate court was
required to act on the petition within thirty days of its filing, and, thus, the
previous order had expired prior to the hearing. Id. at 228. We disagreed,
concluding, “To interpret RSA 135-C:39, II so that the extension of the period of
involuntary admission terminates at the end of the thirty-day period . . . would
thwart both purposes of RSA chapter 135-C: treatment of the [appellant] and
protection of the public.” Id. at 229-30. Thus, we held that the conditional
discharge did not automatically terminate at the end of the thirty-day period,
and the probate court had jurisdiction to hear the petition. Id. at 230.
While in Christopher K. we made our determination based upon
statutory goals similar to those of RSA chapter 135-E, the circumstances of
that case are distinguishable from those at issue here. First, the appellant in
Christopher K. was conditionally discharged during the delay and would
remain conditionally discharged following entry of the probate court’s order.
Thus, he did not possess the degree of liberty interest that a person detained
pending a petition under RSA chapter 135-E holds. Second, the issue in
Christopher K. was a renewal of an involuntary commitment order. Thus,
unlike this case, there had already been a finding that the appellant met the
standard for involuntary commitment under RSA chapter 135-C. The time
10
limits at issue here involve the initial determination that the person is indeed a
sexually violent predator requiring his involuntary commitment. Finally, read
as a whole, RSA chapter 135-E is distinguishable from RSA chapter 135-C in
at least one significant respect. As previously discussed, RSA 135-E:4, IV
explicitly states that the time limits enumerated in the emergency provision are
not jurisdictional, thus persuasively evidencing an intent that the remaining
time limits are jurisdictional. See St. Joseph Hosp. of Nashua, 141 N.H. at 11-
12. There is no comparable provision in RSA chapter 135-C, the statute at
issue in Christopher K.
The State also argues that the primary purpose of RSA chapter 135-E,
protecting the safety and welfare of the public, would be thwarted if the time
limits were found to be jurisdictional. We disagree. We acknowledge that strict
enforcement of mandatory time frames may arguably diminish the goals of a
statute. See McCarthy, 152 N.H. at 647. However, we reiterate that, when
mandatory time limits are rooted in the right to due process and the protection
of a liberty interest, this result is consistent with the overall statutory scheme.
Id. at 646; see also Russell C., 120 N.H. at 268; In re Eric C., 124 N.H. 222,
225 (1983).
While we hold that the time frames set forth in RSA 135-E:7, I and RSA
135-E:9, II are jurisdictional, dismissal of the current petition may not be
required in this case. We have consistently held that a jurisdictional time limit
that has not been complied with requires dismissal of the underlying petition
“unless such noncompliance is the result of a delay caused or requested by the
[prejudiced party], in which case he will be deemed to have waived the time
limits.” McCarthy, 152 N.H. at 646; see also Russell C., 120 N.H. at 268.
Therefore, to the extent the defendant has caused a delay, the period of that
delay may not be counted against the statutory time period. See, e.g., State v.
Brown, 157 N.H. 555, 563-64 (2008) (in Interstate Agreement on Detainers Act
proceeding, delays in bringing defendant to trial caused by his requests are not
counted toward the time limit); State v. Allen, 150 N.H. 290, 294 (2003) (in
speedy trial analysis, “we initially discount any delays that were prompted by
the defendant because he cannot take advantage of delay that he has
occasioned”).
Here, the record demonstrates that the defendant caused at least some
delay in the initial determination of probable cause by filing a substantive
motion in that regard. However, the extent of this delay, and whether there
were any additional delays, is unclear. We therefore remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11