THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2008-723
GREEN MOUNTAIN REALTY CORPORATION
v.
THE FIFTH ESTATE TOWER, LLC & a.
Argued: September 8, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 10, 2010
Donahue Tucker & Ciandella PLLC, of Exeter (Robert M. Derosier and
Keriann Roman on the brief, and Robert D. Ciandella orally), for the plaintiff.
D'Amante Couser Steiner Pellerin, P.A., of Concord (Roy S. McCandless
on the brief), Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (William L. Chapman on the brief
and orally), Haughey, Philpot & Laurent, P.A., of Laconia (William Philpot, Jr.
on the brief), and McCormick, Fitzpatrick, Kasper & Burchard, P.C., of
Burlington, Vermont (Thomas P. Simon on the brief), for the defendants.
Stephen M. Hoersting, of Alexandria, Virginia, on the brief, and
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Dean B. Eggert and Michael J.
Tierney on the brief), for Center for Competitive Politics, as amicus curiae.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Matthew R. Johnson
and Joshua M. Wyatt on the brief), for The New Hampshire Association of
Realtors, as amicus curiae.
Barbara Keshen, of Concord, by brief, for New Hampshire Civil Liberties
Union, as amicus curiae.
Ben Robbins and Martin J. Newhouse, of Boston, Massachusetts, on the
brief, and Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Matthew R. Johnson
on the brief), for New England Legal Foundation, as amicus curiae.
St. Hilaire & St. Hilaire, PLLC, of Concord (Daniel St. Hilaire on the brief),
and Robert M. O’Neil & a., of Charlottesville, Virginia, on the brief, for The
Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression, as amicus
curiae.
DALIANIS, J. The defendants, The Fifth Estate Tower, LLC and Jay
Williams, individually and in his official capacity as manager of The Fifth
Estate Tower, LLC (collectively, Fifth Estate), appeal a $6.7 million jury verdict
in favor of the plaintiff, Green Mountain Realty Corporation (Green Mountain),
on its claim that Fifth Estate violated the New Hampshire Consumer Protection
Act (CPA), see RSA ch. 358-A (2009). Fifth Estate argues that the Superior
Court (Fitzgerald, J.) erred by denying its summary judgment motion and
motions for directed verdict and judgment notwithstanding verdict (JNOV). We
reverse.
I. Background
The record evidences the following facts. Green Mountain and Fifth
Estate both site, construct, own and operate personal wireless service facilities.
This case arises out of a series of postcards that Fifth Estate designed, printed
and distributed, which included statements that Green Mountain claims were
misleading and/or false. The postcards were distributed to the general
electorate of the town of Wolfeboro in connection with a September 2005
special town meeting involving two warrant articles. The warrant articles
asked whether town voters would authorize the town’s board of selectmen to
enter into long-term leases with Green Mountain, which would enable it to
construct a radio communications tower on town property known as Poor Farm
2
Hill and install radio communications antennas at the site of the town’s
existing water tank.
The postcards urged town voters to vote against the two warrant articles
because the town did not need “to get better cellular service or emergency
services” as it “already [had] existing structures to handle both.” The postcards
referred to the proposed communications tower as an “[e]yesore” and
unnecessary, and to the proposed leases as “no-bid, 30-year, [and] non-
cancellable.” The postcards also told voters that they could save the view of the
lake from the town docks “[a]nd get complete cell coverage” by voting “[n]o” on
the warrant articles.
In the months preceding the special town meeting, in addition to sending
the postcards, Fifth Estate ran a series of advertisements, newspaper pieces,
radio announcements and mass mailings that included statements that: (1)
the tower to be erected on Poor Farm Hill would destroy the town’s picturesque
skyline; (2) for the water tank site alone, Green Mountain would take more
than $1 million from town taxpayers; (3) the tower on Poor Farm Hill was
unnecessary because Fifth Estate provided “complete wireless coverage” to the
town; (4) Green Mountain’s personal wireless service facilities would cause
town residents to suffer from cancer, Alzheimer’s disease and other serious
illnesses; and (5) the leases would cost town taxpayers between $200,000 and
$600,000 over their respective terms.
Ultimately, the town electorate rejected both warrant articles. In
January 2006, Green Mountain filed a writ against Fifth Estate alleging, among
other causes of action, a claim that Fifth Estate violated the CPA because its
“false and misleading statements” constituted “unfair and deceptive acts or
practices.”
Fifth Estate moved for summary judgment, arguing that the CPA does
not apply to its conduct because it took place in a political context, rather than
a commercial one, and because its statements were political speech protected
by the First Amendment to the Federal Constitution and Part I, Article 22 of the
New Hampshire Constitution. The trial court denied the motion, and the claim
proceeded to trial. Fifth Estate raised these same arguments in its motions for
directed verdict and JNOV. The trial court rejected the arguments for the
reasons articulated in its order denying Fifth Estate’s summary judgment
motion. This appeal followed.
II. Discussion
Fifth Estate argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that the CPA
applied to Fifth Estate’s conduct. It contends that the legislature did not
intend the CPA to regulate conduct occurring in a political setting, rather than
in a business setting. See Rodgers v. F.T.C., 492 F.2d 228, 229-32 (9th Cir.)
3
(Federal Trade Commission Act did not apply to campaign activities of
opponents to state anti-litter measure, which were directed to electorate at
large), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 834 (1974); O’Connor v. Superior Court (Wyman),
223 Cal. Rptr. 357, 360 (Ct. App.) (noting that “[f]ederal cases under the
Federal Trade Commission Act and the Sherman Antitrust Act have uniformly
held that the laws regulating business practices do not apply to political
campaign activities”), review denied (Cal. 1986). To address this argument, we
must interpret the CPA, which is a question of law that we review de novo. See
Laramie v. Stone, 160 N.H. ___, ___, 999 A.2d 262, 276 (2010).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. LaChance v. U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Co., 156 N.H. 88, 93 (2007).
When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute
as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. To interpret the
CPA, the legislature has directed that we “may be guided by the interpretation
and construction given Section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act . . .
by the Federal Trade Commission and the federal courts.” RSA 358-A:13; see
State v. Moran, 151 N.H. 450, 452-53 (2004); see also Rousseau v. Eshleman,
129 N.H. 306, 310 (1987) (Thayer, J., concurring) (it is proper to consult cases
decided under Sherman Antitrust Act to construe the CPA because lower
federal courts view the Federal Trade Commission and Sherman Acts as
involving the same subject matter).
A. CPA
The CPA provides, in relevant part: “It shall be unlawful for any person
to use any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or
practice in the conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” RSA 358-
A:2. After this general proscription, the CPA lists fifteen representative
categories of unlawful acts that the legislature has determined constitute
unfair methods of competition or unfair or deceptive acts or practices.
Simpson v. Young, 153 N.H. 471, 476 (2006). One category of unlawful acts
involves “[d]isparaging the goods, services, or business of another by false or
misleading representation of fact.” RSA 358-A:2, VIII; see Mortgage Specialists
v. Davey, 153 N.H. 764, 781 (2006). Other categories include “[r]epresenting
that goods or services have . . . characteristics, . . . uses, benefits, or quantities
that they do not have,” RSA 358-A:2, V, and “[r]epresenting that goods or
services are of a particular standard, quality, or grade, . . . if they are of
another,” RSA 358-A:2, VII. The CPA defines “[t]rade” and “commerce” as
including “advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any services and
property, tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed, and any other article,
commodity, or thing of value wherever situate.” RSA 358-A:1, II. The terms
4
also “include any trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of
this state.” Id.
For the purposes of this appeal, we assume, without deciding, that Fifth
Estate’s conduct constituted an unfair or deceptive practice, within the
meaning of the CPA. See RSA 358-A:2. Nonetheless, we conclude that the CPA
does not apply because Fifth Estate’s conduct occurred in a political setting.
See Rodgers, 492 F.2d at 229-32.
B. Noerr-Pennington Doctrine
In reaching this conclusion, we rely upon the Noerr-Pennington doctrine,
which was originally developed by the United States Supreme Court in Federal
Sherman Antitrust Act (Sherman Act) cases, see Eastern R. Conf. v. Noerr
Motors, 365 U.S. 127 (1961); Mine Workers v. Pennington, 381 U.S. 657
(1965), but since has been applied to Federal Trade Commission Act cases, see
Rodgers, 492 F.2d at 229-32, as well as to those brought under state unfair
trade practices acts, see, e.g., People ex rel. Gallegos v. Pacific Lumber, 70 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 501, 513 (Ct. App.), (applying doctrine to claim brought under
California Unfair Competition Law), review denied (Cal. 2008). See Bayou
Fleet, Inc. v. Alexander, 234 F.3d 852, 859 (5th Cir. 2000) (noting that Noerr-
Pennington doctrine is no longer limited to antitrust context), cert. denied, 532
U.S. 905 (2001); Manistee Town Center v. City of Glendale, 227 F.3d 1090,
1092 (9th Cir. 2000) (same).
Under the Noerr-Pennington doctrine, “[c]oncerted efforts to restrain or
monopolize trade by petitioning government officials are protected from
antitrust liability.” Allied Tube & Conduit Corp. v. Indian Head, Inc., 486 U.S.
492, 499 (1988). In Noerr, the Court held that the defendant railroads could
associate for the purpose of waging a publicity campaign directed at the
general electorate designed to secure legislation that was destructive to the
truckers with whom they competed, without incurring liability under the
Sherman Act. Noerr, 365 U.S. at 129-45; see Sandy River Nursing Care v.
Aetna Cas., 985 F.2d 1138, 1142 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 818 (1993).
The railroads’ publicity was designed specifically not only to foster the adoption
of laws that were damaging to truckers, but also “to create an atmosphere of
distaste for truckers among the general public, and to impair the relationships
existing between the truckers and their customers.” Noerr, 365 U.S. at 129.
“Interpreting the Sherman Act in light of the First Amendment’s Petition
Clause, the Court noted that at least insofar as the railroads’ campaign was
directed toward obtaining governmental action, its legality was not at all
affected by any anticompetitive purpose it may have had.” FTC v. Superior
Court Trial Lawyers Assn., 493 U.S. 411, 424 (1990) (quotation omitted). Even
though the “sole purpose” of the railroads’ campaign “was to destroy the
truckers as competitors for the long-distance freight business,” the court ruled
that the railroads were entitled to immunity from antitrust liability for their
5
conduct. Noerr, 365 U.S. at 138. Thus, under the Noerr-Pennington doctrine,
“[a] publicity campaign directed at the general public, seeking legislation . . .
enjoys antitrust immunity even when the campaign employs unethical and
deceptive methods.” Allied Tube & Conduit Corp., 486 U.S. at 499-500; see
Noerr, 365 U.S. at 135 (“[N]o violation of the [Sherman] Act can be predicated
upon mere attempts to influence the passage or enforcement of laws.”).
In Pennington, an antitrust case brought by owners of a small coal
mining company against the coal miners’ union, the Court reiterated: “Joint
efforts to influence public officials do not violate the antitrust laws even though
intended to eliminate competition. Such conduct is not illegal, either standing
alone or as part of a broader scheme itself violative of the Sherman Act.”
Pennington, 381 U.S. at 670. There, the alleged unlawful conspiracy was
between certain large coal operators and the coal miners’ union. Id. at 659.
Among other things, the large coal operators and coal miners’ union petitioned
the federal Secretary of Labor to establish unreasonably high minimum wages
for employees of contractors selling coal to the Tennessee Valley Authority so
as to make it difficult for small coal operators, such as the complainant, to
compete in the market. Id. at 660.
The United States Supreme Court has since extended the Noerr-
Pennington doctrine to petitions before administrative agencies and courts.
See California Mot. Transport v. Trucking Unlimited, 404 U.S. 508, 510 (1972);
see also Davric Maine Corp. v. Rancourt, 216 F.3d 143, 147 (1st Cir. 2000).
Additionally, it has granted Noerr-Pennington immunity “to a wide range of
activities in addition to traditional lobbying, including . . . sales and marketing
efforts[ ] and court litigation.” Doron Precision Systems, Inc. v. FAAC, Inc., 423
F. Supp. 2d 173, 189 (S.D.N.Y. 2006) (citing cases); see Columbia v. Omni
Outdoor Advertising, Inc., 499 U.S. 365, 373 (1991) (granting Noerr-Pennington
immunity to company’s effort to persuade city to adopt ordinance, even though
ordinance would exclude company’s competitor).
At least one federal court has applied the Noerr-Pennington doctrine to a
Federal Trade Commission Act case. See Rodgers, 492 F.2d at 230. Rodgers
involved a petition for declaratory judgment and injunctive relief challenging
actions taken by opponents to an anti-litter measure. Id. at 228-29. If
adopted, that measure would have forbidden the sale of beer and soft drinks in
containers not having a refund value of at least five cents. Id. at 229. The
petitioner alleged that opponents to the measure had “combined in both
vertical and horizontal agreements, to make price representations to the public
that constituted unfair and deceptive trade practices” under the Federal Trade
Commission Act. Id. (quotation omitted).
The Federal Trade Commission ruled that the opponents were entitled to
Noerr-Pennington immunity for their alleged actions. Id. at 229-30. It
observed that the proscriptions of the Federal Trade Commission Act, “like the
6
proscriptions of the Sherman Act, are tailored for the business world, not for
the political arena.” Id. at 230 (quotation omitted). The opponents were
entitled to Noerr-Pennington immunity, the commission ruled, even if they
made their alleged misrepresentations willfully and with ill motive, because
they made them to influence legislation. Id. at 229. The commission
concluded: “[I]t is our view that actionable violation of . . . the FTC Act is not
indicated due to the overriding public interest in preservation of uninhibited
communication in connection with political activity, particularly in connection
with legislative process.” Id. at 230 (quotation omitted).
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, reasoning: “Both
supporters of [the] [i]nitiative . . . and its opponents had equal right to submit
their arguments to the electorate at large.” Id. at 231. As no charge was made
that the measure’s opponents had interfered with voters at the polls or with
officials tabulating the votes, the court ruled that the opponents were entitled
to Noerr-Pennington immunity. Id.
The Federal Trade Commission also has applied the Noerr-Pennington
doctrine to Federal Trade Commission Act cases. See, e.g., Union Oil Company
of California, 138 F.T.C. 1, 17-78 (2004),
http://www.ftc.gov/os/decisions/docs/volume138.pdf (discussing application
of Noerr-Pennington immunity to claim that Union Oil Company of California
(Unocal) violated Federal Trade Commission Act through knowing and willful
misrepresentations to the California Air Resources Board and competitors that
Unocal lacked or would not assert patent rights concerning automobile
emissions research results). Additionally, several state and federal courts have
applied the Noerr-Pennington doctrine to cases brought under state unfair
trade practices acts. See Suburban Restoration Co., Inc. v. Acmat Corp., 700
F.2d 98 (2d Cir. 1983) (applying Noerr-Pennington to Connecticut Unfair Trade
Practices Act case); Keep Thomson, Etc. v. Citizens for Gallen Com., 457 F.
Supp. 957, 961 (D.N.H. 1978) (applying doctrine to CPA claim); Pacific Lumber,
70 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 513 (applying doctrine to claim brought under California
Unfair Competition Law); cf. Zeller v. Consolini, 758 A.2d 376, 378, 382 (Conn.
App. Ct. 2000) (Noerr-Pennington doctrine applies to petitioning activity
directed at local zoning board); Cove Rd. Dev. v. W. Cranston Indus. Park, 674
A.2d 1234, 1237 (R.I. 1996) (applying Noerr-Pennington doctrine to developer’s
efforts to obtain zoning relief).
For instance, in Keep Thomson, Etc., the United States District Court for
the District of New Hampshire ruled that Noerr-Pennington immunity applied
to a claim that a committee seeking reelection of the incumbent governor had
used a song in a political advertisement to support the incumbent’s candidacy
even though a committee to advance the election of another candidate claimed
to own the rights to the song. Keep Thomson, Etc., 457 F. Supp. at 958-59,
61. Relying upon Rodgers, the court concluded that the proscriptions of the
7
CPA, like those of the Federal Trade Commission Act, were not intended for the
political arena. Id. at 961.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals used similar logic in Suburban
Restoration Co., Inc., 700 F.2d at 101-02, to interpret the Connecticut Unfair
Trade Practices Act. The court reasoned that Connecticut courts would likely
apply the Noerr-Pennington doctrine to the Connecticut statute because it was
expressly modeled after the Federal Trade Commission Act and because the
statute directs courts to be guided by federal interpretations of the federal act.
Suburban Restoration Co., Inc., 700 F.2d at 101-02. The court ruled that
because the activity complained of -- the filing of a single non-sham lawsuit --
was entitled to Noerr-Pennington immunity, it could not form the basis of
either a claim under the Connecticut statute or a common law claim for
tortious interference with business expectancy. Id. at 102.
We find the reasoning of these cases persuasive and hold that the Noerr-
Pennington doctrine applies to claims brought under the CPA. The CPA, like
the Connecticut statute at issue in Suburban Restoration Co., Inc., is
analogous to the Federal Trade Commission Act. See Roberts v. General
Motors Corp., 138 N.H. 532, 539 (1994). Our legislature, like the Connecticut
legislature, has directed that we may rely upon the interpretation of the Federal
Trade Commission Act by the Federal Trade Commission and federal courts.
See RSA 358-A:13; see also Moran, 151 N.H. at 452-53. The CPA, like the
Federal Trade Commission Act, is tailored for the business arena, not the
political arena. It proscribes unfair methods of competition or unfair or
deceptive acts “in the conduct of any trade or commerce” in the state. RSA
358-A:2. “Fraudulent or deceptive conduct can be actionable under the [CPA]
only if it occurs in a business setting involving the advertising or sale of a
commodity or service as part of the day-to-day business of the defendant.”
Brzica v. Trustees of Dartmouth College, 147 N.H. 443, 451 (2002). Just as the
Rodgers court and the Federal Trade Commission have ruled that the Noerr-
Pennington doctrine applies to claims brought under the Federal Trade
Commission Act, so too do we hold the Noerr-Pennington doctrine applies to
claims brought under the CPA.
C. Application of Noerr-Pennington Immunity to Defendants
We next address whether Fifth Estate’s conduct in this case is entitled to
Noerr-Pennington immunity. The facts of this case mirror those in Noerr. In
this case, as in Noerr, 365 U.S. at 129, at issue is a publicity campaign
directed at the general electorate. Like the campaign in Noerr, the alleged
purpose of Fifth Estate’s publicity campaign was anti-competitive -- here, it is
to eliminate Green Mountain as a competitor. See Noerr, 365 U.S. at 138.
Additionally, as in Noerr, “the publicity matter circulated in the campaign was
made to appear as spontaneously expressed views of independent persons and
civic groups,” when, in fact, in Noerr, it was paid for by the railroads and, in
8
our case, by Fifth Estate. Id. at 130. Just as the Noerr court ruled that the
railroad industry’s “mere attempts to influence the passage or enforcement of
laws” did not violate the Sherman Act, so too do we conclude that Fifth Estate’s
“mere attempts to influence” the passage of the warrant articles does not
violate the CPA, even if, as Green Mountain alleges, Fifth Estate’s sole motive
was to eliminate Green Mountain as a competitor. Id. at 135, 138; see Allied
Tube & Conduit Corp., 486 U.S. at 499-500.
We are not persuaded by Green Mountain’s assertion that the special
town meeting at issue did not involve the passage or enforcement of laws. As
Green Mountain acknowledges, the town of Wolfeboro has a town meeting form
of government, and “[i]t is well understood that, within the limits of the power
of legislation conferred upon it, a town meeting is a legislative body.” New
London v. Davis, 73 N.H. 72, 74 (1904); see Attorney-General v. Folsom, 69
N.H. 556, 557 (1899) (“In New England town meetings the voters are the
sovereigns, and their will, when duly expressed, is supreme.”). At issue here is
the passage of warrant articles, which, in a town meeting, are the equivalent of
legislation.
1. “Commercial” Exception
Green Mountain contends that Fifth Estate is not entitled to Noerr-
Pennington immunity because of the “commercial” exception thereto, which
some courts, including the First Circuit, have recognized. See Hecht v. Pro-
Football, Inc., 444 F.2d 931, 940-42 (D.C. Cir. 1971), cert. denied, 404 U.S.
1047 (1972); George R. Whitten, Jr., Inc. v. Paddock Pool Builders, Inc., 424
F.2d 25, 31-34 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 400 U.S. 850 (1970). But see
Greenwood Utilities v. Mississippi Power Co., 751 F.2d 1484, 1505 n.14 (5th
Cir. 1985) (noting that “there should be no commercial exception to Noerr-
Pennington”); In re Airport Car Rental Antitrust Litigation, 693 F.2d 84, 88 (9th
Cir. 1982) (holding that “[t]here is no commercial exception to Noerr-
Pennington”), cert. denied, 462 U.S. 1133 (1983).
The First Circuit Court of Appeals applied this exception in Whitten,
which involved manufacturers of prefabricated pipeless pool gutters that were
competing to sell their products to public bodies acting under competitive
bidding procedures. Whitten, 424 F.2d at 27. One of the manufacturers
combined with dealers and others to require the use of its own specifications in
the public swimming pool industry, with the intent to exclude other
manufacturers. Id. The court ruled that Noerr-Pennington immunity was
unavailable to the company in part because “the efforts of an industry leader to
impose his product specifications by guile, falsity, and threats on a harried
architect hired by a local school board hardly rise to the dignity of an effort to
influence the passage or enforcement of laws.” Id. at 32. The court explained:
“The entire thrust of Noerr is aimed at insuring uninhibited access to
government Policy makers. . . . By ‘enforcement of laws’ we understand some
9
significant policy determination in the application of a statute, not a technical
decision about the best kind of weld to use in a swimming pool gutter.” Id.
The court further reasoned:
The state legislatures, by enacting statutes requiring public
bidding, have decreed that government purchases will be made
according to strictly economic criteria. [While the company] is free
to seek legislative change in this basic policy, . . . until such
change is secured, [its] dealings with officials who administer the
bid statutes should be subject to the same limitations as its
dealings with private consumers.
Id. at 33. Thus, the court ruled that Noerr-Pennington immunity was
unavailable when the government was:
acting in a proprietary capacity, purchasing goods and services to
satisfy its own needs within a framework of competitive bidding,
where the initial responsibility for recommending specifications
has been entrusted to a hired professional, and where the selling
effort directed at that professional and his public client was
monopolistically motivated and ran the gamut from high pressure
salesmanship to fraudulent statements and threats.
Id. at 29.
It is unclear whether Whitten is still good law in the First Circuit. In
Sandy River Nursing Care, 985 F.2d at 1143, the First Circuit may have
disavowed its reasoning in Whitten when it observed that the United States
Supreme Court in Superior Court Trial Lawyers’ Assn., 493 U.S. 411, did not
establish a government-as-market-participant exception to Noerr-Pennington
immunity. Moreover, other courts have suggested that when the United States
Supreme Court expanded Noerr-Pennington immunity to petitions before
administrative agencies, see California Mot. Transport, 404 U.S. at 510, it
implicitly overruled Whitten. See In re Airport Car Rental Antitrust Litigation,
693 F.2d at 88; Bustop Shelters v. Convenience & Safety Corp., 521 F. Supp.
989, 996 (S.D.N.Y. 1981) (Whitten “ha[s] been disapproved in this circuit, as
implicitly overruled or weakened by California Motor Transport.”).
Even if we assume that Whitten is still good law and that we would follow
it in construing the CPA, it is factually distinguishable from the instant case.
Whitten “involved direct commercial competitors attempting to sell their
products to public bodies under competitive bidding procedures.” Council for
Employment, Etc. v. WHDH Corp., 580 F.2d 9, 12 n.11 (1st Cir. 1978), cert.
denied, 440 U.S. 945 (1979). The present case, by contrast, involves “access to
the public media . . . for the purpose of influencing political decisions of the
10
general electorate.” Id. at 12. The government in Whitten was acting as a
consumer. Here, it is not.
2. “Sham” Exception
To the extent that Green Mountain argues that Fifth Estate is not
entitled to Noerr-Pennington immunity because of the “sham” exception to this
doctrine, we disagree. The Noerr-Pennington doctrine withholds immunity
from “sham” activities, which although “ostensibly directed toward influencing
governmental action, [are] a mere sham to cover an attempt to interfere directly
with the business relationships of a competitor.” Professional Real Estate
Investors, Inc. v. Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., 508 U.S. 49, 56 (1993)
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). The “sham” exception applies when a party’s
resort to governmental process is both objectively baseless and subjectively
intended only to burden a rival with the governmental decision-making process
itself. See id. at 60-61; see also Davric Maine Corp., 216 F.3d at 147.
Subjective intent, alone, is insufficient to establish the “sham” exception.
Professional Real Estate Investors, 508 U.S. at 60. Thus, a defendant is
entitled to Noerr-Pennington immunity even if it pressured or lied to
government officials, as long as its conduct was part of a good faith campaign
aimed at securing government action. Doron Precision Systems, 423 F. Supp.
2d at 189.
This exception is unavailable here. A successful effort, such as Fifth
Estate’s campaign to defeat the warrant articles, “certainly cannot be
characterized as a sham.” Allied Tube & Conduit Corp., 486 U.S. at 502; see
Davric Maine Corp., 216 F.3d at 148. Moreover, the exception only
“encompasses situations in which persons use the governmental process -- as
opposed to the outcome of that process -- as an anticompetitive weapon.”
Omni Outdoor Advertising, Inc., 499 U.S. at 380. “In this case, it is apparent
that the defendants sought to benefit from the outcomes of the process at
issue,” Davric Maine Corp., 216 F.3d at 148, the defeat of the warrant articles.
III. Conclusion
To summarize, we hold that the Noerr-Pennington doctrine applies to
claims brought under the CPA and that Fifth Estate is entitled to immunity
under that doctrine for its actions. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial
court erred when, in denying Fifth Estate’s summary judgment motion and
motions for directed verdict and JNOV, it ruled that the CPA applied to Fifth
Estate’s conduct.
Reversed.
DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
11