THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2008-272
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSHUA SHEPARD
Argued: March 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 29, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Michael S. Lewis, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Joshua Shepard, appeals his conviction for
three counts of negligent homicide and one count of vehicular assault following
a jury trial. See RSA 630:3, I (2007); RSA 265:79-a (2004). He argues that the
Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) erred when it denied his motions to dismiss the
indictments against him and for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (JNOV).
We reverse.
The jury could have found the following facts, viewed in the light most
favorable to the State. The defendant’s convictions stem from a 2006 motor
vehicle accident that seriously injured him and another motorist and killed
three others. The accident happened at approximately noon on the first day of
Laconia’s Motorcycle Week, Sunday, June 11, 2006, which was a partly cloudy,
relatively warm and comfortable day, with good visibility. The defendant was
driving his car eastbound on Route 49 from Interstate 93 to his job in
Waterville Valley, a road that he had traveled hundreds of times before. The
accident occurred in Thornton, where Route 49 is a narrow, winding two-lane
highway populated by residences and businesses. Traffic traveling in the
opposite direction included, in order, a car driven by Carleton Vaughan, a
motorcycle carrying Gary and Joyce Varden, a motorcycle carrying Rick and
Claudia Huffman, and a car containing Christopher and Kristin Caplice. The
motorcycles were traveling behind Vaughan’s vehicle in staggered positions
with the Varden motorcycle positioned closer to the double yellow line and the
Huffman motorcycle positioned fifty feet behind the Varden motorcycle, closer
to the center of the westbound lane.
Just before the collision, the defendant’s car headed toward the center
double yellow line in the direction of Vaughan’s car. Vaughan steered his car
to the right to avoid the defendant. The defendant’s car continued across the
double yellow line and was a quarter to halfway into the lane of oncoming
traffic when it hit the Varden motorcycle in the westbound lane. The Varden
motorcycle then collided with the Huffman motorcycle. The Vardens died at
the scene. The Huffmans were transported to a hospital where Claudia
Huffman later died. Both Rick Huffman and the defendant suffered serious
bodily injuries.
At most, the defendant’s car strayed over the yellow line for
approximately two seconds before hitting the Varden motorcycle. There was no
evidence that the defendant took any evasive action to avoid the motorcycles
after he drove into their lane. There was no evidence that any of the vehicles
involved were speeding. Nor was there any evidence that the defendant was
under the influence of alcohol or drugs at the time.
The grand jury returned three indictments alleging that the defendant
negligently caused the death of Gary Varden, Joyce Varden and Claudia
Huffman, respectively. The grand jury also returned a fourth indictment
alleging that the defendant negligently caused serious bodily injury to Rick
Huffman. At the conclusion of the State’s case, the defendant moved
unsuccessfully to dismiss the indictments on the ground that the State had
failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that his conduct was criminally
negligent. See RSA 630:3, I; see also State v. Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. 336,
341 (2003) (holding that vehicular assault statute, RSA 265:79-a, requires
proof of criminal negligence). After the jury returned guilty verdicts on all
charged offenses, the defendant moved for JNOV on the grounds that the
evidence was insufficient to support the verdicts and that the verdicts were
2
against the weight of the evidence. The trial court denied the motion on both
grounds, and this appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it denied his
motions to dismiss the indictments at the close of the State’s case and to set
aside the jury’s verdict based upon sufficiency of the evidence. He contends
that the evidence was insufficient to establish that his conduct was criminally
negligent. “Because the defendant chose to present a case after unsuccessfully
moving to dismiss, however, the issue on appeal as to both motions is the
sufficiency of the evidence and we review the entire trial record to make that
determination.” State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 711-12 (2003).
To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence
and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State,
could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Evans, 150 N.H.
416, 424 (2003). When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under this standard, however, we still
consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State and examine each
evidentiary item in context, not in isolation. Id.
To have convicted the defendant either of negligent homicide or vehicular
assault, the jury must have found, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he acted
negligently as defined in RSA 626:2, II(d) (2004). See RSA 630:3, I (“A person is
guilty of a class B felony when he causes the death of another negligently”);
Rollins-Ercolino, 149 N.H. at 341. Under RSA 626:2, II(d), a person acts
“negligently with respect to a material element of an offense when he fails to
become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material element
exists or will result from his conduct.” RSA 626:2, II(d) specifies that “[t]he risk
must be of such a nature and degree that his failure to become aware of it
constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would
observe in the situation.” Whether the defendant failed to become aware of a
“substantial and unjustifiable risk” is determined by an objective test, not by
reference to the defendant’s subjective perception. State v. Ebinger, 135 N.H.
264, 265-66 (1992).
In the instant matter, the risk at issue for the negligent homicide charges
is the risk of death, see RSA 630:3, I; the risk at issue for the vehicular assault
charge is the risk of serious bodily injury, see RSA 265:79-A. Not every act of
carelessness that results in a death or serious bodily injury entails criminal
negligence, however, and a person charged with criminal negligence may not be
convicted on evidence that establishes only ordinary negligence. See State v.
Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 350 (2005). “[T]he carelessness required for criminal
negligence is appreciably more serious than that for ordinary civil negligence,
and . . . its seriousness [must] be apparent to anyone who shares the
3
community’s general sense of right and wrong.” Id. at 351 (quotation and
ellipsis omitted). Criminal negligence requires not only the failure to perceive a
more than ordinary risk, “but also some serious blameworthiness in the
conduct that caused it.” Id. (quotation omitted). Accordingly, “unless a
defendant has engaged in some blameworthy conduct creating or contributing
to a substantial and unjustifiable risk of death [or serious bodily injury],” he
has not engaged in criminally negligent conduct. Id. (quotation omitted).
For example, in Littlefield, the bow of the defendant’s thirty-six foot
performance boat collided with the stern of a twenty-foot motorboat and then
the length of the larger boat rode over the smaller boat, killing the smaller
boat’s owner. Id. at 333. In upholding the defendant’s conviction for negligent
homicide, we pointed to the substantial evidence of his blameworthy, risk-
creating conduct: his intoxication, his lack of attention while piloting the boat,
the speed at which he operated his boat on a dark, moonless night, and his
failure to see a properly illuminated boat in front of him. Id. at 353.
Similarly, in Ebinger, we likewise rejected the defendant’s assertion that
the evidence was insufficient to convict him of negligent homicide. Ebinger,
135 N.H. at 267. In that case, the defendant was driving his truck when it
struck and killed a teenaged bicyclist. Id. at 265. In Ebinger, as in Littlefield,
we pointed to the evidence of the defendant’s blameworthy, risk-creating
conduct, which included evidence that he was driving while under the
influence of alcohol and that he drove across the white fog line into the
breakdown lane. Id. at 266.
In State v. Pittera, 139 N.H. 257, 259 (1994), the defendant was
operating his motorboat on Lower Suncook Lake when the boat and its
propeller struck and killed a young boy who was swimming in the lake. In
affirming his conviction, we emphasized the defendant’s conduct, not only in
failing to perceive the risk, but also in causing it. Pittera, 139 N.H. at 260-61.
We concluded that the jury could have found that a reasonable person, in the
defendant’s place, would have seen the victim in the water and avoided hitting
him. Id. at 261. Furthermore, the jury could have combined this finding with
the evidence that the defendant was traveling rapidly through a cove area
containing numerous docks and adjacent to a known swimming area while
watching the shoreline, to conclude that his failure to become aware of the risk
constituted a gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would
observe in the situation. Id.
In all three of these cases, the proof established not only that the
defendant failed to perceive the risk, but also that his conduct wrongfully
caused it. In Littlefield and Ebinger, the conduct that caused the risk was the
defendant’s consumption of alcohol; in Pittera, it was his speeding.
4
In the instant case, there is no evidence that the defendant had
consumed any alcohol or drugs before driving. Nor was there was any evidence
that he was speeding. At most, the evidence shows that his car inexplicably
drifted over the double yellow line and into oncoming traffic for no more than
two seconds. The defendant’s two-second failure to keep his car in its lane
may constitute civil negligence, but, without more, it does not constitute
criminal negligence as a matter of law.
In arguing for a contrary result, the State relies upon Utley v. State, 237
S.W.3d 27 (Ark. 2006). In that case, the defendant was driving a loaded
garbage truck, which he drove across the centerline. Utley, 237 S.W.3d at 28.
After the driver of the car in the other lane swerved to avoid the defendant’s
truck, the truck collided with a pickup truck, which then exploded, killing its
driver. Id. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, the
majority concluded that substantial evidence existed to support the defendant’s
negligent homicide conviction. Id. at 30. The majority concluded that “[a]
person driving a garbage truck around a curve and on a bridge should be
aware that driving on the wrong side of the road presents a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that he might hit a car traveling in the opposite direction and
kill someone in that car.” Id. Accordingly, the majority ruled that the
defendant’s failure to perceive that risk constituted a gross deviation from the
standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in his situation. Id.
As the dissent cogently argued, however, the majority’s opinion is flawed
because it blurs the lines between civil and criminal liability for negligence.
See id. at 30-32 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting). As in the instant case, the
evidence in Utley showed, at best, that the defendant had been inattentive, and
while this might well give rise to civil liability, it should not, standing alone,
give rise to criminal liability. Id. at 32 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting). As the
dissent observed: “While wandering over the centerline is certainly very
dangerous, it is an occurrence that, unfortunately, is commonly witnessed in
everyday driving. Many dangerous actions that inattentive drivers engage in do
not give rise to criminal liability.” Id. at 31 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting).
Although the defendant was convicted of negligent homicide, “why he
drove over the centerline remains entirely unknown.” Id. (Hannah, C.J.,
dissenting). All we know is that some witnesses said that he drove his car a
quarter to halfway into the lane of oncoming traffic, while a State trooper
testified that, based upon tire marks, the defendant’s car was likely between
two and one-half and three feet from the centerline. What we do not know,
however, is whether this was the result of an affirmative act. Id. (Hannah, C.J.,
dissenting). Moreover, gouge marks made by the Vardens’ motorcycle show
that their motorcycle was traveling within a foot of the yellow line at the time of
the collision.
5
“What happened to [the defendant]? Did he doze off? Was he changing a
CD or the radio? Did his mind wander? All of these acts are certainly acts of
negligence, but are they acts of criminal negligence?” Id. at 32 (Hannah, C.J.,
dissenting). Or, did he sneeze? Did he hit a pothole or an object in the road?
Were his tires unevenly worn or balanced? Do these acts, which are not even
negligent, constitute a “gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable
person would observe in the situation”? RSA 626:2, II(d). “It would appear
not.” Utley, 237 S.W.3d at 32 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting).
Although it is not binding upon us, we find State v. Krovvidi, 58 P.3d 687
(Kan. 2002), persuasive. The defendant in that case had been convicted of
vehicular homicide after running a red light and causing an accident that killed
another person. Krovvidi, 58 P.3d at 688. To convict him of this offense, the
jury must have found that his conduct was more than ordinary or simple
negligence but less than gross and wanton negligence. Id. at 694. The court
reversed his conviction, ruling that the defendant’s mere violation of a traffic
ordinance, through inattention, without more, was insufficient to constitute the
degree of negligence required. Id. at 697. To constitute criminal negligence
under Kansas law, additional aggravating factors were required. Id. In
Krovvidi, there were no aggravating factors. The defendant had not been
drinking and was not under the influence of any drug and was not speeding.
Id. Under these circumstances, the court ruled that his conduct was not
culpable under the vehicular homicide statute. Id.
In the instant matter, the degree of negligence required for criminal
culpability is even higher than in Krovvidi. Whereas in Krovvidi, the required
degree of negligence was less than gross negligence, id. at 694, in the instant
case, gross negligence is mandated. Yet, as in Krovvidi, there was only the
defendant’s violation of a traffic law due to momentary inattention. Like the
court in Krovvidi, we conclude that, without more, such conduct is insufficient
to impose criminal liability. Were it otherwise, criminal liability would attach
as a matter of law whenever a person dies in an accident caused by a driver
who crosses the centerline, regardless of the circumstances. See Utley, 237
S.W.3d at 32 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting).
Adopting the State’s position here would go well beyond our established
cases, and could expand the scope of criminal negligence to encompass
virtually any vehicular fatality. As Ebinger, Littlefield and Pitterra
demonstrate, however, criminal negligence does not depend upon the
consequences of the defendant’s act, no matter how tragic. Rather, it is the
circumstances of the defendant’s conduct that control the outcome. Here,
those circumstances are unknown. “Defaulting to an alleged failure by [the
defendant] to offer a reasonable hypothesis that does not lead to guilt is not
proof beyond a reasonable doubt. That turns criminal law on its head,
6
essentially placing [the defendant] in the position of being guilty until he proves
himself innocent.” Utley, 237 S.W.3d at 32 (Hannah, C.J., dissenting).
In light of our ruling, we need not address the defendant’s alternative
argument that the trial court erred when it denied his motion for JNOV based
upon the weight of the evidence.
Reversed.
DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred; BRODERICK, C.J., dissented.
BRODERICK, C.J., dissenting. Based upon the standard of review that
we are obligated to apply, see State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 350 (2005), this
case, although tragic, is, in my view, not close. Viewed in the light most
favorable to the State, the evidence supports findings that at approximately
noon on Sunday, June 11, 2006, a partly cloudy, relatively warm and
comfortable day, with good visibility, the defendant was driving his car
eastbound on Route 49, a road that he had traveled hundreds of times before,
at approximately 40 miles per hour. Traffic traveling in the opposite direction
included, in order, a car driven by Carleton Vaughan, a motorcycle carrying
Gary and Joyce Varden, a motorcycle carrying Rick and Claudia Huffman, and
a car containing Christopher and Kristin Caplice. The motorcycles were
traveling behind Vaughan’s vehicle in staggered positions with the Varden
motorcycle positioned in the center of its lane and the Huffman motorcycle
positioned fifty feet behind and to the right of the Varden motorcycle.
In Thornton, where Route 49 is a narrow, winding, two-lane highway,
when the defendant’s car was approximately 250 feet in front of the
motorcycles, Rick Huffman noticed that it began to come across the double
yellow line. Carleton Vaughan described it as “coming kind of – way toward the
yellow line,” requiring Vaughan to “crowd[] myself over to the right to avoid it
because I thought he was going to come over the yellow line.”’ The defendant’s
car then crossed the double yellow line and continued until it was halfway into
the lane of oncoming traffic, at which time it hit the Varden motorcycle. The
Varden motorcycle and the defendant’s car then collided with the Huffman
motorcycle.
The defendant’s car was in the wrong lane for approximately two seconds
before hitting the Varden motorcycle. In addition, Vaughan noticed the
defendant’s car heading towards the centerline for some period of time prior to
it actually crossing the line. Despite the fact that Vaughan steered his car to
the right to avoid the defendant’s car, the defendant took no evasive action to
avoid either Vaughan or the motorcycles behind him. Nor did the defendant
apply his brakes prior to hitting the motorcycles. As a result of the
7
defendant’s actions, Gary Varden, Joyce Varden and Claudia Huffman died,
and Rick Huffman suffered serious bodily injury.
Under RSA 626:2, II(d), a person acts “negligently with respect to a
material element of an offense when he fails to become aware of a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result from his
conduct.” RSA 626:2, II(d) specifies that “[t]he risk must be of such a nature
and degree that his failure to become aware of it constitutes a gross deviation
from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the situation.”
Whether the defendant failed to become aware of a “substantial and
unjustifiable risk” is determined by an objective test, not by reference to the
defendant’s subjective perception. State v. Ebinger, 135 N.H. 264, 265 (1992).
The majority correctly states that “the carelessness required for criminal
negligence is appreciably more serious than that for ordinary civil negligence,
and . . . its seriousness [must] be apparent to anyone who shares the
community’s general sense of right and wrong.” Littlefield, 152 N.H. at 351
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). In this case, the community has spoken – a
jury of twelve has unanimously determined that the defendant’s conduct
satisfies the test for criminal negligence. The trial judge, who was asked to set
aside the verdict in his role as the “thirteenth juror,” which permits a trial
judge to set aside even a verdict supported by sufficient evidence, see State v.
Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 465 (2007), declined to do so. I see no reason to doubt
the wisdom of their collective judgment in this case.
Our case law supports the verdict. In State v. Pittera, 139 N.H. 257
(1994), the defendant was operating his motorboat on Lower Suncook Lake
when the boat and its propeller struck and killed a young boy who was
swimming in the lake. In affirming his conviction for negligent homicide, we
emphasized the defendant’s conduct, not only in failing to perceive the risk, but
also in causing it. Pittera, 139 N.H. at 260-61. We concluded that the jury
could have found that a reasonable person, in the defendant’s place, would
have seen the victim in the water and avoided hitting him. Id. at 261.
Furthermore, the jury could have combined this finding with the evidence that
the defendant was traveling rapidly through a cove area containing numerous
docks and adjacent to a known swimming area while watching the shoreline, to
conclude that his failure to become aware of the risk constituted a gross
deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the
situation. Id.
Similarly, here the jury could have found that a reasonable person, in
the defendant’s place, would have seen the motorcycles and avoided hitting
them. While the majority contends that “at most,” the evidence shows that the
defendant’s car “inexplicably” drifted over the double yellow line and into
oncoming traffic for “no more than two seconds,” a reasonable jury could have
8
found that the defendant’s inattention lasted substantially longer than two
seconds and caused the accident. The evidence showed that before the
defendant’s car actually crossed the double yellow line, it was moving towards
the line at a sufficient rate to require Vaughan to drive his car to the right to
avoid the defendant. Despite forcing Vaughan’s car to move out of his way, the
defendant continued to cross the double yellow line and drive halfway into the
oncoming lane until he collided with the motorcycles. At no point did the
defendant take any evasive action or apply his brakes. Even assuming that
driving in the wrong lane in the face of oncoming traffic for two seconds (which
at 40 miles per hour would mean traveling in the wrong lane for approximately
40 yards) would not support the verdict in this case, the evidence shows that
this case involves far more than an inexplicable two-second failure by the
defendant to keep his car in his lane. A rational jury could easily conclude that
the defendant was paying no attention to where his car was going for
substantially longer than two seconds, despite driving at 40 miles per hour on
a narrow, winding, two-lane road with oncoming traffic. Thus, the defendant
engaged in blameworthy conduct creating or contributing to a substantial and
unjustifiable risk of death or serious bodily injury. See Littlefield, 152 N.H. at
351.
Respectfully, the majority’s reliance upon the dissent in Utley v. State,
237 S.W.3d 27 (Ark. 2006), is misplaced. The majority quotes approvingly the
dissent’s statement that “[w]hile wandering over the centerline is certainly very
dangerous, it is an occurrence that, unfortunately, is commonly witnessed in
everyday driving.” As the jury in this case undoubtedly concluded, driving
halfway into the wrong lane into oncoming traffic is not something commonly
witnessed in everyday driving. This was not a case of momentary inattention,
such as might be caused by changing the radio or by a sneeze. The
defendant’s sustained inattention, leading to his car crossing halfway into the
wrong lane in the face of oncoming traffic, is an occurrence that I venture most
drivers have not witnessed, and hope never to witness, in their lives.
Thus, in my judgment, the majority is simply incorrect when it
characterizes this case as “only the defendant’s violation of a traffic law due to
momentary inattention,” and its fear that affirming the jury’s verdict will result
in “criminal liability [attaching] as a matter of law whenever a person dies in an
accident caused by a driver who crosses the centerline, regardless of the
circumstances” is unfounded. Juries will continue to perform their function of
determining whether defendants have grossly deviated from the conduct that a
reasonable person would observe. Because the evidence in this case, viewed in
the light most favorable to the State, supports this jury’s determination, I
respectfully dissent.
9