THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Nashua District Court
No. 2008-526
LYNETTE WALKER
v.
CLIFFORD WALKER
Argued: February 25, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 17, 2009
Kalled Law Offices, PLLC, of Ossipee (John P. Kalled on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Small & Lyons, of Nashua (Daniel R. Krislov on the brief and orally), for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Clifford Walker, appeals an order of the Trial
Court (Moore, J.) granting the plaintiff, Lynette Walker, a final domestic
violence protective order. See RSA 173-B:5 (Supp. 2008). We affirm.
The record supports the following. The plaintiff and defendant are
married and have three minor children. At all times relevant to this appeal, the
defendant lived and worked in Thetford, Vermont, while the plaintiff and
children resided in Nashua. The defendant visited his wife and children on
weekends. For several months prior to the domestic violence petition, the two
had a series of “conversations” regarding whether the plaintiff intended to leave
the defendant and seek custody of the children. After one of these
conversations, the plaintiff researched “the laws . . . concerning custody,” wrote
“down several things” and placed them in her pocketbook.
During the 2008 Memorial Day weekend, while the family was at the
plaintiff’s family camp, the defendant came across the written materials in the
plaintiff’s pocketbook. The plaintiff maintains that the defendant searched her
purse without permission, while the defendant claims that he “hooked” the
open pocketbook as he walked by, causing it to fall and spill its contents. The
two had another “discussion.” The plaintiff testified that, upon finding this
information, the defendant did not “trust [her], . . . was afraid that [she] was
going to leave and . . . take the children, [and] . . . wanted [her] to immediately
move to . . . Vermont with the children.” She testified that he became upset
after she declined. Although he did not strike or specifically threaten to strike
her, the plaintiff interpreted his behavior as a threat to her life.
On the following Tuesday, May 27, 2008, the plaintiff petitioned for a
temporary protective order. She alleged that she was in immediate danger
because, upon finding the information in her pocketbook, the defendant stated
to her that “he is coming to take [the children] at whatever cost and not to get
in his way.” She alleged that the defendant “ha[d] threatened [her] on
numerous occasions that if [she left] him he would do whatever he had to do to
take away [their] children,” that he possessed a “.45 pistol[ and] numerous
knives” and that he “carries [the] unregistered .45 pistol in [their] vehicle at all
times.” Finally, she alleged that the defendant removed her credit cards, debit
card and check book from her purse.
The Nashua District Court (Leary, J.) held an ex parte hearing the same
day. The court questioned the plaintiff about her understanding of the alleged
threat. She explained that she understood his threat as one to her life and
safety and that she intended the allegation within her petition to convey as
much. She elaborated that the allegations in her petition were only those from
the most recent conversation and that the defendant specifically threatened her
life on other recent occasions. During or just after the hearing, the court, with
the plaintiff’s permission, added the following sentence to the plaintiff’s petition
in the space for additional facts: “He has threatened to kill her in the past and
plaintiff takes ‘at whatever cost’ . . . to mean to kill her[.]” It then granted a
temporary protective order.
The District Court (Moore, J.) conducted a plenary hearing on June 4,
2008, at which it received evidence and heard sworn testimony from the
plaintiff, the defendant and his mother.
2
The plaintiff testified that most of the defendant’s recent threats have
“been in reference to [their] children.” The substance of the threats was either
“to kill [her]” or to “do whatever [he has] to do to get [his] children back.” Her
understanding of the latter threat is that “he’s saying the same thing no matter
how it’s phrased . . ., [that] if [she] should leave him and take [their] children,
that he is going to do [her] physical harm.” She testified that the defendant
acquired a .45 pistol in April 2008, that he carries the pistol and often one
knife from his collection, and that he has issued at least one threat to her while
holding the firearm.
The defendant denied threatening the plaintiff. He testified that his
statements meant that he would do anything to get custody of the children
“within the means of the law.” He testified that he took the plaintiff’s credit
cards, debit card and checkbook with her permission. The defendant’s mother
corroborated parts of his testimony.
After the plenary hearing, the court granted a final protective order. See
RSA 173-B:5, I. It first ruled that the defendant committed criminal
threatening, and found that a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety existed
because “the Plaintiff reasonably believes that the Defendant has the ability to
carry out his threats of physical harm.”
The defendant moved for reconsideration. The trial court denied this
motion. On appeal, the defendant argues that: (1) the trial court exceeded its
authority by adding the explanatory text to the domestic violence petition; (2)
denying his motion to reconsider was an unsustainable exercise of discretion;
and (3) there was insufficient evidence in the record to support a finding of
abuse.
“The purpose of [RSA chapter 173-B] is ‘to preserve and protect the
safety of the family unit for all family . . . members by entitling victims of
domestic violence to immediate and effective police protection and judicial
relief.’” In the Matter of Morrill and Morrill, 147 N.H. 116, 117 (2001) (quoting
Laws 1979, 377:1, II).
“Any person may seek relief pursuant to RSA 173-B:5 by filing a petition
. . . alleging abuse by the defendant.” RSA 173-B:3, I (2002). “‘Abuse’ means
the commission or attempted commission of one or more [enumerated acts,]”
RSA 173-B:1, I (2002), including “[c]riminal threatening as defined in RSA
631:4,” RSA 173-B:1, I(b), when such act “constitutes a credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety,” RSA 173-B:1, I. The plaintiff must show abuse by a
preponderance of the evidence. RSA 173-B:5, I. “A finding of abuse shall
mean the defendant represents a credible threat to the safety of the plaintiff.”
Id.
3
I
The defendant first argues that the trial court lacked statutory authority
to insert the explanatory sentence into the petition. The defendant’s argument
requires us to construe RSA 173-B:3, I.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we
review de novo. We are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words
used. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its
meaning is not subject to modification. We will neither consider
what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did not
see fit to include.
In the Matter of Aldrich & Gauthier, 156 N.H. 33, 34 (2007) (citations omitted).
The relevant text of RSA 173-B:3, I, provides that “[t]he plaintiff shall be
permitted to supplement or amend the petition only if the defendant is provided
an opportunity prior to the hearing to respond to the supplemental or amended
petition.” RSA 173-B:3, I. The defendant acknowledges that, prior to the final,
plenary hearing, he received notice of the explanatory sentence inserted into
the petition. The only question before us, therefore, is whether “[t]he plaintiff
. . . supplement[ed] or amend[ed] the petition,” RSA 173-B:3, I.
We hold that the plaintiff, and not the court, amended the petition. This
is primarily because the explanatory sentence merely clarified the plaintiff’s
own allegation that the defendant threatened to take the children “at whatever
cost.” Although the court acted as scrivener by physically writing the
explanatory text on the petition, the plaintiff effected the clarifying amendment
through her testimony at the ex parte hearing. It is well within the court’s
power to document and record the clarification of an allegation in the interest
of narrowing the issues to only those that are contested, cf. In re Ronnie Prime,
120 N.H. 849, 850 (1980) (“As long as a judge maintains his impartiality, he
has the right to question a witness in order to clarify the testimony.”), and
facilitating meaningful judicial review of its disposition, see In the Matter of
Gordon and Gordon, 147 N.H. 693, 700 (2002) (recognizing for purposes of
child support award that, although no statute expressly requires trial court “to
calculate the guidelines award before determining that an adjustment would be
appropriate[,] . . . a specific finding . . . will facilitate our review”).
The defendant further argues that the trial court compromised its
impartiality by “act[ing] as the attorney for the Plaintiff” and prosecuting the
action in violation of due process and separation of powers. We disagree.
4
The State Constitution plainly forbids judges from acting as counsel to
any party. See N.H. CONST. pt. II, art. 79. Consistent with this mandate, the
court neither advocated for the plaintiff nor provided her with legal advice. Nor
did it undertake any prosecutorial function. The court simply discharged its
duty to determine and document whether the statutory standard was met.
Temporary relief was warranted only if there was “an immediate and present
danger of abuse,” RSA 173-B:4, I (2002). In the course of its inquiry, the court
sought to clarify an ambiguous allegation. “It is the judge’s duty to understand
the testimony since it is he . . . who must determine whether . . . the statutory
standard” has been met. In re Ronnie Prime, 120 N.H. at 850; see State v.
Hause, 82 N.H. 133, 138 (1925) (stating that court may ask witness questions
because it “must understand the testimony . . . to be able properly to pass on
motions and requests for rulings”). Indeed, temporary relief may not have been
warranted had “at whatever cost” not been perceived as a threat to the
plaintiff’s well-being. See RSA 173-B:4, I (the court may enter temporary relief
only “[u]pon a showing of an immediate and present danger of abuse”).
II
The plaintiff alleged in her petition that the defendant “went through
[her] purse and took [her] credit cards, debit[] card, [and] check book (joint
account).” She testified to the same at the final hearing. The day after the final
hearing, once the final protective order was in place, the plaintiff transmitted a
note to the defendant, by way of her father, addressing various arrangements.
The copy of the note provided to the court is difficult to read because the right
edge has been removed in the copying process. However, it appears to state
that the plaintiff would “send[] the checks from the che[cking] account as well
as [her] debit card.” Upon reviewing the note, the defendant moved for
reconsideration before the trial court, arguing that it conclusively proves that
the plaintiff “lied about a material fact,” casting doubt upon all of her
testimony. The trial court denied this motion.
On appeal, the defendant contends that denying his motion for
reconsideration was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. He argues that
“[a]t the very least, when confronted with such evidence so close to the delivery
of its decision, the court should be required to rehear the matter in order to
determine” the plaintiff’s credibility. In the alternative, he argues that the trial
court “should be required to vacate the order and dismiss the petition.”
“We will uphold a trial court’s decision on a motion for reconsideration
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Barkus, 152 N.H.
701, 705 (2005). “To show that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the
defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295,
5
296 (2001) (quotation omitted). Our inquiry is “whether the record establishes
an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment made.” Id.
The defendant has failed to carry his burden. First, it is unclear that the
post-hearing note was indeed inconsistent with the plaintiff’s testimony. She
testified: “At that time, he had also removed from my pocketbook my credit
cards, our debit card, the checkbook to our joint checking account . . . .”
(Emphasis added.) The two statements would be consistent if the deprivation
of her debit card and checkbook ended after the petition was filed and before
the post-hearing note was sent to the defendant. Even assuming that the post-
hearing note was somehow inconsistent with the plaintiff’s testimony, we
generally “defer to the trial court’s credibility judgments.” Comer v. Tracey,
156 N.H. 241, 247 (2007). Regardless, the defendant concedes that the
“accusation [regarding the debit card and checkbook] was admittedly not
essential to a finding of abuse.” Accordingly, we find no error in the trial
court’s ruling denying the motion for reconsideration.
III
The defendant argues that there is insufficient evidence to support the
trial court’s rulings because the plaintiff and defendant lived together on
weekends during the alleged threats to her life. He also points to the plaintiff’s
testimony agreeing that things between herself and the defendant were “okay”
before she filed the petition. Thus, the defendant contends that, even
assuming “that the [defendant] threatened to kill [the plaintiff] . . . [,] the threat
is too distant in time . . . [to constitute] an ongoing, credible threat.”
(Quotation omitted.)
“We review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidential support or tainted by error of law.” In the Matter of Alexander and
Evans, 147 N.H. 441, 442 (2002) (quotation and brackets omitted). “We accord
considerable weight to the trial court’s judgments on the credibility of
witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.” Comer, 156 N.H. at 246. “We
view the evidence in the light most favorable to the [plaintiff].” Id.
“Upon a showing of abuse of the plaintiff by a preponderance of the
evidence, the court shall grant such relief as is necessary to bring about a
cessation of abuse.” RSA 173-B:5, I. “Abuse” is defined as having two
elements: (1) commission or attempted commission of one or more of several
criminal acts, including “[c]riminal threatening as defined in RSA 631:4,” RSA
173-B:1, I(b); and (2) a finding that such misconduct “constitutes a credible
threat to the plaintiff’s safety,” RSA 173-B:1, I. Because the defendant does
not challenge the sufficiency of evidence that he criminally threatened the
6
plaintiff, our inquiry is whether the threats “constitute[] a credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety,” RSA 173-B:1, I.
Incidents which are “too distant in time and non-specific” cannot support
a finding of abuse under RSA chapter 173-B. Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H.
283, 286 (2001) (holding two incidents of physical abuse occurring eight and
eleven years prior to the petition were insufficient to show current abuse). In
addition, “a plaintiff . . . [must] show more than a generalized fear for personal
safety based upon past physical violence and more recent non-violent
harassment to support a finding that a credible threat to her safety exists.”
Tosta v. Bullis, 156 N.H. 763, 768 (2008).
The evidence, when viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff,
established that the defendant’s misconduct prompted the filing of the
domestic violence petition and posed a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety at
the time she filed the petition.
We previously concluded in Tosta that the link between the criminal
misconduct and the filing of a domestic violence petition was attenuated where
nine months passed between the two events, during which the parties lived
together without physical violence. Conversely, the defendant in the instant
case recently threatened the plaintiff’s life multiple times, all within several
weeks of her petition. The defendant issued at least one threat while holding a
firearm. Cf. id. at 767 (allegations that defendant hit plaintiff in past and “had
recently followed her while armed with a knife” permitted reasonable inference
that plaintiff was “at risk of further abuse”).
Although the plaintiff agreed that things were “okay” during the weekend
preceding her petition, she elaborated:
We were at a family campground where there w[ere] probably
somewhere between fifteen and twenty people right there, on the
campground in the area. At that time, I did not feel like I was in
any immediate danger. I had not done anything to make him
further believe that I had intended to leave, and at that time, I felt
. . . that things were under control enough that I just needed to get
through the weekend, get away from the situation, and then
proceed.
Further distinguishing this case from Tosta, where “the defendant’s
sudden and unexplained decision to leave . . . ultimately prompted her to file
for a protective order,” id. at 768, is the fact that here the plaintiff based her
decision to leave upon the recent threats. Indeed, the plaintiff seized her first
opportunity to petition the court on the Tuesday following Memorial Day
weekend, when her husband had returned to Vermont.
7
Accordingly, there was sufficient evidence for the trial court to
reasonably conclude that the criminal threatening prompted the domestic
violence petition and constituted a credible threat at the time of the petition.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
8