THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2008-308
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GARY DODDS
Argued: May 14, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R.
Schulman on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Gary Dodds, appeals his convictions
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Fauver, J.) for false public alarms, see
RSA 644:3, I (2007), falsifying physical evidence, see RSA 641:6, I (2007), and
conduct after an accident, see RSA 264:25, I (2004). We affirm.
I
The record supports the following facts. On April 5, 2006, the defendant,
who was a candidate in the Democratic primary for the United States House of
Representatives, was traveling southbound on Route 16 between Dover and
Portsmouth in a snowstorm. Shortly after 8 p.m., a woman driving behind him
observed his car swerve left and right and then veer off the road. At the point
where his car left the road, she noticed that the guardrail was bent and that
the defendant’s car was on the far side of it. She drove her car onto the
shoulder, stopped and dialed 911.
A short distance west of where the accident occurred, an adjacent
roadway, Spur Road, runs parallel to Route 16. To the west of Spur Road lies
the Bellamy River. Caren Peloso, who lives on Spur Road, heard the sound of
the crash and went out to her driveway to investigate. When she observed the
headlights of the defendant’s car, she ran back into her house and dialed 911.
She then walked through a brushy area to the accident scene. When she
reached the defendant’s car, she noticed that its interior light was on, that its
passenger side window was down, and that its airbags had deployed. No one
was inside the car. Peloso then approached the witness’s car and asked her
whether she knew the whereabouts of the driver. She did not.
Emergency personnel and firefighters soon arrived at the scene. They
unsuccessfully searched the area for the driver of the vehicle. After
determining that the car belonged to the defendant, the police called his wife
and she came to the scene. She reported that the defendant was supposed to
have been on his way to a campaign-related meeting in Somersworth.
The defendant’s whereabouts remained a mystery for nearly twenty-
seven hours, and his disappearance was the subject of extensive news
coverage. Family, friends, emergency personnel and other state and federal
officials searched for him on land, by boat on the Bellamy River, and by
helicopter. He was eventually found by a search and rescue volunteer in a
wooded area west of the Bellamy River, less than a mile from the accident
scene, approximately 550 feet from the Garrison School. When he was found,
the defendant was awake and knew who and where he was, but not what day it
was. He was wearing casual business attire, including a button down shirt,
khakis and a fleece pullover. He had on dress socks and one shoe, which were
very wet. His oral temperature, taken in the ambulance about fifty minutes
after he was found, was 96.8 but later dropped to 96.4 degrees. His face was
gray and his feet were discolored, swollen and cold to the touch.
Route 16, also known as the Spaulding Turnpike, is a toll road. The
defendant had an EZ pass transponder in his vehicle that automatically paid
his toll when he passed through the toll plaza. The defendant’s EZ pass
records reflect that his car passed through the Dover toll plaza southbound at
7:39 p.m. on the night of the accident. However, the accident occurred north
of the toll plaza approximately one half hour later, as the defendant was again
driving southbound on the stretch of Route 16 he had already traversed. He
could not recall why he backtracked northbound on a non-toll road and then
headed south again.
2
The defendant claimed to have little memory either of the accident or the
events leading up to it. He recalled that his car swerved and crashed, and that
he left the scene because he smelled smoke and thought his car was on fire.
He recalled swimming across a river, walking for a long time, following a power
line up a steep hill, becoming exhausted and collapsing. He did not recall the
details of what he was doing or where he was going immediately before his car
swerved off of the road.
The defendant was initially charged with one count of false public alarms
and one count of conduct after an accident. He was later indicted on one
count of falsifying physical evidence. He filed a motion in limine to exclude a
portion of the expert testimony of one of his treating neurologists, whom both
he and the State had included on their witness lists, arguing that some of her
opinions were not timely disclosed to him. See Super. Ct. R. 98 (C)(1).
Following a hearing, the trial court denied the motion in part. The State
successfully moved to preclude the defendant from introducing computer
animation evidence purportedly depicting the accident. After a sixteen-day jury
trial, the defendant was convicted on all charges. This appeal followed. The
defendant argues that: (1) his conduct did not fall within the meaning of the
false public alarms statute or the falsifying physical evidence statute; (2) no
reasonable jury could have found him guilty of any of the charges; (3) the trial
court should have excluded the expert opinion of his treating neurologist; and
(4) the trial court should have admitted the computer animation of the
accident.
II
The defendant first contends that his conduct did not fall within the
meaning of the false public alarms statute or the falsifying physical evidence
statute. The false public alarms statute provides: “Any person who directly or
indirectly communicates to any governmental agency that commonly deals with
emergencies involving danger to life or property a report known by him to be
false regarding a[n] . . . emergency, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor . . . .” RSA
644:3, I (emphases added). With respect to this charge, he argues that he “is
not guilty of false public alarm because he never made any sort of
‘communication’ and never ‘reported’ an emergency.” The falsifying physical
evidence statute provides: “A person commits a class B felony if, believing that
an official proceeding . . . or investigation is pending or about to be instituted,
he . . . [a]lters, destroys, conceals or removes any thing with a purpose to
impair its verity or availability in such proceeding or investigation . . . .” RSA
641:6, I. With respect to this charge, the defendant argues that he “is not
guilty of falsifying physical evidence by injuring his feet because [they] were not
anything that could be used in a proceeding or investigation.” (Quotation
omitted.)
3
The State asserts that these arguments have not been preserved for our
review. We agree. The defendant’s arguments on appeal concern
interpretations of RSA 644:3, I, and RSA 641:6, I, whereas in the trial court he
asserted only that the evidence was insufficient to support a conviction.
Indeed, the defendant concedes that these arguments may have been
“imperfectly preserved” because they “were couched in general terms” in his
motions to dismiss and he “did not specifically address the State’s failure to
prove either a ‘report’ or a ‘communication.’” “[P]reservation of an issue for
appeal requires a contemporaneous and specific objection.” State v. Ryan, 135
N.H. 587, 588 (1992). “Any objection not raised at trial is deemed waived.” Id.
By his own admission, the defendant did not raise at trial the statutory
interpretation arguments he now advances; thus they are deemed waived.
The defendant nonetheless argues that we ought to review these issues
under the plain error rule. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. The plain error rule allows us
to consider errors either not brought to the attention of the trial court or not
raised in the notice of appeal. The rule should be used sparingly, its use
limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would
otherwise result. Thus, to fall within the plain error rule: (1) there must be an
error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights;
and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings. State v. Lamy, 158 N.H. 511, 524 (2009).
Under the first prong of plain error review, “there must be an error.” This
requires us to examine the trial court’s interpretation of the false public alarms
statute and the falsifying physical evidence statute, which we review de novo.
Id. at 515. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. State v. Formella, 158 N.H. 114, 116 (2008). When interpreting
statutes, we look to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe
that language according to its plain and ordinary meaning. State v. Duran, 158
N.H. 146, 155 (2008). We construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to
the fair import of their terms and to promote justice. See RSA 625:3 (2007). We
will neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add words that it
did not see fit to include. Duran, 158 N.H. at 155. Absent an ambiguity, we
will not look beyond the language of the statute to discern legislative intent.
Formella, 158 N.H. at 116.
To be guilty of false public alarms, a defendant must (1) directly or
indirectly communicate to a governmental agency (2) a report of an emergency
(3) known by him to be false. See RSA 644:3, I. The defendant does not dispute
that the police constitute a governmental agency within the meaning of the
statute, and it is undisputed that he did not directly report an emergency.
Accordingly, we are concerned only with whether the defendant indirectly
communicated a report of an emergency that he knew was false.
4
The plain and ordinary meaning of “indirectly” includes “not directly
aimed at or achieved . . . : not resulting directly from an action or cause.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1151 (unabridged ed. 2002).
“Communicate” means, among other things, “to make known.” Id. at 460. A
“report” includes “something that gives information . . . : NOTIFICATION.” Id. at
1925. We find that these terms are not ambiguous, and that they are
sufficiently broad to include the conduct at issue in this case. The plain
meaning of these terms does not require that an indirect communication occur
solely by spoken word from the mouth of the defendant. To the contrary, a
defendant could make known or “communicate” an emergency through his
conduct – in this case, by evading search and rescue. The statute proscribes
communicative conduct that indirectly causes a “report” of an emergency that
the defendant knows is false, as was the case here.
The defendant was convicted of “failing to return from an undisclosed
location and failing to communicate his location thereby evading search and
rescue personnel,” after having been in an automobile accident, and of doing so
knowingly. Conviction for this conduct was not inconsistent with our
interpretation of the false public alarms statute and did not constitute an error
of law under the plain meaning of its terms. The acts of failing to return from
an undisclosed location, evading search and rescue personnel and of doing so
knowingly constitute conduct that “indirectly communicates” a report of an
emergency based upon the plain meanings of those terms.
We next address the charge of falsifying physical evidence. To be guilty of
falsifying physical evidence, a defendant must (1) alter any thing (2) with a
purpose of impairing its verity or availability for an official proceeding or
investigation (3) believing that an official proceeding or investigation is pending
or about to be instituted. See RSA 641:6, I. The defendant essentially argues
that because uninjured feet would likely not have been relevant to an
investigation, altering his feet did not transform them into something relevant.
He does not dispute that he knew a proceeding or investigation was pending at
the time his feet were altered.
We disagree that, under the circumstances of this case, the defendant’s
uninjured feet would not have been relevant to an investigation. Because the
defendant claimed he did not recall much of what happened after the accident,
any injury or absence thereof would have been relevant to officials trying to
reconstruct what had occurred. This conclusion is supported by our decision
that RSA 641:6, I, does not require that the evidence falsified be admissible at
trial. See State v. McGurk, 157 N.H. 765, 770 (2008). The falsifying physical
evidence statute simply “requires the State to prove that the defendant,
believing that there was a proceeding pending, knowingly altered, destroyed,
concealed or removed anything, and did so with a purpose to impair its
availability.” Id. at 773. To be guilty here, the State needed to prove that the
defendant altered “any thing with a purpose to impair its verity or availability in
5
[an official] proceeding or investigation.” RSA 641:6, I. Having determined
there was no error in the trial court’s interpretation of the statutes, we need not
examine the remaining prongs of the plain error analysis.
III
Next, the defendant challenges the sufficiency of the evidence.
To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the
evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Under this standard, however,
we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in isolation.
State v. Breed, 158 N.H. __, __ (decided July 2, 2009) (citations omitted).
We first consider the charge of false public alarms. A rational juror could
have found that the defendant failed to return from an undisclosed location and
failed to communicate his location, thereby evading search and rescue
personnel. A rational juror could also have found that he did this knowingly,
even though he testified that he hit his head and did not remember much of
what happened. Credibility determinations are best left to jurors. See id. at __.
The State presented testimony from medical professionals who treated
the defendant that cast doubt upon the nature of his claimed memory loss. In
particular, a neurologist, Dr. Karen Lauze, examined the defendant in the
hospital the day after he was found. She concluded that he had not suffered
any brain injury, but that he had a moderate closed head injury in the form of
a bump with swelling. She asked the defendant to describe his memory of the
accident. Based upon his responses, she testified that his pattern of memory
was “unusual” if he indeed suffered a head injury significant enough to make
him wander off from the scene of the accident. She also opined that because
the paramedic who treated the defendant at the scene did not observe any
signs of a head injury, the bump to his head may not have occurred when the
accident occurred. Notes from emergency room personnel who treated the
defendant upon his arrival at the hospital indicated that he did not suffer any
brain trauma.
The defendant’s own witness, one of his treating physicians, testified that
a core body temperature below 95 degrees would constitute mild hypothermia.
Shortly after the defendant was found, his oral temperature was above 95
degrees. The State presented expert testimony that oral temperatures often
read colder than the more accurate rectal temperature. A reasonable inference
6
to be drawn from this evidence when taken in the light most favorable to the
State is that the defendant did not suffer from hypothermia, which would
permit a jury to doubt his version of events and conclude that he evaded
search and rescue. Although the defendant presented his own experts and
treating physicians who in some cases contradicted evidence presented by the
State, “[a]s the trier of fact, the jury was in the best position to measure the
persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and was not compelled to believe
even uncontroverted evidence.” Id. at __.
In arguing that the evidence was insufficient to convict him of the false
public alarms offense, the defendant examines each piece of evidence in
isolation and characterizes it as “loose ends,” “rank speculation,” or “more
consistent with innocence than guilt.” When addressing a sufficiency of the
evidence argument, however, we view the evidence in context. See id. Any
conflicts in the evidence were for the jury to resolve. See id. Based upon the
record before us, we cannot say that no rational juror could have found the
defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of false public alarms.
We next consider the sufficiency of the evidence supporting the
defendant’s conviction for falsifying physical evidence. In presenting this
argument, the defendant mischaracterizes the State’s burden as having to prove
that he “(a) went from the west bank of the river to safety, (b) soaked his feet in
cold water while he was in a warm room and then (c) surreptitiously re-inserted
himself in a place in the woods where no one would be looking for him.”
However, the State needed to prove only that the defendant altered the
appearance of his feet to make them appear consistent with his statement of
events with a purpose to impair their verity or availability in a proceeding or
investigation. See RSA 641:6, I.
A rational juror could have found that after being involved in an accident,
the defendant altered the appearance of his feet to make them appear
consistent with his statement of events, including his claim that he crossed the
Bellamy River and remained outside exposed to the elements. A rational juror
could also have found that he did this with a purpose to impair their verity or
availability in a proceeding or investigation.
The State presented testimony from a cold injury expert, Dr. Murray
Hamlet, a retired Director of Medical Research for the United States Army. Dr.
Hamlet testified that it would have been possible for the defendant to have
injured his feet intentionally by soaking them in cold water. He further testified
that the injury to the defendant’s feet was not frostbite, but an injury caused by
prolonged immersion in cold water. Based upon review of the defendant’s
medical records, knowledge of the weather conditions and the clothing the
defendant was wearing while he was missing, Dr. Hamlet opined that the injury
to the defendant’s feet was caused by immersing them in water for between one
and ten hours, depending upon the water temperature. The State also
7
presented testimony from multiple witnesses who treated the defendant at the
scene where he was found and at the hospital and documented his condition as
potentially inconsistent with his version of events. Although the defendant
presented testimony from his treating physician that the condition of his feet
was consistent with his account of crossing the river and spending a night in
the woods, this presented an issue of fact for the jury to resolve. See Breed, 158
N.H. at __. Based upon the record before us, we cannot say that no rational
juror could have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt of
falsifying physical evidence.
The defendant makes no argument specifically challenging the sufficiency
of the evidence supporting his conviction for conduct after an accident.
Therefore, we deem this issue waived. See State v. Hofland, 151 N.H. 322, 327
(2004) (“All issues raised in the defendant’s notice of appeal but not briefed are
deemed waived.”).
IV
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in partially denying
his motion in limine to exclude expert testimony from Dr. Lauze. He argues
that her expert opinions were not timely disclosed, causing him prejudice.
Superior Court Rule 98(C)(1) provides, in relevant part: “Not less than twenty
(20) calendar days prior to jury selection . . . the state shall provide the
defendant with . . . all statements of witnesses the state anticipates calling at
the trial . . . .” Super. Ct. R. 98(C)(1). Under the rule, the State must also
“state a summary of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to
testify and a summary of the grounds for each opinion.” Id.
“We will not reverse the trial court’s admission of evidence absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Gamester, 149 N.H. 475, 478
(2003). “This same standard applies to review of the trial court’s decision with
respect to alleged discovery violations.” Id. “To show that the trial court’s
exercise of discretion is unsustainable, the defendant must show that the
decision was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. “Actual
prejudice exists if the defense has been impeded to a significant degree by the
nondisclosure.” State v. Stickney, 148 N.H. 232, 236 (2002).
Both parties included Dr. Lauze on their witness lists as someone who
would testify regarding what she observed and memorialized in her reports, but
seven days before the start of trial, the State received an unsolicited letter from
her. In the letter, Dr. Lauze described several inconsistencies in the medical
reports from the various medical professionals who had examined the
defendant shortly after he was found. Her letter indicated that she believed
that the defendant had fabricated his memory loss and the cause of his
injuries. The following day, the State gave the letter to the defendant, and he
8
moved to exclude the expert opinions it contained based upon the late
disclosure. The trial court denied the motion in part, ruling:
Dr. Lauze can testify as an expert as to her experience as a medical
professional and to her practice of reading and interpreting
medical records. Dr. Lauze can further testify as to the signs and
symptoms of exposure and her testimony regarding the symptoms
that the defendant presented. Dr. Lauze may also testify, provided
the State lays the proper foundation, to the signs and symptoms of
a head injury and testify to the injuries that the defendant
presented. Dr. Lauze may also give her ultimate medical diagnosis
regarding the defendant’s head injury. Dr. Lauze, however, cannot
testify to an ultimate conclusion regarding whether the defendant
was or was not faking his exposure to the cold.
The defendant argues that the State’s late disclosure of Dr. Lauze’s
expert testimony caused him prejudice because he did not have time to depose
her, to retain his own expert or to prepare his cross-examination adequately.
We disagree. Assuming, without deciding, that the State’s disclosure of Dr.
Lauze’s unsolicited letter six days prior to trial failed to comply with Rule
98(C)(1), the defendant has failed to carry his burden of proving that the trial
court’s admission of the testimony caused him prejudice. The State’s
disclosure of Dr. Lauze’s January 21, 2008 letter occurred on January 22, and
the defendant did not rest his case until February 15, 2008. He did not ask
the court for time to depose her. Moreover, he was aware that Dr. Lauze had
examined him and he listed her as one of his own witnesses for trial. Dr. Lauze
did not testify until February 1, and the defendant had the opportunity to
cross-examine her. In addition, the defendant called three doctors who
testified that his injuries were consistent with his version of what transpired.
Accordingly, he has failed to show that he suffered prejudice or that his defense
was impeded to a significant degree, and the trial court did not commit an
unsustainable exercise of discretion by allowing her testimony.
V
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court should have admitted a
computer animation purporting to depict how the accident occurred to
illustrate the testimony of his traffic reconstruction expert. Outside the
presence of the jury, the trial court held a hearing on whether to admit the
computer animation. Daniel Donovan, the accident reconstruction expert who
created the script upon which the animation was based, and Mark Dole, the
computer animator, both testified. The trial court found that “[n]o evidence
was offered to specifically substantiate the[ ] facts and figures” Dole and
Donovan used in creating the animation, and that “Donovan never saw the
vehicle first hand, never spoke with anyone who was at the accident scene
other than the defendant, and does not know how the damage to the vehicle
9
occurred.” The trial court ruled that “the defendant ha[d] failed to meet his
burden to prove that Mr. Donovan’s script, and therefore the animation, [was] a
fair and accurate representation of the accident.” Accordingly, the trial court
excluded the computer animation under New Hampshire Rules of Evidence 901
and 403.
The defendant argues that “[t]he trial court erred by requiring a greater
degree of scientific foundation for an animated chalk than for the underlying
expert opinion.” We interpret this argument to mean that the computer
animation was sufficiently authenticated as required by Rule 901(a). He
further asserts: “That [the animation] might impress upon the jury the
meaning of the expert’s testimony does not make it unduly prejudicial.” We
interpret this argument to mean that the trial court erred in precluding the
animation because it had probative value even without “evidence . . . to
specifically substantiate the[ ] facts and figures” and that its probative value
was not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the
State.
Rule 901(a) provides that “[t]he requirement of authentication or
identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is satisfied by evidence
sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question is what its proponent
claims.” Rule 403 provides: “Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if
its probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations
of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative
evidence.” We defer to the trial court in determining admissibility of evidence
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. Legere, 157 N.H.
746, 758 (2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1623 (2009). We will not reverse the
trial court’s evidentiary ruling unless the defendant can demonstrate that it
“was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id.
The defendant does not argue that the computer animation was anything
other than an illustration of Donovan’s expert testimony. At trial, he presented
diagrams drawn by Donovan depicting what Donovan believed occurred during
the accident. Upon direct and cross-examination, Donovan explained the
diagrams and the basis for his opinions and conclusions to the jury. Thus, the
computer animation would not have provided the jury with any evidence not
already provided by the diagrams and testimony. Therefore, we conclude that
the defendant has failed to carry his burden of proving that excluding it
prejudiced him under the facts of this case. See id. Accordingly, we cannot
say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion by granting the
State’s motion to exclude the animation.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10