THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-737
HEIDI L. MIKELL, ADMINSTRATOR OF THE
ESTATE OF JOSHUA R. MARKIEWICZ
v.
SCHOOL ADMINISTRATIVE UNIT #33 & a.
Argued: March 18, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 15, 2009
Cleveland, Waters & Bass, P.A. , of Concord (William B. Pribis and Lisa
M. Blanchard on the brief, and Mr. Pribis orally), for the plaintiff.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A. , of Bedford (Dona Feeney on
the joint brief and orally) for defendants School Administrative Unit #33, Susan
Allen, and Lindy L. Moule.
McDonough & O’Shaughnessy, of Manchester (Robert Whaland on the
joint brief), for defendants Susan Allen and Lindy L. Moule.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Heidi L. Mikell, as administrator of the estate
of her son, Joshua R. Markiewicz, appeals an order of the Superior Court
(McHugh, J.) dismissing her claims against the defendants, School
Administrative Unit #33 (SAU #33), Susan Allen, and Lindy L. Moule. We
affirm.
I
The plaintiff alleges the following facts, which we accept as true for
purposes of this appeal. In January 2005, Joshua Markiewicz was a seventh
grade student attending the Iber Holmes Gove Middle School in Raymond, part
of SAU #33. Joshua had had some difficulties in the school environment, and
his teachers reported that he was learning disabled and had behavioral
problems. The plaintiff disagreed, however, and believed this was an attempt
to have Joshua removed from the school.
In November 2004, a teacher’s aide overheard Joshua state that he
“wanted to blow his brains out.” The teacher’s aide reported the statement to
Moule, the school’s guidance counselor, who in turn called the plaintiff.
Although the plaintiff offered to pick Joshua up, Moule indicated that he was
“okay now” and she would send him back to class. Without informing the
plaintiff, Moule had Joshua sign a “contract for safety,” but subsequently took
no further action in regard to his suicide threat.
On January 18, 2005, Allen, a special education teacher, reported to the
vice-principal that Joshua had referred to two mints on his desk as medicine.
The plaintiff alleges Allen did so “falsely and knowingly” in an attempt to affect
his disciplinary record, and winked at Joshua while reporting the incident as
“an acknowledgement of her lie.” The following day, January 19, Joshua was
again reported to the vice-principal for tipping his desk in class, being rude,
and calling a teacher, apparently not Allen, a “bitch.” Joshua was suspended,
and the plaintiff was called to pick him up. At that point, the plaintiff
contemplated home schooling Joshua, as she had done at times in the past.
She told this to the vice-principal, who agreed it was a good idea.
Upon arriving home, Joshua went immediately to his room without
speaking to his mother. Soon after, the plaintiff left to bring Joshua’s
grandfather, who had accompanied her to the school, to his residence. When
she returned, she found Joshua had hanged himself. Joshua left a suicide
note, which, among other things, stated he was telling the truth about the
disciplinary incident involving Allen.
The plaintiff subsequently brought an action against SAU #33, Moule
and Allen, alleging negligence claims against SAU #33 and Moule, intentional
infliction of emotional distress and wrongful death claims against Allen, and
vicarious liability claims for both Moule and Allen against SAU #33. The
2
defendants moved to dismiss the claims against them. The trial court granted
the motions. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in dismissing her
claims against SAU #33 and Moule because they owed Joshua a general and
special duty to prevent his suicide and, further, that Moule had voluntarily
assumed a duty to act reasonably to prevent his suicide. The plaintiff further
contends that the trial court erred in concluding that Allen’s conduct was not
extreme and outrageous. She also argues that the trial court erred when it
determined that the disciplinary incident on January 19 was the more likely
cause of Joshua’s decision than Allen’s conduct on January 18.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss, our standard of review is whether the
allegations are reasonably susceptible of a construction that would permit
recovery. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72, 73 (2008). We assume the
plaintiff’s pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the
light most favorable to her. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that
tests the facts in her petition against the applicable law. Id. If the allegations
constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant
the motion to dismiss. Id.
As a general rule, negligence actions seeking damages for the suicide of
another will not lie because the act of suicide is considered to be a deliberate,
intentional and intervening act, which precludes a finding that a given
defendant is, in fact, responsible for the harm. McLaughlin v. Sullivan, 123
N.H. 335, 337 (1983). “This is because the act of suicide breaks the causal
connection between the wrongful or negligent act and the death.” Bruzga v.
PMR Architects, 141 N.H. 756, 757-58 (1997) (quotation omitted). A number of
jurisdictions, however, have recognized two exceptions to that general rule. Id.
at 758. “Under one exception, liability exists because the defendant actually
caused the suicide; under the other, liability exists because the defendant had
a duty to prevent it.” Maloney v. Badman, 156 N.H. 599, 603 (2007).
“The first exception involves cases where an intentionally tortious act is
found to have caused a mental condition in the decedent that proximately
resulted in an uncontrollable impulse to commit suicide, or prevented the
decedent from realizing the nature of his act.” Id. (quotation omitted). These
cases “typically involve the infliction of severe physical injury, or, in rare cases,
the intentional infliction of severe mental or emotional injury through wrongful
accusation, false arrest or torture.” Id. (quotation omitted). We adopted this
exception in Mayer v. Town of Hampton, 127 N.H. 81, 87 (1985), holding:
[F]or a cause of action for wrongful death by suicide to lie for
intentional torts, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the
tortfeasor, by extreme and outrageous conduct, intentionally
3
wronged a victim and that this intentional conduct caused severe
emotional distress in his victim which was a substantial factor in
bringing about the suicide of the victim.
Mayer, 127 N.H. at 87.
The second exception recognizes a cause of action when “the defendant
has a specific duty of care to prevent suicide, arising from the defendant’s
special relationship with the suicidal individual.” Bruzga, 141 N.H. at 758
(quotations omitted). “The typical defendant in such cases is someone who has
a duty of custodial care, is in a position to know about suicide potential, and
fails to take measures to prevent suicide from occurring.” Maloney, 156 N.H.
at 604 (quotation omitted).
Specifically, this duty has been imposed on: (1) institutions such
as jails, hospitals and reform schools, having actual physical
custody of and control over persons; and (2) persons or institutions
such as mental hospitals, psychiatrists and other mental-health
trained professionals, deemed to have a special training and
expertise enabling them to detect mental illness and/or the
potential for suicide, and which have the power or control
necessary to prevent that suicide.
Id. (quotation omitted). The plaintiff raises claims under both exceptions. We
address each in turn.
II
With respect to the first exception, the plaintiff argues that Allen’s false
report of misconduct was extreme and outrageous, and that a reasonable fact
finder could have determined Allen’s conduct was a substantial cause of
Joshua’s suicide. The plaintiff also argues that the trial court inappropriately
substituted its judgment rather than assuming the truth of the facts alleged.
We disagree.
One who by extreme and outrageous conduct intentionally or recklessly
causes severe emotional distress to another is subject to liability for such
emotional distress, and if bodily harm to the other results from it, for such
bodily harm. Morancy v. Morancy, 134 N.H. 493, 496 (1991). As we discussed
above, when an action for wrongful death by suicide lies as an intentional tort,
the plaintiff has the burden to prove that the defendant intentionally engaged
in extreme and outrageous conduct that caused extreme emotional distress,
and that this emotional distress was a substantial factor in bringing about the
suicide. Mayer, 127 N.H. at 87. In determining whether conduct is extreme
and outrageous, it is not enough that a person has “acted with an intent which
4
is tortious or even criminal, or that he has intended to inflict emotional
distress, or even that his conduct has been characterized by ‘malice.’”
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46 comment d at 73 (1965). “Liability has
been found only where the conduct has been so outrageous in character, and
so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be
regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community.” Id.
The plaintiff contends that Allen’s actions were extreme and outrageous,
as well as the substantial cause of Joshua’s suicide, because Allen misused her
position of authority over Joshua by making a false report of misconduct in an
effort to affect his disciplinary record and eventually expel him from the school.
We recognize that false accusations may be grounds for liability under an
intentional infliction of emotional distress claim. See McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at
338. We also acknowledge that “[t]he extreme and outrageous character of the
conduct may arise from an abuse by the actor of a position . . . which gives him
actual or apparent authority over the other, or power to affect his interests.”
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46 comment e at 74. We do not find, however,
that the alleged false accusation at issue here, even coupled with Allen’s
position of authority, rises to the level of extreme and outrageous conduct
necessary to sustain a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
As an initial matter, we note that the actual substance of the alleged
false accusation, characterizing mints as medicine, was relatively innocuous.
Other jurisdictions have found under far more egregious circumstances that a
single false accusation could not support this type of claim. For example, in
Reardon v. Allegheny College, 926 A.2d 477 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2007), Reardon
brought a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, alleging that a
professor and two co-students had “intentionally and wrongly targeted and
accused [her] of violations of the college’s honor code, despite their knowledge
of the falsity of these allegations.” Reardon, 926 A.2d at 488 (quotation
omitted). Although the alleged false accusations resulted in, among other
things, Reardon failing a class, being stripped of certain honors, and also being
placed on academic probation for the remainder of her academic career, id. at
479, the court determined that these allegations, even if true, were not extreme
and outrageous, and could not sustain her claim, id. at 488.
In Woods v. St. Charles Parish School Board, 790 So. 2d 696 (La. Ct.
App. 2001), the mother of a first grader brought an action for damages alleging
that her son’s school had engaged in a continuous campaign of harassment
and false accusations to “manufacture a case against her son . . . to prevent
him from returning [to school] in the fall.” Woods, 790 So. 2d at 698.
According to the plaintiff, these instances included being disciplined for actions
he did not do, such as throwing mud at another student; reprimanding him for
being disrespectful and disrupting the class, when he had not; intentionally
refusing to call on him for answers to questions posed to the class, even
5
though he had his hand up; and not offering prompt medical attention when he
fell and scraped his hands. Id. at 698-99. In denying the plaintiff’s claim, the
court noted that the alleged incidents “do not constitute outrageous behavior of
a pattern to cumulate into a tort such as intentional infliction of emotional
distress.” Id. at 701-02. Although the legal question in Woods is
distinguishable from those at issue here, the underlying allegations are
substantially similar, and the court’s determination is instructive.
Moreover, the plaintiff does not allege any further actions that may have
exacerbated the situation to an extreme and outrageous level, such as publicly
reprimanding Joshua in front of his class or threatening him with additional
abuse of her authoritative power. See, e.g., Ortiz v. Brookstone Co., 274 F.
Supp. 2d 456, 466 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (finding allegations insufficient to sustain
intentional infliction of emotional distress claim where plaintiff had not alleged
“some combination of public humiliation, false accusations of criminal or
heinous conduct, verbal abuse or harassment, physical threats, . . . or conduct
contrary to public policy”). The plaintiff does allege that Allen “winked” at
Joshua as an acknowledgment of the falsity of her accusation. While this
alleged conduct was, at the very least, unprofessional and confrontational, it is
insufficient to constitute extreme and outrageous conduct.
While there is no question that a teacher falsely reporting misconduct by
a student is a reprehensible act, the circumstances of this case are simply not
“beyond all possible bounds of decency.” Therefore, we cannot conclude that
the trial court erred in finding, as a matter of law, that Allen’s conduct was not
extreme and outrageous, and consequently dismissing the plaintiff’s claims.
The plaintiff also argues that the trial court made improper factual
determinations regarding the likely event that triggered Joshua’s suicide,
thereby improperly substituting its judgment for that of a jury. Specifically, in
its order granting Allen’s motion to dismiss, the trial court stated that it was
the desk-tipping incident on the day of his death, rather than Allen’s conduct
the day before, “that would seem to have been much more likely to have caused
[Joshua] to make the decision to take his life.” We agree that the trial court’s
conclusions in this regard would have been improper had it relied upon them
in granting the motion to dismiss. However, the trial court did not do so.
Rather, it correctly concluded that Allen’s conduct was insufficient as a matter
of law to sustain the plaintiff’s claims. Therefore, we find no error.
III
With respect to the second exception, the plaintiff asserts that the trial
court erred in dismissing her claims against Moule and SAU #33 because they
owed Joshua a general and special duty to prevent his suicide. The existence
of a duty in a particular case is a question of law, which we review de novo.
6
Carignan v. N.H. Int’l Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 412 (2004). In general, the
concept of duty arises out of the relationship between the parties and
protection against reasonably foreseeable harm. Sintros v. Hamon, 148 N.H.
478, 480 (2002). The existence and extent of that duty depends upon the
nature of the relationship between the parties. Id.
The plaintiff contends there was a duty owed here based upon Moule’s
position as the school’s guidance counselor and as the person who acted on
and reported Joshua’s suicide threat. Specifically, the plaintiff contends:
“When Moule and her employer decided to retain control and custody of
Joshua after learning of the suicide threat, they exercised the requisite level of
control and custody over him to create a duty to prevent his suicide” under the
second exception. We disagree.
In Marquay v. Eno, 139 N.H. 708, 717 (1995), we recognized that
“schools share a special relationship with students entrusted to their care,
which imposes upon them certain duties of reasonable supervision.” In
Marquay, three students brought a variety of state and federal claims in federal
court against the school district, the school administrative unit and employees
of their former high school, after allegedly being sexually abused by at least one
teacher. Marquay, 139 N.H. at 711. The United States District Court for the
District of New Hampshire certified several state law questions, one of which
asked whether school district employees have a common law duty to protect
students whom they know or should know are being sexually abused by
another school employee. Id. at 712. We answered in the affirmative for those
employees who have supervisory responsibility over students because “[s]chool
attendance impairs both the ability of students to protect themselves and the
ability of their parents to protect them.” Id. at 717. “It is this impairment of
protection from which the special relationship between school and student
arises and from which the duty of supervision flows.” Id. We limited the duty,
however, to only those periods of time when parental protection is
compromised, and only to those risks that are reasonably foreseeable. Id. at
717, 718.
However, we disagree that this special relationship – and the duty of
reasonable supervision – extends so far as to create a duty to prevent a
student’s suicide in this case.
Fundamental to the second exception [allowing tort liability for the
suicide of another] is a pre-existing duty of care and protection
imposed on defendants either because they have actual physical
custody of, and substantial or total control over, an individual, or
because the defendants are specially trained medical or mental
health professionals, who have the precise duty and the control
7
necessary to care for the physical and/or mental well-being of a
patient.
Bruzga, 141 N.H. at 758 (quotations, citation, and brackets omitted).
Here, the plaintiff has not alleged, nor do we find, that the primary
purpose of the school, or Moule in her capacity as a guidance counselor, is to
“care for” its students, such that this relationship would fall within the purview
of this second exception. Further, although a school no doubt possesses some
amount of custody and control over its students during school hours, such
control is a far cry from that held by jails, juvenile detention facilities or similar
institutions where the duty to prevent another’s suicide has been imposed. See
McLaughlin, 123 N.H. at 338. Indeed, “[m]ost jurisdictions are reluctant to
impose liability for suicide even upon defendants who had custodial control
over the suicidal individual.” Bruzga, 141 N.H. at 759.
In support of her position, the plaintiff relies upon Eisel v. Board of
Education, 597 A.2d 447 (Md. 1991). There, the school’s guidance counselor
heard through other students that the appellant’s daughter had stated she
intended to commit suicide. Eisel, 597 A.2d at 450. The guidance counselor
questioned the daughter, who denied making the statements. Id. The
guidance counselor did not contact the father or the school administration to
report the statements. Id. at 450. The daughter subsequently died after
apparently consummating a murder-suicide pact. Id. at 449-50. The court
ultimately concluded that the guidance counselor had a duty to warn the
father of her suicidal intent. Id. at 456. In so holding, the court specifically
noted: “The theory of Eisel’s case is that he could have exercised his custody
and control, as parent, over [his daughter], had he been warned.” Id. at 451.
The circumstances here are plainly distinguishable, as the plaintiff was made
aware of Joshua’s suicide threat on the day it occurred, and, thus, had the
opportunity to exert some control over the situation, unlike the appellant in
Eisel. Further, while the Eisel court found that there was a duty to warn, it
made no further determinations as to a school’s potential liability when that
duty had been fulfilled, but a suicide still occurred.
The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has stated:
“Absent a showing that the school affirmatively caused a suicide, the primary
responsibility for safeguarding children from this danger, as from most others,
is that of their parents; and even they, with direct control and intimate
knowledge, are often helpless.” Hasenfus v. LaJeunesse, 175 F.3d 68, 73 (1st
Cir. 1999). Indeed, many courts have declined to extend liability to a school for
the suicide of a student under a variety of circumstances. See, e.g., Wyke v.
Polk County School Bd., 898 F. Supp. 852, 857 (M.D. Fla. 1995), aff’d in part,
129 F.3d 560 (11th Cir. 1997) (holding the fact school knew of previous suicide
threat did not create special relationship requiring school to prevent student’s
8
suicide); Carrier v. Lake Pend Oreille School Dist. #84, 134 P.3d 655, 660
(Idaho 2006) (school’s statutory duty to warn parents of minor’s suicidal
tendencies did not extend to passing reference in an essay written seven
months earlier); McMahon v. St. Croix Falls School Dist., 596 N.W.2d 875, 882
(Wis. Ct. App. 1999) (even if school had duty to report suicide threat, district
could not be held liable for failing to do so because “the suicide is an
intervening and superseding cause and is thus too remote from the negligence
to render the district liable”). We likewise decline to find a duty under the
circumstances of this case.
The plaintiff also argues that Moule acted contrary to the school district’s
policies for dealing with suicide threats and that her failure to follow these
policies may form the basis for liability. However, we need not address this
issue, as the plaintiff has merely stated a legal conclusion without specifying
either the contents of the alleged policy or how Moule’s actions violated it. See
Guglielmo v. WorldCom, 148 N.H. 309, 312 (2002) (in reviewing a motion to
dismiss, we need not accept statements that are merely legal conclusions).
The plaintiff’s final argument is that Moule voluntarily assumed a duty to
act reasonably to prevent Joshua’s suicide when, two months before his
suicide, she advised the plaintiff not to remove Joshua from school after his
suicide threat, sent him back to class, stated that the threat was a result of a
learning disability, and did not advise her to have Joshua examined by an
outside professional. The plaintiff asserts that “[t]his series of actions
effectively shielded Joshua from the benefit of parental or other professional
assistance while . . . [in] school.” We disagree.
We have recognized that a party who does not otherwise have a duty, but
who voluntarily renders services for another, may be held to a duty of
reasonable care in acting. Belhumeur v. Zilm, 157 N.H. 233, 238 (2008). “The
fact that an actor starts to aid another does not necessarily require him to
continue his services. An actor may abandon his services at any time . . .
unless, by giving the aid, he has put the other in a worse position than he was
in before.” Id. at 239 (quotation omitted). “A person is put in a worse position
if the actual danger to him has been increased by the partial performance, or if
in reliance he has been induced to forego other opportunities of obtaining
assistance.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Here, the plaintiff has not made any specific allegations in her writ
reflecting the specific conduct that she and others would have taken to prevent
Joshua’s suicide, had Moule taken some further action. Instead, she asks us
to infer that, had Moule instructed her to seek professional help, “Joshua
would have received an appropriate diagnosis and treatment in time to prevent”
his suicide. She further alleges that, “[i]t may also be inferred that, had Moule
informed Allen of the suicide threat and otherwise cautioned Allen to use
9
particular care when imposing discipline on Joshua,” Allen may not have made
the false accusation against Joshua on the day before his suicide. However,
when reviewing the grant of a motion to dismiss, we accept only those
inferences that are reasonable. See McNamara, 157 N.H. at 73. The plaintiff’s
argument rests upon the assumption that, had Moule taken some further
action, a third person may have also taken some further action, which, in turn,
may have kept Joshua from making the decision to commit suicide. These
inferences are tenuous at best, and are far too speculative for us to find that
the risk of Joshua’s suicide increased based upon Moule’s conduct, or lack
thereof. Cf. Duval v. Wiggin, 124 N.H. 550, 555 (1984) (finding jury’s verdict
could not stand when, taking the evidence in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff, it was based upon conjecture and not a reasonable inference). We
therefore cannot conclude that Moule voluntarily assumed a duty to prevent
his suicide.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10