THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-235
KIRSTEN WERNE
v.
EXECUTIVE WOMEN’S GOLF ASSOCIATION & a.
Argued: January 9, 2009
Opinion Issued: February 19, 2009
William Aivalikles, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Morrison Mahoney LLP, of Manchester (Ralph Suozzo on the brief, and
William J. Flanagan orally), for defendant Executive Women’s Golf Association.
Getman, Stacey, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Christopher J.
Poulin on the brief and orally), for defendant Executive Women’s Golf
Association of Southern New Hampshire.
Downs Rachlin Martin PLLC, of Littleton (Kate Strickland on the brief
and orally), for defendant Alpine Ridge Golf, LLC d/b/a Alpine Ridge Golf Club.
Desmarais, Ewing & Johnston, PLLC, of Manchester (Fred J. Desmarais
and Emily M. Doherty on the brief, and Mr. Desmarais orally), for defendant
Deb Armfield.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Kirsten Werne, appeals from an order of
the Superior Court (Groff, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendants,
Executive Women’s Golf Association, Executive Women’s Golf Association of
Southern New Hampshire, Alpine Ridge Golf, LLC and Deb Armfield. We
affirm.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. On
September 5, 2003, Werne was struck by a golf ball while participating in
“Annual Nite Lite Outing” at Alpine Ridge Golf Club (Alpine Ridge) in Hollis, a
golf course owned and operated by Alpine Ridge Golf, LLC. The event was an
evening of glow golf sponsored by the Executive Women’s Golf Association of
Southern New Hampshire, a chapter of the Executive Women’s Golf
Association. Glow golf involves golfing at night while using glowing golf balls
and other glowing devices, such as tiki torches and glow necklaces, to
illuminate the golf course and the participants. Prior to this event, Alpine
Ridge had offered glow golf on Friday evenings on a regular basis to
organizations and the general public for at least two years. The event began
once darkness fell.
At the event, Werne played in a group of four, which included Deb
Armfield and two other women. Participants were given glowing golf balls and
they wore glow jewelry. Lighting on the course was minimal, and the longest
hole was 110 yards. Alpine Ridge placed glow sticks on each side of the tees
and on the flag on each green. Tiki torches were also placed near the green at
some of the holes. The players generally agree the course was dark.
The players consumed some beer over the course of the evening, but
Werne does not allege and the record does not indicate that anyone was
impaired. In the course of their round, Armfield made a shot which hit Werne
in the head, causing her to suffer a concussion and permanent brain damage.
Werne brought a claim for negligence against all four defendants. Each
defendant filed a special plea and brief statement, arguing, among other things,
that it did not owe Werne a duty and that Werne’s claims were barred by her
assumption of the risk and her own comparative fault.
The defendants then filed motions for summary judgment that the trial
court granted. Relying upon Allen v. Dover Co-Recreational Softball League,
148 N.H. 407, 418 (2002), the trial court reasoned that “the defendants can
only be held liable . . . for reckless or intentional injurious conduct outside the
range of ordinary activity involved in the sport and for creating or allowing
unreasonable risks beyond those risks inherent within the sport of glow golf.”
(Quotations omitted.) The court concluded that Werne had failed to allege facts
showing that the conduct of any defendant unreasonably increased the
inherent risks of the game, and ruled that they had not breached the
applicable duty of care owed to her under the Allen standard.
2
In reviewing a trial court’s summary judgment ruling, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party. Cohoon v. IDM Software, 153
N.H. 1, 4 (2005). If our review of the evidence fails to reveal any genuine issue
of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Orr v. Goodwin, 157 N.H. 511,
514 (2008). However, we review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
Werne first argues that the trial court “fail[ed] to apply the common law
duties that are owed by land owners to members of the public.” Specifically,
she contends that Alpine Ridge cannot assert the defense of primary implied
assumption of the risk because “[t]he assumption of the risk doctrine is not
applicable to tort claims against owners and occupiers of land.” We disagree.
Werne correctly observes in her brief that owners and occupiers of land
owe plaintiffs a duty of reasonable care under all the circumstances in the
maintenance and operation of their property. See, e.g., Simpson v. Wal-Mart
Stores, 144 N.H. 571, 574 (1999). As a land owner operating a sports facility,
Alpine Ridge Golf, LLC owed Werne the same duty of reasonable care.
However, as the trial court noted, courts have recognized that participating in a
sport “gives rise to commonly appreciated risks which are inherent in and arise
out of the nature of the sport generally and flow from such participation.”
Allen, 148 N.H. at 417 (quotation omitted).
In Allen, the plaintiff was struck by an errantly thrown softball while
running to first base. A land owner, the owner of the softball field, was one of
the six defendants in that case. We held that the duty owed by the owner of
the softball field was to “create only [the] risks that are normal or ordinary to
the sport or that would be created by a reasonable person of ordinary prudence
under the circumstances.” Id. at 422 (quotations omitted). Thus, in ordinary
negligence terms, a land owner operating a sports facility “who creates only
[the] risks that are normal or ordinary to the sport [at issue] acts as a
reasonable person of ordinary prudence under the circumstances.” Id. at 418
(quotation omitted). Allen does not represent a departure from the land
owner’s general duty to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances; it
simply addresses the duty with regard to the circumstances common to land
owners operating a sports facility. Accordingly, by applying Allen to the facts of
this case, the trial court correctly identified the common law duties land
owners owe to members of the public.
Similarly, Werne’s argument that the assumption of the risk doctrine is
not applicable to tort claims against owners and occupiers of land
misapprehends the relationship between the primary implied assumption of
risk doctrine and the common law duties of land owners, including those of
land owners operating sports facilities. In Allen, we observed that the doctrine
3
of primary implied assumption of the risk applies when a plaintiff voluntarily
and reasonably enters into some relation with a defendant which the plaintiff
reasonably knows involves certain obvious risks such that a defendant has no
duty to protect the plaintiff against injuries that may be caused by those risks.
Id. at 414. In Allen, we held that being struck in the head by an errantly
thrown ball was part of the risk inherent in the game, and that the defendants,
including the owner of the field, were not liable because they had not
unreasonably increased that risk or unreasonably created or countenanced
risks outside the range of ordinary activity involved in the sport. Id. at 417-18,
420-23.
We applied primary implied assumption of the risk in Allen to bar the
plaintiff’s claim against a land owner. Werne does not argue that we should
overturn that case, and nothing in our case law suggests that primary implied
assumption of the risk would otherwise be unavailable as a defense against
liability in this case.
Werne next argues that the trial court should have barred all four
defendants from asserting the defense of primary implied assumption of the
risk because they pled that Werne was comparatively at fault in their special
pleas and brief statements. Her argument suggests that because the
defendants initially pled that the plaintiff was comparatively at fault, they
admit that they owed her a duty, and therefore must be barred from arguing
that no duty was owed. Superior Court Rule 28 requires a defendant to file a
special plea and brief statement. Failure to plead any potential defense
amounts to a waiver of that defense. The rule does not provide that a
defendant is bound by those defenses. See Super. Ct. R. 28. Moreover,
inconsistent defenses may be pled. LePage v. Company, 97 N.H. 46, 50 (1951).
Accordingly, the defendants were not limited to asserting comparative fault to
the exclusion of other defenses.
Next, Werne contends that glow golf is not a distinct sport from golf, and
that the trial court erred in premising its decision on whether the defendants’
conduct unreasonably increased the inherent risks of the sport of glow golf as
opposed to golf generally. We disagree.
To determine the appropriate standard of care to be applied to
participants, sponsors and organizers of recreational athletics, we consider:
(1) the nature of the sport involved; (2) the type of contest; i.e., amateur, high
school, little league, pick-up, etc.; (3) the ages, physical characteristics and
skills of the participants; (4) the type of equipment involved; and (5) the rules,
customs and practices of the sport, including the types of contact, and the level
of violence generally accepted. Allen, 148 N.H. at 418. The sign-up sheet
announcing Annual Nite Lite Outing provided: “Come play around in the dark!
Yes, the dark!” Although the rules of glow golf appear to be essentially the
same as those of golf, it is the custom to play it after dark. The record
4
indicates that participants of any age or skill level are allowed to play the game.
Moreover, record testimony indicates that glow golf has its own equipment,
distinct from that of golf, and that it is marketed at trade shows and in
industry magazines. In considering these factors, we find no error in the trial
court’s characterization of the sport at issue as glow golf as opposed to golf.
Werne further argues that the trial court erred in granting the
defendants’ motions for summary judgment because their conduct
unreasonably increased the risks inherent in the game. We disagree.
All parties agree that being hit by an errant golf ball is a risk inherent in the
game of glow golf. Werne did not allege any facts to show that the defendants
unreasonably increased this inherent risk by their conduct. In so concluding,
we apply the five considerations from Allen that inform the appropriate
standard of care each defendant owed to Werne. See id. at 418.
Werne alleges that Alpine Ridge breached a duty to provide safe premises
due to inadequate lighting. However, Werne’s own deposition shows that the
dark conditions were an integral part of the game. During her deposition she
was asked why she did not stop playing if she knew it was “really, really dark,”
to which she replied: “That was the point. It was dark. . . . [T]hey made us
wait until it was dark.”
She further argues that lack of light prevented Armfield from being able
to see where she was hitting the ball. One of Werne’s experts opined: “[T]he
only logical explanation . . . is that Ms. Armfield did not know where she was
hitting the ball at the time of the injury.” However, the expert’s report does not
conclude, and Werne does not argue, that the darkness or Armfield’s alleged
inability to see unreasonably increased the inherent risk that Werne would be
struck by a shot while playing in the dark.
Allen provides that we must consider the nature of the sport involved and
its rules, customs and practices in determining the appropriate standard of
care. Id. The record shows that glow golf is played in the dark. Therefore,
Werne’s claims of negligence related to darkness or the players’ inability to see
fail to establish that these conditions unreasonably increased the inherent risk
that Werne would be struck by a ball.
We reach the same result for each of Werne’s factual allegations with
regard to the conduct of the Executive Women’s Golf Association and the
Executive Women’s Golf Association of Southern New Hampshire, including,
among other things, failing to monitor, screen, or instruct players. Although
the conditions under which the game was played may not have been the safest
possible conditions, Werne failed to demonstrate that any conduct
unreasonably increased the inherent risk that Werne could be struck by a ball
while playing glow golf.
5
Werne points to several cases with similar facts from other jurisdictions
that purportedly impose a different standard of care for defendants and urges
us to adopt that approach. We decline to do so. Allen provides the governing
standard in this case. The defendants may only be held liable if their conduct
unreasonably increased the risks inherent in the game of glow golf or if they
unreasonably created or countenanced risks outside the range of ordinary
activity involved in the sport. See id. at 417-18, 420-23.
Finally, Werne argues that the trial court failed to apply the proper
standard in ruling upon the defendants’ motions for summary judgment.
Specifically, she claims the trial court made findings of fact unsupported by the
evidence and failed to draw all reasonable inferences in her favor. Werne
alleges that “[t]here was sufficient evidence to raise an arguable issue that
Armfield was impaired due to her [alcohol] consum[ption].” She further
claimed that “[t]he evidence did raise the inference that [Alpine Ridge’s]
allowing the consumption of alcohol while on the golf course [in violation of
RSA 179:27 (Supp. 2008)] may have increased the inherent risk of golf.”
We find these claims to be contrary to the evidence in the record and the
applicable law. In particular, Werne admitted in her deposition that she did
not know how many beers any player had consumed before she was struck by
the ball. None of the other players’ depositions indicated that any player was
impaired or that alcohol consumption had anything to do with what occurred.
Moreover, RSA 179:27 does not prohibit consumption of alcohol on a golf
course. Golf courses can obtain liquor licenses that allow consumption of
alcohol in locations where the commission approves service, including on a golf
course. See RSA 178:22, V(u)-(v), :24 (Supp. 2008). In addition, Werne
presented no evidence to establish that a reasonable golf club owner would not
permit alcohol consumption while playing glow golf or that consuming alcohol
would unreasonably increase the inherent risk of being struck by a ball while
playing glow golf.
Werne has failed to demonstrate reversible error, and, accordingly, we
affirm the superior court order granting the defendants’ motions for summary
judgment.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6