THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-875
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOHN BROOKS
Argued: February 16, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Janice K. Rundles, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Hinckley, Allen & Snyder LLP, of Concord (Christopher H.M. Carter and
Danielle L. Pacik on the brief), and Foley Hoag LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts
(Martin F. Murphy on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, John Brooks, appeals his conviction,
following a jury trial, for capital murder involving solicitation, capital murder in
the course of a kidnapping, first degree murder (as an accomplice), and
conspiracy to commit capital murder, in connection with the death of Jack
Reid, Sr. See RSA 630:1, I(b), (c) (1996) (amended 2006, 2011); RSA 630:5
(1996); RSA 626:8 (Supp. 2004); RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (1996); RSA 629:3 (Supp.
2004). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.) erred by: (1)
permitting the State to authenticate documents by use of affidavits, rather than
live testimony, in violation of his rights under the State and Federal
Constitutions; (2) permitting an FBI agent to testify that the defendant’s
account may have been untruthful; (3) permitting the State to introduce a new
opinion from the medical examiner during the trial; (4) failing to instruct the
jury that it must determine the “predominating cause” of death, pursuant to
State v. Seymour, 140 N.H. 736 (1996); (5) failing to instruct the jury that the
solicitation variant of capital murder requires a finding that the defendant
acted for his personal pecuniary gain; and (6) failing to instruct the jury that
the kidnapping variant of capital murder requires a finding that the defendant
intended to confine Reid to commit a crime other than murder. We affirm.
I. Facts
The jury could have found the following facts. See State v. Knight, 161
N.H. 338 (2011) (related proceeding). In September 2003, the Brooks family’s
belongings were stolen from a rental truck and trailer, which the family had
loaded in preparation for their move from New Hampshire to Las Vegas.
Although the Brookses suspected Jack Reid of the theft, they agreed not to give
his name to the police; instead, the defendant told two friends of his son, Jesse
– Andrew Carter and Michael Benton – that he wanted their help to kill Reid.
He met with Carter and Benton over the next several months to discuss how to
“take care of” Reid, including possibly kidnapping him so that the defendant
could find out the location of his property, and ultimately killing him. The
defendant assured Carter and Benton that they would be “taken care of” if they
helped him, and they were initially paid $5,000. However, their attempts on
Reid’s life in 2003 were unsuccessful. The defendant and Carter continued to
discuss killing Reid into the fall of 2004.
In August 2004, the defendant, his wife Lorraine, and Jesse went to the
Portsmouth office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, where they reported
their suspicions regarding Reid and provided Special Agent Laura Hanlon a
written chronology of events that concerned them.
At some point, the defendant became acquainted with Joseph Vrooman
and Robin Knight in Las Vegas. Sometime after June 10, 2005, he offered
Vrooman $10,000 to help him kill Reid, and Vrooman agreed. The defendant
and Vrooman then met at the defendant’s Las Vegas home, joined by Jesse.
They discussed obtaining a telephone with which to lure Reid to the property of
Michael Connors, another New Hampshire acquaintance, and obtaining
handcuffs, pepper spray, and a stun gun with which to subdue Reid. After this
meeting, Vrooman obtained the handcuffs, pepper spray, and stun gun and
brought them to the defendant’s Las Vegas home, where they packaged the
supplies and sent them to Connors in New Hampshire. On June 18, 2005, the
defendant and Vrooman flew to New Hampshire, where Connors picked them
up at the airport, bearing the unopened package of supplies as the defendant
had instructed.
2
The next day, the defendant and Vrooman met Benton in Manchester.
The defendant paid for Benton to purchase a prepaid cellular telephone with
which to call Reid; Benton activated the telephone using the name “Charlie
Was.” They then drove to Connors’s home. Although Connors told the
defendant he did not want him to use his property, Vrooman testified that the
defendant told him and Benton that they could use Connors’s place.
Over the next week, the defendant and Vrooman, joined by Knight,
purchased more supplies – a large black plastic tarp, duct tape, garbage bags,
zip-ties, Saran Wrap, and gloves. They decided that Vrooman, Knight, and
Benton would subdue Reid, and the defendant would be armed with his .22
caliber handgun in case anything went wrong.
On June 27, 2005, the date they had set for Reid to come to Connors’s
property for a fictitious job, the defendant, Vrooman, Benton, and Knight drove
to the property. Once there, Benton testified, the defendant stated that he
wanted Reid to know that “it’s me that’s doing this to him.” To this end, they
decided that they would confine Reid in a small closet area in the home’s
attached barn, after which the defendant would confront him and they would
suffocate him using the Saran Wrap. However, Benton found a sledgehammer
in the barn, so the plan became that Vrooman would push Reid into the closet,
where Benton would hit him with the sledgehammer.
When Reid arrived at Connors’s house, the defendant and Benton hid in
the barn. Knight and Vrooman greeted Reid and led him down a hallway into
the barn. After Vrooman pushed Reid into the closet, Benton hit him on the
side of the head with the sledgehammer. Knight told Benton that Reid was not
yet dead, and Benton struck two or three additional blows to Reid’s forehead
with the sledgehammer. Knight, Vrooman, and the defendant carried Reid, still
breathing, from the closet to the black plastic tarp, which had been laid out on
the barn floor. As Knight and Benton tried to clean up the blood, Vrooman told
the defendant that Reid would not stop bleeding. Vrooman testified that the
defendant said, “[S]top the heart, stop the bleeding,” and struck Reid two or
three times in the chest with the sledgehammer. The four men then emptied
Reid’s pockets, wrapped his body in the tarp, carried it out to the back of Reid’s
dump truck, and covered it with branches and rocks.
Vrooman and Knight drove Reid’s truck to Massachusetts and left it in a
Target Store parking lot. The defendant gave Benton $5,000. After returning
to New Hampshire, the defendant and Vrooman threw the sledgehammer,
handcuffs, and Reid’s watch into a nearby river. They stopped by the home of
Bert Seaver, a friend of the defendant, where they disposed of evidence. The
following day, the defendant, Vrooman, and Knight returned to Connors’s barn
and replaced the walls and floor of the closet area where Reid had been killed.
3
On July 1, 2005, the defendant, Vrooman, and Knight returned to Las
Vegas. There, the defendant paid Vrooman $2,500 in cash; over the next few
months, Vrooman received an additional $10,000 from the defendant and
Jesse. Vrooman was told that Knight had also been paid. In late July, the
defendant sent Benton another $400 through Western Union. In early August,
Benton telephoned Jesse to ask for more money so he could travel to Las
Vegas, and received another $800 through Western Union.
II. Confrontation Clause
At trial, the State introduced extensive documentary evidence, including
telephone records, air travel records, insurance company records, Federal
Express records, and Western Union records, as business records under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 803(6), and authenticated the records through
certifications from the records’ custodians pursuant to New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 902(11). The defendant argues that allowing the records to be so
authenticated violated his rights under the Sixth Amendment’s Confrontation
Clause and the New Hampshire Constitution. He challenges the trial court’s
ruling that the certifications of authenticity pursuant to Rule 902(11) were not
testimonial, arguing that “the custodian affidavits did far more than
‘authenticate’ records as genuine copies of originals in the custodian’s
possession.”
We review the defendant’s Confrontation Clause challenges de novo. See
United States v. Yeley-Davis, 632 F.3d 673, 678 (10th Cir. 2011), cert. denied,
131 S. Ct. 2172 (2011). Because the defendant has raised his claim under
both the State and Federal Constitutions, we would normally address his State
claim first. See State v. Ayer, 154 N.H. 500, 504 (2006). However, the
defendant’s arguments center upon his rights under the Federal Constitution:
he contends that admitting the records through affidavits, rather than live
testimony, was contrary to Crawford v. Washington, 541 U.S. 36 (2004), and its
progeny, Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 557 U.S. 305 (2009), and
Bullcoming v. New Mexico, 131 S. Ct. 2705 (2011). We will therefore first
address his claim under the Federal Constitution.
The Sixth Amendment provides: “In all criminal prosecutions, the
accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be confronted with the witnesses against
him.” The Fourteenth Amendment renders the Confrontation Clause binding
on the States. See Michigan v. Bryant, 131 S. Ct. 1143, 1152 (2011). Only
“testimonial statements” cause a declarant to be a “witness” within the
meaning of the Confrontation Clause. Davis v. Washington, 547 U.S. 813, 821
(2006) (quotations omitted). A witness is a person who “bear[s] testimony.”
Crawford, 541 U.S. at 51 (quotation omitted). “Testimony, in turn, is typically
a solemn declaration or affirmation made for the purpose of establishing or
proving some fact.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted).
4
“The crucial determination under Crawford as to whether an out-of-court
statement violates the Confrontation Clause is whether it is ‘testimonial’ or
not.” State v. O’Maley, 156 N.H. 125, 131 (2007), overruled in part by
Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 312-20; see also United States v. Mallory, 461 Fed.
Appx. 352, 356 (4th Cir. 2012) (“the right of confrontation covers all testimonial
statements that declarants would reasonably expect to be used prosecutorily”
(quotation omitted)). “To be considered testimonial, the primary purpose of the
statement must be ‘to establish or prove past events potentially relevant to
later criminal prosecution.’” Mallory, 461 Fed. Appx. at 356 (quoting Davis,
547 U.S. at 822).
“Business records are generally admissible, even without confrontation.”
Id.; see Bullcoming, 131 S. Ct. at 2714 n.6. “Business and public records are
generally admissible absent confrontation not because they qualify under an
exception to the hearsay rules, but because – having been created for the
administration of an entity’s affairs and not for the purpose of establishing or
proving some fact at trial – they are not testimonial.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S.
at 324. Statements that qualify as business records are not, however,
nontestimonial per se. See O’Maley, 156 N.H. at 135. “Accordingly, under
Melendez-Diaz, the relevant question in determining whether a business record
is testimonial is whether it was created for the administration of an entity’s
affairs or for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact at trial.” United
States v. Hudson, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 126830 at *12 (E.D. La. 2011). “If the
primary purpose of creating the record is not to prove a fact at trial, the
admissibility of the records is the concern of state and federal rules of evidence,
not the Confrontation Clause.” Id. (quotation, brackets, and emphasis
omitted).
Although the defendant argues that the State should have presented live
testimony regarding the requirements of the business records rule, he conceded
at oral argument that if the records had been sponsored by a live witness who
gave testimony establishing that they were business records, nearly all of the
records admitted in the case would not be testimonial. He contends, however,
that some of the telephone records “were not records . . . that were maintained
in the ordinary course of business by the phone company.” We disagree. The
defendant’s argument relies upon the testimony of a witness who explained
that the telephone records that were not billing records were nonetheless part
of the telephone company’s record system. See Yeley-Davis, 632 F.3d at 679
(finding that, although certain telephone records were not telephone bills,
“[t]his does not mean . . . that these records were created simply for litigation –
they were not. Rather, these records were kept for [the telephone company’s]
business purposes” and, therefore, were not testimonial). Because all of the
telephone records, including the records that would not normally be provided
to a subscriber, were “created for the administration of [the] entity’s affairs and
not for the purpose of establishing or proving some fact at trial,” Melendez-
Diaz, 557 U.S. at 324, they are not testimonial. See Mallory, 461 Fed. Appx. at
5
356 (FedEx record); Hudson, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 126830 at *12-*13
(telephone and financial records).
Unlike the records themselves, however, the certifications of the business
records were created for the sole purpose of litigation – that is, to authenticate
documents pursuant to Rule 902(11). See Hudson, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
126830, at *13-*14 (noting that business record certifications pursuant to
Federal Rule of Evidence 902(11) could be described as affidavits prepared for
litigation purposes); United States v. Hemphill, 514 F.3d 1350, 1358-59 n.2
(D.C. Cir. 2008) (same). Thus, we turn to the question of whether admission of
the certifications violated the defendant’s Confrontation Clause rights.
We note first that the defendant does not challenge the certifications’
compliance with Rule 902(11). Rather, he challenges Rule 902(11)’s
authentication procedure as incompatible with his confrontation rights. The
Supreme Court, however, has distinguished an affidavit that is created for the
purpose of providing evidence against a defendant (to which the right of
confrontation would apply) from an affidavit merely authenticating an
admissible record (an exception to confrontation requirements). See Melendez-
Diaz, 557 U.S. at 322-23. It stated, “A clerk could by affidavit authenticate or
provide a copy of an otherwise admissible record, but could not . . . create a
record for the sole purpose of providing evidence against a defendant.” Id.
Certifications under Rule 902(11) “are authentications of otherwise admissible
records and do not themselves create new records. Accordingly, they are
nontestimonial.” Hudson, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 126830 at *16.
“Consequently, Melendez-Diaz makes clear that the Sixth Amendment right to
confront witnesses does not include the right to confront a records custodian
who submits a Rule 902(11) certification of a record that was created in the
course of a regularly conducted business activity.” Mallory, 461 Fed. Appx. at
357; see United States v. Fajardo-Guevara, 2011 WL 6003840 at *2 n.1 (M.D.
La. 2011) (“902(11) certifications are nontestimonial and do not implicate the
Confrontation Clause”).
The defendant insists that “the custodian affidavits did far more than
‘authenticate’ records as genuine copies of originals in the custodian’s
possession.” He points out that an affidavit merely verifying that the records
were true copies of those in the business’s file would not suffice to authenticate
the documents as business records. See United States v. Weiland, 420 F.3d
1062, 1076 n. 13 (9th Cir. 2005) (“Unlike public records admitted under Rule
803(8), records of a regularly conducted activity admitted under Rule 803(6)
require additional foundation.”). Indeed, Rule 902(11) provides that
authentication requires the custodian or another qualified person to certify
under oath that the record: (A) was made at or near the time of the occurrence
of the matters set forth by, or from information transmitted by, a person with
knowledge of those matters; (B) was kept in the course of the regularly
conducted activity; and (C) was made by the regularly conducted activity as a
6
regular practice. N.H. R. Ev. 902(11). Thus, the defendant argues, Rule
902(11) certifications provide “testimony about who made the records . . . and
how the records were made,” like the affidavits involved in Melendez-Diaz.
We agree with the courts that have ruled that Rule 902(11) certifications
are distinguishable from the certificates at issue in Melendez-Diaz. See
Hudson, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 126830 at *16-*17 n.5 (“Although a 902(11)
certification goes beyond a simple statement that the record in issue is a record
of the business in question, none of the courts to address the issue has found
this to be an impediment to the use of these certifications under the
Confrontation Clause.”). The evidence at issue in Melendez-Diaz consisted of
“three ‘certificates of analysis,’ . . . sworn to before a notary public by analysts
at the State Laboratory Institute of the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health,” reporting the weight of bags of material seized by the police and
stating that the bags “[had] been examined with the following results: The
substance was found to contain: Cocaine.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 308
(quotations omitted). In Melendez-Diaz, “not only were the affidavits ‘made
under circumstances which would lead an objective witness reasonably to
believe that the statement would be available for use at a later trial,’ but under
Massachusetts law the sole purpose of the affidavits was to provide ‘prima facie
evidence of the composition, quality, and the net weight’ of the analyzed
substance.” Melendez-Diaz, 557 U.S. at 311 (quoting Crawford, 541 U.S. at 52
& Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 111, § 13).
The certifications in this case, however, served only as the foundation for
the admission of the substantive evidence. The certifications themselves had
minimal evidentiary value. See United States v. Kos, 2008 WL 5084006, at *3
(W.D.N.C. 2008) (“a business record certification does not serve independently
as evidence in the case; rather, it serves merely to lay a foundation for the
admission of business records” (quotations, brackets and ellipsis omitted)).
Thus, we conclude that the admission of the records and the certifications did
not violate the defendant’s confrontation rights under the Federal Constitution.
The defendant argues that “[t]he New Hampshire right must be at least
as extensive as the Confrontation Clause rights described in Crawford,
Melendez-Diaz, and Bullcoming; however, given the greater precision of the
New Hampshire Constitution, it should be interpreted as more expansive.” “We
have not, however, adopted the Crawford analysis as applicable in this State.”
State v. Munoz, 157 N.H. 143, 148 (2008). The defendant’s assertion that the
New Hampshire Constitution’s Confrontation Clause protection is more
expansive than the Crawford rule relies entirely upon our observation in State
v. Peters, 133 N.H. 791, 794 (1991), that “[t]he language of the New Hampshire
Constitution[’s Confrontation Clause] is the more precise of the two, in that it
explicitly provides what the Federal Constitution has been interpreted to
mean.” The defendant, however, does not offer argument under any standard
other than the federal standard regarding the violation of his rights under the
7
State Constitution, see Munoz, 157 N.H. at 148. Neither does he address the
applicability of the Confrontation Clause test we have adopted – namely, that of
Ohio v. Roberts, 448 U.S. 56 (1980). See State v. Ata, 158 N.H. 406, 409
(2009); Ayer, 154 N.H. at 511. We will not consider the admissibility of the
records and their certifications under a standard the defendant has not argued.
See Munoz, 157 N.H. at 148. Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has
not established that admitting the records by means of custodians’ affidavits
rather than live testimony violated his rights under Part I, Article 15 of the New
Hampshire Constitution.
II. FBI Agent’s Opinion
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by permitting the
State to elicit the opinion of FBI Special Agent Hanlon that her conversation
with the Brooks family was “peculiar and kind of odd,” and that “parts of the
stories that [the Brookses] were telling [her] seemed not only odd, but perhaps
didn’t have a full ring of truth to it.” He first argues that the opinion testimony
was not relevant because Lorraine Brooks’s extensive testimony about her visit
to the FBI was admitted only as evidence of the defendant’s intent, and not for
the truth of the matters stated during the discussion with Hanlon. Second, he
asserts that “the admission of this evidence violated the cardinal rule that a
trial judge should not permit the prosecution to ask a witness to express an
opinion about the credibility of another witness.” See State v. Lopez, 156 N.H.
416, 423-24 (2007) (adopting a broad prohibition on questions requiring a
witness to comment on credibility of other witnesses).
“We review challenges to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard and reverse only if the rulings
are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case.” State
v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 586 (2009). We have held that “requiring a witness
to opine upon the credibility of other witnesses is error because such
questioning interferes with the jury’s obligation to determine the credibility of
witnesses.” Lopez, 156 N.H. at 423. We have also declined to create an
exception to Lopez’s “broad prohibition on questions requiring a witness to
comment upon the credibility of other witnesses.” State v. Parker, 160 N.H.
203, 213 (2010) (quotation omitted). Thus, although Hanlon testified as to her
impression of the veracity of a prior report by the Brookses rather than of a
witness’s trial testimony, we conclude that the trial court erred in allowing her
to do so.
The State argues that any error in admitting the testimony was harmless.
The State bears the burden of proving that an error is harmless. State v.
Pseudae, 154 N.H. 196, 202 (2006). An error is harmless only if it is
determined, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the verdict was not affected by
the error. Id. An error may be harmless if the alternative evidence of the
defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature, quantity or weight and if the
8
inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. Id. In determining whether an error
was harmless, we consider the alternative evidence of guilt presented at trial as
well as the character of the inadmissible evidence. See id.
We conclude that the State has established beyond a reasonable doubt
that the verdict was not affected by the admission of Hanlon’s opinion. The
evidence of the defendant’s guilt is overwhelming. Benton testified that the
defendant wanted Reid killed, offered money to have him killed, engaged in
numerous discussions about how to carry out the plan, and ultimately
participated with him in the murder of Reid. Vrooman testified that the
defendant recruited him in 2005 to help kill Reid and offered him money to do
so, and corroborated Benton’s testimony that the defendant participated in the
killing of Reid. His testimony about the planning and purchasing of supplies to
further the plot, and about the events surrounding the murder itself,
corroborated Benton’s testimony. Vrooman’s and Benton’s testimony about
meetings before the murder, supplies gathered with which to commit the
murder, and the destruction of evidence after the murder was corroborated by
Connors, Seaver, and Lorraine Brooks. Connors also testified about the
defendant’s intention to lure Reid to his property and kill him.
Benton’s and Vrooman’s testimony about the specific location where Reid
was killed, how he was killed, and what was done with his body was
corroborated by a forensic examination of the body, by physical evidence
gathered at the scene of the murder and from the river near the defendant’s
home, and by DNA analysis.
Testimony indicated that the June 27, 2005 surveillance video from the
Target store where Reid’s dump truck had been left showed two men leave
Reid’s truck and get into a 2004 or 2005 gold or tan Toyota Sienna mini-van.
Motor vehicle records showed that the defendant owned a beige 2004 Toyota
Sienna mini-van. Testimony established that a videotape from a Waste
Management facility in Londonderry showed Reid alive at 2:13 p.m. on June
27. Reid’s telephone records showed that the last call he made that day was to
the number associated with “Charlie Was.” When the records pertaining to this
number were retrieved, it was found to be the number of a pre-paid cellular
telephone activated June 19, 2005, in the name of “Charlie Was.” The only call
shown by the records of the “Charlie Was” telephone that was not to Reid was a
call placed to the telephone from a landline in the defendant’s name from a
home he owned in Derry.
The logbook removed from Reid’s truck listed on the pages dated June
27-28 the name “Charlie,” the number of the “Charlie Was” telephone, and
Connors’s address. In late July 2005, police visited Connors’s home to speak
with him and learned of other potential witnesses. The police then obtained
flight records showing that the defendant had traveled from Manchester, New
9
Hampshire, to Las Vegas, Nevada, on July 1, 2005, with Joseph Vrooman and
Robin Knight.
In December 2006, two halves of a pair of handcuffs were recovered from
the river, corroborating Vrooman’s statement that the handcuffs he and the
defendant had mailed from Las Vegas had been thrown into the river. Also in
December 2006, State Police executed a search warrant in Connors’s barn and
found that, while it appeared that the walls and floor of the closet had been
replaced, the ceiling had not, and it contained a small spatter of blood later
identified as being consistent with Reid’s. Luminol testing revealed blood
smears leading from the hallway outside the closet to an open area in the barn,
and later examination of the floorboards confirmed the presence of blood
consistent with that of Reid.
Benton’s and Vrooman’s testimony about the purchase of the telephone
with which to contact Reid was corroborated by records of that purchase.
Telephone records corroborated Benton’s, Carter’s, and Vrooman’s testimony
about telephone contacts among the conspirators at pertinent times. Federal
Express records corroborated testimony by Connors, Benton, and Vrooman
about a package of supplies sent from Las Vegas to New Hampshire. Airline
records corroborated testimony by Connors, Vrooman, and Lorraine Brooks
about relevant air travel. Western Union records corroborated Benton’s
testimony about receiving money from the defendant and Jesse. Benton’s
testimony that some of those funds were used to travel to Las Vegas was
corroborated by Vrooman’s and Lorraine Brooks’s confirmation that he was
visiting there at the relevant time.
In addition to the overwhelming nature of the alternative evidence of the
defendant’s guilt, we consider the character of the inadmissible evidence to
determine whether it “is merely cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt.” Id. Here, Hanlon’s opinion was
inconsequential. The conversation between the Brooks family and the FBI was
not admitted for the truth of the Brookses’ statements, but rather to show that
the defendant’s actions were inconsistent with a longstanding plan to commit
murder. The trial court allowed Lorraine Brooks to testify, over the State’s
hearsay objection, to the entire content of the family’s discussion with Hanlon,
reasoning that the testimony was admissible “because it undermines the theory
of a conspiracy because . . . a jury could find people who are involved in a
conspiracy are not likely to provide their identities to a law enforcement agency
that may be – you know, at some point may be charged with investigating
them.” The purpose for which the defense proffered the evidence – to show that
the defendant presented himself to the FBI and provided the names of Benton
and Carter – was thus met, regardless of Hanlon’s opinion of the Brooks
family’s account. Thus, despite the error, any prejudice caused by admission
of Hanlon’s opinion was minimal, and inconsequential in light of the strength
of the State’s evidence of guilt.
10
Because the evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming, the
admission of Hanlon’s opinion regarding the Brookses’ statements was
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
III. Medical Examiner’s Opinion
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by permitting the
State to introduce a new opinion from the medical examiner during the trial.
He contends first that the trial court erred by applying former Superior Court
Rule 98, rather than the version in effect at the time of trial. Second, he argues
that the court unsustainably exercised its discretion in finding that he was not
prejudiced by admission of the opinion evidence.
Pursuant to Rule 98, the State timely disclosed, as its cause-of-death
expert, Dr. Richard Evans, the Massachusetts medical examiner who
conducted Reid’s autopsy. The State produced Dr. Evans’s autopsy report and
death certificate, which described the cause of Reid’s death as “homicidal
violence of undetermined etiology with evaluation complicated by multiple
perimortem fractures, body discovered wrapped in plastic and severe
postmortem putrefaction.” At trial, the State informed the trial court that at
Dr. Evans’s deposition, available to both parties, “he testified extensively that
the nature of the chest injuries was such that he couldn’t tell specifically why
they had been inflicted or how but rather that they were blunt force trauma
injuries.” The defense opening statement employed Dr. Evans’s anticipated
testimony as a tool to attack the credibility of Vrooman’s account of the
murder, casting Dr. Evans’s evaluation of the victim’s rib injuries as
inconsistent with Vrooman’s anticipated testimony that the defendant struck
Reid in the chest with a sledgehammer.
On the day that Dr. Evans was scheduled to testify, counsel for the State
notified defense counsel by e-mail as follows:
It is my recollection that during a recent conversation with Dr.
Richard Evans, he informed me that he believes that at the time of
the autopsy, he was informed that rocks were found in the vicinity
of the body and it was suggested to him that rocks might have
been on top of the body prior to its discovery.
Before Dr. Evans took the stand, defense counsel asked the trial court to
exclude any opinion from Dr. Evans that had not been previously disclosed.
The State countered that there was no new or undisclosed opinion, since the
only testimony the State planned to elicit from Dr. Evans, outside of that
contained in the disclosed reports, was “[e]ssentially just that rocks are capable
of inflicting blunt force trauma.” The trial court allowed the State to question
Dr. Evans about the potential contribution of rocks to the “blunt force trauma”
originally disclosed, reasoning: “[T]his new disclosure of the doctor is a very
11
marginal difference. It’s not something that’s, you know, sort of a completely
new thing.” In response to the State’s hypothetical question, “If someone had
struck the victim in the chest several times with [the handheld sledgehammer]
. . . very close in time to when his heart stopped beating and then at some
point after the victim was deceased someone tossed several rocks weighing
between four and thirteen pounds onto his chest, could that cause the
constellation of chest injuries you observed during the autopsy?” Dr. Evans
replied, “The constellation of the two sets of events would in my opinion
account for the injuries.”
“We will not reverse the trial court’s admission of evidence absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Gamester, 149 N.H. 475, 478
(2003). “This same standard applies to review of the trial court’s decision with
respect to alleged discovery violations.” Id. “To show that the trial court’s
exercise of discretion is unsustainable, the defendant must show that the
decision was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” State v. Dodds,
159 N.H. 239, 248-49 (2009) (quotation omitted). “In the context of a discovery
violation, actual prejudice exists if the defense has been impeded to a
significant degree by the nondisclosure.” State v. Roldan, 151 N.H. 283, 287
(2004) (quotation omitted).
The version of Rule 98 in effect at the time of trial provided, in relevant
part:
For each expert witness included on the list of witnesses, the state
shall provide a brief summary of the expert’s education and
experience relevant to his area of expertise, state the subject
matter on which the expert is expected to testify, state a summary
of the facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify
and a summary of the grounds for each opinion, and provide a
copy of any expert report relating to such expert.
Super. Ct. R. 98(C)(1) (emphasis added). Rule 98(H) further provided that
“parties are under a continuing obligation to supplement” discovery responses
as additional materials are generated or if a party learns that previously
provided discovery “is incomplete, inaccurate or misleading.” Super. Ct. R.
98(H); see also State v. Pelletier, 149 N.H. 243, 250 (2003). By contrast, former
Superior Court Rule 98 did not include the above requirements concerning
expert witnesses. Rather, it merely required the State to provide the defendant
copies, prior to trial, of all “results or reports of physical or mental
examinations, scientific tests or experiments, or any other reports or
statements of experts, as well as a summary of each expert’s qualifications.”
Super. Ct. R. 98(A)(2)(i) (2004). In Gamester, we held that former Rule 98 did
not require the State to summarize the testimony of the experts whose reports
the State had provided to the defense, nor did it “mandate that an expert’s
report contain all of the opinions regarding which the expert may be called
12
upon to testify at trial.” State v. Lavoie, 152 N.H. 542, 545 (2005).
The defendant first argues that “the trial court appeared to apply the law
before Rule 98 was amended, and erroneously relieved the State of its
obligation to disclose its expert’s opinions in conformity with the current Rule.”
He bases this assertion on what he characterizes as the trial court’s
consideration of whether the State had produced the underlying facts that
formed the basis of Dr. Evans’s opinion, and the fact that, prior to the 2004
amendments, Rule 98 did not require the State to disclose “all of the opinions
regarding which the expert may be called upon to testify at trial.” Id.
(emphasis added).
The record does not support the defendant’s reading of the trial court’s
legal analysis. After allowing defense counsel extensive argument, the trial
court attempted to determine the essence of the defendant’s objection, and
specifically asked whether defense counsel was being taken by surprise based
upon an undisclosed opinion. Accordingly, we do not agree that the trial court
erroneously applied the former rule.
We next turn to the defendant’s argument that the trial court’s exercise
of discretion in allowing Dr. Evans’s opinion is unsustainable. We assume,
without deciding, that the admission of Dr. Evans’s opinion about the possible
contribution of rocks to the decedent’s chest injury violated Rule 98. The
defendant has nonetheless failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s “decision
was clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Dodds, 159 N.H. at
248-49 (quotation omitted).
“Actual prejudice exists if the defense has been impeded to a significant
degree by the nondisclosure.” State v. Stickney, 148 N.H. 232, 236 (2002).
Here, the nondisclosure was limited to Dr. Evans’s opinion of one possible
cause of the previously disclosed “blunt force trauma” – that is, the rocks that
both parties had long known were found with the body. On cross-examination
of Dr. Evans, the defense suggested other possible instrumentalities that might
be consistent with the compressive chest injury. Dr. Evans specifically testified
that he had not formulated an opinion as to whether rocks were the cause of
the compressive chest injury. The tardy disclosure that the placement of rocks
on Reid’s body may have contributed to his chest injuries did not alter Dr.
Evans’s determination of the cause of death, or the evidence of the defendant’s
role therein. The defendant thus has not established actual prejudice as a
result of the nondisclosure, or that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in allowing admission of the testimony.
IV. “Predominating Cause” Instruction
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by rejecting the
defendant’s request for a jury instruction on “predominating cause” pursuant
13
to Seymour. He asserts that, as to the murder indictments, the jury had to
determine whether Reid’s death was caused by Benton’s blows to Reid’s head
or the defendant’s blows to Reid’s chest. Without a “predominating cause”
instruction, he contends, the jury’s verdict on the murder indictments may
have been based upon the erroneous conclusion that the defendant’s physical
actions were the legal cause of Reid’s death. We disagree.
One capital murder indictment charged that Brooks “did knowingly
cause the death of Jack Reid, Sr., by criminally soliciting” one or more
individuals “to cause his death . . . . in that, with the purpose to cause the
death of Jack Reid, Sr., he offered one or more of said individuals some form of
pecuniary gain in exchange for their participation in causing the death.” The
second capital murder indictment charged that Brooks, “acting in concert with
and aided by another,” knowingly caused Reid’s death while engaged in an
actual or attempted kidnapping, by striking Reid with a blunt object. The first-
degree murder indictment likewise charged Brooks with purposely causing
Reid’s death by striking him with a blunt object while “acting in concert with
and aided by another.”
“Under New Hampshire law, the ‘acting in concert with’ language used in
the indictment is ordinarily sufficient to charge a defendant as both a principal
and an accomplice.” State v. Doucette, 146 N.H. 583, 589 (2001). Where the
indictments charged the defendant as both a principal and an accomplice, the
State had two options for proving capital and/or first-degree murder. It could
have proven that the defendant himself caused Reid’s death by striking him
with a blunt object. Or it could have proven accomplice liability; that is, that
the defendant solicited, aided or attempted to aid another in causing Reid’s
death by striking him with a blunt object. See State v. Winward, 161 N.H. 533,
539 (2011); see also State v. Young, 159 N.H. 332, 340 (2009) (where defendant
charged as both principal and accomplice, “evidence supporting each element
of accomplice liability also would be sufficient to support the conviction[]
against the defendant”).
“The purpose of the trial court’s charge is to state and explain to the jury,
in clear and intelligible language, the rules of law applicable to the case.” State
v. O’Leary, 153 N.H. 710, 712 (2006) (quotation omitted). “When reviewing jury
instructions, we evaluate allegations of error by interpreting the disputed
instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror would have understood
them, and in light of all the evidence in the case.” Id. (quotation omitted). We
determine whether the jury instructions adequately and accurately explained
each element of the offense, bearing in mind that the scope and wording of jury
instructions are within the sound discretion of the trial court. See id. We
review the trial court’s decisions on these matters for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion, and reverse only if the instructions did not fairly cover
the issues of law in the case. See id.; see also State v. Lamprey, 149 N.H. 364,
366 (2003) (“Reversal of a jury verdict is unwarranted when a jury charge fairly
14
covers the issues and law of a case.”).
Before addressing the elements of the crimes with which the defendant
was charged, the trial court instructed the jury “as to the principles of law that
apply when more than one person is accused of being a participant in a crime.”
Its instructions on accomplice liability – which the defendant does not argue
were erroneous – explained that “a person may be convicted of a crime even if
he did not personally perform all of the conduct which constitutes the crime,”
and that “an accomplice is just as guilty if the crime is in fact committed as if
he had personally performed each step in the commission of the crime.”
The court then instructed the jury on the elements of the three
alternative murder counts, each of which required the State to prove that the
defendant had caused Reid’s death. The instructions defined the element of
“causation” as follows:
To show that the defendant caused the death of Reid means
that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant’s criminal conduct was a direct and substantial factor in
bringing about the death of Reid. In other words, a legal cause of
death is a cause without which the death would not have occurred,
and a substantial factor from which the death flows – from which
the death follows as a natural, direct and immediate consequence.
To be a legal cause of death, the defendant’s acts do not have
to be the sole cause of death or the last acts which produce the
death; rather, the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt
only that the defendant’s conduct substantially and materially
contributed to the death of Reid in natural and continuous
sequence unbroken by superseding or intervening cause. The
State is not required to prove the manner in which or the means by
which the death of Reid was caused.
(Emphasis added). Specifically addressing accomplice liability, the court
instructed the jury as to each of the three murder counts that, to find the
defendant guilty, it must “find beyond a reasonable doubt that all of the
elements” of the crime “were committed by one or more of the following
individuals: The defendant; Robin Knight; Joseph Vrooman; and/or Michael
Benton,” and “that the defendant solicited, aided or attempted to aid Vrooman,
Knight, and/or Benton” in the criminal activity with the requisite intent. The
defendant does not contest that the instructions accurately stated the law on
accomplice liability. See RSA 626:8.
15
The defendant’s premise – that to convict Brooks on the murder
indictments, the jury had to find that Reid’s death was caused by Brooks’s
blows to Reid’s chest rather than Benton’s blows to Reid’s head – is not
supported by the indictments or the law. None of the indictments required the
jury to find that the defendant himself delivered the mortal blow. As the court
properly instructed the jury, the State was not required to prove the manner in
which or the means by which the death of Reid was caused. Because the
defendant was charged as an accomplice, the jury could have found him guilty
of all three charges regardless of whether Benton’s blows to Reid’s head or the
defendant’s blows to Reid’s chest were the “predominating cause” of Reid’s
death. Therefore, “predominating cause” language was not required to fairly
cover the issues and law of this case, and reversal of the jury verdict is
unwarranted. See Lamprey, 149 N.H. at 366.
V. Solicitation Variant and the Requirement of “Personal Pecuniary Gain”
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in its interpretation
of RSA 630:1, I(c). He argues that the statute requires that to be convicted on
the solicitation variant of capital murder, the defendant must have acted for his
own pecuniary gain.
RSA 630:1, I(c) provides in pertinent part, “A person is guilty of capital
murder if he knowingly causes the death of . . . [a]nother by criminally
soliciting a person to cause said death or after having been criminally solicited
by another for his personal pecuniary gain.” The defendant argues that the
statute requires proof that he acted “for his personal pecuniary gain” regardless
of whether he solicited the death or was the person solicited. The State argues
that only the person solicited must act for his own personal pecuniary gain.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we decide de
novo. See State v. Brown, 155 N.H. 590, 591 (2007). In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. State v. Gallagher,
157 N.H. 421, 422 (2008). We construe the Criminal Code “according to the
fair import of [its] terms and to promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (2007). In doing
so, we first look to the plain language of the statute to determine legislative
intent. State v. Formella, 158 N.H. 114, 116 (2008). Absent an ambiguity, we
will not look beyond the language of the statute to discern legislative intent. Id.
“We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include.” State v. Drake, 155 N.H. 169, 174-75 (2007). Our goal
is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in
light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory scheme. State
v. Lamy, 158 N.H. 511, 515 (2009). Accordingly, we interpret a statute in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. See id.
16
The plain language of RSA 630:1, I(c) creates two categories: those who
solicit and those who are solicited. “One established rule of statutory
construction, the ‘last antecedent rule,’ is the general rule of statutory as well
as grammatical construction that a modifying clause is confined to the last
antecedent unless there is something in the subject matter or dominant
purpose which requires a different interpretation.” Mt. Valley Mall Assocs. v.
Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642, 652 (2000) (quotation and citation
omitted). “Therefore, qualifying phrases are to be applied to the words or
phrases immediately preceding and are not to be construed as extending to
others more remote.” Id. (quotation omitted); see also 2A N. Singer & J.D.
Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction § 47.33, at 487-89 (7th ed. 2007).
This rule of statutory construction supports applying the qualifying phrase “for
his own pecuniary gain” to only the second category, those who are solicited to
kill. Further, this interpretation is logically sound in that it imposes equally
severe penalties on hired killers who act for mercenary motives and those who
hire them, regardless of their motivation. Accordingly, we agree with the trial
court’s interpretation of RSA 630:1, I(c).
The defendant’s argument under the rule of lenity is unavailing. “[T]he
rule of lenity serves as a guide for interpreting criminal statutes where the
legislature failed to articulate its intent unambiguously.” In re Alex C., 161
N.H. 231, 239 (2010) (quotation omitted). Because we find the legislative intent
unambiguous, the rule of lenity, which forbids interpretation of a criminal
statute so as to increase the statutory penalty where the legislature’s intent is
unclear, is inapplicable. See id. (legislative history to be consulted to aid
statutory analysis if statute is ambiguous; if both statute and history are
ambiguous, rule of lenity applies); State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 811, 814 (1986)
(“Lenity thus serves only as an aid for resolving an ambiguity; it is not to be
used to beget one.” (quotations omitted)).
VI. Predicate Crime Underlying Kidnapping Variant
The defendant finally argues that the trial court erred in its
interpretation of RSA 630:1, I(b). He asserts that, pursuant to the merger
doctrine, to prove the kidnapping variant of capital murder, the State had to
prove that the defendant intended to confine Reid for the purpose of
committing a crime other than murder. We disagree.
RSA 630:1, I(b) provides that “[a] person is guilty of capital murder if he
knowingly causes the death of . . . [a]nother before, after, while engaged in the
commission of, or while attempting to commit kidnapping as that offense is
defined in RSA 633:1.” RSA 633:1 (Supp. 2002), in turn, provides:
I. A person is guilty of kidnapping if he knowingly confines another
under his control with a purpose to:
17
(a) Hold him for ransom or as a hostage; or
(b) Avoid apprehension by a law enforcement official; or
(c) Terrorize him or some other person; or
(d) Commit an offense against him.
The indictment charged that the defendant, “acting in concert with
another or others, did knowingly confine [Reid] under his control with a
purpose to terrorize him and/or to commit a crime against him,” and that the
defendant, in concert with others, caused Reid’s death. In accordance with
this language, based upon RSA 633:1, I(c) and I(d), the trial court instructed
the jury that the elements of the crime included that the defendant “confined or
attempted to confine Reid . . . with the conscious object or specific intent to
terrorize Reid or to commit a crime against Reid,” and that the defendant
caused Reid’s death “before, after, while engaged in, or while attempting to
engage in the confinement of Reid.” The court further instructed the jury that
the confinement could not be merely incidental to the murder: “In other words,
if you find that Reid was only confined for the purpose of killing him, and that
the confinement was only expected to be a momentary or passing event before
the killing occurred, then this element of the crime has not been met and you
must find the defendant not guilty of this charge.” In order to convict, the
court instructed, the jury had to unanimously agree either:
One, that the confinement of Reid was designed to accomplish
an objective in addition to or independent of the killing of Reid,
namely, the terrorizing of Reid;
Or, two, that if the only objective of the confinement was to kill
Reid, the confinement was contemplated or expected to last for
some appreciable period of time beyond that necessary to
accomplish the killing.
In response to a jury question regarding whether the predicate crime
could be the murder itself, the court agreed that the murder itself could be the
purpose of the confinement, but “the evidence must establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that the confinement of Reid was not merely incidental to the
murder.”
The merger doctrine, in this context, “prohibits a conviction for
kidnapping based upon acts that fall within the definition of that crime but are
merely incidental to another crime.” People v. McEathron, 926 N.Y.S.2d 249,
251 (App. Div. 2011). The application of this doctrine presents an issue of first
impression in New Hampshire. A significant majority of state courts have
concluded that “the crime of kidnapping does not include conduct involving a
18
restraint that is merely incidental to the commission of some other crime
against the victim.” State v. Salamon, 949 A.2d 1092, 1119 (Conn. 2008)
(collecting cases). Despite the varying statutory language and analyses
underlying these cases, “they share a common theme, namely, that it is
unlikely that the legislature intended to expose an accused to a kidnapping
conviction, and the severe sanctions accompanying such a conviction, when
the restraint involved is merely incidental to the commission of a separate,
underlying crime.” Id. We note that a minority of jurisdictions nonetheless
hold that “a kidnapping conviction may be sustained even when the restraint
that forms the basis of that conviction is no greater in severity or duration than
the restraint necessary to complete another crime, such as assault or robbery.”
Id. at 1108, 1119 n. 30 (collecting cases). We agree with the view taken by the
majority of jurisdictions, and now hold that a kidnapping conviction cannot
rest on “unlawful confinements or movements incidental to the commission of
other felonies.” State v. Goodhue, 833 A.2d 861, 864 (Vt. 2003); see also
Annotation, Seizure or Detention for Purpose of Committing Rape, Robbery, or
Other Offense as Constituting Separate Crime of Kidnapping, 39 A.L.R.5th 283,
361, 368 (1996) (collecting cases).
As a threshold matter, we consider the merger doctrine to apply to a
capital murder charge based upon kidnapping, since the kidnapping is an
element of the offense that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
See RSA 630:1, I(b) (“[a] person is guilty of capital murder if he knowingly
causes the death of . . . [a]nother before, after, while engaged in the
commission of, or while attempting to commit kidnapping as that offense is
defined in RSA 633:1”); see also State v. Green, 616 P.2d 628, 634 (Wash.
1980) (“kidnapping is a specific element of aggravated murder in the first
degree. It is, however, a separate and distinct statutory crime having specific
elements each of which must be established beyond a reasonable doubt.”).
The parties appear to agree, and the jury instructions reflect, that a
kidnapping “incidental” to the commission of the murder would not suffice to
support conviction. The issue before us, therefore, turns on the meaning of the
word “incidental.” The defendant argues that the confinement of Reid needed
to have independent significance from the crime of murder, and that in order to
have such significance, the purpose of the confinement must have been other
than the murder. The State maintains that the trial court accurately stated the
law when it instructed that, in order to convict, the jury had to agree that
either: (1) the confinement was designed to accomplish something other than
Reid’s death (namely, to terrorize Reid), see RSA 633:1, I(c); or (2) “the
confinement was contemplated or expected to last for some appreciable period
of time beyond that necessary to accomplish the killing.”
“Whether restraint and movement are merely incidental to another crime
or support kidnapping as a separate crime is a fact-specific determination
based on the totality of the circumstances.” State v. R.A., 2005 WL 2271889,
19
at *3 (Wash. Ct. App. 2005); see also Goodhue, 833 A.2d at 866. “In making
that determination, our guiding principle is whether [the] defendant’s restraint
of the victim was so much the part of another substantive crime that the
substantive crime could not have been committed without such acts and that
independent criminal responsibility may not fairly be attributed to them.”
McEathron, 926 N.Y.S.2d at 251 (brackets and quotations omitted).
In determining whether a separate kidnapping conviction was
supportable, courts have considered various factors, including
whether evidence of the seizure, detention, or movement was or
was not inherent in the nature of the underlying crimes; whether
the crime was facilitated by the confinement; whether the
movement or confinement prevented the victim from summoning
assistance; whether the movement or detention lessened the
defendant’s risk of detection; and whether the movement or
detention created a significant danger or increased the victim’s risk
of harm.
Goodhue, 833 A.2d at 865.
The defendant’s reading of the statute – requiring the confinement to be
for a purpose other than the underlying murder without consideration of the
totality of the circumstances or any factor other than the purpose of the
confinement – does not accord with other jurisdictions’ interpretations of the
merger doctrine. See Salamon, 949 A.2d at 1117 (concluding that, “to commit
a kidnapping in conjunction with another crime, a defendant must intend to
prevent the victim’s liberation for a longer period of time or to a greater degree
than that which is necessary to commit the other crime”). Nor does such an
interpretation comport with the fairness purposes of the merger doctrine,
which require analysis of whether the restraint constituted “a minimal
intrusion necessary and integral to another crime, . . . simultaneous and
inseparable from another crime,” or rather “a crime in itself.” McEathron, 926
N.Y.S.2d at 251 (quotations omitted).
We agree with the Washington courts that “simply because the restraint
takes place to facilitate another crime does not by itself render that restraint
‘merely incidental.’” R.A., 2005 WL 2271889, at *4. The defendant’s argument
that, if he restrained the victim solely for the purpose of killing him, then he
did not commit kidnapping,
ignores the “totality of the circumstances” analysis Green
mandates. Under [the defendant’s] reasoning, there could be no
kidnapping anytime the victim was restrained to facilitate a
murder, regardless of the nature of the restraint. He would have us
20
view all the events leading up to the murder as merely incidental to
the murder itself.
Id.
The trial court’s instructions to the jury required a unanimous decision
as to whether the defendant confined Reid for the purpose of terrorizing him,
or, if the purpose of the confinement was to kill Reid, whether “the confinement
was contemplated or expected to last for some appreciable period of time
beyond that necessary to accomplish the killing.” We find no error in this
instruction.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, J., concurred.
21