THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-051
BEL AIR ASSOCIATES
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Argued: September 16, 2008
Opinion Issued: November 20, 2008
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas Quarles and
Shelagh C.N. Michaud on the brief, and Mr. Quarles orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Laura E. B. Lombardi, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Bel Air Associates, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) that the Medicaid provider agreement between
it and the respondent, the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS), does not constitute a contract. We reverse and remand.
Bel Air Associates (Bel Air) operates a state-licensed nursing home in
Goffstown, providing care to Medicaid-eligible individuals. Medicaid is a joint
federal-state program that provides health care services to certain low-income
individuals. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 1396a et seq. (2000); RSA ch. 151-E (2005 &
Supp. 2008). In New Hampshire, the Medicaid program receives half of its
funding from the federal government and half from the State and its counties.
The program is administered on the federal level by the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, an agency within the United States Department of
Health and Human Services, and on the state level by DHHS.
In order to participate in the Medicaid program, a nursing home must
enter into a Medicaid provider agreement with the State. In 1985 and 1992,
Bel Air entered into such agreements. We note that although Bel Air argues
that both the 1985 and 1992 agreements are contracts, the trial court’s order
was based upon only the 1992 agreement and we therefore limit our review to
that agreement. The 1992 agreement has been indefinitely extended and is
currently in force.
States participating in the Medicaid program have flexibility in
establishing the payment methodologies to reimburse providers, provided that
each state’s rate-setting methodology complies with federal law. See 42 U.S.C.
§ 1396a(a)(13). DHHS establishes rates of reimbursement for providers of
services to Medicaid-eligible persons through the state medical assistance
program. See RSA 161:4, VI (2002). Under the program, nursing homes are
reimbursed on the basis of per diem, per resident rates which are determined
by totaling five rate components, including capital costs. These rates are set by
DHHS twice per year.
In the mid-1990s, the State ordered that one of Bel Air’s buildings be
closed due to safety issues. See Bel Air Assocs. v. N.H. Dep’t of Health &
Human Servs., 154 N.H. 228, 229 (2006). Bel Air received approval from the
New Hampshire Health Services Planning and Review Board to build an
addition to replace the nursing home beds lost due to the closure of the original
building. Id. The renovations cost Bel Air approximately $2 million. At the
time Bel Air undertook its new construction, the Medicaid rate-setting process
allowed nursing homes to recover most capital costs. In 2002, however, DHHS
instituted a cap on capital cost recoveries at the 85th percentile of allowable
capital cost expenses. In 2003, Bel Air brought suit against DHHS, challenging
its rate-setting methodology, specifically the 85th percentile cap on capital cost
recovery, and DHHS’ use of a budget neutrality factor in calculating
reimbursement amounts. Id. at 231. We held that the capital cost cap and the
budget neutrality factor were rules that were not adopted in accordance with
the New Hampshire Administrative Procedure Act and therefore not valid
against Bel Air. Id. at 235.
In 2006, relying upon RSA 491:8 (1997), Bel Air brought a claim for
breach of contract against DHHS based upon the provisions of the 1992
Medicaid provider agreement. Bel Air moved for partial summary judgment on
the basis that DHHS breached the implied terms of the provider agreement by:
(1) failing to adopt the capital cost cap and budget neutrality factor in
accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act; and (2) failing to comply
2
with RSA 151-E:6, II, which requires that the State’s nursing home
reimbursement system fulfill an efficiency requirement. DHHS moved for
summary judgment on the grounds that: (1) Bel Air’s claims are barred by res
judicata, the statute of limitations, laches and the doctrine of sovereign
immunity; (2) Bel Air’s claims fail because the Medicaid provider agreement is
not a contract; and (3) if the provider agreement is a contract, the State has not
breached it.
The trial court granted DHHS’ motion for summary judgment and denied
Bel Air’s motion for partial summary judgment, ruling that the 1992 Medicaid
provider agreement could not provide the basis for a breach of contract claim
because it neither contained any substantive reimbursement provisions, nor
placed any reciprocal obligation on DHHS to perform. The court found that the
agreement was limited to establishing Bel Air’s eligibility to receive payment
from DHHS and did not establish an express contractual right to
reimbursement. The court did not address any of the remaining issues raised
by the parties.
On appeal Bel Air argues that the trial court erred because the Medicaid
provider agreement contains “all of the indicia of a contract” and specifically
refers to the New Hampshire Medicaid program and the rates set therein.
DHHS argues that because the provider agreement “only place[s] obligations on
the provider, with no reciprocal duties on [DHHS],” it does not constitute a
contract. Rather, DHHS argues, the provider agreement is simply “an
agreement by the provider to abide by statutory and regulatory requirements in
order to be eligible to participate in the Medicaid program.” Accordingly, DHHS
maintains that “[a]ny reimbursement liability on the State is imposed by
statute, rather than by the terms of the provider enrollment agreement.”
“The court shall grant a motion for summary judgment pursuant to RSA
491:8-a if, after considering all the evidence in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party, it finds that there is no genuine issue of material fact and
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Horse Pond Fish
& Game Club v. Cormier, 133 N.H. 648, 653 (1990). “In reviewing the trial
court’s initial grant of summary judgment, we consider the affidavits and other
evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in the light most
favorable to the non-moving party. If there is no genuine issue of material fact,
and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of
summary judgment is proper. We review the trial court’s application of the law
to the facts de novo.” Broom v. Continental Cas. Co., 152 N.H. 749, 752 (2005)
(citations omitted).
“Offer, acceptance, and consideration are essential to contract
formation.” Behrens v. S.P. Constr. Co., 153 N.H. 498, 501 (2006). “A valid
offer may propose the exchange of a promise for a performance. An offer may
3
be accepted by commencement of performance. Consideration is present if
there is either a benefit to the promisor or a detriment to the promisee. In
addition, there must be a meeting of the minds in order to form a valid
contract.” Chisholm v. Ultima Nashua Indus. Corp., 150 N.H. 141, 144-45
(2003) (citations, quotation, and ellipsis omitted). “For a meeting of the minds
to occur, the parties must assent to the same contractual terms. That is, the
parties must have the same understanding of the terms of the contract and
must manifest an intention, supported by adequate consideration, to be bound
by the contract.” Durgin v. Pillsbury Lake Water Dist., 153 N.H. 818, 821
(2006) (citation, quotation, and brackets omitted).
The 1992 Medicaid provider agreement is titled “Agreement with Skilled
Nursing and Intermediate Care Homes Participating Under New Hampshire
Title XIX-Medical Assistance Program.” The agreement was signed by both Bel
Air and DHHS, and states that its purpose is “establishing eligibility for
payment under the New Hampshire Title XIX Medical Assistance Program.” It
further states that Bel Air agrees “[t]o comply with such standards for
participation as a Skilled Nursing Facility . . . and the making of payments
under Title XIX of the Social Security Act as are prescribed by [DHHS]” and
that Bel Air will “accept payments by [DHHS] as payment in full.” The
agreement is “binding upon [Bel Air] and [DHHS].” It “may be terminated by
either party at any time following at least 30 days written notice of such intent
to terminate” and requires that DHHS hold Bel Air harmless for “any violation
of the Federal Privacy Act for any disclosure, public or otherwise, of patient’s
personal, financial, or medical records where such disclosure is made by
[DHHS].”
We agree with Bel Air that the 1992 provider agreement contains the
essential elements of a contract – offer, acceptance, consideration and a
meeting of the minds. “[T]he important consideration is not whether the
document is a paradigm of draftsmanship, but whether its general structure
and specific provisions are reasonably clear.” Chisholm, 150 N.H. at 145
(quotations omitted). We hold that it is reasonably clear that pursuant to the
1992 provider agreement, Bel Air and DHHS agreed that Bel Air would provide
nursing home services to Medicaid-eligible individuals in exchange for
reimbursement by DHHS as required by the provisions of Title XIX of the Social
Security Act, specifically incorporated by reference in the agreement. See
Caritas Services v. State, DSHS, 869 P.2d 28, 36 (Wash. 1994) (contractual
right to reimbursement no different from statutory right if statute incorporated
by reference in contract); accord Midwest Division–OPRMC v. Dept. Soc. Serv.,
241 S.W.3d 371, 380 (Mo. Ct. App. 2007) (provider agreements are contracts);
Ohio Hosp. Ass’n v. Ohio D.H.S., 579 N.E.2d 695, 700 (Ohio 1991) (Medicaid
reimbursement claims are contracts), cert. denied, 503 U.S. 940 (1992); United
States v. Upper Valley Clinic Hospital, 615 F.2d 302, 306 (5th Cir. 1980) (action
to recover overpayments to Medicaid provider “sounds in contract”); Green v.
4
Cashman, 605 F.2d 945, 946 (6th Cir. 1979) (provider agreement is contract for
purposes of determining provider rights); Briarcliff Haven, Inc. v. Department of
Hum. Res. GA., 403 F. Supp. 1355, 1358 (N.D. Ga. 1975) (provider agreement
is best construed as business contract between state and Medicaid provider).
We reverse and remand for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion. We do not address the State’s argument that the trial court “reached
the correct result in granting summary judgment in favor of [DHHS] because
Bel Air’s contract claim is barred by res judicata and the statute of limitations.”
The trial court may consider these issues on remand.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5