THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-147
WILLIAM SCHROEDER & a.
v.
TOWN OF WINDHAM & a.
Argued: November 19, 2008
Opinion Issued: December 18, 2008
Michael L. Donovan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the plaintiffs.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gregory E. Michael and Nicole M.
Barsamian on the brief, and Mr. Michael orally), for the intervenors, Andrew P.
and Christine J. Lane, trustees of the A&C Revocable Trust.
Beaumont & Campbell, P.A., of Salem, for the Town of Windham, filed no
brief.
GALWAY, J. The intervenors, Andrew P. and Christine J. Lane, trustees
of the A&C Revocable Trust, appeal the ruling of the Superior Court (Nadeau,
J.) reversing the Town of Windham Zoning Board of Adjustment’s (ZBA)
decision to grant them an equitable waiver. See RSA 674:33-a (2008). We
affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. The intervenors reside
on property located adjacent to Canobie Lake in Windham. In 2003, they
sought to construct a detached garage on a portion of the property and
obtained a building permit. After construction began, concerns arose regarding
the potential impact on the surrounding wetlands. Alfred Turner, Director of
Planning and Development for the Town of Windham, issued a stop work order.
Turner eventually allowed construction to continue after the intervenors
rotated the garage to increase the distance between excavation and wetlands
and repaired the silt fencing.
Subsequently, abutters to the property filed an administrative appeal
with the ZBA challenging Turner’s decision to allow construction of the garage.
They argued that the garage fell within the Wetlands and Watershed Protection
overlay district (WWPD), which prohibits its construction. The ZBA agreed,
determining that a portion of the intervenors’ property falls within the WWPD,
and that the garage impinges upon the WWPD in violation of the town
ordinance. The superior court affirmed the ZBA’s decision. As a result, Turner
withdrew the intervenors’ building permit.
Thereafter, the intervenors obtained from the ZBA the equitable waiver at
issue here. The waiver permitted the garage to remain in its current location,
despite its infringement into the WWPD. The plaintiffs, William Schroeder and
Al Letizio, Jr., appealed to the superior court, arguing that the relief granted by
the ZBA constitutes waiver of a use restriction, which cannot be waived under
RSA 674:33-a. The court agreed and reversed the ZBA’s decision to grant the
equitable waiver. This appeal followed.
Our review of zoning cases is limited. Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152
N.H. 74, 77 (2005). “The factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie
lawful and reasonable, and will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors
of law, unless the court is persuaded, based upon a balance of probabilities, on
the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable.” Id. The party
seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision bears the burden of proof on appeal to
the superior court. Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 85, 89 (2004). We
will uphold the superior court’s decision on appeal unless it is not supported
by the evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
RSA 674:33-a allows a landowner to obtain an equitable waiver when “a
lot or other division of land, or structure thereupon, is discovered to be in
violation of a physical layout or dimensional requirement imposed by a zoning
ordinance” if certain criteria are met. RSA 674:33-a, I. The statute further
provides that equitable waivers shall only be granted “from physical layout,
mathematical or dimensional requirements, and not from use restrictions.”
RSA 674:33-a, IV. On appeal, the intervenors argue that the superior court
erred in finding that their request was for relief from a use restriction.
2
Specifically, they argue that the zoning provision at issue is a setback
provision, which constitutes a dimensional requirement.
We have on several occasions recognized a distinction between area and
use restrictions for purposes of zoning. See Harrington, 152 N.H. at 78;
Boccia, 151 N.H. at 90. With respect to variances, a use variance allows the
landowner to engage in a use of the land that the zoning ordinance prohibits.
Harrington, 152 N.H. at 78. An area variance is generally made necessary by
the physical characteristics of the lot. Id.
In contrast to a use variance, an area variance
involves a use permitted by the zoning ordinance
but grants the landowner an exception from strict
compliance with physical standards, such as
setbacks, frontage requirements, height
limitations and lot size restrictions. As such, an
area variance does not alter the character of the
surrounding area as much as a use not permitted
by the ordinance.
Id. (citation omitted). The critical distinction between area and use variances is
whether the purpose of the particular zoning restriction is to preserve the
character of the surrounding area and is thus a use restriction. Id. at 78-79.
“Whether the variance sought is an area or use variance requires a case-
by-case determination based upon the language and purpose of the particular
zoning restriction at issue.” Id. Therefore, we must interpret the zoning
ordinance in order to determine the purpose of the restriction. Id. Because the
traditional rules of statutory construction generally govern our review, the
words and phrases of an ordinance should be construed according to the
common and approved usage of the language. Anderson v. Motorsports
Holdings, 155 N.H. 491, 494-95 (2007). When the language of an ordinance is
plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance itself for
further indications of legislative intent. Id. at 495.
In Harrington, we examined whether a particular provision relating to the
placement of manufactured housing parks created a use or area restriction for
purposes of obtaining a variance. Harrington, 152 N.H. at 76. The zoning
provision at issue provided that the proposed park must consist of at least ten
acres, and the number of housing lots within the park was not to exceed
twenty-five. Id. at 79. We concluded that this zoning provision created a use
restriction because the limitation on the number of housing sites “applies
regardless of the number of acres within the park.” Id. at 79-80. “Thus, unlike
an area restriction, the limitation on the number of manufactured housing
sites is not related to the acreage or other physical attributes of the property.
3
Rather, the restriction limits the intensity of the use in order to preserve the
character of the area.” Id. at 80.
Here, section 601 of the Town of Windham Zoning Ordinance establishes
the WWPD. See Town of Windham, Zoning Ordinance and Land Use
Regulations § 601 (2008) (hereinafter Ordinance). The WWPD is an overlay
district, which is superimposed over the existing zoning district and “imposes
specified requirements . . . in addition to those otherwise applicable for the
underlying zone.” 10 P. Rohan, Zoning and Land Use Controls § 53C.08[2][a],
at 53C-444.90 (2008); see, e.g., Brewster v. Town of Amherst, 144 N.H. 364,
365 (1999). Section 601.4.1 provides that the WWPD “shall include all lands
within one hundred and fifty feet (150’) of the normal high water mark” of
certain named brooks and “for any other brook, stream or pond shall include
all land within one hundred feet (100’) of the normal high water mark of said
Brook or stream and one hundred feet (100’) from the normal high water of
said pond.” Ordinance § 601.4.1. While the ordinance permits certain uses
within the WWPD, it restricts permitted uses to those that “do not result in the
erection of any permanent building or conflict with the intents and purposes in
Section 601.1.” Id. § 601.3.
By its plain language, the ordinance expressly prohibits the construction
of permanent buildings within the WWPD. See id. Like the provision in
Harrington, this restriction does not depend upon the size of the structure, its
placement on the property, or the amount of the intervenors’ land located
within the WWPD. Construction of permanent buildings is simply not
permitted anywhere within the district. Consequently, the intervenors’
equitable waiver request was not made necessary “by the physical
characteristics of the lot.” Harrington, 152 N.H. at 78. It was made necessary
by the WWPD’s unambiguous prohibition of permanent buildings within its
boundaries.
Furthermore, we conclude that the WWPD’s restriction prohibiting
permanent buildings was enacted in order to protect the character of the
surrounding area, thereby creating a use restriction. The ordinance states that
the purpose of the WWPD’s regulations are, in pertinent part,
to guide the use of wetlands . . . in order to:
. . . .
Prevent the development of structures, or other
land uses within the W.W.P.D. that would
contribute to surface and groundwater
contamination or reduce surface and groundwater
supplies;
4
. . . .
Encourage those uses that can be appropriately
and safely located within the W.W.P.D.
Ordinance § 601.1. Locating a permanent structure within the WWPD is not
just an incidental deviation from strict compliance with the WWPD regulations;
it directly contradicts the regulations’ underlying goal of preserving the area.
Thus, the prohibition of permanent buildings is a use restriction. See
Harrington, 152 N.H. at 79.
Section 601.3 also supports our conclusion that this is a use and not a
dimensional restriction. As stated above, section 601.3, titled “Uses
Permitted,” provides: “Any of the following uses that do not result in the
erection of any permanent building . . . .” Ordinance § 601.3 (emphasis
added). Thus, the plain language of the ordinance indicates that construction
of permanent buildings is a use that is not permitted within the WWPD. Id.
Further, the applicable heading in the ordinance supports our conclusion. The
provisions relating to the WWPD are located within section 600 of the
ordinance, titled “Use Regulation.” While the heading is not conclusive of this
provision’s interpretation, it provides significant indication of what the drafters
intended. See Greenland Conservation Comm’n v. N.H. Wetlands Council, 154
N.H. 529, 534 (2006). In this case, the heading is particularly significant
because the ordinance has a separate section, titled “Development of Sites And
Location of Buildings And Structures,” which appears to set forth the
ordinance’s dimensional restrictions. See Ordinance § 700.
The intervenors assert that section 601.4.1 is a setback provision, and,
as such, is simply a dimensional restriction that is not meant to preserve the
character of the surrounding area. The intervenors rely upon our decision in
Heron Cove Assoc. v. DVMD Holdings, 146 N.H. 211, 212 (2001), to support
this assertion. This reliance is misplaced. In Heron Cove, the property at issue
contained a small brook that ran through the property into a pond. Id. The
Town of Windham Zoning Ordinance specifically exempted the pond from the
WWPD. Id. at 214. The petitioner argued that, despite the presence of the
brook, the land was not subject to the WWPD because of its proximity to the
exempted pond. Id. at 214-15. The issue before us was whether this
exemption covered the land contiguous to the pond. Id. at 215. The question
of infringement into the WWPD was not at issue. Indeed, the Heron Cove
petitioner conceded that, but for the exemption, the land would be protected by
the WWPD. Id. Thus, Heron Cove is readily distinguishable from this case.
Furthermore, accepting the intervenors’ assertion that section 601.4.1 is
a setback provision would require us to conclude that the WWPD’s boundaries
5
are simply an incidental physical limitation to the underlying residential
district’s permitted uses. See Harrington, 152 N.H. at 78. Indeed, the
intervenors assert that construction of the garage within the WWPD “is no
different than construction of a garage being prohibited within a front, side or
rear yard setback.” This assertion is incorrect. Section 601 of the ordinance
creates an autonomous overlay district mandating its own restrictions above
and beyond those of the underlying district. See, e.g., 10 Rohan, supra
§ 53C.08[2][a], at 53C-444.90. “Land in an overlay district may be used in a
manner permitted in the underlying district only if and to the extent that such
use is also permitted in the overlay district.” 9 Rohan, supra § 53.21[6], at 53-
335. As the Town acknowledged at the hearing before the superior court, the
WWPD established a distinct zoning district which includes all land within 100
feet of the designated brooks and streams. See Ordinance § 601.4.1. Just as
the boundaries of a residential district are not a setback for the permitted uses
of an abutting zone, the boundaries of the WWPD do not merely serve as a
setback requirement incidental to the otherwise permitted uses of the
underlying zone. See Harrington, 152 N.H. at 78. The boundaries of the
WWPD establish a distinct area within which certain uses, including the
construction of permanent buildings, are not permitted.
Moreover, the ordinance states: “Non-accessory buildings closer than
fifty (50) feet to the W.W.P.D. shall require review by planning staff.”
Ordinance § 601.4.9. This supports our determination because it would be
illogical to conclude that the boundaries of the WWPD are a mere setback when
the WWPD has explicitly established a fifty-foot setback from its boundaries.
Because the superior court did not err in ruling that the ZBA improperly
granted an equitable waiver from a use restriction, we affirm.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
6