THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-371
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL P. HYNES
Argued: March 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 5, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Elizabeth J. Baker, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Daniel P. Hynes, appeals his conviction after a
jury trial in Superior Court (Barry, J.) of one count of theft by extortion. See
RSA 637:5, II(i) (2007). We affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant is an
attorney who was admitted to the New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bars in
2006. In December of that year, he sent a “Cease and Desist/Demand Letter”
to Claudia Lambert, the owner of Claudia’s Signature Salon in Concord (the
salon). The letter, written on “Daniel P. Hynes Esq.” letterhead and noting his
admission to the New Hampshire Bar, stated:
I am writing in regards to your company’s policy of pricing for
different types of haircuts. It has been brought to my attention that
your business charges $25 for haircuts but $18 for a Men’s cut
and $12 for a children [sic] haircut. Such a distinction in price
based on gender and age is discrimination in violation of the law.
Accordingly, I demand you immediately cease this unfair pricing
and charge customers in a more appropriate manner, such as by
the length of their hair or the amount of time it would take.
The letter claimed that the salon’s practice was both unlawfully discriminatory
in violation of RSA 354-A:17 (2009), and constituted an unfair trade practice in
violation of RSA chapter 358-A (2009). The letter went on to state:
I demand that you immediately cease your unlawful practice of
charging for haircuts based upon age and gender. Should you not
comply I will be forced to file a complaint with the State
Commission for Human Rights while reserving all rights to remove
and file in Superior Court. In addition, I demand payment in the
amount of $1000 in order to avoid litigation . . . . I believe $1000
is a fair amount as it is the minimum that would be awarded for
an unfair trade practice alone. You have ten (10) days to comply
. . . . Should you fail to comply additional steps will be taken
including filing with the State Commission for Human Rights and
potential removal to Superior Court. If such action is necessary I
will seek all remedies available including but not limited to an
injunction, damages for discrimination, damages for the unfair
trade practice, ill-gotten gains, punitive damages, attorney fees and
costs. If you object or otherwise wish to discuss the above matter
you may have your attorney contact me.
The letter was signed “Daniel P. Hynes Esq.”
At some point after receiving the letter, Lambert’s husband, Bernard
Nardi, called the defendant to see if they could “work out a settlement.” During
the ensuing conversation, the defendant indicated he was not a client of the
salon and had found it, along with its prices, on the Internet. Nardi offered,
and the defendant accepted, $500 to settle the matter. The defendant then
prepared settlement documents reflecting the agreement, which he faxed to
Nardi’s real estate business office. The documents indicated that, in
consideration of five hundred dollars received, the defendant would discharge
2
the salon from any claims and demands regarding its alleged discriminatory
practice. A meeting was scheduled to execute the documents.
Nardi subsequently contacted the New Hampshire Attorney General’s
Office, and it was determined that an investigator would attend the settlement
meeting posing as Lambert’s business partner. At the settlement meeting, the
defendant again stated that he did not have a client. He further indicated that
he, personally, would keep the $500 he received from Nardi, and that he was
currently in negotiations with other attorneys in response to similar letters he
had sent out. The investigator executed the settlement agreement, providing
$500 to the defendant. After taking possession of the $500, the defendant was
arrested and charged with theft by extortion. See RSA 637:5, II(i).
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that his conduct
is not prohibited by RSA 637:5, II(i), and, even if it is, the statute is
unconstitutional. The trial court denied the motion, and the defendant was
subsequently convicted. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) does not prohibit
his conduct, either because it does not include a threat to sue, or because he
stood to substantially benefit from the threatened conduct. In the alternative,
he asserts that RSA 637:5, II(i) is unconstitutionally vague and overbroad.
Finally, he argues that the trial court improperly instructed the jury. We
address each argument in turn.
II. Scope of RSA 637:5, II(i)
RSA 637:5, I (2007) provides: “A person is guilty of theft as he obtains or
exercises control over the property of another by extortion and with a purpose
to deprive him thereof.” The statute provides eight specific circumstances in
which extortion occurs, as well as a catch-all provision, under which the State
charged the defendant. RSA 637:5, II(a)-(i). The catch-all provision states that
extortion occurs when a person threatens to “[d]o any other act which would
not in itself substantially benefit him but which would harm substantially any
other person with respect to that person’s health, safety, business, calling,
career, financial condition, reputation, or personal relationships.” RSA 637:5,
II(i).
The defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II does not prohibit his conduct
because none of its eight specific provisions includes a threat to file a lawsuit.
In addition, he asserts that the term “substantially benefit” encompasses the
kind of non-pecuniary satisfaction he would receive by ending the salon’s
alleged discrimination, and that this provision was satisfied by his standing to
bring suit against the salon under RSA chapter 354-A (2009).
3
Resolution of this issue requires that we interpret RSA 637:5, II(i), which
presents a question of law that we review de novo. State v. Gallagher, 157 N.H.
421, 423 (2008). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter
of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered
as a whole. Id. at 422. We first examine the language of the statute, and,
where possible, we apply the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used.
Id. at 422-23. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language it did
not see fit to include. State v. Langill, 157 N.H. 77, 84 (2008). Further, we
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id.
The defendant first asserts that we should interpret RSA 637:5, II(i) as
excluding any threat to sue, regardless of whether there is a basis for the
threatened suit, because it does not constitute the type of harm contemplated
by the statute. In support of this assertion, he argues that this type of threat
falls outside the core purpose of the extortion statute, and that including a
threat to sue in the statute would chill the right of access to the courts. The
defendant also argues that the rule of lenity supports his interpretation. We
disagree.
At common law, “extortion consisted of the corrupt taking of a fee by a
public officer, under color of his office, where no fee is due, or not so large a fee
is due, or the fee is not yet due.” State v. O’Flynn, 126 N.H. 706, 709 (1985)
(quotation and brackets omitted). “Beginning in the 19th century, many states
enacted extortion statutes to criminalize conduct that was extortionate but did
not fall within the ambit of the narrow crime of common law extortion.”
Rendelman v. State, 927 A.2d 468, 474 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2007), aff’d, 947
A.2d 546 (Md. 2008). This statutory form of extortion applied to both private
individuals and public officials, and made criminal “the act or practice of
obtaining something or compelling some action by illegal means, as by force or
coercion.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted). In New Hampshire, the
legislature has enlarged the scope of extortion to include “unlawful acquisitions
of property by means of threats,” O’Flynn, 126 N.H. at 709; see RSA 637:5, II
(2007).
Here, the defendant suggests that a threat to sue is inconsistent with the
purpose of the statute in part because the “threat of civil litigation . . . does not
give rise to the kind of intimidation that constitutes extortion.” While we agree
that simply threatening to institute a lawsuit does not, standing alone, carry
the inherent hallmarks of an extortionate act, our inquiry does not end there.
Unlike the other provisions within RSA 637:5, II, the plain language of RSA
637:5, II(i) does not simply evaluate the type of threat that was made; that is,
the substance of the threat. Rather, it requires us to consider both the threat’s
potential harm to the person threatened as well as its potential benefit to the
4
person making the threat. Thus, contrary to the defendant’s interpretation, we
cannot simply evaluate the threat on its face and disregard the circumstances
under which it was made. In order to make a proper determination as to these
additional factors, we must consider all of the circumstances surrounding that
threat on a case-by-case basis. We, therefore, cannot conclude, as a matter of
law, that there are no circumstances under which a threat to sue would
constitute extortion.
We recognize that several courts have drawn a contrary conclusion,
finding that a threat to sue, even if baseless, does not constitute extortion. See
United States v. Pendergraft, 297 F.3d 1198, 1207-08 (11th Cir. 2002); First
Pacific Bancorp, Inc. v. Bro, 847 F.2d 542, 547 (9th Cir. 1988); I.S. Joseph Co.,
Inc. v. J. Lauritzen A/S, 751 F.2d 265, 267 (8th Cir. 1984); Rendelman, 927
A.2d at 483. The focus in the majority of these cases is whether the threat
constitutes a wrongful means to achieve a wrongful objective, as defined by the
Hobbs Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1951 (2000). See, e.g., Pendergraft, 297 F.3d at 1205-
06. For example, in Rendelman, the court stated:
A wrongful purpose does not necessarily make the means
threatened to accomplish it wrongful. The means threatened must
be of a sort that will instill fear . . . . The threat of litigation, being
a lawful means in which a third party assigned by government to
decide disputes will decide that very dispute, is not such a means.
Rendelman, 927 A.2d at 482. Similarly, in I.S. Joseph Co., the United States
Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit noted that “only the most liberal
construction of the word ‘fear’ in the extortion statute could make it apply to”
the threat to file a civil action. I.S. Joseph Co., 751 F.2d at 267.
However, we find these cases distinguishable, because the courts’
analyses considered the wrongful means – the threat – independent from the
wrongful objective – the taking of property. As such, the type of threat made is
a determinative factor. RSA 637:5, II(i) does not make such a distinction.
Rather, as discussed above, it more broadly considers the consequences of the
threat, both to the person making it and to its intended recipient.
Furthermore, RSA 637:5, II(i) does not require there to be fear as a result of the
threat, but, rather, only that there be substantial harm. We do not believe that
these terms are interchangeable.
Further supporting our interpretation, other courts have held that an
extortion conviction may be supported by the threat to bring a civil suit. The
United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit has indicated that, under
federal law, an extortion charge may be based upon the threat of litigation if
there is no basis for the threatened suit. See United States v. Sturm, 870 F.2d
769, 774 (1st Cir. 1989) (“It would be unjust to convict A of extortion unless
5
she knew she had no claim to the property that she allegedly sought to
extort.”). Additionally, in construing a statute almost identical to RSA 637:5,
II(i), a New Jersey court upheld a conviction for theft by extortion based upon a
demand for money coupled with a threat to sue. See State v. Roth, 673 A.2d
285, 290-91 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div.), cert. denied, 679 A.2d 655 (N.J. 1996).
We also disagree with the defendant’s contention that this interpretation
chills an individual’s right of access to the courts. By no means does our
holding imply that every demand for money, buttressed by a threat to sue,
constitutes extortion. Rather, we are simply denying the defendant’s
contention that a threat to sue may never constitute extortion. Moreover, we
decline to apply the rule of lenity in support of the defendant’s interpretation.
The rule of lenity “forbids interpretation of a federal statute so as to increase
the statutory penalty” when legislative intent is unclear and “is applicable only
where statutory ambiguity has been found.” State v. Ravell, 155 N.H. 280, 284
(2007) (quotation omitted). The statute at issue does not seek to increase a
statutory penalty, and we have not found it ambiguous.
The defendant next argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) does not cover his
conduct because he stood to “substantially benefit” from his actions. He
argues that the term “benefit” is not limited to tangible interests, but
“encompasses advantages to the sense of well-being,” including his
“satisfaction in eliminating an instance of gender-based price discrimination.”
We disagree.
Under the defendant’s interpretation of “benefit,” the extortion statute
could be circumvented by any social injustice or generalized concern,
regardless of how attenuated the connection between it and the defendant or
whether he had sustained some actual injury to support the claim. In essence,
any perceived bias would be sufficient to evade a charge of extortion. We do
not believe the legislature intended such a result. We agree with the trial court
that the phrase “substantially benefit” is not so broad as to encompass “an
altruistic sense of accomplishment for ridding the world of a perceived
injustice.” Indeed, as Roth explained, this type of conceptual interpretation “is
far too abstract to constitute a substantial benefit under this statute; it
bespeaks of a societal goal, not personal gain. Allowing such a tenuous
advantage to fulfill the substantial benefit requirement would simply eviscerate
the statute.” Roth, 673 A.2d at 288-89. We agree and similarly conclude that
the defendant’s asserted general interest in ending discrimination is
insufficient to satisfy the “substantially benefit” element.
The defendant next argues that his standing to pursue a lawsuit under
RSA chapter 354-A removed him from the ambit of RSA 637:5, II(i) by
“substantially benefit[ting]” him. The dissent agrees in part, concluding that
6
the defendant had a good faith basis to believe that the threatened action had
merit. We disagree with both contentions.
We begin by noting that the defendant threatened the salon with a claim
under the Consumer Protection Act (CPA), RSA chapter 358-A, demanding
“$1000 in order to avoid litigation” because “$1000 is a fair amount as it is the
minimum that would be awarded for an unfair trade practice alone.” Even
assuming that the defendant marshaled a good faith argument that the salon
was engaging in a prohibited act, he fails to explain exactly how his threatened
CPA claim fits within the statutory language conferring private-party standing
upon only those “injured by another’s use of any method, act or practice
declared unlawful.” RSA 358-A:10, I (emphasis added); see, e.g., Remsburg v.
Docusearch, 149 N.H. 148, 160 (2003) (holding that person deceived by
investigator proper party to bring suit under CPA, notwithstanding lack of
privity with investigator). Although the CPA formed the basis for the
defendant’s demand of $1000, and although he maintained at trial that he had
standing under the CPA, he no longer presses this argument on appeal. The
defendant argues only that he had standing under RSA chapter 354-A. We
presume that, because this is his sole argument, the defendant premises his
$1000 demand to the salon upon the threatened RSA chapter 354-A action.
Among other things, RSA chapter 354-A prohibits unlawful
discriminatory practices in a place of public accommodation, RSA 354-A:17,
and permits only persons “aggrieved,” RSA 354-A:21, I(a) (2009); RSA 354-
A:21-a, I (2009), to complain of discriminatory practices. In the abstract, the
word “aggrieved” may leave room for advocacy regarding its intended meaning,
but no reasonable attorney would construe the term in a vacuum. The
defendant, who lacked a client and did not personally patronize the salon,
could not reasonably conclude that he was “aggrieved” by virtue of his general
interest in ending sex discrimination and its distressing effect upon him.
The State Commission for Human Rights presumes that all participants
in RSA chapter 354-A proceedings have direct interests. See N.H. Admin.
Rules, Hum 311.01(a) (permitting intervention only by “person or entity, other
than a party, having a direct interest in the outcome of the public adjudicative
hearing” (emphasis added)). Furthermore, we have never construed “aggrieved”
to confer standing in the absence of a direct and particularized interest. See
Babiarz v. Town of Grafton, 155 N.H. 757, 760 (2007) (holding, in construing
RSA 669:35 (2008) (amended 2008), that a “person aggrieved” by a ruling of the
board of recount has “an interest [in the election] which is special or superior
to that of a mere voter or member of the public” (quotation and brackets
omitted)); Goldstein v. Town of Bedford, 154 N.H. 393, 395 (2006) (holding, in
the context of a zoning board appeal pursuant to RSA 676:5, I, that to be a
“person aggrieved” a petitioner must demonstrate “some direct definite interest
in the outcome of the proceedings,” and, further, that we will not extend
7
standing to “all persons in the community who might feel that they are hurt by
a local administrator’s decision” (quotations omitted)).
If any doubt remained about the meaning of “aggrieved,” it is resolved
after reviewing the monetary remedies available to an “aggrieved” person. If an
“unlawful discriminatory practice” is found in a public accommodation action
brought before the commission, the claimant may receive, within the discretion
of the commission, only “compensatory damages.” RSA 354-A:21, II(d) (2009);
see Black’s Law Dictionary 416 (8th ed. 2004) (defining compensatory damages
as “[d]amages sufficient in amount to indemnify the injured person for the loss
suffered”); see, e.g., Smith v. Cote, 128 N.H. 231, 243 (1986). Furthermore, the
defendant’s threat to seek punitive damages, a remedy unavailable in this state
absent statutory authorization, RSA 507:16 (1997), is entirely baseless because
RSA chapter 354-A authorizes only the assessment of an “administrative fine”
and that fine is payable only to “the general fund.” RSA 354-A:21, II(d). Even
in an action removed to superior court, the statute authorizes only “damages
and relief which could have been awarded by the commission, except that in
lieu of an administrative fine, enhanced compensatory damages may be
awarded.” RSA 354-A:21-a, I (emphasis added). Enhanced compensatory
damages are, as their name indicates, compensatory and not punitive in
nature. See Vratsenes v. N. H. Auto, Inc., 112 N.H. 71, 73 (1972). Thus, by
incorporating the idea of compensation into each monetary remedy payable to
the public accommodation claimant, the legislature quite clearly contemplated
that such claimants will have suffered direct harm.
We respectfully disagree with the dissent’s conclusion that the defendant
had a good faith basis to argue for standing under RSA chapter 354-A. See
Kukene v. Genualdo, 145 N.H. 1, 3 (2000) (“A frivolous claim lacks . . . any
reasonable claim in the law as it is, or as it might arguably be held to be.”
(quotation omitted)). A review of Scarborough v. R.T.P. Enterprises, Inc., 120
N.H. 707 (1980), shows that it does not establish a “substantial possibility,”
Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 110 comment d at 172
(2000), that a tribunal would accept the contention that a claimant may bring
an RSA chapter 354-A public accommodation action for damages without
having suffered the slightest direct harm.
Scarborough centered upon an employment dispute and the defendant-
employer’s challenged misconduct was directly applied to the plaintiff. We
looked to the Supreme Court’s decision in Teamsters v. United States, 431 U.S.
324, 358 (1977), and rejected the contention that a plaintiff failed to establish a
prima facie showing of employment discrimination. Scarborough, 120 N.H. at
710. We said that, in order to prove a violation of RSA 354-A:8, I (current
version at RSA 354-A:7, I (2009)), a plaintiff need not give the defendant the
opportunity to reject her because she could demonstrate a violation by showing
a “failure to fairly consider her because of her sex.” Id. “A charge that an
8
employer failed to give equal consideration to an applicant would never require
the applicant to wait until she is formally rejected because the offense is
complete before that time.” Id. at 711.
Unlike the plaintiff in Scarborough who actually contacted the defendant
employer and attended a job interview, Scarborough v. Arnold, 117 N.H. 803,
805 (1977), the defendant here had no preexisting relationship with the salon
before threatening litigation and, furthermore, he suffered no direct,
compensable harm. Neither is there here, as there was in Scarborough, federal
or other persuasive authority supporting such a remarkable extension of the
compensatory monetary remedies within RSA chapter 354-A. While the
defendant pointed at trial to Massachusetts’ “identical” public accommodation
law, its monetary remedies, unlike RSA chapter 354-A, include punitive
damages. See Mass. Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 151B, § 9 (West 2004). Furthermore,
it is well established that “[t]o qualify as a ‘person aggrieved,’ a person must
allege substantial injury as the direct result of the action complained of.”
Mass. Elec. v. Mass. Com’n Against Discrim., 375 N.E.2d 1192, 1204 (Mass.
1978) (construing public accommodation administrative remedy within Mass.
Gen. Laws Ann. ch. 151B, § 5 (West 2004)).
Turning to the circumstances of this case, we conclude that RSA 637:5,
II(i) applies to the defendant’s conduct. It is apparent that the defendant,
acting as an attorney, sent a letter to the salon demanding money and
threatening to file a lawsuit if it did not pay him. The defendant did not have a
client who had suffered from the alleged discriminatory pricing at the salon,
nor had he been a client of the salon himself. In fact, the money the defendant
demanded, and eventually received, was for his own personal gain. For the
reasons set forth more fully above, we fail to see how the threatened action
would have substantially benefited the defendant. As the State aptly explains,
it was the defendant’s “threat to bring an action which . . . as an attorney [he]
knew he could not pursue, coupled with his demand for a cash payment to
which he was not legally entitled, that makes the defendant’s conduct
criminal.” We, therefore, conclude that the trial court did not err in denying
the defendant’s motion to dismiss.
III. Constitutionality of RSA 637:5, II(i)
The defendant next argues that, even if RSA 637:5, II(i) prohibits his
conduct, we must vacate his conviction because the statute is
unconstitutionally vague on its face and as applied to him under both the
United States and New Hampshire Constitutions. In addition, the defendant
argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) is unconstitutionally overbroad, both on its face
and as applied.
9
We review questions of constitutional law de novo. State v. MacElman,
154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006). We first address the defendant’s claims under the
State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. Id. In
reviewing a legislative act, we presume it to be constitutional and will not
declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds. State v. Gubitosi, 157 N.H.
720, 727 (2008). In other words, we will not hold a statute to be
unconstitutional unless a clear and substantial conflict exists between it and
the constitution. Id.
A. Vagueness
“Where a defendant’s vagueness claim does not involve a fundamental
right, a facial attack on the challenged statutory scheme is unwarranted.”
MacElman, 154 N.H. at 307. Here, the defendant argues that his claim
involves fundamental rights because the statute implicates his rights to free
speech and access to the courts under Part I, Articles 14 and 22 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution. We assume, without deciding, that the defendant has articulated
a fundamental or First Amendment challenge. We will therefore first review his
facial challenge, and then consider his as-applied challenge. See id.
A statute can be impermissibly vague for either of two independent
reasons: (1) it fails to provide people of ordinary intelligence a reasonable
opportunity to understand the conduct it prohibits; or (2) it authorizes or even
encourages arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement. Id. “A statute is not
unconstitutionally vague as long as its prohibitions are set out in terms that
the ordinary person exercising ordinary common sense can sufficiently
understand and comply with.” State v. Lamarche, 157 N.H. 337, 340 (2008)
(quotation omitted). “In addition, mathematical exactness is not required in a
penal statute, nor is a law invalid merely because it could have been drafted
with greater precision.” MacElman, 154 N.H. at 307 (quotation and brackets
omitted). A party challenging a statute as void for vagueness bears a heavy
burden of proof in view of the strong presumption favoring a statute’s
constitutionality. Id.
The defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) is void on its face because the
phrase “substantially benefit” is vague. Specifically, the defendant notes that
the statute does not specify a required mental state or attach an objective
measure in defining that phrase. He further notes that the phrase is not of the
type that needs to be expressed in general terms. He argues it is the “absence
of all of these saving characteristics” that makes RSA 637:5, II(i) vague on its
face.
We conclude that RSA 637:5, II(i) provides a person of ordinary
intelligence a reasonable opportunity to understand the conduct it prohibits. It
10
is well established that the necessary specificity required to uphold a statute
“need not be contained in the statute itself, but rather, in the context of related
statutes, prior decisions, or generally accepted usage.” State v. Porelle, 149
N.H. 420, 423 (2003) (quotation omitted). Here, read in the context of generally
accepted usage, the phrase “substantially benefit” is plain, unambiguous, and
easily understandable. The term “substantial” is defined as “something having
substance or actual existence . . . : something having good substance or actual
value.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2280 (unabridged ed.
2002). Webster’s defines “benefit” as “to be useful or profitable . . . : become
protected, aided, or advanced.” Id. at 204. Taken together, the terms give clear
notice to a person of ordinary intelligence that the statute prohibits a threat
that would not provide him or her with some actual advantage that is real and
definite.
Moreover, although “a scienter requirement in a statute ameliorates” a
vagueness concern, MacElman, 154 N.H. at 308, the lack of such a
requirement does not necessitate invalidating the statute as unconstitutionally
vague. The defendant argues that the legislature could have provided an
illustrative list to help demonstrate the type of interests encompassed in
“benefit,” or at least used a more specific phrase than “substantially benefit.” A
law is not invalid, however, merely because it could have been drafted with
greater precision. Id. at 307. We conclude that the phrase “substantially
benefit” is sufficiently clear, and it therefore is not unconstitutionally vague on
its face.
Turning to the defendant’s as-applied challenge, we conclude that the
statute provided him with a reasonable opportunity to know that his conduct
was proscribed by the statute. See Porelle, 149 N.H. at 424. The defendant
asserts that it fails to give adequate notice that a threat to sue falls within the
scope of extortion, arguing that the “disagreement [among courts]
. . . evidences an ambiguity” in the statute as to whether it would apply under
these circumstances. We find this argument unavailing. The plain language of
the statute makes clear that it applies to a threat to “[d]o any act which would
not in itself substantially benefit him but which would harm substantially”
another person. RSA 637:5, II(i) (emphasis added). Thus, the statute neither
explicitly, nor by implication, excludes a baseless threat to sue. The defendant
also argues that the statute failed to provide him with adequate notice that his
antipathy towards gender discrimination was insufficient to satisfy the
“substantially benefit” requirement. For the reasons set forth more fully above,
we find this argument equally unavailing. Reading the statute as a whole, the
defendant had a reasonable opportunity to know that the term “benefit” would
require, at the very least, standing to bring the threatened suit. Further, the
defendant was not a client of the salon, nor did he represent one. Thus, he
had not sustained even a nominal injury as a result of the salon’s alleged
discrimination to support his claim. We conclude that a person of ordinary
11
intelligence would understand that RSA 637:5, II(i) applies to his conduct, and
reject his as-applied claim.
Because the defendant does not argue that the statute may be subject to
arbitrary enforcement, we do not address it. Cf. Lamarche, 157 N.H. at 340.
Further, because the Federal Constitution offers no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances, compare Gonzales v.
Carhart, 550 U.S. 124, 148-49 (2007), with MacElman, 154 N.H. at 307, we
reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
B. Overbreadth
“The purpose of the overbreadth doctrine is to protect those persons who,
although their speech or conduct is constitutionally protected, may well refrain
from exercising their rights for fear of criminal sanctions by a statute
susceptible of application to protected expression.” Gubitosi, 157 N.H. at 726-
27 (quotation omitted). In other words, “[a] statute is void for overbreadth if it
attempts to control conduct by means which invade areas of protected
freedom.” MacElman, 154 N.H. at 310 (quotation omitted). “While the
Constitution gives significant protection from overbroad laws that chill speech
within the First Amendment’s vast and privileged sphere, the application of the
overbreadth doctrine is strong medicine to be employed only as a last resort.”
Gubitosi, 157 N.H. at 727 (quotation omitted)
If a statute is found to be substantially overbroad, the statute
must be invalidated unless the court can supply a limiting
construction or partial invalidation that narrows the scope of the
statute to constitutionally acceptable applications. If, on the other
hand, a statute is not substantially overbroad, then whatever
overbreadth may exist should be cured through case-by-case
analysis of the fact situations to which its sanctions, assertedly,
may not be applied.
Id. at 727 (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) is overbroad as it applies to
him because his conduct is constitutionally protected. Specifically, the
defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) infringes upon both his freedom of
speech, see U.S. CONST. amend. I; N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 22, and his right to
petition the government for redress of his grievances, see U.S. CONST. amend.
I; N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 14, 32. He further argues that his prosecution
under RSA 637:5, II(i) is not permissible as a reasonable time, place and
manner restriction. We first address the defendant’s arguments under the
12
State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball,
124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
The defendant’s arguments can be collectively disposed of by simply
recognizing that, although we have never addressed this issue, we are not
inclined to find the defendant’s action protected under the State Constitution.
It is well established that the First Amendment does not immunize a person’s
pursuit of baseless litigation. See Bill Johnson’s Restaurants, Inc. v. NLRB,
461 U.S. 731, 743 (1983); Wolfe v. George, 385 F. Supp. 2d 1004, 1010 (N.D.
Cal. 2005), aff’d, 486 F.3d 1120 (9th Cir. 2007); People v. Richardson, 181 P.3d
340, 345 (Colo. Ct. App.), cert. denied, 2008 WL 1850965 (Colo. 2008). The
United States Supreme Court has noted:
The first amendment interests involved in private litigation –
compensation for violated rights and interests, the psychological
benefits of vindication, public airing of disputed facts – are not
advanced when the litigation is based on intentional falsehoods or
on knowingly frivolous claims. Furthermore, since sham litigation
by definition does not involve a bona fide grievance, it does not
come within the first amendment right to petition.
Bill Johnson’s Restaurants, 461 U.S. at 743 (quotation omitted).
Litigation is objectively baseless if “no reasonable litigant could
realistically expect success on the merits.” Professional Real Estate Investors,
Inc. v. Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., 508 U.S. 49, 60 (1993). As
discussed, the defendant could not have realistically expected success on the
merits of the threatened suit where he had neither standing nor a good faith
argument to pursue the threatened claim.
Not only was the threatened litigation objectively baseless, but in
threatening such litigation the defendant was motivated by an “unlawful
purpose.” BE&K Constr. Co. v. NLRB, 536 U.S. 516, 531 (2002). The jury
concluded that the defendant “obtain[ed] or exercise[d] control over the
property of another by extortion and with a purpose to deprive him thereof,”
RSA 637:5, I, where he sought out the salon; sent a demand letter identifying
himself as an attorney and threatening baseless litigation; and ultimately used
the threat as leverage to obtain a settlement for his personal gain. Cf. R.
Rotunda & J. Nowak, Treatise on Constitutional Law: Substance and
Procedure § 20.54(e)(ii), at 632-33 (4th ed. 2008) (“The line between protected
and unprotected litigation is crossed when the party’s purpose is not to win a
favorable judgment against a competitor but to harass him, and deter others,
by the process itself – regardless of outcome – of litigating.”). The insidious
nature of these circumstances distinguishes the defendant’s threat to institute
13
suit from the typical, valid demand letter and removes the constitutional
protection it otherwise would have enjoyed.
Because application of RSA 637:5, II(i) to the defendant’s actions does
not impermissibly infringe upon activity protected by the State Constitution, we
conclude that such application is not unconstitutionally overbroad. Thus, we
do not reach the defendant’s argument concerning whether his prosecution
constitutes a reasonable time, place and manner restriction upon protected
speech. Because the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater
protection, see Bill Johnson’s Restaurants, 461 U.S. at 743, we reach the same
result under the Federal Constitution.
The defendant next argues RSA 637:5, II(i) is unconstitutionally broad on
its face. We first address the defendant’s arguments under the State
Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. Ball, 124 N.H. at
231-33. The defendant argues that RSA 637:5, II(i) is facially overbroad
because it could cover several otherwise legitimate scenarios, such as an expert
who threatens not to testify until his fee is paid, or a consumer who threatens
to complain to the Better Business Bureau if he does not receive a refund for a
defective product. The defendant asserts that, under either scenario, the
prospective defendant is not benefited by the threatened act, but substantial
harm could be caused to the person threatened, thus falling within the scope of
RSA 637:5, II(i). We disagree.
RSA 637:5, II(i) is a catch-all definition of extortion following eight
particularized examples of the crime. The lack of particularization in RSA
637:5, II(i) does not sweep all conceivable fact-scenarios within its proscription,
but only the same type as the enumerated acts. See State v. Sideris, 157 N.H.
258, 262 (2008) (construing CPA). The common thread between the eight
particularized examples, as we recognized in O’Flynn, is the “unlawful
acquisition[] of property by means of threats.” O’Flynn, 126 N.H. at 709
(emphasis added). Similarly, in United States v. Jackson, 180 F.3d 55 (2d Cir.
1999) (reversing), reh’g granted, 196 F.3d 383 (1999) (affirming on basis of
harmless error), cert. denied, 530 U.S. 1267 (2000), the Second Circuit
concluded that the term “extort,” although undefined within 18 U.S.C. § 875(d)
(2000), nevertheless proscribed acts within “the traditional concept of extortion,
which includes an element of wrongfulness.” Jackson, 180 F.3d at 70. This
implicit concept of “wrongfulness” was evident, in part, because extortion
appeared within other statutes relating to acts such as threats to kidnap. Id.
at 67.
Simply put, the term “extortion,” as illustrated by the eight particular
examples and the language within O’Flynn, impliedly excludes legitimate
claims to property through threats. See State v. Pauling, 69 P.3d 331, 336
(Wash.) (adopting limiting construction of certain provisions within extortion
14
statute based upon Jackson), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 986 (2003). Thus,
“whatever overbreadth may exist should be cured through case-by-case
analysis.” State v. Brobst, 151 N.H. 420, 422 (2004) (quotation omitted).
Because the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater
protection under these circumstances, compare Broadrick v. Oklahoma, 413
U.S. 601, 615 (1973) (setting out substantial overbreadth doctrine), with
Brobst, 151 N.H. at 422-25 (applying substantial overbreadth doctrine under
State Constitution), we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution
as we do under the State Constitution.
IV. Jury Instructions
The defendant asserts that the trial court inadequately instructed the
jury as to the mental state elements of theft by extortion. Specifically, he
argues that the court’s instruction was flawed in that it “did not require the
jury to make a finding as to whether [he] actually knew the [threatened] suit
lacked a basis.” This issue, however, was not preserved for appeal.
As a general rule, we will not consider grounds of objections not
specified or called to the court’s attention at the trial. This
requirement, grounded in common sense and judicial economy,
affords the trial court an opportunity to correct an error it may
have made and is particularly appropriate where an alleged error
involves a jury instruction.
State v. Eldredge, 135 N.H. 562, 564 (1992) (quotation omitted). Here, the
defendant made no objection to the court’s jury instruction in this regard. In
fact, the jury instruction proposed by the defendant on the elements of the
crime charged does not raise the issue of the defendant’s knowledge.
Therefore, we conclude this issue has not been preserved for appeal, and we
decline to address it.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, J., concurred; DALIANIS, J., dissented.
DALIANIS, J., dissenting. The majority concludes that RSA 637:5, II(b)
(2007) is not overbroad as applied to the defendant, Daniel P. Hynes, because it
finds that his threatened lawsuit was “objectively baseless.” I disagree with
this conclusion, and, therefore, respectfully, dissent.
The majority concludes that the threatened suit is objectively baseless
because the defendant “could not have realistically expected success on the
merits of the threatened suit where he had no standing to pursue it.” In my
15
view, however, the defendant could have realistically believed that he had
standing. We have never, before today, articulated that a person must have
some definite or special interest in the outcome in order to be an aggrieved
person under RSA chapter 354-A (1995 & Supp. 2008). Cf. State v. Panarello,
157 N.H. 204, 209-10 (2008) (in plain error context, when this court has never
before decided issue, trial court’s error could not have been clear or obvious).
Further, there is at least some suggestion in our jurisprudence, albeit in the
context of employment discrimination, that to bring this type of claim, a person
need not actually sustain an injury as a result of a discriminatory practice.
See Scarborough v. R.T.P. Enterprises, Inc., 120 N.H. 707, 710-11 (1980).
While I agree with the majority that our employment discrimination cases can
be distinguished from the instant case, the fact remains that, until today, we
have not distinguished them.
Given these two factors, I would conclude that it was not objectively
baseless for the defendant to believe he possessed standing to pursue a claim
under RSA chapter 354-A. See also N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 3.1. (lawyer may
assert issue when there is good faith argument for extension, modification or
reversal of existing law).
16