THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry District Court
No. 2008-826
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JESSICA KELLEY
Argued: October 21, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 4, 2009
Orville B. Fitch II, acting attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, orally), for the State.
Timothy P. Gurshin, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Jessica Kelley, appeals her conviction after
a bench trial in Derry District Court (Coughlin, J.) of driving while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor (DWI). See RSA 265-A:2, I (Supp. 2008). We
affirm.
A reasonable trier of fact could have found the following. At 12:35 a.m.
on April 11, 2008, the defendant was driving north on Rockingham Road in
Londonderry toward Derry. Her car crossed over the double yellow line into the
southbound lane, nearly side-swiping Londonderry Police Officer Keith Lee’s
cruiser. Making a U-turn, Lee turned on his emergency lights and stopped the
defendant. She admitted to having consumed alcohol, and he observed several
signs that she was intoxicated. He administered the horizontal gaze
nystagmus (HGN), “one-leg stand” and walk-and-turn field sobriety tests. He
determined that the defendant failed all three tests.
At trial, the defendant moved to strike evidence of the HGN test, arguing
it was inadmissible because Lee testified that he did not administer it correctly.
See State v. Dahood, 148 N.H. 723, 735 (2002). The trial court impliedly
denied the motion and admitted the evidence.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred in
admitting evidence of the HGN test because Lee failed to administer it correctly.
The State concedes that the test results were improperly admitted, but argues
that any error was harmless.
An error is not harmless unless the State proves beyond a reasonable
doubt that it did not affect the verdict. State v. Rogers, 159 N.H. 50, 60 (2009).
In deciding whether the State has met its burden, we consider the strength of
the State’s evidence presented at trial, as well as the character of the excluded
evidence, including whether the evidence was inconsequential in relation to the
State’s evidence. Id. “An error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if
the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature,
quantity, or weight and if the inadmissible evidence is merely cumulative or
inconsequential in relation to the State’s evidence of guilt.” Id.
Here, other evidence of the defendant’s intoxication was of an
overwhelming nature, and the HGN test evidence was merely cumulative or
inconsequential. Lee initially pulled over the defendant for crossing over the
double yellow line into the southbound lane, which nearly resulted in a crash
with his cruiser. When he pulled her over, she brought her vehicle to a sudden
stop. Her speech was slurred, her face red and her eyes glassy. She emitted a
strong odor of alcohol and she admitted to having consumed alcohol that
evening. She had difficulty opening her car door, used the door for leverage to
get out, and was unsteady on her feet. She failed the one-leg stand and the
walk-and-turn field sobriety tests. Even without the HGN evidence, the
remaining evidence presented by the State proved beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant was guilty of DWI, since the State was required only to
prove that her ability to operate her vehicle was “impaired to any degree.”
State v. MacDonald, 156 N.H. 803, 804 (2008) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, the trial court’s failure to exclude the HGN evidence was harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt. Cf. State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 712 (2003)
(holding that evidence of intoxication was sufficient where defendant admitted
2
having consumed three beers, smelled of alcohol, had slurred speech, blood
shot eyes, swayed while standing, and performed poorly on field sobriety tests).
This case is distinguishable from State v. O’Maley, 156 N.H. 125, 128-30
(2007), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 2856 (2009). In that case, we held that, while
there was no error in admitting a blood sample collection form and a laboratory
director’s testimony about the defendant’s blood test results, had there been
error, it would not have been harmless. O’Maley, 156 N.H. at 129-30. In
O’Maley, the strength and character of the excluded evidence differed
significantly from that at issue here, and the alternative evidence of the
defendant’s guilt was not of an overwhelming nature. Id. at 130. The O’Maley
defendant was involved in a single-car accident, admitted to having been
drinking and driving and emitted a strong odor of alcohol, but did not have red
or glassy eyes, did not sway, and was not asked to complete any field sobriety
tests. Id. Thus, in O’Maley, evidence of the defendant’s blood alcohol content
was not merely cumulative. Id. Moreover, in contrast to HGN evidence, blood
alcohol evidence is sufficient, on its own, to constitute prima facie evidence of
intoxication. See RSA 265-A:11 (Supp. 2008); Dahood, 148 N.H. at 734.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to support
her conviction. The State argues that this issue was not preserved by a
contemporaneous and specific objection or motion at trial and that we cannot
review it for plain error because the defendant did not analyze the sufficiency of
the evidence under the plain error doctrine. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. We assume,
without deciding that the defendant preserved her challenge to the sufficiency
of the evidence in the trial court, but we agree with the State that the evidence
was sufficient to convict.
To convict the defendant, the State was required to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant drove or attempted to drive a vehicle upon
a way while she was “under the influence of intoxicating liquor.” RSA 265-A:2,
I. To prove that the defendant was “under the influence of intoxicating liquor,”
the State need only prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was
impaired to any degree. MacDonald, 156 N.H. at 804.
The parties disagree about the applicable standard of review for the
defendant’s sufficiency claim. The defendant contends that “the lack of any
chemical evidence renders the State’s case a circumstantial case,” and that,
“[c]onsequently, the State’s evidence had to establish impairment beyond a
reasonable doubt, to the exclusion of all rational conclusions except guilt.” In
support of this contention, she cites State v. Lorton, 149 N.H. 732, 733-35
(2003), in which we reversed a DWI conviction for lack of sufficient evidence.
The defendant essentially argues that Lorton establishes that any evidence
other than chemical test results, including direct observations of a defendant’s
behavior, constitutes circumstantial evidence of impairment. The State
3
counters that if “Lorton can be said to hold that either a witness’s direct
observations of intoxicated behavior or a witness’s opinion that a defendant is
impaired based on such observations is always circumstantial evidence of
impairment,” it “should be clarified or overruled.” Both parties analyze
ambiguities in our holding in Lorton. We, therefore, take this opportunity to
clarify Lorton’s implied characterization of all non-chemical evidence as being
circumstantial evidence of intoxication. In doing so, however, we emphasize
that “[t]he law makes no distinction between direct evidence of a fact and
evidence of circumstances from which the existence of a fact may be inferred.”
State v. Kelley, 120 N.H. 14, 16 (1980); see also 2 C. Fishman, Jones on
Evidence § 11:7, at 270 (7th ed. 1994) (“It is axiomatic that circumstantial
evidence can suffice to sustain a verdict . . . .”); United States v. Andrino, 501
F.2d 1373, 1378 (9th Cir. 1974) (“Circumstantial evidence is not less probative
than direct evidence, and, in some instances, is even more reliable.”).
In Lorton, the following evidence was supported by the record. A trooper
stopped the defendant for making a right hand turn without a signal. Lorton,
149 N.H at 732. The trooper observed that the defendant smelled of alcohol,
his eyes were red and glassy and his face was flushed. Id. The defendant
performed poorly on the walk-and-turn and the one-leg stand field sobriety
tests; however, the roadway edge where the tests were conducted was wet. Id.
at 733. The defendant admitted to having consumed alcohol but refused to
take a breath test. Id. In holding that there was insufficient evidence to
convict, we stated: “[W]e cannot say . . . that the circumstantial evidence in
this case excluded all rational conclusions except that the defendant was
guilty.” Id. This statement indeed suggests that we considered the trooper’s
direct observations to be circumstantial, as opposed to direct, evidence of the
defendant’s intoxication or impairment.
In reaching our holding in Lorton, however, we relied in part upon dicta
in State v. Arsenault, 115 N.H. 109, 111 (1975), where we stated: “Admittedly
the results of the field sobriety tests do not possess the scientific reliability or
the same degree of certitude attributed to the chemical analysis of the alcoholic
blood content by a breathalyzer or other such methods.” In Arsenault, the
issues were whether evidence obtained from field sobriety tests is competent
despite its lack of scientific basis and whether such evidence was admissible in
light of a defendant’s constitutional right not to incriminate himself. Id. at 110.
We held that the evidence is competent and admissible. Id. at 112-13. We did
not discuss whether it constituted direct or circumstantial evidence of
impairment. We noted, however, that:
It has been the law in this jurisdiction for more than a century
that[ ] [i]ntoxication is a fact open to the observation of every man;
and no special skill or learning is requisite to discern it. Untrained
laymen have always been permitted to testify as to intoxication on
4
the basis of sight, smell, speech and locomotion. It is also a
commonly recognized fact that the consumption of alcohol impairs
coordination, judgment and alertness.
Id. at 111 (citation, quotations, brackets and ellipsis omitted); see State v.
Gowen, 150 N.H. 286, 289 (2003).
Direct evidence “is evidence which, if accepted as true, directly proves the
fact for which it is offered, without the need for the factfinder to draw any
inferences.” C. Fishman, supra § 11:6, at 268 n.33. In New Hampshire, direct
evidence has been defined to include “the testimony of a person who claims to
have personal knowledge of facts about the crime charged such as an
eyewitness.” State v. Newcomb, 140 N.H. 72, 80 (1995) (quotation omitted).
Though the issue was not before the Arsenault court, nothing in that
opinion runs contrary to these definitions of direct evidence. Where a
defendant is charged with DWI, as in any other case, the State could, in theory,
present any type of “evidence which, if accepted as true, directly proves”
impairment, “without the need for the factfinder to draw any inferences.” C.
Fishman, supra § 11:6, at 268 n.33. It follows that chemical evidence does not
constitute the sole form of direct evidence of impairment. In this case, for
example, Lee observed directly that the defendant crossed the double yellow
line, brought her vehicle to a sudden stop, and that she displayed slow and
unsteady movements. She admitted to him that she had been drinking
alcohol. These facts together constitute direct evidence of impairment in the
context of the statute. Accord George v. State, 812 So. 2d 1103, 1105, 1107-
08 (Miss. Ct. App. 2001) (holding that testimony of a waitress who saw the
defendant drinking and thought he was “obviously intoxicated” was direct
evidence of intoxication (quotation omitted)); Nichols v. State, 591 N.E.2d 134,
137 (Ind. 1992) (holding that officers’ observations of the defendant constituted
direct evidence of intoxication). To the extent, if any, that Lorton conflicts with
this holding, it is overruled.
Having clarified the scope of Lorton, we now turn to whether the evidence
was sufficient to convict in this case. To prevail in a challenge to the
sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant bears the burden of proving that no
rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Crie, 154
N.H. 403, 406 (2006). In reviewing the evidence, we examine each evidentiary
item in the context of all the evidence, not in isolation. Id. Circumstantial
evidence may be sufficient to support a finding of guilty beyond a reasonable
doubt. Id. The trier of fact may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved
and also inferences from facts found as a result of other inferences, provided
they can be reasonably drawn therefrom. Id.
5
Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, we conclude
that it was sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find beyond a reasonable
doubt that the defendant was guilty of DWI. As previously discussed, Lee
initially stopped the defendant for crossing over the double yellow line into the
southbound lane, which nearly resulted in a crash with his cruiser. When he
stopped her, he observed several signs that she was impaired. She admitted to
having consumed alcohol and failed the one-leg stand and the walk-and-turn
field sobriety tests.
Contrary to the defendant’s argument, this case is factually
distinguishable from Lorton. In Lorton, the defendant failed to use a turn
signal while making a right turn, but “stopped in a safe and prudent manner.”
Lorton, 149 N.H. at 734. Here, Lee stopped the defendant because she crossed
over the double yellow line and nearly crashed into his cruiser. She came to a
sudden stop upon being pulled over. While the defendant in Lorton was able to
immediately produce his license and registration, id., the defendant here had
difficulty producing her registration. While searching for it, she “fiddl[ed]
through the different papers, very slow, almost like she . . . didn’t know what
she was doing.” In Lorton, the defendant had no difficulty getting out of his car
and “walked with a normal gait without stumbling or faltering in any way.” Id.
at 734. The Lorton defendant’s walk-and-turn test results were “essentially
unremarkable,” id. at 735, whereas here, the defendant failed.
The defendant did not brief the remaining question in her notice of
appeal. Accordingly, we deem it waived. State v. Hofland, 151 N.H. 322, 327
(2004).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6