THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-672
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JAMES KELLY
Argued: January 20, 2010
Opinion Issued: May 6, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, James Kelly, appeals his conviction for
violating a protective order, see RSA 173-B:9 (Supp. 2009), arguing that the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) erred in its answers to jury questions and by
excluding evidence of a witness’s allegedly false statements to police. We
reverse and remand.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant and
Elizabeth Kelly were engaged and cohabited until their relationship ended in
February 2006. Their separation produced an ongoing custody dispute and
prompted Elizabeth to seek a protective order against the defendant. On
February 21, 2006, the Nashua District Court issued a protective order that
prohibited the defendant from going within 100 yards of where Elizabeth might
be, including the house where she resided, unless accompanied by a police
officer. The district court modified this order to require the defendant to
provide Elizabeth, through counsel, a list of all business property he sought to
retrieve from the residence.
On October 16, 2006, the defendant and his brother-in-law drove, in
separate cars, from Massachusetts to Hudson. They both testified that they
drove directly to the Hudson police station, and not past Elizabeth’s residence.
The defendant presented an officer with the protective order and asked him to
accompany him to Elizabeth’s residence to obtain his belongings. The officer
agreed after hearing that Elizabeth was home.
Later that evening, the officer escorted the defendant to Elizabeth’s
residence, where they each parked on the side of the road approximately 100
yards from Elizabeth’s house. The officer went to Elizabeth’s side door to speak
with her while the defendant waited in his car. When Elizabeth answered the
door, the officer testified, “[s]he seemed excited” and told him she was just
about to call the police. At trial, Elizabeth testified that she had seen the
defendant drive past her house twice that evening, once when she arrived home
between 5:00 and 6:00 p.m. and once just before the officer arrived. She stated
she had memorized his car and license plate.
After hearing this information, the officer gave Elizabeth the protective
order that the defendant had given him. Elizabeth responded that he had the
incorrect order and gave him the amended protective order. The officer then
walked to the defendant’s car, and advised him that he could not remove his
belongings that day. The defendant drove up the street, turned around in
Elizabeth’s driveway, and drove away. Subsequently, the defendant was
charged, by complaint, with violating a protective order. Specifically, the
complaint alleged that on October 16, 2006, the defendant committed “the
crime of violation of a protective order and that [he] did knowingly violate a
protective order . . . by driving within 100 yards of Elizabeth Kelly’s residence.”
At trial, the defense argued that Elizabeth was not credible. Two of
Elizabeth’s neighbors testified that they had not seen the defendant on October
16, 2006, until he arrived with the officer. The two neighbors, a father and
daughter, had been working in the yard. The defense also argued that
Elizabeth’s testimony was incompatible with the police officer’s testimony.
To impeach Elizabeth’s credibility, the defendant moved in limine to
permit cross-examination regarding five allegedly false statements Elizabeth
had made to the police. Two statements concerned allegations that her former
2
husband assaulted her in February 2003 during their divorce proceedings and
that a boyfriend assaulted her in May 2004. The other three concerned
statements Elizabeth made to the police denying reported threats of suicide or
suicide attempts in March 2003 and October 2005. The trial court ruled that
the defense could not refer to the “statements she may have made to the police
in connection with possible suicide attempts,” but could ask Elizabeth whether
she had given a false statement in 2003 or on other occasions. Defense
counsel followed these instructions but renewed the motion in limine during
the cross-examination of Elizabeth. The court allowed counsel to attempt to
refresh Elizabeth’s recollection with the police reports but barred counsel from
impeaching her with the substance of the reports. The defendant was
convicted as charged. This appeal followed.
I
We first address whether the trial court’s response to three jury
questions constructively amended the complaint to the defendant’s prejudice.
The defendant argues that he preserved this issue by making a motion for a
new trial, citing State v. Elliott, 133 N.H. 759 (1990), and State v. Johnson, 130
N.H. 578, 586 (1988). In Johnson, we stated: “We agree that an amendment
to an indictment . . . might constitute ground for a new trial, if the amendment
surprises the defendant and this surprise prejudices his defense.” Johnson,
130 N.H. at 586 (quotation omitted). We, however, did not address whether a
motion for new trial would preserve this argument. Instead, we held that the
trial court’s jury instruction that allegedly amended the indictment did not
prejudice the defendant in his ability to present his case. Id. In Elliott, the
defendant contended that the State’s proposed jury instruction in a felony case
would impermissibly amend the indictment. Elliott, 133 N.H. at 762-63. In
contrast, the defendant in the case before us did not object to the trial court’s
jury instructions or to the trial court’s answers to the jury questions. He only
filed a motion for a new trial.
The general rule is that “a contemporaneous and specific objection is
required to preserve an issue for appellate review.” State v. Croft, 142 N.H. 76,
80 (1997) (quotation omitted). We have held that an objection to jury
instructions raised for the first time in a motion for a new trial is not timely.
Mailhot v. C & R Const. Co., 128 N.H. 323, 325 (1986); see State v. Ainsworth,
151 N.H. 691, 693 (2005) (finding necessary a contemporaneous objection to
preserve a jury instruction issue for appellate review). Similarly, we believe
that a contemporaneous objection is necessary to preserve a challenge to a trial
court’s answer to a jury question. This rule, based on “common sense and
judicial economy,” Johnson, 130 N.H. at 587, affords a “trial court an
opportunity to correct an error it may have made,” Ainsworth, 151 N.H. at 693.
A contemporaneous objection is particularly appropriate where an alleged error
3
involves a response to a jury question. Accordingly, our review is limited to
plain error.
The plain error rule allows us to consider errors not brought to the
attention of the trial court. State v. Almodovar, 158 N.H. 548, 553 (2009).
However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to those
circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id.
For us to find error under the rule: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error
must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error
must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings. Id.
During deliberations, the jury asked three questions to which the court
responded. The first question was: “Are we to decide if Mr. Kelly came within
100 yards of Ms. Kelly or if he violated any stipulations of the protective order.
For example not making an appt via the appropriate channels via the protective
order?” The court answered: “The issue for you to decide is whether Mr. Kelly
violated the protective order by coming within 100 yards of where Elizabeth
Kelly may be.” Second, the jury asked: “At what point did the police escort
officially end?” The court responded: “This is a factual question which is for
you as jurors to resolve if it is necessary for you to render a fair and just
verdict.” Third, the jury inquired: “Is charge based on 1st driveby only (w/out
police) or entire chain of events (ie: police escorted visit, driveway turn-a-
round, etc.).” The court answered: “You may consider all of the evidence that
was admitted at trial in deciding whether the State has proven the elements of
the crime beyond a reasonable [doubt].”
The defendant contends that the trial court’s answers constructively
amended the complaint to his prejudice by “expand[ing] the scope of the
charge” to include the defendant’s conduct during the police escort. The
defendant believed that the complaint only charged him with violating the
protective order by “driving past Elizabeth’s house prior to the police escort.”
The State counters that the trial court’s answers were appropriate and did not
expand the scope of the complaint. “The response to a jury question is left to
the sound discretion of the trial court.” State v. Poole, 150 N.H. 299, 301
(2003) (quotation omitted). We review the trial court’s answer to a jury
question under the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Id.; see
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise
of discretion standard).
Here, the trial court’s answer to the third jury question constructively
amended the complaint to the defendant’s prejudice. The complaint alleged
that the defendant committed “the crime of violation of a protective order and
that [he] did knowingly violate a protective order . . . by driving within 100
yards of Elizabeth Kelly’s residence” on October 16, 2006. The complaint,
4
therefore, placed the defendant on notice that he could be prosecuted for any
act of “driving within 100 yards of Elizabeth Kelly’s residence” on October 16,
2006 in violation of the protective order as the State argues.
The complaint, however, must be read in conjunction with the parties’
stipulation as to what the protective order provided. This stipulation read in
pertinent part:
That there was a protective order . . . in effect on October 16,
2006 which provided that . . . Defendant shall not go within 100
yards of where plaintiff may be; [and] Defendant shall not enter the
premises and curtilage where the plaintiff resides, except when the
defendant is accompanied by a peace officer and, upon reasonable
notice to the plaintiff, is allowed entry by the plaintiff for the sole
purpose of retrieving items specified by the Court . . . .
The protective order on its face permits a defendant to go within 100 yards of
Elizabeth’s residence to retrieve specified items as long as he is accompanied
by a police officer. Here, the police officer accompanied the defendant to
Elizabeth’s residence, spoke with Elizabeth while the defendant waited in his
vehicle, and then asked the defendant to leave because the defendant had not
provided Elizabeth’s attorney with a list of the items he sought to retrieve. The
defendant complied and left promptly turning around in the driveway while the
police officer stood in the yard. It was not a criminal act for the defendant to
come within 100 yards of Elizabeth’s residence with a police escort under the
protective order.
The trial court, therefore, impermissibly amended the complaint when it
told the jury to “consider all of the evidence that was admitted at trial in
deciding whether the State has proven the elements of the crime beyond a
reasonable [doubt]” in response to the jury’s third question. The trial court’s
answer effectively expanded the scope of the charge to include the police escort
and the defendant’s turning around in the driveway.
The State argues that the defendant should have requested a bill of
particulars or a clarification of the complaint if he did not know which acts
were at issue. We agree that it may be good practice to ask for a bill of
particulars if a defendant is unsure of the specific acts alleged. Indeed, “[t]he
purpose of a bill of particulars is to protect a defendant against a second
prosecution for an inadequately described offense and to enable him to prepare
an intelligent defense.” State v. Dixon, 144 N.H. 273, 275 (1999) (quotation
omitted). But we do not find the defendant’s failure to request a bill of
particulars fatal to his claim here as the State urges. When the protective
order is read in conjunction with the complaint, no rational trier of fact could
find that it was a criminal act for the defendant to turn around in Elizabeth’s
5
driveway with a police officer present. Further, as explained below, the
defendant was prejudiced by the trial court’s amendment. See Poole, 150 N.H.
at 303 (“If the defendant was prejudiced by [a] constructive amendment, his
failure to request a bill of particulars is irrelevant.”).
Specifically, the trial court’s amendment prejudiced the defendant in his
ability to prepare his defense and to understand the charges against him. The
defendant did not prepare a defense to the police escort and driveway
turnaround. In his opening at trial, defense counsel argued that the defendant
never violated the protective order because he never drove past Elizabeth’s
house. As the trial progressed, the defendant tailored his defense to rebut
Elizabeth’s claim that he drove by her house prior to the police escort. The
defendant presented three witnesses, Elizabeth’s two next-door neighbors and
the defendant’s brother-in-law, who all testified that the defendant never drove
by Elizabeth’s house the evening of October 16, 2006, prior to the police escort.
During the cross-examination of the State’s witnesses, the defendant also
focused upon the two alleged earlier drive-bys. For example, defense counsel
asked the police officer, “And your allegation - - what you wrote in your arrest
warrant is that Mr. Kelly had driven past [Elizabeth’s residence]. Is that
correct?” The officer replied, “Based on the witness [Elizabeth Kelly], yes.”
Finally, the defendant in his closing argument asserted that the restraining
order did not include the police escort and driveway turnaround. The
defendant stated:
Let’s talk about this pulling into the driveway. There’s a
restraining order in effect; don’t dispute that. The restraining
order says you can’t come within 100 yards of [the residence], or
Ms. Kelly . . . except when accompanied by a peace officer. . . . [The
officer] was there in the driveway when Mr. Kelly pulled in, he
pulled out and he left with a peace officer. I submit to you that the
order allows him to be there with a police officer; that is
permissible.
Defense counsel then argued reasons why the defendant turned around in the
driveway, which were primarily safety-related. By permitting the jury to
consider “all of the evidence,” including the police escort and driveway
turnaround, the trial court’s response to the jury’s questions prejudiced the
defendant.
This case is similar to Poole, where we held that the trial court’s answer
to a jury question impermissibly amended the complaint to the defendant’s
prejudice. Poole, 150 N.H. at 303. In Poole, the complaint alleged that the
defendant committed the crime of simple assault on December 22, 2001, at
7:00 p.m., but at trial the defendant presented an alibi for this time frame. Id.
at 300-01. During deliberations, the jury asked, “[I]f we think the crime
6
happened, but not necessarily on that date, are we permitted to consider this
line of reasoning?” Id. at 301. The trial court replied that “the date is not an
element of the crimes charged”; therefore, “you may find the defendant guilty of
the crime with which he is charged, even if you find that the state was
mistaken as to the specific date or time.” Id. This answer prejudiced the
defendant because in preparing his defense he had relied upon the date
specified in the complaint. Id. at 302. Similarly, here the defendant relied
upon the complaint and protective order to not include the act of driving by
Elizabeth’s house with a police escort. The trial court, therefore, erred in
responding to the jury’s third question and impermissibly amended the
complaint.
We further conclude that the four elements of the plain error rule have
been met in this case. First, there was error. Second, the error is plainly
evident when the complaint is read with the stipulated protective order. Third,
the error affected the defendant’s substantial rights because the error
prejudiced the outcome of the proceeding. See State v. Lopez, 156 N.H. 416,
425 (2007) (“[T]o satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected
substantial rights, the defendant must demonstrate that the error was
prejudicial, i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding.”). Based upon
the jury’s questions, the jury may well have convicted the defendant for an act
that was not criminal. Fourth, because the trial court amended the complaint
to include an act neither charged in the complaint, nor itself a criminal act, to
allow the defendant’s conviction to stand would seriously affect the fairness
and integrity of judicial proceedings.
II
Because the issue may arise again upon remand, we will address
whether the trial court erred in excluding evidence of Elizabeth Kelly’s prior
allegedly false statements to the police. The defendant contends that he should
have been permitted to cross-examine Elizabeth about five statements that she
gave to police between 2003 and 2005: three involving alleged threats of
suicide and two relating to accusations of abuse. In March 2003 and February
2005, the police received reports that Elizabeth had threatened or attempted to
commit suicide – reports that Elizabeth denied. In February 2003, Elizabeth
filed a police report claiming that her former husband assaulted her and
burned her arm with a lamp. The police investigated this allegation and
concluded that it was false, according to defense counsel. In 2004, Elizabeth
claimed that her “boyfriend,” who met the same description as her ex-husband,
had assaulted her, but refused to name the “boyfriend.”
The trial court ruled that defense counsel could not refer to the
statements concerning the possible “suicide attempt[s]” and barred defense
7
counsel from asking about the 2004 assault investigation. The trial court also
ruled:
[T]here would be no reference to the [2003 assault] investigation,
but for one document that I released . . . because it reflected an
omission on the part of Ms. Kelly that she was not truthful with
the police during an interview about her association with other
men. And that that was the only area of cross-examination that I
[am] going to allow [concerning the 2003 assault investigation] and
it was going to be done without reference to the general context of
the investigation.
The trial court further clarified that “the cross-examination would be you were
interviewed by the police back in 2003 and during the course of that interview
you made a false statement about that.” Defense counsel could also “ask
[Elizabeth] if there were any other times . . . when she was interviewed by the
police that she lied.”
Defense counsel followed these instructions and asked Elizabeth if she
gave inconsistent statements to the police about her relationship with another
man in February 2003. Elizabeth admitted she had but explained that she
“didn’t feel it was [the police’s] business.” Defense counsel then asked, “Have
there been other instances where you’ve been less than truthful to law
enforcement?” Elizabeth responded, “No.” Based upon this response, the
defendant renewed his request to cross-examine Elizabeth about her alleged
false statements to police and moved to impeach her with the substance of
these reports. The trial court denied both these motions, allowing counsel to
refresh Elizabeth’s recollection with the police reports but prohibiting any
questions about their substance.
A trial court has broad discretion to determine the scope of cross-
examination or the admissibility of evidence, and we will not upset its ruling
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Miller, 155 N.H. 246,
249 (2007). To prevail under this standard, the defendant must demonstrate
that the trial court’s decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 608(b) states, in pertinent part, that:
Specific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of
attacking or supporting the witness’ credibility, other than
conviction of crime as provided in Rule § 609, may not be proved
by extrinsic evidence. They may, however, in the discretion of the
court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired
8
into on cross examination of the witness (1) concerning the
witness’ character for truthfulness or untruthfulness . . . .
“Although Rule 608(b) permits a cross-examiner to inquire into conduct that is
probative of the witness’s character for truthfulness or untruthfulness, the
examiner must generally take the answer as the witness gives it.” State v.
Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. 821, 824 (2008) (quotation omitted). Rule 608(b) forbids
the cross-examiner from introducing “extrinsic evidence such as calling other
witnesses, to rebut the witness’s statements.” State v. Hopkins, 136 N.H. 272,
276 (1992). The ban on extrinsic evidence is to avoid a trial within a trial; in
other words, to avoid the litigation of collateral matters. Miller, 155 N.H. at
249.
When exercising its discretion under Rule 608(b), a trial court must also
consider Rule 403. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 824-25. As the reporter’s notes to
Rule 608(b) explain, “[T]he overriding protection of Rule 403 requires that
probative value not be outweighed by danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of
issues, or misleading the jury . . . .” N.H. R. Ev. 608 Reporter’s Notes; see N.H.
R. Ev. 403 (stating “evidence may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of . . . needless
presentation of cumulative evidence”). In assessing the probative value of
evidence, the court should consider:
(1) whether the testimony of the witness is crucial or unimportant;
(2) the extent to which the evidence is probative of truthfulness or
untruthfulness; (3) the extent to which the evidence is also
probative of other relevant matters; (4) the extent to which the act
of untruthfulness is connected to the case; (5) the extent to which
the circumstances surrounding the specific instances of conduct
are similar to the circumstances surrounding the giving of the
witness's testimony; (6) the nearness or remoteness in time of the
specific instances to trial; (7) the likelihood that the alleged
specific-instances conduct in fact occurred; (8) the extent to which
specific-instances evidence is cumulative or unnecessary in light of
other evidence already received on credibility; and (9) whether
specific-instances evidence is needed to rebut other evidence
concerning credibility.
Miller, 155 N.H. at 252-53 (quotations and ellipses omitted). Additionally,
when examining the danger of unfair prejudice where the witness is not the
defendant, “the court may consider whether the jury will develop a bias against
the witness because of the Rule 608(b) evidence,” and “whether the jury will
give the evidence too much weight.” State v. Brum, 155 N.H. 408, 413 (2007).
Finally, the court may consider whether the cross-examination will subject the
9
witness to harassment and undue embarrassment or result in a time-
consuming, distracting mini-trial. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 825.
We agree with the defendant that Elizabeth’s testimony, and, therefore,
her credibility, was crucial to the State’s case. Elizabeth was the only eye-
witness who testified to seeing the defendant drive by her house on the evening
of October 16, 2006, prior to the police escort. We also agree that all of these
alleged statements were made less than four years prior to the charged offense,
a “time period . . . not so remote as to eliminate probity.” Id. at 826 (finding
false allegations of assault made seven years prior to the conduct at issue still
probative of defendant’s character for truthfulness). Further, although she has
never recanted her statements, there is evidence that Elizabeth “lied to the
police” at least once. A police investigation deemed her February 2003 assault
claim unfounded. Finally, the 2003 alleged abuse accusation occurred under
substantially similar circumstances – the stress of a family law dispute.
Permitting cross-examination about the 2003 accusation may have shown that
Elizabeth had a bias, motive or prejudice in accusing the defendant of violating
the protective order. See Davis v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308, 316 (1974) (noting
that courts have demonstrated a greater willingness to entertain specific
attacks on credibility “directed toward revealing possible biases, prejudices, or
ulterior motives of the witness as they may relate directly to issues or
personalities in the case at hand” over general attacks on credibility); see also
Miller, 155 N.H. at 255-56.
But other Miller factors weighed against admitting the statements. The
other four statements would not reveal any biases, prejudices or ulterior
motives. See id. Permitting cross-examination as to these statements would
only serve as general attacks on credibility. We are less willing to permit cross-
examination that creates the general inference that “because the victim made a
false accusation in the past, the instant accusation is also false.” Id. at 256
(quotation omitted). Further, the trial court permitted limited cross-
examination. The trial court allowed the defendant to question Elizabeth about
one misstatement she made to police during the 2003 investigation and to ask
if she had lied on other occasions to police. Therefore, further cross-
examination could have been cumulative. See Miller, 155 N.H. at 253.
Moreover, even if these statements were probative of Elizabeth’s
character for truthfulness, the trial court could have weighed the probative
value of these statements against the risk of prejudice and determined them to
be too prejudicial. We agree that questioning Elizabeth about her prior police
statements, particularly as related to her alleged suicide attempts, could have
subjected her to “harassment and undue embarrassment.” Miller, 155 N.H. at
253 (quotation omitted). It may also have led to confusion of the issues and
“time consuming and distracting minitrials” on whether Elizabeth actually lied
previously – not the point at issue here. Id. (quotation omitted). Therefore, we
10
conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion when
it denied defense counsel’s motions to question Elizabeth further about the five
previous statements she gave to police.
The defendant also contends that he should have been allowed “to
impeach Elizabeth with [her] prior false statements after she testified she had
never lied to the police.” Specifically, he asserts that “[b]y claiming that she
had never made any false statements to the police Elizabeth opened the door to
cross-examination about prior statements that contradicted her testimony.”
We review the trial court’s decision on the admissibility of evidence for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v. White, 155 N.H. 119, 123
(2007).
The defendant confuses the “specific contradiction” branch of the
opening the door doctrine, see State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 589 (2009), with
Rule 608(b). Under the specific contradiction branch, “when one party has
introduced admissible evidence that creates a misleading advantage . . . the
opponent is then allowed to introduce previously suppressed or otherwise
inadmissible evidence to counter the misleading advantage.” Wamala, 158
N.H. at 589. “The rule is intended to prevent a party from successfully
excluding evidence favorable to his opponent, and then selectively introducing
evidence for his own advantage, without allowing the opponent to place the
evidence in proper context.” Lopez, 156 N.H. at 422. These concerns do not
apply here. Here, defense counsel on cross-examination asked Elizabeth
whether “there [had] been . . . instances [other than the 2003 assault
investigation] where you’ve been less than truthful to law enforcement?”
Elizabeth answered, “No.” The State did not ask this question on direct
examination or “open the door.” See 1 G. Dix et al., McCormick on Evidence
§ 49, at 232-33 (Kenneth S. Broun ed., 6th ed. 2006).
Rule 608(b) governs here. Under Rule 608(b), defense counsel may
cross-examine a State witness about “conduct that is probative of the witness’s
character for truthfulness or untruthfulness,” but must “take the answer” the
witness gives on cross-examination. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 824 (quotation
omitted). Extrinsic evidence is not allowed. N.H. R. Ev. 608(b). Here, the trial
court permitted the defendant to refresh Elizabeth’s memory with the police
reports, but limited defense counsel’s cross-examination to the parameters it
laid out prior to trial. We cannot say that the trial court unsustainably
exercised its discretion in not allowing further cross-examination or
impeachment.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
11