THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-073
NEW HAMPSHIRE BALL BEARINGS, INC.
v.
W. SCOTT JACKSON & a.
Argued: January 9, 2009
Opinion Issued: March 18, 2009
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Lisa Snow Wade on the brief and orally),
for the plaintiff.
Cook, Little, Rosenblatt & Manson P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Arnold
Rosenblatt and Daphne Lessard on the brief, and Mr. Rosenblatt orally), for
defendant W. Scott Jackson.
Downs Rachlin Martin P.L.L.C., of Littleton (Kate Strickland on the brief),
and Snell & Wilmer L.L.P, of Phoenix, Arizona (Sid Leach on the brief and
orally), for defendant Sargent Controls and Aerospace.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, New Hampshire Ball Bearings, Inc. (NHBB),
appeals decisions of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) concerning discovery
motions, evidentiary rulings, jury instructions and the denial of post-trial
motions. We affirm.
I. Pre-Trial Proceedings
NHBB initiated this suit in early May 2006, alleging that W. Scott
Jackson, a former NHBB employee, breached his confidentiality agreement by
taking approximately fifty-three NHBB computer files when he left the
company, and that Jackson and his current employer, Sargent Controls and
Aerospace (Sargent), misappropriated NHBB trade secrets. The parties
engaged in a lengthy and bitterly fought discovery process. At the start of the
case, the trial court issued two orders requiring the defendants to preserve all
evidence relevant to the case. After seven months of discovery, NHBB filed a
motion to compel Sargent to grant NHBB access to its servers, server backup
tapes and employee computers in all three of Sargent’s engineering divisions at
its facility in Tucson, Arizona. The court denied the request, stating that the
potential imaging of up to 250 hard drives was “too broad and burdensome,”
but allowed NHBB to make a narrower request. NHBB renewed its request to
include all Sargent backup tapes and servers, but only thirty-five employee
computers. The thirty-five computers were those used in the Kahr Bearing
Engineering Group, the Sargent division dedicated to manufacturing bearings.
The trial court granted NHBB’s revised request in March 2007.
The parties, however, disputed their obligations under the order.
Sargent allowed NHBB access to the thirty-five hard drives in April, but refused
access to its servers or backup tapes. In late May, the trial court clarified its
order to include the backup tapes, but not Sargent’s servers; the trial court
ordered Sargent to produce the backup tapes. In late August, one month
before trial, Sargent filed a motion in limine requesting the exclusion of
evidence concerning discovery disputes under New Hampshire Rules of
Evidence 401, 402 and 403. Over NHBB’s objection, the trial court granted
Sargent’s motion. On appeal, NHBB challenges the trial court’s rulings
concerning discovery and the granting of the defendants’ motion in limine.
II. Trial
The jury could have found the following facts. Jackson worked for NHBB
in various engineering capacities for over twenty years. During December 2005
and January 2006, Harry Labbe, a former NHBB employee then working at
Sargent, recruited Jackson and convinced him to apply for the position of
northeast sales manager. On January 29, 2006, Jackson returned from an
interview with Sargent in Tucson, Arizona, and accepted a position with
Sargent on February 1. Jackson resigned from NHBB on February 1 and
returned his NHBB-issued laptop (NHBB laptop).
One month after he left, NHBB employees created a forensic image of
Jackson’s NHBB laptop as part of a forensic training course. A forensic image
is an exact replica, bit for bit, of the original storage device that allows
2
investigation of past use without altering the original evidence. Analysis of the
forensic image with forensic software allows an investigator to determine what
peripheral devices have been connected to the device, what a user accessed,
what has been stored on the device, and when it was last accessed or modified.
Because deleted files are not actually erased from storage media, analysts are
able to determine both current and deleted files so long as the latter have not
been completely overwritten with new data. When the NHBB laptop was
imaged, however, the equipment operator failed to activate the write blocker on
the imaging equipment, thereby changing the last access dates for certain
system files.
Analysis of the forensic image showed that after returning from Tucson
on the night of January 29, Jackson twice remotely accessed NHBB’s virtual
private network (VPN), and serially accessed a number of files on the NHBB
laptop. Each logon to the VPN lasted only a few minutes, and Jackson testified
that he had checked his NHBB email that night. Witnesses testified that his
brief VPN access with limited data transmission was consistent with retrieving
email and not downloading files. Serial access occurs when a user accesses
multiple files at the same time, thereby creating the same last access date for
each file. NHBB’s expert testified that the most probable cause of serial access
is copying files; Sargent’s expert, however, discussed other possible causes,
such as simply selecting or moving files. Of those files serially accessed, NHBB
identified roughly fifty-three that it believed to contain trade secrets or
confidential information. Those files contained employee performance reviews
as well as a number of documents used in computer-aided engineering
including: engineering formulas, NHBB part specifications, production
specifications and information on customers’ products and requirements.
There was nothing suspect about Jackson possessing such files during his
employment, as they were either placed on the laptop by NHBB or created
while working on NHBB projects. The other serially accessed files were
Jackson’s personal files. The image also showed that a Lexar flash drive was
connected to the NHBB laptop the night of January 29.
Based largely upon recovered emails between Labbe and Jackson during
his recruitment, Jackson’s remote VPN access, the serial access of files on the
NHBB laptop, and the use of a peripheral flash drive, NHBB filed suit in May
2006, alleging misappropriation of trade secrets. The trial court issued an
order for all parties to preserve any evidence related to the case.
In late 2006, NHBB requested that Jackson turn over for imaging his
digital camera, the Lexar flash drive, his wife’s laptop (Jackson laptop), his PDA
— personal digital assistant, containing his contacts and date planner — his
wife’s mp3 player, and additional flash drives that were connected to the NHBB
or Jackson laptops at various times. Jackson and his wife testified that the
additional flash drives belonged to their children and had been lost or
3
destroyed. Jackson did, however, produce one additional flash drive during
trial in September 2007, after his wife found it in her son’s room at her ex-
husband’s house.
Comparison of the NHBB laptop and Lexar flash drive images showed
that some, but not all, of the serially accessed files were copied from the NHBB
laptop to the flash drive. Jackson testified that after he decided to resign at
NHBB, he took all of his personal files off the NHBB laptop using the flash
drive and transferred them to the Jackson laptop. The images showed that the
files copied on the night of January 29 were predominantly personal files, such
as Jackson’s photographs, country club documents, and divorce and marriage
records, though NHBB claimed other NHBB files were taken over a period of
time.
The image also showed that at least two NHBB documents were taken
from the NHBB laptop and created and opened on the flash drive as Microsoft
Excel spreadsheets. NHBB’s expert testified that subsequent activity on the
flash drive made it difficult to determine which, if any, other NHBB files were
copied. The two copied files contained engineering formulas and part
specifications including part dimensions, materials, performance capacities
and tooling specifications for manufacturing machines. Jackson and other
witnesses testified that the contents of those files were engineering formulas
and specifications generally known in the bearing industry and widely available
from customers, engineering textbooks and NHBB’s internet catalog.
Analysis of the Lexar flash drive image showed that a large amount of
data was added to the drive, possibly overwriting any previous contents. It also
showed that in February 2006, the drive had been connected to the laptop of
Ryan Faust, a Sargent employee. Both Jackson and Faust testified that the
drive was used to provide Jackson with Sargent’s sales data for recent years,
and that nothing was transferred from the drive to the computer. Analysis of a
later forensic image of Faust’s computer did not reveal evidence of any NHBB
files, although it did show that a large amount of data had been added to the
computer, which had been reassigned to a different employee for a period of
time, potentially overwriting the remnants of deleted files.
The forensic image of the Jackson laptop revealed the presence of the two
NHBB files transferred to the Lexar flash drive on January 29, as well as an
additional spreadsheet that was on the NHBB computer but not the Lexar flash
drive. Jackson testified that after receiving a phone call about the suit on May
5, 2006, he had difficulty sleeping and searched his computer at 4:00 a.m. for
any NHBB files he may have accidentally copied, found three, and placed them
in the recycling bin — where they remained — with instructions not to erase
them. Sometime in June 2007, some of the files’ last access dates were
changed, overwriting the prior last access date, which NHBB argued could have
4
been after Jackson left NHBB. Analysis of the Jackson laptop did not reveal
any of the other NHBB files at issue.
The image of the Jackson laptop also showed that numerous files had
been deleted, large amounts of additional data had been added, and the disk
defragmenter and disk cleanup functions were run before it was turned over to
NHBB for imaging. Adding large amounts of data overwrites previously deleted
data and makes it far more difficult for analysts to discover what was present
beforehand. The functions that were run delete temporary files and rearrange
the placement of fragmented files on the hard drive, which also make it more
difficult to determine the content of deleted files. Jackson’s wife testified that
she did not know how so many files were deleted, and that she regularly ran
the disk functions to keep her computer running faster. The forensic image of
the Jackson laptop showed that it was only the second time she had run those
functions since buying the computer two years earlier.
NHBB ran searches on thirty-five Sargent computers for data contained
in the NHBB files as well as the presence of anti-forensic software activity that
could have altered or erased data. NHBB was also permitted to copy the file
registry for each computer, which analysts can use to determine what
hardware and software have been installed or used on a computer. As a result
of the searches, NHBB imaged seven or eight hard drives that produced hits
against the search terms; the remaining computers revealed no indication of
NHBB files or wiping software. Although no NHBB files were ever found, three
of the hard drives produced for imaging had been reformatted or replaced,
erasing all data. Additionally, the image of an information technology (IT)
employee’s hard drive showed that disk-wiping software had been installed and
that a user had run internet searches on erasing hard drives. The jury heard
that the three computers were reformatted or replaced because of hardware
problems or computer upgrades, and that it was normal practice for an IT
technician at an information sensitive company to have file deletion software
on his computer. NHBB also had access to Sargent’s backup tapes for its
email server, but one tape was not produced. The jury heard that Sargent was
unable to produce that tape because it was unreadable for unknown reasons,
possibly overwriting or damage to the tape.
The president of Sargent and the head of Kahr Bearing both testified that
they had run searches of Sargent’s networks and were unable to find any
NHBB files. In response, NHBB tried to introduce testimony that Sargent had
restricted NHBB access to its computers during discovery and that NHBB was
therefore denied access to all Sargent’s servers and the 250 computers it had
originally desired. Despite the fact that the trial court sustained the
defendants’ objection based upon its granting of their motion in limine, NHBB
was later allowed to cross-examine Sargent’s expert witness concerning NHBB’s
limited access to Sargent computers after the witness opened the door to that
5
subject. NHBB also attempted to introduce a copy of the trial court’s evidence
preservation orders as jury exhibits. Although the trial court sustained the
defendants’ objection, it did instruct the jury that it had issued an order at the
beginning of the case requiring all parties to preserve any evidence relevant to
the case.
At the close of trial, NHBB requested the following jury instruction:
At the beginning of this case, I issued an Order requiring the
defendants to preserve relevant evidence. The evidence presented
demonstrates that defendants Sargent and Jackson failed to
comply with my Order. Therefore, if you find that a reasonable
person in the position of Sargent and/or Jackson would have
preserved the evidence, you may assume that the evidence that
was not preserved would have helped the plaintiff, and you may
decide the case as if the evidence was helpful to the plaintiff and
presented by the plaintiff during the trial.
The trial court denied NHBB’s request and gave the following instruction:
I instruct you that all parties are under an obligation to preserve
documents and records from the time that the party is reasonably
on notice that a document or record may become evidence or be
subject to discovery in a lawsuit. In this case, the Plaintiff
maintains that the Defendants intentionally lost or destroyed
certain records or documents subject to a preservation obligation.
The Defendants deny this and to the extent that documents or
records are missing, they suggest innocent explanations. Also, the
Defendants, in turn, maintain that the Plaintiff destroyed certain
records subject to a preservation obligation, a claim that the
Plaintiff has denied. If, based on the evidence, you find that
records or documents would have been relevant to this case and
that a party intentionally lost or destroyed them to keep the
information secret, you may draw an unfavorable inference on
account of there having been missing documents or records. If you
find, however, that there was an innocent explanation for the
missing records or documents, or if you find that those records
and documents would not have been relevant to this case, you may
not draw such an inference.
The jury returned a verdict in favor of the defendants on the
misappropriation of trade secrets claim, but found in NHBB’s favor on its claim
that Jackson breached his nondisclosure contract. NHBB moved for a
judgment notwithstanding the verdict on the misappropriation claims, which
was denied, and moved to set aside the verdict for a new trial on those claims,
which was also denied. NHBB also moved for sanctions against the defendants
6
for intentional spoliation of evidence. The trial court denied NHBB’s request for
sanctions, stating that it had no authority to issue sanctions for what it
considered to be indirect criminal contempt under our decision in Mortgage
Specialists v. Davey, 153 N.H. 764 (2006). Rather, the trial court referred the
matter to the New Hampshire Attorney General, who, after review, declined to
prosecute. NHBB then appealed to this court.
NHBB makes a number of arguments on appeal. First, NHBB argues
that the trial court erred in restricting NHBB’s access to Sargent’s computers
and networks during discovery. Second, NHBB argues that the trial court
made erroneous rulings on the admissibility of evidence by granting the
defendants’ motion in limine barring NHBB from “explain[ing] to the jury in
context how the denial of access and discovery abuse hampered its ability to
directly establish misappropriation,” and later excluding copies of the trial
court’s evidence preservation orders as exhibits. Third, NHBB argues that the
trial court erred by not instructing the jury that the defendants had in fact
violated the preservation orders, but giving a neutral instruction instead.
Finally, NHBB argues that the trial court erred in denying its post-trial
requests for a new trial and discovery sanctions against the defendants. We
address each in turn.
III. Discovery
NHBB argues that the trial court should have granted it broader access
to Sargent’s computers and servers during discovery because misappropriation
of electronic trade secrets is difficult to establish and thus requires extensive
examination of electronic data systems. Only broad access, NHBB argues,
could assure the preservation and detection of evidence that is easily erased or
manipulated — either intentionally or unintentionally. The defendants respond
that the trial judge acted properly by blocking what would have been an “open-
ended fishing expedition,” thus limiting access to relevant systems.
Decisions concerning pretrial discovery are within the sound discretion of
the trial judge. In the Matter of Maynard & Maynard, 155 N.H. 630, 636
(2007). We review a trial court’s rulings on the management of discovery under
an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H.
616, 623 (2008). To establish that the trial court erred, NHBB must
demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable
to the prejudice of its case. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T Forest
Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 40 (2007).
Although discovery rules are to be given a broad and liberal
interpretation, the trial court has discretion to determine the limits of
discovery. Scarborough v. R.T.P. Enterprises, Inc., 120 N.H. 707, 711 (1980).
A party’s request for information must appear relevant and “reasonably
7
calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.” Super. Ct. R. 35
b(1); Scarborough, 120 N.H. at 711. The trial court, therefore, is permitted to
keep discovery within reasonable limits and avoid “open-ended fishing
expeditions” or harassment to ensure that discovery contributes to the orderly
dispatch of judicial business. Robbins v. Kalwall Corp., 120 N.H. 451, 453
(1980); Hartford Accident &c. Co. v. Cutter, 108 N.H. 112, 114 (1967); Riddle
Spring Realty Co. v. State, 107 N.H. 271, 278 (1966).
NHBB argues that the nature of electronic trade secrets requires
particularly broad discovery. Because electronic discovery has been more
predominant in federal courts, we look to those courts for guidance. We begin
by recognizing that electronic data, including forensic imaging of hard drives, is
within the scope of discoverable material. See In re Pharmatrak, Inc., 329 F.3d
9, 17 (1st Cir. 2003); Antioch Co. v. Scrapbook Borders, Inc., 210 F.R.D. 645,
652 (D. Minn. 2002). Because electronic discovery can easily become broad
and intrusive, “[c]ourts have been cautious in requiring the mirror imaging of
computers where the request is extremely broad in nature and the connection
between the computers and the claims in the lawsuit are unduly vague or
unsubstantiated in nature.” Balboa Threadworks, Inc. v. Stucky, No. 05-1157-
JTM-DWB, 2006 WL 763668, at *3 (D. Kan. Mar. 24, 2006). Without a
sufficient showing of relevance and need, courts disallow the “drastic discovery
measure” of permitting a party to image all of an opponent’s electronic media.
McCurdy Group v. American Biomedical Group, Inc., 9 Fed. Appx. 822, 831
(10th Cir. 2001). Courts are more receptive, however, to circumscribed
requests limited to specified individuals or computers expected to produce
relevant information. See Rowe Entertainment v. William Morris Agency, 205
F.R.D. 421, 427-28, 432-33 (S.D.N.Y. 2002) (granting revised and limited
request for defendants’ backup tapes and emails and prescribing protocols for
imaging); Simon Property Group L.P. v. mySimon, Inc., 194 F.R.D. 639, 641
(S.D. Ind. 2000) (granting access to computers used by four named
individuals); Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles, 60 F. Supp. 2d 1050, 1053
(S.D. Cal. 1999) (granting access to defendant’s personal computer). We find
the limitations imposed in federal courts to be both sensible and persuasive.
Here, the trial court denied NHBB’s initial request to image all 250
computers and every server used at Sargent’s Tucson facility. In doing so, it
relied upon Sargent’s claim that the request was overbroad and burdensome,
and found that examining every hard drive and server would be “unnecessarily
disruptive to [Sargent’s] operations.” Given that NHBB’s claim encompassed
trade secrets related only to bearings, that Sargent’s Kahr Bearing division
comprised only a small portion of its operations in Tucson, and that Jackson
only connected his flash drive to Faust’s laptop, it was within the trial court’s
discretion to refuse NHBB access to Sargent’s entire electronic network.
Indeed, once NHBB limited its request to the backup tapes and those
computers relevant to its allegations, the trial court granted its motion to
8
compel. NHBB has not persuaded us that this ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of its case, and therefore the trial court did not
unsustainably exercise its discretion.
IV. Evidentiary Rulings
NHBB argues that it should have been allowed to introduce the context
in which it was required to review Sargent’s electronic data so that the jury
could understand why NHBB had limited evidence of misappropriation.
Specifically, NHBB argues that the trial court erred by granting the defendants’
motion in limine to exclude discovery disputes and then compounded that
error by allowing Sargent’s witnesses to testify that they had searched their
electronic network and found no NHBB data.
The admissibility of evidence is generally within the discretion of the trial
court, and we will uphold its rulings unless the exercise of its discretion is
unsustainable. Murray v. Developmental Servs. of Sullivan County, 149 N.H.
264, 267 (2003). To meet this threshold, NHBB must demonstrate that the
trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of its
case. Id.
To be admissible, evidence must be relevant. Evidence is relevant if it
has “any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to
the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 401.
Although it is true that Sargent fought NHBB’s discovery requests, the
trial court ultimately decided that NHBB’s initial request was overbroad.
Introducing evidence that Sargent resisted discovery requests that the trial
court ultimately denied, therefore, has no tendency to make the existence of
misappropriation more probable than it would be without the evidence. See
Empire Gas Corp. v. American Bakeries Co., 840 F.2d 1333, 1341 (7th Cir.
1988) (trial court properly excluded evidence of discovery disputes because it
was “at best cumulative and probably irrelevant”); Waters v. Genesis Health
Ventures, Inc., 400 F. Supp. 2d 814, 818 (E.D. Pa. 2005) (stating evidence of
contentious and hostile discovery disputes is “entirely irrelevant to the
Plaintiff’s . . . claim”). Indeed, as discussed above, discovery is generally within
the province and discretion of the trial judge, not the jury. See Maynard, 155
N.H. at 636. Because the trial court was within its discretion to circumscribe
discovery, its exclusion of discovery disputes was not clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of NHBB’s case. The trial court, therefore, did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion.
NHBB goes on to argue that in light of the exclusion of discovery
disputes, it was prejudiced when Sargent’s president testified that he and
9
another employee searched the entire network for NHBB data and found none.
Any prejudice NHBB may have suffered, however, was certainly cured during
its cross-examination of Sargent’s expert witness. Despite the exclusion of
discovery disputes, the trial court allowed NHBB to question Sargent’s expert
witness about NHBB’s limited access to Sargent’s data after the witness
expanded the scope of examination by giving non-responsive answers.
In its cross-examination, NHBB was thus able to elicit that it was not
permitted to examine computers unless they returned a hit on pre-agreed
search terms, that it had originally wanted to image more than thirty-five
computers, and that it was denied access to Sargent’s servers. Based upon the
witness’s answers, it would have been clear to the jury that NHBB had less
access to Sargent’s electronic data than it desired. For NHBB to argue on
appeal that it was prejudiced because it was not allowed to inform the jury of
the limited scope of discovery is therefore without merit.
NHBB next argues that the trial court erred by not admitting copies of its
preservation orders as exhibits, even after the jury requested them during
deliberations. The defendants respond that the orders were rightfully excluded
because it is the role of the judge to instruct the jury as to the law rather than
allow the jury to distill the law from a court order.
Interpretation of the orders required an interpretation of the parties’ legal
obligations. The scope of a party’s legal obligations is a question of law, and
therefore within the province of the trial court judge. See State v. Barnett, 147
N.H. 334, 339 (2001). Furthermore, legalese, at times, can obfuscate the
underlying substance and meaning of words. Trial judges, therefore, are
charged with the duty to “state and explain to the jury ‘in clear and intelligible
language the rules of law applicable to the issues of fact upon which their
verdict is to be based.’” Rawson v. Bradshaw, 125 N.H. 94, 99 (1984) (quoting
Poulin v. Provost, 114 N.H. 263, 264 (1974)). Here, it was the trial court’s role
to interpret its orders and the parties’ obligations therein, and then relay those
obligations to the jury in clear and intelligible language. It did just that.
Furthermore, admitting copies of the orders would have been cumulative.
Although the trial court questioned the relevance of providing the jury with the
actual orders, it did allow witnesses to reference the orders and the fact that
they required parties to preserve evidence in general. After witnesses
mentioned the orders, the trial court gave the jury the following instruction:
Members of the jury, you just heard reference to a Temporary
Restraining Order, and you may hear further references during the
course of this trial, and I just want to let you know that at the
beginning of the case as well as the beginning of many cases such
10
as this, there often is a request by one or both of the parties for an
Order of the Court basically preserving the status quo.
After the close of evidence, the trial court further instructed the jury “that all
parties are under an obligation to preserve documents and records from the
time that the party is reasonably on notice that a document or record may
become evidence or be subject to discovery in a lawsuit.”
Review of the preservation orders reveals that the above instructions are
an adequate summary of the parties’ duties in this case. Because the trial
court’s refusal to allow copies of the orders into evidence was not clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of NHBB’s case, the trial court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion.
Finally, NHBB argues that the trial court erred in not providing copies of
the orders to the jury after they requested them during deliberation. Because
there is no record of that decision or NHBB’s contemporaneous objection
thereto, it has not been preserved and we decline to review it. See E. Derry Fire
Precinct v. Nadeau, 155 N.H. 429, 430 (2007) (declining review without
sufficient record); Berliner v. Clukay, 150 N.H. 80, 82-84 (2003) (off-record
conferences inadequate to preserve an objection).
V. Adverse Inference Instruction
NHBB argues that the trial court erred by rejecting its requested
instruction, which would have stated that the defendants had in fact violated
the preservation orders. NHBB argues that the instruction was warranted as a
sanction for discovery abuse, but that the trial court misinterpreted Mortgage
Specialists, 153 N.H. 764, as constraining its authority to issue an adverse
inference instruction as a sanction for spoliation of evidence. NHBB further
argues that the trial court erred by referring only to the destruction of
“documents or records,” and by giving a party-neutral instruction stating that
both parties had alleged spoliation of evidence.
The purpose of jury instructions is to identify issues of material fact, and
to explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the appropriate
standards of law by which it is to resolve them. Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H.
393, 400 (2003); Rawson, 125 N.H. at 99. A trial court’s decision to give an
instruction must be based upon “some evidence to support a rational finding in
favor of that [instruction].” State v. Larose, 157 N.H. 28, 33 (2008) (quotation
omitted). The scope and wording of jury instructions, however, are within the
sound discretion of the trial judge and are evaluated as a reasonable juror
would have interpreted them. State v. MacRae, 141 N.H. 106, 114 (1996). A
jury charge is sufficient as a matter of law if it fairly presents the case to the
jury such that no injustice is done to the legal rights of the parties. Carignan
v. N.H. Int’l Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 418 (2004). In a civil case, we review jury
11
instructions in context. Id. We will reverse if the charge, taken in its entirety,
fails to explain adequately the law applicable to the case in such a way that the
jury could have been misled. Id.
In general, “the trial judge’s discretion to remove questions of fact from
the jury is very limited.” St. Pierre v. Elgert, 145 N.H. 620, 621 (2000). As one
court held, however, the trial court may grant a party’s request for an adverse
inference instruction if the evidence establishes: “(1) that the party having
control over the evidence had an obligation to preserve it at the time it was
destroyed; (2) that the records were destroyed with a culpable state of mind;
and (3) that the destroyed evidence was relevant to the party’s claim or defense
such that a reasonable trier of fact could find that it would support that claim
or defense.” Residential Funding Corp. v. DeGeorge Financial, 306 F.3d 99,
107 (2d Cir. 2002) (quotations omitted). This standard accords with our own
case law. See Murray, 149 N.H. at 271; see also Super. Ct. R. 35 g(2)(b) (court
can designate certain facts be taken as established to sanction discovery
abuse). If, however, there remains a question of fact as to any of the three
factors, spoliation is a matter for the jury, not the judge. See Murray, 149 N.H.
at 271 (affirming jury instruction substantially the same as the instruction
given here); Rodriguez v. Webb, 141 N.H. 177, 179 (1996).
Here, NHBB’s requested instruction would have instructed the jury that
the defendants had in fact failed to comply with the trial court’s preservation
orders, and, if the jury found a reasonable person would have preserved the
evidence, that it could assume the destroyed evidence would have helped
NHBB’s case. The trial court refused the instruction because it found that
conflicting evidence concerning spoliation required the question to go to the
jury. In fact, the trial court’s decision had nothing to do with its authority
under Mortgage Specialists, to which it made only a passing reference in
response to NHBB’s mention of post-trial sanction procedures. Rather, the
trial court recognized that disputed facts are within the province of the jury. At
the charge conference, the trial court stated that, were it up to the court, it
would credit the plaintiff’s witnesses. However, it went on to say: “[T]he jury is
also free to credit [defendants’] witnesses with respect to innocent explanations
for the disappearance of certain files, certain documents, and so forth.
Whether the jury should do that or shouldn’t, not my call . . . it’s up to the jury
to make that determination.” Because there were conflicting explanations
concerning the defendants’ state of mind and the relevance of missing
evidence, the trial court properly allowed the jury to determine the weight and
credibility to be given the testimony. See Transmedia Restaurant Co. v.
Devereaux, 149 N.H. 454, 461 (2003) (stating weight and credibility of
testimony is within the jury’s province).
We now turn to NHBB’s argument that the wording of the instruction
was erroneous because it referred to the destruction of “documents and
12
records” as opposed to the destruction of “evidence.” In the context of a thirty-
day trial, during which the jury heard voluminous testimony concerning the
destruction of evidence, a reasonable juror would have understood “documents
or records” to encompass the electronic data at the heart of this case. The
wording of the instruction did not give the jurors an erroneous conception of
the law, and therefore reversal is not required. See Carignan, 151 N.H. at 418.
Finally, NHBB’s argument that it was error to give a party-neutral
instruction including reference to the defendants’ spoliation claim also fails.
NHBB argues that, by equating the two allegations of spoliation, the trial court
left “the jury with an unfair impression of the evidence given the circumstances
of this case.” Although the trial court stated that, were it the fact finder, it
would not credit the defendants’ allegation, it also recognized that the jury was
free to credit the witnesses as it saw fit. The trial court stated:
[I]f I go out on a limb and fully, fully credit the Defendant’s case
and fully, fully discredit [NHBB’s] witnesses, there is a case that
could be made that [NHBB], as a policy from the start, was
attempting to choke competition and, in fact, an inference could be
made that this hard drive was being used for that purpose from
the start. Do I accept that if I were the fact finder? . . . No, I don’t
accept that. But that’s not my call.
Because there was some evidence concerning NHBB’s improper imaging of the
NHBB laptop hard drive, the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its
discretion in giving the party-neutral instruction. See Larose, 157 N.H. at 33.
VI. Post-Trial Motions
NHBB argues that the trial court erred by denying its motion to set aside
the verdict and order a new trial “even though it refused to provide to the jury a
copy of its Orders . . . after the jury requested this information.” As discussed
above, NHBB has not preserved this issue and we decline to address it. NHBB
also argues that the court erred by denying its motion for a new trial after the
court “recognized that substantial evidence existed to support the conclusion
that the Orders had been violated by Defendants.”
A jury’s verdict may only be set aside if it is conclusively against the
weight of the evidence or if it is the result of mistake, partiality, or corruption.
PMC Corp. v. Houston Wire & Cable Co., 147 N.H. 685, 692 (2002).
“Conclusively against the weight of the evidence” means that the verdict was
one no reasonable jury could return. Id. We will not overturn the trial court’s
denial of NHBB’s motion to set aside the verdict and order a new trial unless it
was an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Anderson v. Smith, 150 N.H. 788,
790 (2004).
13
Although the trial court gave more credit to NHBB’s allegations of
spoliation, it acknowledged that the jury was free to find differently and
submitted the case to the jury. That decision was not erroneous. After the
jury apparently credited the defendants, it was not an unsustainable exercise
of discretion for the trial court to uphold the verdict in light of conflicting
testimony.
Finally, NHBB argues that the trial court erred by denying its motion for
sanctions and referring the spoliation issue to the New Hampshire Attorney
General for criminal investigation. NHBB argues that the trial court
misinterpreted our holding in Mortgage Specialists as constraining its inherent
power to sanction discovery abuses. NHBB did not, however, present the issue
in its notice of appeal. See Guyotte, 157 N.H. at 623 (we will not review any
issue that was not raised in the notice of appeal). After thorough review of the
record, we also conclude that the trial court’s decision was not plain error. See
Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. Accordingly, we will not address it.
We write briefly, however, to clarify any misunderstanding of our holding
in Mortgage Specialists, 153 N.H. 764. The defendants in Mortgage Specialists
destroyed evidence prior to trial, failed to produce certain documents and
violated the trial court’s injunction forbidding them from originating mortgages
using allegedly misappropriated trade secrets. Id. at 782. In response to the
plaintiff’s motion for sanctions, the trial court required the defendants to pay
fines “to vindicate the integrity of the court,” as well as reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs. Id. at 785. We held that the imposition of punitive fines to
protect the court’s integrity amounted to sanctions for criminal contempt as
opposed to civil contempt. Id. at 791. Because the conduct the court was
punishing occurred outside its presence, it had no authority to summarily
impose punitive fines for the defendants’ indirect criminal contempt. Id.
Rather, if the trial court wished to vindicate its integrity, it was required to
refer the matter for prosecution by a disinterested party. Id. at 789. It was the
nature of the sanction — punitive fines — not the character of the defendants’
conduct, that required disinterested prosecution. In no way did our holding
affect a trial court’s inherent authority to sanction discovery abuses by
awarding reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, or by imposing any other
appropriate sanction. See Super. Ct. R. 35 g(2).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
14