THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Mental Health Practice
No. 2008-382
APPEAL OF LAURENCE M. KELLY, Ed.D
(New Hampshire Board of Mental Health Practice)
Argued: January 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 3, 2009
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Robert E. Murphy, Jr.
and Gregory M. Sargent on the brief, and Mr. Murphy orally), for the petitioner.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Anthony I. Blenkinsop, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the New Hampshire Board of
Mental Health Practice.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Laurence M. Kelly, Ed.D., appeals an
order of the New Hampshire Board of Mental Health Practice (Board) finding
that he engaged in professional misconduct and imposing discipline. We
reverse.
The Board found or the record supports the following facts. Dr. Kelly has
been a licensed psychologist since 1985. He has a private practice in
Manchester, where he provides consultation, evaluation and treatment services
for children, adolescents and families. He also provides similar services for
individuals suffering from substance abuse and he is employed as a school
psychologist by the Manchester School District.
This appeal arises out of a consultation by Dr. Kelly with Patient A, a
divorced father seeking overnight visitation with his minor daughter. In 2003,
Patient A received a court order requiring him to satisfy certain conditions “in
order . . . to be in a position to request the reinstatement of overnight visitation
[with his daughter].” The order provided that:
[T]he Court will not entertain a request by [Patient A] for the
resumption of overnight visitation with [his daughter] until he
does the following:
1. Complete a new psychological evaluation.
2. Present supporting expert testimony at a hearing respecting
overnight visitation and establish that [he] has successfully dealt
with anger and control issues and parenting issues as they relate
to [his daughter].
3. Document the successful completion of an individual parenting
program focusing on age and gender appropriate expectations and
related parenting behavior.
Patient A retained Dr. Kelly to help him satisfy the conditions set forth in the
order.
Dr. Kelly performed a full psychological evaluation of Patient A in
November 2003 and completed a written report. He also had several one-hour
therapy sessions with Patient A. Before the sessions, Dr. Kelly sometimes saw
Patient A and his daughter interacting in his waiting room, and he testified
that he observed their relationship to be a warm and loving one.
Dr. Kelly was subpoenaed by Patient A to testify at the subsequent court
hearing on visitation. He testified to the substance of his evaluation report, in
which he recommended to the trial court that Patient A be permitted overnight
visitation with his daughter. Among other things, his report made the following
recommendations:
1. Increase visitation with daughter, both [father and daughter]
would grow from the interaction.
2. [The father] could pick his daughter up at school on Friday and
return her home between 6 or 7 on Sunday every other weekend.
3. Every other holiday could be worked out between mother and
father.
4. [The father] should be allowed to spend two-weeks vacation with
his daughter every year.
5. Individual counseling [for the father] to deal with anxiety, career
counseling, and parenting issues.
2
Prior to the visitation hearing, Dr. Kelly submitted a letter to the trial
judge “to outline [his] testimony revolving around [Patient A],” elaborating upon
and explaining, in part, the basis for the recommendations. The letter included
the following observations and recommendations with respect to visitation:
5. Parenting and custody issues: all of the research supports that
the mental health of the child is impacted adversely by strife
between parents. Both parents need to work together for the good
of the child with [Patient A] playing an increasing role. The roles of
mother and father are equally important and essential for the
parenting of a healthy child.
6. Increase visitation with daughter: Both would grow from the
interaction. The research states that parenting changes people for
the better on both ends. A father can learn patience, love,
compassion and empathy through effective parenting. It is a
profound life experience that can change both father and daughter
forever. [Patient A] is committed to being a better father with each
passing day. He completed a parenting course last year and lives
the things he learned.
7. [Patient A] would pickup [sic] his daughter at school on Friday and
return[ ] her [to] her mother’s house between 6:00 or 7:00 p.m.
every other weekend. School is often the best place to pick up a
child due to . . . feelings of safety and security. Schools are well
supervised and comfortable for the child.
8. Every other holiday could be worked out between mother and
father. The best parenting decisions are made by honest and open
communication between mother and father. Each parent should
support the decisions made by the other. Each side should make
compromises.
9. [Patient A] should be allowed two weeks vacation with his daughter
every year. The more normal the visitation schedule the deeper
the relationship between parent and child. Most families take
vacations that last two weeks long and entail special times and
experiences. [Patient A] would like to give his daughter quality
times and experience each summer.
Prior to the court hearing, Patient A’s ex-wife filed a complaint against
Dr. Kelly with the Board, alleging that he was “out of line” and “unethical.”
Specifically, she complained that his opinion that “both [father and daughter]
would grow from the interaction” was a statement “regarding [the minor
3
daughter with whom] he has . . . had [no] contact” and that it was made
without knowledge of the issues involved in the family’s visitation dispute.
Dr. Kelly responded to the complaint, denying any wrongdoing. In his
letter to the Board, he wrote: “I was requested to evaluate [Patient A] . . . as
part of a Court Order. I submitted a psychological report in compliance with a
Court Order with the understanding that I would . . . be open to cross
examination . . . as deemed appropriate.” He further asserted that his “piece
was to evaluate[ ] [Patient A] with respect to his mental health issues and
capability of caring for a minor child” and that his evaluation was “only one
component considered by the Courts.” Dr. Kelly explained that he had not
made any custody recommendations, only recommendations regarding
visitation that were based upon empirical test data, years of clinical experience
and knowledge of Patient A. He did not claim that he evaluated the daughter;
nor did he claim to have provided an opinion of the psychological
characteristics of anyone other than Patient A.
The Board conducted an investigation of the complaint and issued a
report, noting that Dr. Kelly’s statement was all-inclusive in its scope referring
to all children. The report noted that “[h]e did not speak to the child . . . or to
her therapist or any of her care givers to obtain further information regarding
any specific benefit or harm such visits would have on her.” The Board’s report
concluded that “[i]n order to have acted as the expert witness regarding the
visitation and parenting issues, Dr. Kelly should have conducted interviews
with the child, her caregivers and therapist,” and that “[his] opinion that the
child would benefit from increased visitation with her father without further
investigation of the child was not the action recommended by [American
Psychological Association, Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct, Standard] 9.01(b).”
In its Notice of Hearing issued after the investigation, the Board identified
the issues to be determined:
A. Whether, by making a recommendation in writing regarding
visitation between Patient A and the minor child, [Dr. Kelly]
engaged in professional misconduct in violation of RSA 330-
A:27, II(c) and/or (d); [New Hampshire Administrative Rules,
Mhp] 501.02(a)(1); and [American Psychological Association,
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct,
Standard] 9.01(a) and/or (b); and/or
B. Whether, by reporting recommendations regarding visitation
between Patient A and the minor child by offering testimony in
court, [Dr. Kelly] engaged in professional misconduct in
violation of [the same statute and/or rules].
4
C. If any of the above allegations are proven, whether and to what
extent [Dr. Kelly] should be subjected to one or more of the
disciplinary sanctions authorized by RSA 330-A:27, III.
At his hearing before the Board, Dr. Kelly was the only witness, and the
parties stipulated to all exhibits. The Board was comprised of public members
and mental health professionals, although no member was a psychologist. As
a preliminary matter, the Board heard and denied a motion to dismiss
presented orally by counsel for Dr. Kelly.
During his direct and cross-examination, Dr. Kelly explained how he
conducted his evaluation of Patient A, and how he presented the results in his
report, the letter to the trial judge and his testimony at the visitation hearing.
He identified for the Board the current research in his field and discussed his
thirty years of clinical experience as a psychologist. He also testified that the
testing he performed on Patient A, the research in his field and his own clinical
work provided a sufficient basis for his recommendations with respect to
Patient A’s visitation with his daughter. Dr. Kelly made clear that his
recommendations were not professional opinions of the daughter’s
psychological characteristics. Rather, they were intended to be understood in
the global sense that “[o]n sound psychological princip[le]” he “ha[d] not met a
child yet that wouldn’t benefit from a father being more involved.” Hearing
counsel for the Board presented no witnesses and no evidence as to the
appropriate standard of care for a psychologist under Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct, Standards 9.01(a) or (b). See American
Psychological Association, Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct (APA Code of Conduct), Standard 9.01(a)-(b) (2002), at
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code2002.pdf.
In its order, the Board found:
Dr. Kelly never represented . . . that his evaluations or
opinions were based upon examinations conducted of [the
daughter or her mother]. He accurately portrayed in the [report
and letter] and in his testimony . . . that his evaluative comments
were based exclusively on examination of Patient A. In his court
testimony, Dr. Kelly further submitted that his many years [of]
experience as a psychologist further substantiate his opinions.
Asked in Board testimony whether he had an opinion to a
reasonable degree of certainty within his science of psychology as
to whether the evaluation that he performed had an appropriate
basis, Dr. Kelly answered that he did.
5
The Board also granted Dr. Kelly’s request for findings that he
“expressed the limitation of the basis of his psychological report and
recommendation repeatedly throughout his testimony” and that
[i]n a colloquy between [Patient A] representing himself [at the
visitation hearing] and [the trial judge], the judge made clear that
the judge and the parties were aware of the limited basis of the
evaluation. [The trial judge said to Patient A that] “[Dr. Kelly]
wasn’t given a task that in terms of his presenting testimony for
you sir that he had to speak to the mother or the Guardian Ad
Litem as a condition to do so. I’m aware of that and so is [the
mother’s attorney].”
(Citations and brackets omitted.)
Nonetheless, the Board concluded that Dr. Kelly engaged in misconduct
because his letter to the trial judge and his evaluation report violated APA Code
of Conduct, Standards 9.01(a) and (b). The Board found, in relevant part that:
Dr. Kelly’s five enumerated recommendations as reflected in his
Psychological Report [were] insufficiently substantiated on
information and techniques for such opinions for a psychologist.
Dr. Kelly’s opinions go beyond commenting upon and directing
actions that would be strictly those of Patient A. Dr. Kelly
recommends increased visitation with the daughter, opining that,
“both would grow from the interaction” and then asserts that
“every other holiday could be worked out between mother and
father.” Such a recommendation would require evaluation of and
direction to persons Dr. Kelly did not examine and concerning
whom he had insufficient information.
With respect to his letter to the trial judge outlining his anticipated testimony
at the court hearing on visitation, the Board found: “[T]hese comments lack
adequate basis for assessment in violation of [APA Code of Conduct, Standards]
9.01(a) and (b).”
The Board imposed discipline upon Dr. Kelly, including, among other
things, restricting his professional license, requiring that he engage in a period
of supervision for twelve months, requiring that he provide a copy of the
Board’s order to his current employers and affiliates and mandating that the
Board’s order become a permanent part of his public file. Dr. Kelly’s motion for
reconsideration was denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Dr. Kelly argues that: (1) the Board erred in denying his
motion to dismiss because hearing counsel presented no evidence that he did
6
not have an adequate basis for his opinions and testimony; (2) the Board
violated his right to be notified of the charges against him at the
commencement of the proceeding; (3) the Board failed to consider several
mitigating factors in its imposition of discipline; and (4) the Board’s imposition
of discipline was grossly disproportionate to the alleged misconduct and in
excess of its authority.
Our standard of review for the Board’s decisions is governed by RSA
541:13 (2007). See RSA 330-A:29, VII (2004). We defer to the Board’s findings
of fact, see Appeal of City of Manchester, 153 N.H. 289, 292 (2006), and we will
reverse its decision only if it is erroneous as a matter of law, or if we are
satisfied by a clear preponderance of the evidence that its order was unjust or
unreasonable. Appeal of Lowy, 156 N.H. 57, 60 (2007).
The Board has the authority to conduct disciplinary hearings for any
alleged unprofessional or dishonorable conduct by a mental health
practitioner. See RSA 330-A:27, II(c) (2004). The Board’s definition of what
constitutes professional or dishonorable conduct for a psychologist includes
failure to adhere to the APA Code of Conduct. See N.H. Admin. Rules, Mhp
501.02(a)(1) (“A [psychologist] shall adhere to the ethical principles of the
profession . . . as adopted by . . . the American Psychological Association.”).
We review the Board’s interpretation of its administrative rules de novo,
ascribing the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used and looking at
the regulatory scheme as a whole and not piecemeal. See Appeal of Morton,
158 N.H. 76, 78 (2008). Although we accord deference to the Board’s
interpretation of the rule, that deference is not absolute. See id. at 78-79. We
still examine its interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the language
of the regulation and with the purpose the regulation is intended to serve. See
id. at 79.
We first examine APA Code of Conduct, Standard 9.01, which constitutes
the basis for the alleged misconduct. Standard 9.01 provides:
Bases for [Psychological] Assessments
(a) Psychologists base the opinions contained in their
recommendations, reports, and diagnostic or evaluative
statements, including forensic testimony, on information and
techniques sufficient to substantiate their findings. . . .
(b) Except as noted in 9.01(c), psychologists provide opinions of the
psychological characteristics of individuals only after they have
conducted an examination of the individuals adequate to support
their statements or conclusions. When, despite reasonable efforts,
such an examination is not practical, psychologists document the
efforts they made and the result of those efforts, clarify the
7
probable impact of their limited information on the reliability and
validity of their opinions, and appropriately limit the nature and
extent of their conclusions or recommendations. . . .
(c) When psychologists conduct a record review or provide
consultation or supervision and an individual examination is not
warranted or necessary for the opinion, psychologists explain this
and the sources of information on which they based their
conclusions and recommendations.
On the record before us, we hold that the Board erred in its
interpretation and application of the APA Code of Conduct to the
circumstances of this case. One goal of the APA Code of Conduct is to promote
“the welfare and protection of the individuals and groups with whom
psychologists work.” APA Code of Conduct, Preamble at 3. The APA Code of
Conduct further provides that “the application of an [APA Code of Conduct]
Standard may vary depending on the context” and that “[w]hether a
psychologist has violated the [APA Code of Conduct] standards does not by
itself determine whether . . . legal consequences occur.” APA Code of Conduct,
Introduction and Applicability at 2.
In its rulings with regard to APA Code of Conduct, Standard 9.01(a), the
Board appears to have concluded that Dr. Kelly expressed opinions about the
daughter that were not based upon information and techniques sufficient to
substantiate his findings. However, the Board’s findings of fact do not support
the conclusion that Dr. Kelly expressed opinions about the daughter, and the
trial court’s order did not request or require such opinions.
The Board’s own report of its investigation of the complaint noted that
Dr. Kelly’s statement was all-inclusive in its scope referring to all children. A
review of the record reveals that Dr. Kelly consistently and repeatedly
expressed that none of the opinions or recommendations he provided were
made with respect to the daughter in particular, but were offered only with
respect to Patient A and parent-child relationships generally, based upon his
years of clinical experience. Dr. Kelly’s entire psychologist-patient relationship
with Patient A was circumscribed by court order. He was retained solely to
comply with a court order requiring Patient A to undergo a psychological
evaluation. He was subpoenaed to testify about his opinions concerning
Patient A as they related to his capacity to have visitation with his daughter.
He was not ordered to evaluate the daughter, and at all times the parties
involved and the trial judge were fully aware of the limitations of his
recommendations, whether they were presented in court or in writing. No one
could reasonably have been misled about the scope or bases of his opinions.
Hearing counsel presented no evidence to show that Dr. Kelly provided an
8
opinion concerning any individual other than Patient A or that his conduct
undermined the welfare and protection of those with whom he worked.
We observe that the Board’s ruling on the alleged violation of APA Code of
Conduct, Standard 9.01(a) was non-specific, stating that Dr. Kelly’s
recommendations “would require evaluation of and direction to persons Dr.
Kelly did not examine and concerning whom he had insufficient information.”
With regard to Dr. Kelly’s observations of the father and daughter in his waiting
room, the Board stated: “[S]uch contacts fall short of a professionally adequate
basis for the assessments embodied in Dr. Kelly’s court testimony, in violation
of [APA Code of Conduct, Standards] 9.01(a) and (b).” The language of the
order suggests that the Board interpreted APA Code of Conduct, Standard
9.01(a) to mean that Dr. Kelly should have examined or otherwise gathered
information from additional, unnamed individuals or sources to comply with
the Standard. It is possible that the Board intended these statements to mean
that, in addition, it found that Dr. Kelly’s opinions as they pertained to Patient
A were not based upon information and techniques sufficient to substantiate
his findings as required by the APA Code of Conduct. If this is the case, then
we disagree.
The record provides thorough explanations of the evaluation procedures
Dr. Kelly used on Patient A and the significance of the results they yielded. In
his testimony before the Board, Dr. Kelly explained how the results were
represented in his report, his letter to the trial judge and his testimony at the
visitation hearing. The record contains evidence about current research in the
field of psychology, which Dr. Kelly said supports his recommendations. In
sum, Dr. Kelly testified that the evaluation, research and his own clinical
experience formed a sufficient basis for his recommendations with respect to
Patient A’s requested reinstatement of overnight visitation. Hearing counsel
presented no evidence to show that the information and techniques relied upon
by Dr. Kelly were insufficient to substantiate his recommendations.
We now turn to the Board’s application of APA Code of Conduct,
Standard 9.01(b). This Standard applies only if Dr. Kelly provided an opinion
of a psychological characteristic of an individual other than Patient A. See APA
Code of Conduct, Standard 9.01(b). The Board’s own report of its initial
investigation of the complaint as well as several of the Board’s findings stated
that his opinions were limited to Patient A, and that references to the child
were intended in the global sense that children benefit from having an involved
father. Assuming, without deciding, that the Board could reasonably have
found that the recommendation to “[i]ncrease visitation with daughter,” and
the statement that “both would grow from the interaction,” did in fact provide
an opinion as to the daughter, the Board’s ruling failed to address how this
recommendation constituted an opinion of a psychological characteristic of the
9
daughter such that an examination of the daughter would be required
pursuant to the APA Code of Conduct. See id.
We agree with the State that Petition of Grimm, 138 N.H. 42, 55 (1993),
and Appeal of Beyer, 122 N.H. 934, 939-40 (1982), provide that expert
testimony is not necessary in all cases to establish a violation of the applicable
standard of care. However, New Hampshire Administrative Rules, Mhp
206.10(a) still mandates that the burden of proof for establishing Dr. Kelly’s
alleged misconduct rests with hearing counsel: “The party asserting the
affirmative of a proposition shall have the burden of proving the truth of that
proposition by a preponderance of the evidence.” We conclude that hearing
counsel failed to carry that burden.
Having determined that the Board erroneously found Dr. Kelly engaged
in professional misconduct, we need not address the parties’ remaining
arguments.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10