THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-025
TARBELL ADMINISTRATOR, INC., TRUSTEE OF THE TARBELL FAMILY
REVOCABLE TRUST OF 2003
v.
CITY OF CONCORD
Argued: June 26, 2008
Opinion Issued: September 12, 2008
Tarbell & Brodich Professional Association, of Concord (Friedrich K.
Moeckel on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Ransmeier & Spellman Professional Corporation, of Concord (Charles P.
Bauer and John T. Alexander on the brief, and Mr. Alexander orally), for the
defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Tarbell Administrator, Inc., as trustee of the
Tarbell Family Revocable Trust (Tarbell), appeals an order of the Trial Court
(Conboy, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the defendant, City of
Concord (City). We hold that the doctrine of discretionary function immunity
bars Tarbell’s negligence claims alleging that the City failed to properly
construct a dam and failed to properly control and regulate the water level, but
does not preclude Tarbell’s remaining claims. Accordingly, we affirm in part,
reverse in part, and remand.
The record supports the following relevant facts. Tarbell owns a twenty-
one unit apartment building on North State Street in Concord (the property).
Rattlesnake Brook flows under and through the property by a channel and
exits through a culvert.
Since 1872, Penacook Lake has served as a municipal water supply
source for the City. The City manages and operates a water treatment facility
adjacent to the lake. An earthen dam and reservoir located between the lake
and Rattlesnake Brook draws water into the treatment facility. Removable
flashboards on the top of the dam allow the City to control the level of water in
the lake. If the lake’s water level exceeds capacity, an emergency spillway
provides an outlet for the excess water and prevents a breach of the dam.
Water from the emergency spillway flows directly into Rattlesnake Brook. If the
lake’s water level becomes too low to meet the city’s needs, the City pumps
water into the lake from the Contoocook River.
In 2003, after experiencing several years of drought-like conditions, the
City hired an expert to conduct a Water Supply Sustainable Yield & Drought
Management Study. The expert determined a target elevation level for the lake
and created a Reservoir Management Model (RMM) to guide the City in deciding
when it should pump water from the river to maintain an adequate water
supply. In December 2004, the Concord City Council adopted and
implemented the RMM.
The City followed the RMM guidelines for approximately one year. In
October 2005, the city experienced unusually heavy rainfalls. At the time,
pursuant to the RMM, the city was scheduled to pump water from the river into
the lake in January 2006. However, because the lake was at an unseasonably
high level, on December 29, 2005, the superintendent of the Water Treatment
Plant, James Donison, again consulted the expert. On January 6, 2006, the
expert advised the City to deviate from the RMM and refrain from pumping
water into the lake that month. The City followed this advice.
On January 17, 2006, the expert advised the City that “special attention”
needed to be given to: (1) assessing whether total or partial removal of the
flashboards was necessary “in anticipation of a large runoff event”; (2)
inspecting the downstream channel “to review . . . what may create a hazard
just in case a significant outflow were to occur” since the channel “may tend to
become a dumping ground for debris etc. when flow does not typically occur”;
and (3) inspecting the culverts to “confirm their integrity.” At that time, the
level of the lake was 185 feet, one foot above the target level.
2
According to the affidavits of Donison and Philip Bodeau, the deputy
director of the City’s General Services Department during the time in question,
the City decided not to remove the boards after analyzing how to best strike a
balance between maintaining the target lake level, the anticipated peak
summer water demands, the potential lack of rainfall conditions which would
lower the lake level, and protecting downstream property owners. Additionally,
In reaching the decision, [the City] considered the
following drawbacks to removing the boards: (a) the
loss of large amounts of a valuable resource (i.e., City
water); (b) the fact that when the boards were removed,
water certainly would have rushed down the spillway;
(c) the fact that there was no way to predict when the
boards could be replaced because the spillway would
have to be dry before this occurred; . . . (d) if the
boards were removed and left out for an unspecified
period of time, this would not have prevented a large
run-off event during unusually heavy rains[; and (e)]
the expensive costs of pumping water from the [river]
to the [lake] in the event lack of rainfall occurred and
the lake level was low.
In May 2006, New Hampshire endured a record amount of rainfall.
Consequently, the lake’s water spilled over the emergency spillway and into
Rattlesnake Brook, resulting in severe water damage to the property. Tarbell
subsequently filed this action against the City, asserting claims of: (1)
negligence for failure to properly construct the dam (count I); (2) negligence for
failure to properly maintain the drainage system (count II); (3) negligence for
failure to properly control and regulate water (count III); (4) trespass (count IV);
and (5) nuisance (count V).
The City moved for summary judgment, arguing that it was entitled to
discretionary function immunity for its decisions regarding the proper
management of the lake, water treatment plant, and spillway. On November
13, 2007, the trial court issued an order, in which it found:
[T]he decisions to refrain from pumping water and to
leave the flashboards in place do not reflect a lack of
deliberation or discretion. Rather, these decisions
show that a concentrated effort was made to best
protect and contain the City’s water supply. . . . [The
affidavits submitted by the City] indicate that city
officials considered multiple economic and social
factors with regard to the decisions made concerning
the pumping of water and the potential removal of the
3
flashboards. . . . In sum, city officials considered and
weighed alternatives, exercised official judgment and
discretion, and made basic policy decisions concerning
water supply issues. The plaintiff’s alleged injuries
arise from those decisions.
Based upon these findings, the trial court ruled that the City was entitled to
discretionary function immunity and granted the City’s motion for summary
judgment on all counts. After the trial court denied its motion for
reconsideration, Tarbell filed the instant appeal. On appeal, Tarbell argues
that the trial court erred in ruling that the City was entitled to discretionary
function immunity as to all counts in the complaint.
In reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Carter v. Concord Gen. Mut.
Ins. Co., 155 N.H. 515, 517 (2007). If our review of the evidence does not
reveal any genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
Tarbell argues first that the trial court erred in applying discretionary
function immunity to count III, which alleges that the City negligently invaded
its property by “not properly releas[ing] the waters of Penacook Lake.” Tarbell
asserts that the court was required to analyze its claim under Cannata v. Town
of Deerfield, 132 N.H. 235 (1989), which, Tarbell further contends, held that a
municipality is always liable if it, “by the use of the land which it holds only for
public governmental purposes, . . . negligently invades an adjoining owner’s
property rights.” Cannata, 132 N.H. at 241.
Resolution of this argument requires a brief review of our municipal
immunity jurisprudence. Initially, the doctrine of municipal immunity was a
creature of the judiciary, City of Dover v. Imperial Cas. & Indemn. Co., 133
N.H. 109, 112 (1990), and was premised upon the notion that “‘[i]t is better
that an individual should sustain an injury than that the public should suffer
an inconvenience,’” Gossler v. Manchester, 107 N.H. 310, 312 (1966) (quoting
Russell v. Men of Devon, 2 Term Rep. 667, 100 Eng. Rep. 359 (1789)).
Historically, it insulated municipalities “from liability for torts arising out of
negligence in the performance of governmental functions.” Opinion of the
Justices, 101 N.H. 546, 548 (1957). However, to alleviate the harshness of the
results produced by municipal immunity, our cases distinguished between
municipal functions that were “governmental with immunity on the one hand,
and proprietary with liability on the other hand.” Gossler, 107 N.H. at 315
(Kenison, J., dissenting). In practice, this often artificial distinction produced
4
results that were not only “confused, inconsistent and difficult,” id., but
absurd, see Gilman v. Concord, 89 N.H. 182, 185-87 (1937).
The confusion engendered by the rules for applying municipal immunity,
as well as concerns over the continued validity of the doctrine’s underlying
premise, caused us to acknowledge the persuasiveness of arguments for the
doctrine’s abrogation in Gossler, 107 N.H. at 314. In that case, we observed
that “[t]he rule against municipal liability for torts has been the subject of
thousands of pages of learned dissertations, and the flood of legal articles and
comments castigating the reasoning embodied in the justification of its
continuance continues unabated.” Id. at 311. However, although we noted
that “the complexities of modern government may from time to time require
some relaxation of our rule of governmental immunity,” id. at 314, the majority
in Gossler declined to abandon the doctrine because opening the door to
municipal liability could produce “nearly catastrophic” financial difficulties, id.
at 313, and, thus, “the scope of municipal liability . . . is a matter for legislative
rather than judicial determination,” id. at 315.
Subsequent to Gossler, an increasing number of states began
acknowledging the lack of administrative or fiscal reasons for retention of the
doctrine of municipal immunity and a major trend developed towards its
abolition. Merrill v. Manchester, 114 N.H. 722, 729 (1974). Following several
failed attempts by the legislature to enact legislation addressing the scope of
the doctrine, we were asked to reconsider the issue in Merrill. Id. at 727.
Merrill first noted that municipal immunity had been amended and eroded to
such an extent that all “that remains is an abstract and confusing principle
which finds literally no continuity between jurisdictions.” Id. We then
expressed concern that the doctrine is “contrary to the basic concept of the law
of torts that liability follows negligence and that individual corporations are
responsible for the negligence of their agents, servants and employees in the
course of their employment.” Id. at 725. Because we could find “no
supportable rationale upon which this judicially created exception to the
ordinary rules of liability c[ould] be predicated,” we held that it was “just and
reasonable that a change be made from our previous holdings as to municipal
immunity.” Id. at 729 (emphasis added). Accordingly, we concluded:
that the immunity from tort liability heretofore
judicially conferred upon cities and towns is hereby
abrogated except for the following exception. They are
immune from liability for acts and omissions
constituting (a) the exercise of a legislative or judicial
function, and (b) the exercise of an executive or
planning function involving the making of a basic
5
policy decision which is characterized by the exercise
of a high degree of official judgment or discretion.
Id.
The discretionary function immunity left intact by Merrill is premised
upon the notion that “certain essential, fundamental activities of government
must remain immune from tort liability so that our government can govern.”
Hacking v. Town of Belmont, 143 N.H. 546, 549 (1999) (quotations and
brackets omitted). In other words, it seeks to “limit judicial interference with
legislative and executive decision-making,” Schoff v. City of Somersworth, 137
N.H. 583, 590 (1993), because “[t]o accept a jury’s verdict as to the
reasonableness and safety of a plan of governmental services and prefer it over
the judgment of the governmental body which originally considered and passed
on the matter would be to obstruct normal governmental operations.” Gardner
v. City of Concord, 137 N.H. 253, 256 (1993). Thus, the doctrine is “tailored to
satisfy the underlying policy of preserving and respecting our system of
separation of powers.” Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co., 156 N.H. 202, 214 (2007).
Since Merrill, several opinions have addressed the scope of municipal
immunity. For instance, we have held that immunity exists for a municipality’s
decisions concerning: whether to lay out roads, Rockhouse Mt. Property
Owners Assoc. v. Town of Conway, 127 N.H. 593, 600 (1986); the location of
parking spaces, Sorenson v. City of Manchester, 136 N.H. 692, 694 (1993); the
placement or subsequent abandonment of an alleyway on a certain street in a
certain place, Gardner, 137 N.H. at 258; traffic control, Bergeron v. City of
Manchester, 140 N.H. 417, 422, 424 (1995); and the training and supervision
of basketball coaches and referees, Hacking, 143 N.H. at 550.
Each of the foregoing cases adhered to the discretionary function
analysis in ascertaining whether or not the municipality was entitled to
immunity from negligence claims. Tarbell nevertheless maintains, relying upon
Cannata, that the test for discretionary function immunity articulated in
Merrill is inapplicable to its claim in count III that the City negligently invaded
its property.
To the extent that Tarbell argues that Cannata altered, in any manner,
the comprehensive test provided in Merrill, we disagree. In Cannata, we noted
that, prior to Merrill, case law had recognized an exception to the immunity
municipalities had enjoyed “in the construction and maintenance of their
highways” for situations where “the municipality, by the use of the land which
it holds only for public governmental purposes, . . . negligently invades an
adjoining owner’s property rights.” Cannata, 132 N.H. at 241. We then
explained that the immunity provided in Merrill does not necessarily shield a
municipality from such claims because there is a distinction “between
6
providing immunity for a discretionary decision whether to install storm drains
and sewers,” as required by Merrill, “and not providing immunity for the
allegedly negligent manner in which that decision is carried out,” as was being
alleged by the plaintiffs in Cannata. Id. at 242 (emphases added); compare
Hurley v. Hudson, 112 N.H. 365, 369 (1972) (holding that a “planning board’s
approval of [a] subdivision plan without adequate drainage facilities . . . is
precisely the type of” discretionary decision entitled to immunity (emphasis
added)), with Allen v. Hampton, 107 N.H. 377, 378 (1966) (holding that a
municipality is not entitled to immunity for its negligence in constructing and
maintaining a highway). In other words, we did not create an exception to the
rule in Merrill, but rather explained our understanding of the prior case law
and how it comports with the modern rule.
Moreover, unlike the plaintiffs in Cannata who were challenging the
“negligent manner in which [a] decision [wa]s carried out,” Cannata, 132 N.H.
at 242, Tarbell is asserting in count III that the City’s decision not to lower the
water in the reservoir was itself negligent. While “[w]e have refused to adopt a
bright line rule to determine whether conduct constitutes discretionary
planning or merely the ministerial implementation of a plan,” Hacking, 143
N.H. at 549-50, the discretionary nature of the City’s decision to not remove
the flashboards is clear. In making this decision, the City had to weigh
competing economic and social factors, including “the expensive costs of
pumping water from the [river] to the [lake] in the event [of a] lack of [future]
rainfall” and protecting downstream property owners. Policy decisions of this
nature, which “involv[e] the consideration of competing economic, social, and
political factors,” Mahan v. N.H. Dep’t of Admin. Services, 141 N.H. 747, 750
(1997), are precisely the type of municipal planning that discretionary function
immunity seeks to protect. See Gardner, 137 N.H. at 257 (explaining that
conduct that is “characterized by the high degree of discretion and judgment
involved in weighing alternatives and making choices with respect to public
policy” is entitled to immunity). This is also the type of claim that Justice
Souter expressed concern about in his dissent in Cannata. See Cannata, 132
N.H. at 246 (Souter, J., dissenting). Subjecting the City to potential liability for
a negligence claim in response to this decision would be tantamount to judicial
interference with legislative or executive decision-making. See Everitt, 156
N.H. at 214. Accordingly, we hold that the City is entitled to summary
judgment as a matter of law on count III.
Tarbell argues that, even if the City is entitled to immunity on count III,
the trial court erred in granting summary judgment to the City on the
remaining counts. The City counters that discretionary function immunity also
bars the remaining claims. Rather than individually address each remaining
count, the City asserts that “[a]ll five counts are restated versions of the claim
that the City’s plan for managing reservoir run-off was deficient,” and, thus,
discretionary function immunity applies to all five counts. Alternatively, the
7
City contends that the trial court correctly granted summary judgment to the
City on all counts because Tarbell, in opposing the City’s summary judgment
motion, failed to provide facts or evidence supporting its remaining claims.
In the first paragraph of its order, the trial court set forth Tarbell’s
claims, and stated that the City had moved for summary judgment “on all
counts.” The court later explained that the City was “arguing that it [wa]s
shielded from liability for its decisions in managing [the lake], the water
treatment plant, and the spillway, pursuant to the doctrine of discretionary
function immunity.” Ultimately, the trial court found that “the City engaged in
discretionary decision-making with regard to management of the dam and the
water supply,” and, because Tarbell’s “alleged injuries ar[ose] from those
decisions, . . . the City’s acts and/or omissions . . . are shielded by
discretionary function immunity.”
The trial court, however, did not independently examine each of Tarbell’s
claims. Rather, the court appears to have granted summary judgment to the
City on all counts because it found that all of Tarbell’s claims were based upon
the City’s decisions concerning “management of the dam and the water supply”
between January and May 2006. This language appears to summarize count
III discussed above, which alleges that the City’s “maintenance and regulation
of the water flow through the [d]am unreasonably invaded [Tarbell]’s property
rights.” We disagree with the trial court that, because the City’s decisions
regarding the “management of the dam and the water supply” were entitled to
discretionary function immunity, the City was also entitled to summary
judgment on Tarbell’s remaining claims.
Count I alleges that the City “unreasonably invaded [Tarbell]’s property
rights” by failing to construct a second outlet for the lake. In granting
summary judgment on this claim, the trial court considered only whether the
City’s decisions concerning the “management of the dam and the water supply”
between January and May 2006 were entitled to discretionary function
immunity. Tarbell’s claim in count I, however, does not relate to a particular
time frame, but instead alleges that at the time the City constructed the dam, it
should have constructed more than one outlet. Thus, the trial court should
not have granted summary judgment on count I based upon its finding that the
City’s decisions regarding the “management of the dam and the water supply”
were entitled to discretionary function immunity.
However, because discretionary function immunity bars count I for
another reason, we uphold the trial court’s grant of summary judgment on this
count. See Handley v. Town of Hooksett, 147 N.H. 184, 189-90 (2001) (“This
court will sustain the decision of the trial court if there are valid alternative
grounds to support it.”). Rattlesnake Brook provides the sole outlet for the
lake. The City’s decision to construct the dam in this fashion constitutes a
8
planning decision requiring the City to make choices as to the manner in which
to construct the dam in light of its goal of providing an adequate water supply.
Cf. Hurley, 112 N.H. at 369. In so doing, the City needed to weigh the benefits
and drawbacks of constructing a dam with only one outlet, including
considering the potential impact of this type of construction upon both the
neighboring property owners and the City’s financial circumstances.
Accordingly, the City’s decision to construct the dam in this particular fashion
is characterized by a high degree of discretion and judgment, and, as such, the
City is entitled to immunity on the negligence claim asserted in count I.
Count II alleges that the City “unreasonably invaded [Tarbell]’s property
rights” by “failing to adequately maintain its water storage systems and outlets
thereto”; specifically, by failing to maintain Rattlesnake Brook and the culvert
through which the brook flows. This claim, however, is not a restated version
of Tarbell’s claim that the City was negligent in failing to properly control and
regulate the water level, and does not concern the management of the dam and
water supply. Rather, Tarbell alleges that the City’s failure to clean out the
debris that had collected in Rattlesnake Brook and the culverts obstructed the
flow of water and caused damage to Tarbell’s property. Thus, the City is not
shielded from liability on count II based upon the trial court’s finding that the
City’s decisions concerning the management of the dam and water supply are
entitled to immunity.
Furthermore, the City has not asserted and the trial court did not find
that the City has a plan or policy concerning the maintenance of the drainage
systems. In the absence of such a plan or policy, the City’s alleged failure to
maintain the drainage systems does not, as alleged, qualify as a discretionary
function entitled to immunity. See Cannata, 132 N.H. at 241. Therefore,
discretionary function immunity does not preclude count II.
Counts IV and V allege claims for intentional trespass and private
nuisance, respectively. These allegations are not restated versions of the
negligence claim asserted in count III. The trespass claim alleges that the City
deliberately invaded the property. The private nuisance claim asserts, inter
alia, that the City used its property in an unlawful or unreasonable manner.
Accordingly, the trial court should not have granted summary judgment on
counts IV and V on the grounds that the City’s decision concerning the
management of the dam and water supply was entitled to discretionary
function immunity.
Moreover, municipalities have long been held liable for such claims. See
Ferguson v. Keene, 111 N.H. 222, 224 (1971) (“a municipality is liable as any
other owner if the use of its property results in a nuisance”); O’Brien v. Derry,
73 N.H. 198, 204 (1905); Rhobidas v. Concord, 70 N.H. 90, 110-11 (1899);
Restatement of Torts § 895C comment e at 409 (1979); 4 J. Martinez & M.
9
Libonati, Local Government Law §§ 27.04, 27.05 (2006); 18 E. McQuillin,
Municipal Corporations §§ 53.02.10, at 151-52, 53.04.10, at 187, 53.11, at
280-83, 53.13, at 285, 53.59.10, at 471, 53.59.40, at 478-87 (3d ed. rev.
2003). “The actionability of intentional infliction of harm to property interests,
like inverse condemnation, [trespass,] and the concept of nuisance, has
constitutional underpinnings in the restraint on the taking of private property
for public use without just compensation.” 4 J. Martinez & M. Libonati, supra
§ 27.04; see also Gilman, 89 N.H. at 186; 18 E. McQuillan, supra § 53.02.10,
at 151-52 (“The nuisance exception is grounded in the beliefs that (1) a
nuisance involving an invasion of private property resembles an
unconstitutional taking, and (2) creating a state of affairs dangerous to life and
limb goes significantly beyond mere negligence.”); cf. Gilman v. Laconia, 55
N.H. 130, 137-38 (1875). As a result of the constitutional implications of such
claims, “[w]hile a municipality enjoys immunity for its exercise of discretion
and judgment in the development of a . . . plan, such immunity does not
protect it from liability for the creation of a nuisance or actual trespass.”
Pinkowski v. Township of Montclair, 691 A.2d 837, 844 (N.J. Super. Ct. App.
Div. 1997) (citations omitted); cf. Gooden v. City of Atlanta, 531 S.E.2d 364,
366 (Ga. Ct. App. 2000); Asiala v. City of Fitchburg, 505 N.E.2d 575, 578
(Mass. App. Ct. 1987); Paduch v. City of Johnson City, 896 S.W.2d 767, 772
(Tenn. 1995).
Thus, in this case, where Tarbell alleges that the City’s actions in
creating a private nuisance, see Heston v. Ousler, 119 N.H. 58, 60-61 (1979),
and intentionally trespassing upon the property amount to a physical taking of
the property, cf. Gilman, 55 N.H. at 137-38, discretionary function immunity
does not bar these claims. To hold otherwise would require an expansion of
the scope of immunity, rather than limit such immunity, as Merrill intended.
See Merrill, 114 N.H. at 729-30; see also Everitt, 156 N.H. at 214 (refusing to
expand the scope of discretionary function immunity and explaining that “[a]s
the last remnant of common law municipal immunity, the exception was
tailored to satisfy the underlying policy of preserving and respecting our system
of separation of powers”). Indeed, “[t]he prevailing rule of torts today is that
where there is negligence by an individual or a corporation[,] liability follows.
Immunity is the rare exception.” Merrill, 114 N.H. at 728 (citations omitted).
The City therefore is not automatically absolved from liability on Tarbell’s
claims of intentional trespass and private nuisance. See generally Cooperrider,
The Court, The Legislature, and Governmental Tort Liability in Michigan, 72
Mich. L. Rev. 187, 238-49 (1973).
Although counts II, IV, and V survive because they are not barred by
discretionary function immunity, we express no opinion as to the validity or
viability of these claims. For the purposes of this appeal, in its motion for
summary judgment, the City argued only that the doctrine of discretionary
function immunity barred Tarbell’s claims. Therefore, to the extent that counts
10
II, IV, and V are not properly pled, unsupported by facts or evidence, or
otherwise unsound, because the City did not request summary judgment on
any basis other than discretionary function immunity, we do not consider
whether such alternative grounds would support the trial court’s grant of
summary judgment on these counts.
In conclusion, we emphasize that “the legislature has authority to specify
the terms and conditions of suit against cities and towns, limit the amount of
recovery, or take any other action which in its wisdom it may deem proper.”
Merrill, 114 N.H. at 730 (citation omitted). Thus, as other state legislatures
have done, see generally 18 E. McQuillan, supra §§ 53.02.10, at 154-58,
53.02.20, at 159-66, our legislature is free to adopt a more comprehensive
scheme delineating the boundaries of municipal liability.
We affirm the trial court’s grant of summary judgment to the City on
counts I and III, reverse the court’s grant of summary judgment on counts II,
IV, and V, and remand for proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
11