THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2008-597
IN THE MATTER OF MANON F. LYNN AND PAUL J. LYNN
Submitted: February 18, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 24, 2009
Manon F. Lynn, by brief, pro se.
Paul J. Lynn, by brief, pro se.
DUGGAN, J. The respondent, Paul J. Lynn (father), appeals the order of
the Derry Family Division (Ryan, J.) granting the motion of the petitioner,
Manon F. Lynn (mother), to modify a child support order. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The parties divorced in August
2005, and have four children from the marriage. One child resides on his own,
one resides with her mother, and the other two children reside with their
father. As of July 2006, the mother was responsible for providing health
insurance coverage and paying $300.00 per month in child support, which
represented a downward deviation from the guidelines because of her limited
income. In April 2008, the mother filed a motion to modify her child support
obligation because she had been accepted into a nursing program at New
Hampshire Technical Institute, and intended to change her employment to
part-time. The mother also alleged that her part-time status will make health
insurance coverage unaffordable.
The trial court granted the mother’s request and modified the child
support order so that neither party is responsible for child support payments
and the mother is no longer responsible for providing health insurance. The
trial court cited the mother’s “income while in school” as a “substantial change
in circumstances” that warranted modification. The trial court also found that
the special circumstances of the mother’s “low income” and “primary
residential responsibility for [one] child” warranted a downward deviation from
the child support guidelines. The trial court ruled that the mother’s “attempt
to improve her income and her marketability is in the best interest of all parties
in the long term.” The father moved for reconsideration, which the court
denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the father argues that the trial court committed an
unsustainable exercise of discretion in deviating from the guidelines. The
father argues that the trial court found that the mother is voluntarily
underemployed and erred by not imputing income to her. The father also
argues that the mother voluntarily reduced her income to circumvent her child
support obligations.
We will affirm the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are
unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. In the Matter of Cole &
Ford, 156 N.H. 609, 610 (2007). Because trial courts are in the best position to
determine the parties’ respective needs and their respective abilities to meet
them, we will set aside a modification order only if it clearly appears from the
evidence that the trial court’s exercise of discretion is unsustainable. In the
Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152 N.H. 55, 59 (2005).
To obtain a modification of support obligations within three years of the
entry of the last order of support, the moving party must show a substantial
change in circumstances that makes continuing the original order improper
and unfair. In the Matter of Adams & Houle, 156 N.H. 257, 258 (2007).
Although RSA 458-C:7 does not specify what constitutes a substantial change
in circumstances, the trial court may consider a variety of factors in
determining whether the financial situation of the parties has changed and
whether modification is required. See In the Matter of Rohdenburg &
Rohdenburg, 149 N.H. 276, 280 (2003) (remarriage and consequential duties of
support to step-children may warrant modification); Lafond v. Lafond, 119 N.H.
512, 514 (1979) (inability to pay and the reasons for such inability are factors
in determining if modification is warranted). A parent’s decision to attend
school and become voluntarily underemployed is a factor that the trial court
may consider in determining if modification is warranted. See Becker, Spousal
and Child Support and the “Voluntary Reduction of Income” Doctrine, 29
Conn. L. Rev. 647, 672-73 (1997); see also Kelly v. Hougham, 504 N.W.2d 440,
441-42 (Wis. Ct. App. 1993).
2
When calculating the child support amount, either in the original child
support award or once the trial court makes a finding for modification, the trial
court uses the parents’ gross income. See RSA 458-C:2, I, IV, VI (Supp. 2008);
RSA 458-C:3, II (Supp. 2008). Included within the definition of “gross income”
is the following language: “The [trial] court, in its discretion, may consider as
gross income the difference between the amount a parent is earning and the
amount a parent has earned in cases where the parent voluntarily becomes
unemployed or underemployed, unless the parent is physically or mentally
incapacitated.” RSA 458-C:2, IV(a). Once the trial court determines the
parents’ income, it then uses the child support formula to calculate the child
support obligation. RSA 458-C:3.
Here, the trial court modified the child support order, finding the
substantial change in circumstances to be “the [mother’s] income while in
school.” The trial court did not impute income to the mother. Instead, the trial
court ruled: “[The mother’s] attempt to improve her income and her
marketability is in the best interest of all parties in the long term.”
The father argues that because the trial court found that the mother was
voluntarily underemployed, the trial court was then required to impute income
to her. We reject this argument. Pursuant to the guidelines, whether to
impute income is discretionary. See RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) (“The court, in its
discretion, may consider . . . .”). Thus, if the trial court decides to modify the
child support order based upon a parent’s decision to attend school, it is within
the trial court’s discretion not to impute income despite the voluntary
underemployment. See In the Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 354
(2006) (holding that trial court has discretion to impute less than the total
difference between the amount the parent is earning and the amount the
parent has earned).
The trial court went on to find special circumstances for a downward
deviation of the guidelines—specifically, the mother’s “low income” and
“primary residential responsibility for [one] child.” The trial court may make
adjustments to the application of the child support guidelines if it finds “special
circumstances” to warrant a downward deviation. See RSA 458-C:5 (Supp.
2008). RSA 458-C:5, I, lists “special circumstances” that would warrant an
adjustment from the child support guidelines. Included within this list is
“[s]ignificantly high or low income of the obligee or obligor,” RSA 458-C:5, I(b),
and “economic consequences of the presence of . . . children,” RSA 458-C:5,
I(c). Thus, the trial court complied with the statutory requirements in making
specific written findings of special circumstances. See RSA 458-C:5.
Because the sparse record before us does not include a transcript of the
hearing for our review, see Sup. Ct. R. 13(2), we cannot conclude that the trial
court erred in these findings. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248,
3
250 (2004) (because of lack of a transcript, supreme court must assume
evidence supported result reached by trial court). For this same reason, we
must assume that the evidence does not support the father’s argument that the
mother voluntarily reduced her income to circumvent the child support
guidelines.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and HICKS, J., concurred; DALIANIS, J., concurred
specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. I agree with the majority that there
was no error of law here and that, because the respondent, Paul J. Lynn
(father), did not provide a transcript as part of the record on appeal, we must
assume that the record supported the trial court’s findings and that it
sustainably exercised its discretion. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004). As the appealing party, the father had the burden to
provide this court with a record sufficient to decide his issues on appeal. See
Rix v. Kinderworks Corp., 136 N.H. 548, 553 (1992); see also Sup. Ct. R. 13.
Without a transcript of the trial court hearing, we assume that the evidence
supported its decision. See Bean, 151 N.H. at 250. We review the trial court’s
order for legal errors only. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 397 (1997).
Because the father failed to demonstrate that the trial court committed any
error of law, we must affirm its decision.
I write separately because I am concerned that this opinion could be
misconstrued to entitle a parent to a reduced child support obligation
whenever the parent has voluntarily reduced his or her income so as to attend
school. This is not so. While the applicable statutes allow the result in this
case, they do not require it. There might well be circumstances in a particular
case that would compel the trial court to impute income to such a parent (and,
accordingly, deny a motion to modify or reduce child support). Without a
transcript, we cannot say whether such circumstances existed here.
4