THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-268
WESLEY C. PIKE, JR.
v.
ANU R. MULLIKIN & a.
Argued: October 8, 2008
Opinion Issued: January 14, 2009
Francis G. Holland, of Nashua, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, P.C., of Manchester (William C.
Saturley on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiff, Wesley C. Pike, Jr., appeals two orders
of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.). The first order denied summary judgment
on the issue of whether his antenuptial agreement was enforceable. The
second granted summary judgment to the defendants, Anu R. Mullikin and
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., and dismissed the plaintiff’s claim for legal
malpractice. We affirm in part, reverse in part and remand.
The record supports the following facts. In November 1998, Pike married
Mary Casey Bekaert. Eleven days prior to their wedding, Pike and Bekaert
executed an antenuptial agreement prepared by Mullikin, an attorney at the
law firm of Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A. (Devine Millimet). The agreement
was signed at Pike’s office, with Mullikin present as Pike’s counsel. Bekaert
had no counsel present, but had retained a Massachusetts attorney, Richard
Glidden, to advise her with regard to the agreement. Glidden had represented
Pike in real estate transactions that occurred approximately two months
earlier. Three days after the agreement was signed, Glidden signed Exhibit C of
the agreement, entitled “Certification of Attorney.” Exhibit C provided that
Bekaert had voluntarily executed the agreement, had consulted with Glidden
before signing it, and that he had advised her of her rights in connection with
it.
Pike had three children from an earlier marriage. His purpose in
requesting the antenuptial agreement was to protect his family business, New
Hampshire Northeast Credit Services, Inc., and to insure that his assets would
be preserved for his children. Under the terms of the agreement, Bekaert was
not entitled to any assets held in Pike’s name or any alimony in the event they
divorced.
After six years of marriage, Bekaert filed for divorce and contested the
validity of the antenuptial agreement. The Family Division at Portsmouth
(Fishman, M.; DeVries, J.) awarded Bekaert $3,500 per month in alimony
under a partial temporary stipulation and scheduled a hearing on the validity
of the contested agreement. The division “STRONGLY advised [the parties] to
attend mediation.” Because the family division unequivocally encouraged
mediation and his new attorney raised concerns with him about the
enforceability of the agreement, Pike feared it would not be upheld, and that
his assets of $4,200,000 might be divided equally with Bekaert. Pike and
Bekaert decided to meet without counsel and negotiated a permanent
stipulation under which she would receive approximately $718,000. In signing
the permanent stipulation, both parties certified to the family division that they
were “satisfied that it [was] a fair and equitable resolution of [the] divorce.” The
permanent stipulation was incorporated into the divorce decree.
Pike then brought this malpractice action, alleging that Mullikin and her
employer, Devine Millimet, were negligent in the drafting, preparation and
execution of the antenuptial agreement. He moved for summary judgment,
claiming that the agreement was legally unenforceable because Bekaert did not
have the benefit of independent counsel to review the agreement prior to its
execution. The superior court denied the motion, finding genuine issues of
material fact as to whether or not Glidden was independent and whether he
gave appropriate advice to Bekaert before she signed the agreement.
Mullikin and Devine Millimet also moved for summary judgment, arguing
that: (1) judicial estoppel barred Pike from bringing his malpractice action
because it was based upon a claim that the antenuptial agreement was legally
flawed, a legal position inconsistent with the permanent stipulation he agreed
to in his divorce; (2) fairness and public policy favoring settlements precluded
Pike from bringing a malpractice claim because he willingly and satisfactorily
2
settled his divorce dispute; and (3) since Pike failed to litigate the validity of the
antenuptial agreement in the family division, he cannot prove causation. The
trial court granted the defendants’ motion and dismissed the suit. This appeal
followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s summary judgment ruling, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party. Cohoon v. IDM Software, 153
N.H. 1, 4 (2005). If our review of the evidence fails to reveal any genuine issue
of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Orr v. Goodwin, 157 N.H. 511,
514 (2008). However, we review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo. Id.
Pike first argues that the trial court erred in holding that the doctrine of
judicial estoppel barred his legal malpractice action. We agree.
The doctrine of judicial estoppel generally prevents a party from
prevailing in one phase of a case using one argument and then relying upon a
contradictory argument to prevail in another phase. In the Matter of Carr &
Edmunds, 156 N.H. 498, 502 (2007). The general function of judicial estoppel
is to prevent “abuse of the judicial process, resulting in an affront to the
integrity of the courts.” 31 C.J.S. Estoppel and Waiver § 188 (2008); see also
New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 749-50 (2001). While the
circumstances under which judicial estoppel may be invoked vary, three
factors typically inform the doctrine’s application: (1) whether the party’s later
position is clearly inconsistent with the party’s earlier position; (2) whether the
earlier position was accepted by the court; and (3) whether the party seeking to
assert a later inconsistent position would derive an unfair advantage or impose
an unfair detriment on the opposing party if not estopped. New Hampshire v.
Maine, 532 U.S. at 750-51; Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. at 502.
The instant case concerns the first factor; namely, whether Pike’s current
position that the antenuptial agreement is unenforceable and that Mullikin
committed malpractice is clearly inconsistent with his earlier agreement to
resolve his divorce by stipulation in which he expressly acknowledged that the
settlement was “a fair and equitable resolution.” See New Hampshire v. Maine,
532 U.S. at 750-51; Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. at 502. We conclude that it is
not.
In the divorce proceeding, Pike and Bekaert sought to end their marriage.
Upon advice from his counsel that the antenuptial agreement was legally
flawed, Pike elected to meet with Bekaert to negotiate a divorce settlement
rather than bear the risk and anticipated costs, both financial and personal, of
litigating the agreement’s validity in the family division. The record supports
3
that Pike pursued this strategy because he believed that if he did not settle,
there was a significant risk that the trial court would award Bekaert half of all
assets titled in his name. See RSA 458:16-a, II (2004) (establishing
presumption that equal division is an equitable division of property in a divorce
proceeding).
During the divorce proceeding, Pike never asserted any claims or took
any position with respect to the validity of the antenuptial agreement or the
adequacy of the legal services he received in connection with its drafting.
However, the record supports that his concern over its validity resulted in a
negotiated permanent stipulation. His acknowledgement that the stipulation
was “fair and equitable” is not clearly inconsistent with his claim that the
defendants committed malpractice. Pike contends that because he had
concerns over the validity of the antenuptial agreement, he settled with Bekaert
to mitigate potential losses that would likely have occurred if the antenuptial
agreement were struck down. Under these circumstances, it was not
unreasonable for Pike to agree that the stipulation was “fair and equitable.” In
his subsequent malpractice action, he claimed that Mullikin breached a duty
she owed to him in drafting and executing the agreement, and that her breach
caused him harm. These two positions are not “clearly inconsistent,” see Carr
& Edmunds, 156 N.H. at 502, and we find nothing in the record which
indicates that permitting Pike’s legal malpractice action to go forward would
entail an abuse of the judicial process resulting in an affront to the integrity of
the courts. See New Hampshire v. Maine, 532 U.S. at 749-50. Because we
find no contradiction in the positions taken, we do not consider the remaining
factors which inform the application of judicial estoppel. See Porter v. City of
Manchester, 155 N.H. 149, 157 (2007).
Pike further argues that the trial court erred in ruling that fairness and
public policy favoring settlements precluded him from bringing a malpractice
claim following his settlement of the divorce. We agree.
To refute Pike’s argument, Mullikin points to a New Jersey Supreme
Court case which held on public policy grounds that “knowing and voluntary
acceptance of a [divorce] settlement that [the claimant] stated was a fair
compromise bars her from proceeding with her malpractice claim.” Puder v.
Buechel, 874 A.2d 534, 543 (N.J. 2005). However, we find Puder inapplicable
here because the circumstances in that case differ from those of the present
case; and, in any event, Puder is not binding authority upon us.
In Puder, the wife’s attorney orally negotiated a divorce settlement
agreement with the husband. Subsequently, the wife consulted a second
attorney who told her the settlement was inadequate. Id. at 536. The wife then
refused to adhere to the terms of the settlement agreement and sued her first
attorney for legal malpractice. The husband moved to enforce the agreement,
4
but before the court reached a verdict, the couple agreed to settle the divorce
for a different amount. The wife then testified that she entered into the second
agreement voluntarily, and that she believed the second agreement was fair
and reasonable. Id. at 537. In dismissing the wife’s legal malpractice claim,
the New Jersey Supreme Court wrote: “It would contravene principles of
fairness and our policy in favor of encouraging conclusive settlements . . . to
allow Mrs. Buechel to now pursue her attorney for greater monetary gain.” Id.
at 540.
In Puder, the wife’s malpractice claim arose directly out of her first
attorney’s acts or omissions in attempting to settle her divorce. Because she
then hired a second attorney and reached a new, acceptable settlement, she
could not proceed with her malpractice claim concerning the first settlement.
Doing so, the court ruled, would undermine the second and final settlement
and the court’s resolution of the divorce. In contrast, here Pike claims his first
attorney was negligent in drafting and executing his antenuptial agreement.
He does not now seek to undermine final resolution of his divorce or to pursue
his attorney for greater monetary gain; he seeks only to put himself in the place
in which he expected he would be if the terms of the antenuptial agreement
had been enforced by the court. Pike bears the burden of proof on each
element of his malpractice claim, but his decision to settle with Bekaert rather
than to litigate the validity of the agreement should not, by itself, bar him from
the opportunity to do so.
Next, Pike argues that the trial court erred in granting summary
judgment on the defendants’ argument that since he failed to litigate the
validity of the antenuptial agreement in the family division, he cannot prove
causation. We agree.
To survive a motion for summary judgment on his malpractice claim,
Pike must show that there was a genuine issue of material fact with respect to
whether Mullikin’s alleged negligence was the cause of harm to him. See Orr,
157 N.H. at 514. This is not equivalent to establishing that the agreement
itself was previously determined invalid by a court. The validity of the
agreement can be determined in the trial court as part of this proceeding.
Both the trial court’s order and Mullikin’s brief correctly cite to McIntire
v. Lee for the proposition that “[a] plaintiff who alleges that an attorney’s
negligence caused the loss of a legal action or a legal defense can succeed only
by proving that the action or defense would have been successful but for the
attorney’s misconduct.” McIntire v. Lee, 149 N.H. 160, 165 (2003) (quotation
omitted). Applied to this case, Pike would have to prove that Mullikin was
negligent, that her negligence caused him to lose the protection of the
antenuptial agreement, and that but for Mullikin’s negligence, the court would
have upheld the terms of the agreement and Pike would not have agreed to the
5
asset division with Bekaert. However, Mullikin and the trial court fail to
recognize that McIntire does not prevent the present case from surviving a
motion for summary judgment as long as a genuine issue of material fact
exists. While McIntire establishes what a malpractice claimant must prove in
order to carry his burden with respect to causation, it does not require that
such proof must have been satisfied prior to bringing the claim itself.
Finally, Pike argues the trial court erred in denying his motion for
summary judgment on the issue of whether his antenuptial agreement was
enforceable. For the reasons provided in the trial court’s order, we disagree.
In viewing the evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party, we conclude there are
genuine issues of material fact with regard to the validity of Pike’s antenuptial
agreement and the elements of his legal malpractice claim. Accordingly, we
affirm the trial court’s order denying Pike’s motion for summary judgment,
reverse the trial court’s order granting the defendants’ motion for summary
judgment and dismissing Pike’s malpractice claim, and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6