THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-844
SOUTHERN NEW HAMPSHIRE MEDICAL CENTER
v.
ANTHONY HAYES
Argued: October 8, 2009
Opinion Issued: February 11, 2010
Welts, White & Fontaine, P.C., of Nashua (Michael J. Fontaine and Lisa
A. Biron on the brief, and Mr. Fontaine orally), for the plaintiff.
Smith-Weiss, Shepard & Durmer, P.C., of Nashua (Robert M. Shepard
and Melissa S. Penson on the brief, and Ms. Penson orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Anthony Hayes, appeals: (1) an order of the
Superior Court (Brennan, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
plaintiff, Southern New Hampshire Medical Center (SNHMC), with respect to
Karen Hayes’ unpaid medical expenses; (2) an order of the Superior Court
(Nicolosi, J.) granting SNHMC’s motion in limine to exclude evidence that Karen
Hayes “eloped” under the doctrine of necessaries; and (3) a ruling on the merits
(Smukler, J.) finding Anthony Hayes liable under the doctrine of necessaries for
Karen Hayes’ medical bills. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Anthony and Karen Hayes
married in 1977. In July, August, October and November 2006, Karen, who
did not have health insurance, received emergency medical treatment at
SNHMC for complications stemming from alcoholism, leaving a balance due of
$85,238.88. The record contains conflicting evidence about the status of Karen
and Anthony’s marriage during this time. While Karen’s medical records
indicate that she was living with Anthony, Anthony disputes this, asserting
that he and Karen “did not live as husband and wife for the past seven to eight
years . . . when [the medical bills] were . . . incurred.” For example, Anthony
testified that sometimes Karen was admitted to SNHMC after being “taken out
of hotels, motels, and other people’s houses.”
SNHMC filed suit against the Hayeses, and successfully sought a real
estate attachment on two unencumbered parcels owned jointly by the Hayeses.
When SNHMC placed an attachment on the properties, Karen and Anthony
were still married. The Hayeses were divorced in January 2007 pursuant to a
stipulated agreement. Under the terms of the divorce, each party was
responsible for his or her own medical expenses not covered by insurance.
Specifically, “Karen [was] responsible for paying the debt to [SNHMC] as well as
any other medical debts or bills.” Karen received one automobile valued at
$1,200, her bank account with a balance of $0.00, and all of her debts.
Anthony received the marital properties subject to SNHMC’s attachment.
Prior to trial, SNHMC moved in limine to prohibit Anthony “from
introducing at trial any information, documentation or witnesses concerning or
in any way referencing an alleged common law doctrine of elopement.” SNHMC
argued that elopement is an affirmative defense, and that Anthony failed to give
adequate notice, pursuant to Superior Court Rule 28, that he intended to rely
upon this doctrine. Anthony objected, contending that he gave adequate
notice.
The trial court granted SNHMC’s motion. It ruled that elopement is an
affirmative defense, but that Anthony failed to properly raise it. The court
found that it would be unfair to require SNHMC to counter this defense, given
that “the legal fact of marriage was not in dispute.”
The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of SNHMC against
Karen, finding “no issue of material fact” that she was liable for the balance
owed to SNHMC. The trial court, however, denied SNHMC’s motion for
summary judgment against Anthony, finding that genuine issues of material
fact remained with respect to his liability for Karen’s medical expenses.
Following a bench trial on the merits, the trial court found that Anthony was
liable, under the doctrine of necessaries, for Karen’s medical debts to SNHMC.
During the pendency of these proceedings, Karen passed away.
2
On appeal, Anthony argues that: (1) elopement is not an affirmative
defense; (2) even if it is, he provided sufficient notice; (3) pursuant to Cheshire
Medical Center v. Holbrook, 140 N.H. 187, 190 (1995), SNHMC was required to
find that Karen had inadequate funds before seeking reimbursement from
Anthony; (4) Karen had sufficient resources to satisfy her debt because Karen
jointly owned the two pieces of property attached by SNHMC; and (5) the trial
court erred when it granted summary judgment against Karen. SNHMC
counters that: (1) elopement is an affirmative defense; (2) Anthony’s
interrogatory responses and pleadings did not provide adequate notice; (3) even
if the trial court erred by treating elopement as an affirmative defense, that
error was harmless because Anthony could not factually support an elopement
defense; (4) SNHMC was required only to first seek payment from Karen before
pursuing Anthony, which it did; (5) Karen lacked sufficient resources to satisfy
her debt to SNHMC; (6) the trial court correctly granted summary judgment
against Karen and found Anthony liable under the necessaries doctrine; and (7)
Anthony lacks standing to contest the trial court’s summary judgment ruling
against Karen.
I. Summary Judgment: Karen Hayes
We first address, as a preliminary matter, SNHMC’s argument that
Anthony lacks standing to appeal the summary judgment against Karen.
Specifically, SNHMC contends that only Karen’s estate would have standing to
appeal and “as of this time, no estate has been opened,” and that “Mr. Hayes
has suffered no legal injury that an appeal to this Court will protect and he
may not seek relief for the benefit of another.” Although Anthony did not
address these contentions in his brief, at oral argument he argued that he has
standing to challenge the judgment against Karen because, under the
necessaries doctrine, he is potentially liable for her debt. We assume for the
purposes of this appeal that Anthony has standing to attack the judgment
against Karen.
Anthony argues that the trial court erroneously granted summary
judgment against Karen. He contends that whether he and Karen were
married for the purposes of liability under the necessaries doctrine, and
whether SNHMC’s charges and the medical services provided to Karen were
reasonably necessary, were material, disputed issues of fact. He argues that
the trial court erroneously granted summary judgment against Karen because
the evidence was insufficient for such a ruling. Anthony also maintains that
the affidavit supporting SNHMC’s motion for summary judgment was
incompetent because the affiant was not a medical practitioner and lacked
personal knowledge of the services provided and whether they were medically
necessary. SNHMC counters that the applicability of the necessaries doctrine
is irrelevant to the validity of the judgment against Karen, Karen’s objection did
not comply with RSA 491:8-a (1997), and Anthony failed to present any facts
supporting his contention that SNHMC’s charges and services were
3
unreasonable. SNHMC also argues that Anthony failed to preserve his
arguments that its charges were not reasonable because of its billing practices
and that its affidavit was incompetent because he first raised those arguments
in a motion to reconsider.
“When reviewing a trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co.,
159 N.H. 232, 234 (2009). “If this review does not reveal any genuine issues of
material fact, i.e., facts that would affect the outcome of the litigation, and if
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm.”
Smith v. HCA Health Services of N.H., 159 N.H. 158, 160 (2009). “We review
the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.” Everitt, 159 N.H.
at 234.
In its motion for summary judgment against Karen, SNHMC contended
that it provided medical care to her and that, as a result, she owed SNHMC for
the services provided. In support of its motion, SNHMC attached an affidavit
from its Credit and Collection Manager who stated that she was “familiar with
the books and records of [SNHMC]” and had “personal knowledge of the
matters stated herein.”
In her objection, Karen denied “that medical and health care services
and/or supplies were properly administered to [her] or that they were
reasonable or necessary.” She also asserted:
In determining whether or not the charges rendered by [SNHMC] in this
case are reasonable, the court needs to consider other issues, such as
the fact that [SNHMC] is allegedly a non-profit organization and needs to
consider billing rates or cash payments as opposed to insurance
payments or [Medicaid] payments.”
Karen neither referred to anything in the record nor filed an affidavit
contradicting SNHMC’s motion.
We agree that whether the Hayeses were married for the purposes of
liability under the necessaries doctrine was irrelevant to the trial court’s grant
of summary judgment against Karen. Moreover, Karen failed to allege that
there were any disputed issues of material fact, or that SNHMC was not
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The party opposing a motion for
summary judgment cannot “rest upon mere allegations or denials of [the]
pleadings, but [her] response, by affidavits or by reference to depositions,
answers to interrogatories, or admissions, must set forth specific facts showing
that there is a genuine issue for trial.” RSA 491:8-a, IV. Karen failed to refer
to any facts in the record, or to present the trial court with an affidavit,
supporting her allegations that the hospital’s charges were not reasonable.
4
In her motion to reconsider, Karen raised a new challenge to the affidavit
supporting SNHMC’s motion for summary judgment:
[SNHMC] submitted an Affidavit in support of its Motion For Summary
Judgment, along with a copy of an invoice for services that were rendered
to the Defendant. The Affidavit was signed by an employee that works in
the business department of the hospital, and not by a doctor or a
medical practitioner.
The motion thus challenged the competency of the affidavit. The motion,
however, failed to identify any facts supporting Karen’s claim, and failed to
demonstrate that SNHMC was not entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
II. The Doctrine of Necessaries
The ancient common law doctrine of necessaries imposed liability on
husbands for “essential goods and services provided to [their wives] by third
parties” if they failed to provide their wives “with such necessaries.” Holbrook,
140 N.H. at 189 (quotation omitted). Necessaries included “necessary food,
drink, washing, physic, instruction, and a suitable place of residence, with
such necessary furniture as is suitable to her condition.” Ray v. Adden, 50
N.H. 82, 83 (1870); see Morrison v. Holt, 42 N.H. 478, 480 (1861) (legal
expenses not necessaries unless husband’s conduct rendered expenses
necessary to secure wife’s personal protection or safety).
This doctrine originated as a result of draconian legal restrictions on the
rights of married women to “contract, sue, or be sued individually” or exercise
control over their property or financial affairs. North Ottawa Community Hosp.
v. Kieft, 578 N.W.2d 267, 269 (Mich. 1998); Medical Business Associates v.
Steiner, 588 N.Y.S.2d 890, 892 (App. Div. 1992). A married woman’s contracts
“‘were absolutely void, -- not merely voidable, like those of infants and
lunatics.’” Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 189 (quoting Dunlap v. Dunlap, 84 N.H. 352,
353 (1930)). “[U]pon marriage a woman forfeited her legal existence and
became the property of her husband,” as, in the eyes of the law, a husband and
wife were considered one legal entity. Id.; Steiner, 588 N.Y.S.2d at 892. In
return for his responsibility for his wife’s support and liability for her torts, a
husband was entitled to her “society.” Drew’s Appeal, 57 N.H. 181, 183 (1876).
“A man has as good a right to his wife, as to the property acquired under
a marriage contract; and to divest him of that right without his default,
and against his will, would be as flagrant a violation of the principles of
justice as the confiscation of his estate.”
Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 188 (quoting Drew’s Appeal, 57 N.H. at 183). The
husband was “the sole owner of the family wealth,” and the wife was “viewed as
5
little more than a chattel in the eyes of the law.” N.C. Baptist Hospitals, Inc. v.
Harris, 354 S.E.2d 471, 474 (N.C. 1987) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, the law of necessaries “attempted to obviate some of the
victimization which coverture would otherwise have permitted” by “providing a
common-law mechanism by which the duty of support could be enforced.”
Kieft, 578 N.W.2d at 270 (quotation omitted). It reflected the sad reality that,
“[b]ecause the wife could not contract for food, clothing, or medical needs, her
husband was obligated to provide her with such necessaries.” Holbrook, 140
N.H. at 189 (citation and quotation omitted). To obtain compensation from a
husband for goods or services provided to his wife, a creditor had to set forth a
prima facie case that husband and wife were married, that the husband failed
to provide his wife with necessaries, and that the articles or services in
question were necessaries “according to the husband’s situation in life.”
Rumney v. Keyes, 7 N.H. 571, 580 (1835); see Ott v. Hentall, 70 N.H. 231, 232
(1899). If the couple separated, the husband could nonetheless be liable under
the necessaries doctrine if he caused the separation by abandoning his wife,
evicting her without reason, or committing some other kind of misconduct that
drove the wife out of the marital home. Ott, 70 N.H. at 232; Allen, Cummings
& Co. v. Aldrich, 29 N.H. 63, 73 (1854); Rumney, 7 N.H. at 578. However, even
if the husband and wife separated by consent, a husband could still be liable
for his wife’s necessaries. Pidgin v. Cram, 8 N.H. 350, 351 (1836).
Husbands could avoid liability under the necessaries doctrine under
certain circumstances. See, e.g., Tebbets v. Hapgood, 34 N.H. 420, 421 (1857);
Allen, 29 N.H. at 73; Rumney, 7 N.H. at 578. For example, a husband whose
wife “eloped” would not be liable for her necessaries. Cogswell v. Tibbetts, 3
N.H. 41, 42 (1824); see Rumney, 7 N.H. at 580. A wife who voluntarily left her
husband to live with an adulterer, or was removed forcibly from the marital
home but chose to reside with the adulterer, “eloped” for the purposes of the
doctrine. Cogswell, 3 N.H. at 42. Key to the determination of “elopement” was
whether the wife had left her husband, committed adultery and also remained
beyond his control. Id.; see Rumney, 7 N.H. at 580.
“In modern America, ‘no longer is the female destined solely for the home
and the rearing of the family, and only the male for the marketplace and the
world of ideas.’” Steiner, 588 N.Y.S.2d at 893 (quoting Stanton v. Stanton, 421
U.S. 7, 14-15 (1975)). “The modern marital relationship is viewed by law as a
partnership of equality, an evolution from the nineteenth century relationship
of dominance by a husband and submission by a wife who had little standing
as an individual person or legal entity.” Forsyth Memorial Hosp., Inc. v.
Chisholm, 467 S.E.2d 88, 90 (N.C. 1996). Undoubtedly, married women today
have an “unrestricted right to contract,” and RSA 546-A:2 (2007) “imposes a
gender-neutral obligation of spousal support.” Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 189. The
doctrine of necessaries has been characterized as “an anachronism that no
longer fits contemporary society,” Steiner, 588 N.Y.S.2d at 893 (quotation
6
omitted), and some courts have abolished it. See, e.g., Emanuel v. McGriff,
596 So. 2d 578, 580 (Ala. 1992); Condore v. Prince George’s Cty, 425 A.2d
1011, 1019 (Md. 1981). In New Hampshire, however, the doctrine endures: we
extended it to apply to all married individuals, regardless of gender, see
Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 190, and many courts have similarly extended the
doctrine to apply to both husbands and wives. See, e.g., Simons, Note, Is the
Doctrine of Necessaries Necessary in Florida: Should the Legislature Accept the
Challenge of Connor v. Southwest Florida Regional Medical Center?, 50 FLA. L.
REV. 933, 939 (1998); Kieft, 578 N.W.2d at 270.
When considering the application of the doctrine in the modern day,
some courts have outlined a prima facie case under the law of necessaries as
follows:
In order to establish a prima facie case against one spouse for the value
of [services or goods] provided to the other spouse, the . . . provider must
show that (1) [services or goods] were provided to the receiving spouse,
(2) [they] were necessary for the health and well-being of the receiving
spouse, (3) the person against whom the action is brought was married
to the receiving spouse at the time the [services or goods] were provided,
and (4) payment for the necessaries has not been made.
Wesley Long Nursing Center, Inc. v. Harper, No. COA06-1706, 2007 WL
4233643, at *2 (N.C. Ct. App. Dec. 4, 2007) (unpublished opinion); see Queen’s
Medical Center v. Kagawa, 967 P.2d 686, 693 (Haw. Ct. App. 1998); Trident
Regional Medical Center v. Evans, 454 S.E.2d 343, 345 (S.C. Ct. App. 1995).
This approach comports with our own common law on the necessaries
doctrine. See, e.g., Ott, 70 N.H. at 232; Rumney, 7 N.H. at 580. We note that,
for the purposes of the necessaries doctrine, hospitals and other medical
providers are uniquely situated and, therefore, uniquely likely to seek the
application of this doctrine, as, unlike other creditors, medical providers may
not turn away patients who require treatment. See Marshfield Clinic v.
Discher, 314 N.W.2d 326, 329 (Wis. 1982) (noting that hospitals are often
forced to respond to patients who require immediate, emergency care).
A. Elopement
We next consider whether elopement is an affirmative or general defense
to the law of necessaries. As stated above, the trial court ruled that elopement
is an affirmative defense, and barred Anthony from presenting evidence that
Karen “eloped,” finding that Anthony had failed to give adequate notice of his
intention to rely upon that defense. We conclude that “elopement” is no longer
a defense to the doctrine of necessaries. Cf. Chisholm, 467 S.E.2d at 91.
As noted above, the necessaries doctrine developed during a time when
married women were severely restricted in their ability to contract, sue, or be
7
sued, or to exercise control over their property, services, or earnings. See Kieft,
578 N.W.2d at 269; Chisholm, 467 S.E.2d at 90; Steiner, 588 N.Y.S.2d at 892.
To defend on the grounds of elopement, the non-debtor spouse had to prove
that the debtor spouse left the non-debtor spouse, escaped his or her control
and committed adultery. See Cogswell, 3 N.H. at 42. Such a defense does not
comport with the modern status of marriage. We have “rejected such
antiquated and obsolete notions concerning women by modernizing the
common law necessaries doctrine to impose liability on a gender-neutral basis
and, thereby, making either spouse responsible for the necessary services
provided to the other.” Chisholm, 467 S.E.2d at 90-91; see Holbrook, 140 N.H.
at 190.
Given that the “historical purposes underlying the [elopement] exception
to the necessaries doctrine are incompatible with current mores and laws
governing modern marital relationships in [New Hampshire],” we find that the
elopement exception “has no place in the common law.” Chisholm, 467 S.E.2d
at 91. But see Bartrom v. Adjustment Bureau, Inc., 618 N.E.2d 1, 9-10 (Ind.
1993) (reasoning that common law defenses to application of doctrine of
necessaries remain applicable). Rather, we conclude that, under the third
prong of the prima facie case that we have outlined above, the creditor – in this
case, the hospital – must show more than the legal fact of marriage to
demonstrate that the parties are “married” for the purposes of liability under
the necessaries doctrine. See Roach v. Mamakos, 764 N.Y.S.2d 539, 541 (Sup.
Ct. 2003); National Account Systems, Inc. v. Mercado, 481 A.2d 835, 837 (N.J.
Super. Ct. App. Div. 1984). “[P]roof of an undissolved marriage does not in
itself provide the basis for liability to a creditor supplying a spouse with
necessaries,” as “in some circumstances a marriage will cease to [exist] for
purposes of liability under” the necessaries doctrine. Mercado, 481 A.2d at
837. This is a fact-specific, and case-specific, inquiry. See Nichol v. Clema,
195 N.W.2d 233, 235 (Neb. 1972) (noting that each decision with respect to
liability under necessaries doctrine “must necessarily be largely governed by
the facts existing in the particular case in which it is rendered”).
The non-debtor spouse’s liability under the necessaries doctrine depends
on a mutual expectation that the spouses will share assets, expenses, and
debts. Accordingly, factors to consider in determining whether the marriage is
no longer viable for the purposes of the necessaries doctrine might include
whether the parties were separated, when they separated, whether they are
living apart, and whether they share their living expenses and debt. See
Mercado, 481 A.2d at 837 (factors to consider in determining liability under
necessaries doctrine include whether the parties are separated and have been
financially supporting each other). If a marriage has broken down to the extent
that spouses are no longer sharing assets or debts, it makes little sense to hold
a non-debtor spouse liable for the medical expenses of the other. See id. at
838. But see Kagawa, 967 P.2d at 699-700 (non-debtor spouse liable for
8
necessaries until divorce finalized); Bartrom, 618 N.E.2d at 9 (holding that
“duty of spousal support continues at least until the marriage relationship is
dissolved”).
For the reasons described above, “elopement” is no longer a defense to
the application of the necessaries doctrine; rather, the third party seeking to
impose liability on the non-debtor spouse – in this case, SNHMC – retains the
burden to demonstrate that the parties were “married” for the purposes of
liability under the necessaries doctrine. Because we hold today that
“elopement” is not an affirmative defense, we reverse and remand to the trial
court for a new trial on the merits.
B. Liability of Non-Debtor Spouse
We next consider Anthony’s argument that SNHMC must determine that
his wife could not satisfy her debt before seeking reimbursement from him.
Anthony relies primarily upon Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 190. SNHMC argues that
it must only seek payment from Karen before pursuing Anthony, relying upon
language in Holbrook which states that “a medical provider must first seek
payment from the spouse who received its services before pursuing collection
from the other spouse.” Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 190.
Under the doctrine of necessaries, “a husband or wife is not liable for
necessary medical expenses incurred by his or her spouse unless the resources
of the spouse who received the services are insufficient to satisfy the debt.”
Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 187 (emphasis added). Accordingly, “the spouse who
receives the necessary goods or services is primarily liable for payment,” and
“the other spouse is secondarily liable.” Id. at 188. We have held that the
doctrine of necessaries renders the non-debtor spouse “liable to the hospital to
the extent [his or her spouse’s] estate[ ] [is] unable to pay for the necessary
medical services provided.” St. Joseph Hosp. of Nashua v. Rizzo, 141 N.H. 9,
12 (1996) (emphasis added).
The defendant argued before the trial court that SNHMC was required to
demonstrate that Karen could not pay for her medical services before pursuing
his assets. The trial court stated that it did “not necessarily agree with . . . Mr.
Hayes[’] legal position,” citing the language in Holbrook which states that the
medical provider must “first seek payment from the spouse who received its
services before pursuing collection from the other spouse.” The trial court
reasoned that the Holbrook “language is directed at collection efforts” and
“does not necessarily restrict a finding of liability.” However, the trial court,
“[f]or the purposes of its analysis . . . accept[ed] [without] deciding the
defendant’s legal position” and determined that, even under a standard
requiring SNHMC to prove that Karen lacks the resources to pay her debts
before pursuing Anthony, SNHMC demonstrated that Karen’s estate could not
satisfy the debt to SNHMC.
9
We clarify our holding in Holbrook by confirming that the trial court
applied the correct standard when it determined that Karen could not satisfy
her debt to SNHMC. On remand, the trial court should apply the standard set
out above, that the non-debtor spouse is liable for his or her spouse’s
necessaries if the debtor spouse is unable to pay for his or her necessaries.
Affirmed in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; HICKS,
J., concurred specially.
HICKS, J., concurring specially. I concur in the judgment of the majority
because the issue of abolishing the common law necessaries doctrine was not
raised by either party. I write separately, however, because anachronisms in
the doctrine, which are evident in the court’s discussion of its origins, raise
questions about its continued applicability in the modern world.
The necessaries doctrine “originated in English common law over three
centuries ago when married women had no property or contractual rights and
their husbands controlled their financial affairs. . . . The primary purpose of
the doctrine was to assure that dependent wives received support from
neglectful husbands.” Medical Center Hosp. of Vt v. Lorrain, 675 A.2d 1326,
1328 (Vt. 1996).
In Cheshire Medical Center v. Holbrook, 140 N.H. 187 (1995), we were
called upon to reexamine the necessaries doctrine in light of subsequent
changes in the legal status of women. More specifically, Holbrook presented
the question whether the doctrine, as it then existed in our common law,
violated the Equal Protection Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions.
Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 188. After chronicling the legal advances that
“dissipated the marital disabilities of women,” id. at 189, we concluded that
“[t]he traditional formulation of the necessaries doctrine, predicated on
anachronistic assumptions about marital relations and female dependence,
does not withstand scrutiny under the compelling interest standard,” id. at
190. We then “expand[ed] the common law doctrine to apply to all married
individuals equally, regardless of gender.” Id.
Although we purported to “determine whether the [necessaries] doctrine
should be abolished or revised,” id. at 190, we undertook none of the
traditional analysis for determining whether to abolish existing precedent.
Thus, while the holding in Holbrook may appear broad, it bears recalling that
the specific question before us was whether the gender distinctions in the
common law necessaries doctrine violated constitutional guarantees of equal
protection. Thus, Holbrook’s revision of the doctrine may be viewed as simply
10
the abolition of gender distinctions that violated equal protection, rather than a
considered expansion of the doctrine. An examination of the doctrine under
the traditional factors for determining whether to abrogate precedent, however,
reveals that it has long outlived its relevance and should be abandoned.
We do not lightly overrule longstanding precedent. See Alonzi v.
Northeast Generation Servs. Co., 156 N.H. 656, 659 (2008). “The doctrine of
stare decisis demands respect in a society governed by the rule of law, for when
governing legal standards are open to revision in every case, deciding cases
becomes a mere exercise of judicial will with arbitrary and unpredictable
results.” Id. at 659-60 (quotation omitted). Nevertheless, we will abandon
precedent when “the ruling has come to be seen so clearly as error that its
enforcement was for that very reason doomed.” Id. at 660 (quotation omitted).
In determining whether to overrule prior case law, we consider several factors,
including:
(1) whether the rule has proven to be intolerable simply in defying
practical workability; (2) whether the rule is subject to a kind of
reliance that would lend a special hardship to the consequences of
overruling; (3) whether related principles of law have so far
developed as to have left the old rule no more than a remnant of
abandoned doctrine; and (4) whether facts have so changed, or
come to be seen so differently, as to have robbed the old rule of
significant application or justification.
Id. (quotation omitted). Most, if not all, of these factors apply to the common
law doctrine of necessaries.
The necessaries doctrine arose out of the legal disabilities imposed upon
married women under the common law; those restrictions on property
ownership and contractual capacity are the raison d’être for the doctrine. As
we stated in Holbrook, “Because the wife could not contract for food, clothing,
or medical needs, her husband was obligated to provide her with such
‘necessaries.’” Holbrook, 140 N.H. at 189 (citation omitted). Without the
underlying legal disability of the wife, the common law justification for binding
her husband to her contracts for necessaries disappears. See Lorrain, 675
A.2d at 1329 (noting that since women now have the same property and
contractual rights as men, “the circumstances that led to the emergence of the
necessaries doctrine no longer exist”). Viewed in this light, the doctrine of
necessaries is “no more than a remnant of abandoned doctrine” that has been
“robbed . . . [of its] justification.” Alonzi, 156 N.H. at 660 (quotation omitted).
The doctrine also defies practical workability. See id. As the Supreme
Court of Vermont noted in Lorrain, “because the husband’s liability under the
doctrine had substantial limitations, the doctrine never accomplished its
purported purpose — to be an effective support mechanism for neglected
11
wives.” Lorrain, 675 A.2d at 1329; see Note, The Unnecessary Doctrine of
Necessaries, 82 Mich. L. Rev. 1767, 1799 (1984) (concluding that the
necessaries doctrine “is generally an ineffective means of providing spousal
support” and finding “no persuasive evidence that the doctrine is useful in the
context of the narrow support problem it was intended to alleviate”).
Finally, there appears to be little reliance upon the doctrine “that would
lend a special hardship to the consequences of overruling” it. Alonzi, 156 N.H.
at 660 (quotation omitted). In fact, “studies indicate that in deciding whether
to extend credit, creditors give little weight to a married woman’s support
rights.” Lorrain, 675 A.2d at 1329.
Consideration of the foregoing factors leads to the conclusion that the
common law doctrine of necessaries is no longer viable. Furthermore, while
our gender-neutral revision of the doctrine in Holbrook may have alleviated
then extant equal protection concerns, it is doubtful that it solved any of the
underlying problems with the doctrine or rendered the doctrine more effective
in fulfilling its original purpose. There is, in fact, some indication that “the
modern[, gender-neutral] doctrine seems to result in less available credit for
needy spouses.” Note, The Unnecessary Doctrine of Necessaries, supra at
1780. As the Lorrain court noted, “In truth, extension of the doctrine serves
creditors’ rights, not spousal support rights,” Lorrain, 675 A.2d at 1329, in
stark contradiction to its genesis. For the foregoing reasons, should a case
presenting the issue come before us, the necessaries doctrine should be
abolished.
12