THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-702
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RENO DEMESMIN
Submitted: October 8, 2009
Opinion Issued: January 28, 2010
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Reno Demesmin, appeals his conviction of
first degree assault. See RSA 631:1 (2007). He argues that the Superior Court
(Smukler, J.) erred when it permitted the re-evaluation of his competency to
stand trial. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In October 2006, a grand jury
indicted the defendant on one count of first degree assault. Before trial,
defense counsel moved for an evaluation of competency because of possible
intellectual disability. Dr. James J. Adams, chief forensic examiner for the
State of New Hampshire, examined the defendant. Dr. Adams concluded that
there was “no evidence that th[e] defendant [was] competent to stand trial.”
However, he expressed concern that the defendant was malingering during the
evaluation.
Based upon Dr. Adams’ findings, the parties submitted a stipulation to
the trial court, which it accepted with modifications. The agreement stated
that while “there is a question as to whether the Defendant is malingering,” the
defendant “shall be found incompetent.” The agreement then called for a
“[h]earing to be scheduled on whether the defendant should continue to remain
in custody pursuant to RSA 135:17-a, V.” RSA 135:17-a, V (Supp. 2009)
permits a court to order a person to remain in custody for a reasonable time if
the defendant is dangerous to himself in order to evaluate the appropriateness
of involuntary treatment. Finally, the agreement provided that “should the
Defendant be found to have been restored to competency during the next year
that the State shall present an Indictment against the Defendant.”
In June 2007, the trial court held a hearing to determine whether the
defendant was dangerous to himself or others. See RSA 135:17-a, V. The trial
court found the defendant dangerous and ordered that he be evaluated for the
appropriateness of involuntary commitment. Dr. Eric G. Mart, a licensed
psychologist, then examined the defendant and found that he was not eligible
for civil commitment because he did not meet the diagnostic criteria for an
intellectual disability. See RSA 171-B:2, IV (Supp. 2009). Based upon these
results, the State moved for a second competency assessment, contending that
the defendant malingered during his first evaluation and was, in fact,
competent to stand trial. Over the defendant’s objection, the trial court
granted the State’s motion and the defendant was re-evaluated for competency.
Subsequently, the trial court found the defendant competent to stand trial. At
trial, a jury found the defendant guilty of first degree assault.
On appeal, the defendant first asserts that the trial court lacked
jurisdiction to order the re-assessment of his competency under the original
indictment, because by ordering an evaluation of the defendant’s
dangerousness under RSA 135:17-a, V, the trial court impliedly dismissed
without prejudice the original indictment by operation of law. According to the
defendant, “[p]roceedings under RSA 135:17-a, V do not commence unless the
case against the defendant [has been] dismissed” (quotation omitted).
Therefore, before the State could resume prosecuting the defendant, the State
had to re-indict him.
The State disagrees, contending that the trial court never found by “clear
and convincing evidence” that the defendant could not be restored to
competency, a prerequisite for there to be a dismissal of the case without
prejudice. Moreover, the State argues that the defendant did not preserve this
2
argument for appeal because “it was never made below, and was never
mentioned either in the notice of appeal or in any motion to add issue.” We,
however, will address the merits of this argument. Subject matter jurisdiction
may be raised at any time in the proceedings, including on appeal, by the
parties, or by the court sua sponte. See Route 12 Books & Video v. Town of
Troy, 149 N.H. 569, 575 (2003).
The defendant’s argument requires us to interpret RSA 135:17-a. In
matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative intent
as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. State v.
Shannon, 155 N.H. 135, 137 (2007). We first examine the language of the
statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. at
137-38. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme. Id. at 138.
RSA 135:17-a, I, and V state,
I. If, after hearing, the district court or superior court determines
that the defendant is not competent to stand trial, the court shall order
treatment for the restoration of competency unless it determines, by
clear and convincing evidence, that there is no reasonable likelihood that
the defendant can be restored to competency through appropriate
treatment within 12 months. If the court finds, by clear and convincing
evidence, that the defendant cannot be restored to competency within
twelve months, the case against the defendant shall be dismissed
without prejudice and the court shall proceed as provided in paragraph
V.
. . . .
V. If the court has determined that the defendant has not regained
competency, and the court determines that he or she is dangerous to
himself or herself or others, the court shall order the person to remain in
custody for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 90 days, to be
evaluated for the appropriateness of involuntary treatment pursuant to
RSA 135-C:34 or RSA 171-B:2. The court may order the person to
submit to examinations by a physician, psychiatrist, or psychologist
designated by the state for the purpose of evaluating appropriateness
and completing the certificate for involuntary admission into the state
mental health services system, the state developmental services delivery
system, or the secure psychiatric unit as the case may be . . . .
RSA 135:17-a, I, specifically requires the trial court to find by “clear and
convincing evidence[] that the defendant cannot be restored to competency” in
3
order for the case against the defendant to be dismissed without prejudice.
Here, the trial court made no such finding. The trial court merely accepted the
parties’ stipulation, which provided that “at this point, the Defendant shall be
found incompetent” as a result of “Dr. Adams’ lack of diagnosis of competency.”
The agreement then called for a dangerousness hearing pursuant to RSA
135:17-a, V. We will not infer from silence in the record that the trial court
found by “clear and convincing evidence[] that the defendant cannot be
restored to competency.” RSA 135:17-a, I. Such a finding must be explicit.
The trial court, therefore, never dismissed the original indictment against the
defendant, and the State was not required to re-indict him to continue
prosecuting him. “There is a presumption against divesting a court of its
jurisdiction once it has properly attached, and any doubt is resolved in favor of
retaining jurisdiction.” 21 Am. Jur. 2d Criminal Law § 434 (2008); see Com. v.
Adkins, 29 S.W.3d 793, 795 (Ky. 2000); People v. Veling, 504 N.W.2d 456, 460
(Mich. 1993). Further, it is common practice that “[o]nce a court has acquired
jurisdiction, no subsequent error or irregularity will remove that jurisdiction,
so that a court may not lose jurisdiction because it makes a mistake in
determining either the facts, the law, or both.” 21 Am. Jur. 2d Criminal Law §
434; see also People v. Davis, 619 N.E.2d 750, 754 (Ill. 1993).
Second, the defendant contends that the trial court exceeded its
statutory authority under RSA 135:17-a by ordering a second competency
evaluation. Specifically, he argues that RSA 135:17-a does not authorize a trial
court to order the re-assessment of a defendant’s competency where the
defendant has been found incompetent and dangerous but has not been
involuntarily committed. According to the defendant, a re-evaluation may only
occur during the period of involuntary commitment and before expiration of the
limitations period. See RSA 135:17-a, VI (Supp. 2009).
RSA 135:17-a lays out the procedures a trial court should follow after
making an initial determination that the defendant is not competent to stand
trial. It includes provisions to order treatment for the restoration of
competency, to order a person determined “dangerous to himself . . . or others”
to be held for up to ninety days for evaluation, and to order an intellectually
disabled or mentally ill person involuntarily committed under RSA chapter
135-C or RSA chapter 171-B. RSA 135:17-a, V. RSA 135:17-a does not
address specifically how a trial court should proceed if evidence exists that a
defendant has procured a finding of incompetence through malingering or
fraud. We, therefore, look to the common law for guidance.
It is a basic principle that “statutory enactments should be construed by
courts as consistent with the common law.” 15A Am. Jur. 2d Common Law
§ 15 (2000). Indeed, we have stated that “we will not interpret a statute to
abrogate the common law unless the statute clearly expresses that intent.”
State v. Elementis Chem., 152 N.H. 794, 803 (2005) (quotation omitted). Here,
4
RSA 135:17-a does not state a clear intent to abrogate the common law
governing malingering.
Trial courts have the inherent authority and obligation to order an initial
psychiatric or psychological evaluation of a defendant to determine competency
to stand trial. See State v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 640, cert. denied, 78 U.S.L.W.
3320 (U.S. 2009). A court also has the authority to order a second competency
evaluation upon request of the State where “the defendant has submitted to
psychological or psychiatric examination by defense experts, and has indicated
an intention to rely on that testimony at trial.” State v. Briand, 130 N.H. 650,
653 (1988); see also RSA 135:17, II (Supp. 2009) (permitting separate
competency evaluations upon request of the parties). In reaching our holding
in Briand, we rejected the defendant’s argument that the State could not
require her to submit to an examination by the State’s expert “because there
[was] no statute granting it the authority to do so.” Id. at 652. Trial courts
possess this inherent authority to protect the constitutional rights of the
defendant, State v. Gagne, 129 N.H. 93, 96-97 (1986), and “to promote the
ascertainment of truth and to insure the orderliness of judicial proceedings,”
Briand, 130 N.H. at 652-53. Whether a trial court has inherent authority to
order a second evaluation and competency hearing when there is evidence of
malingering is an issue of first impression in New Hampshire.
Concern that a defendant is fabricating or exaggerating the symptoms of
intellectual disability or mental illness to avoid trial is not a recent
phenomenon. For example, Sir Matthew Hale, a Lord Chief Justice of England,
in his seventeenth century treatise, warned that “there may be great fraud” in
determinations of mental competence. 1 M. Hale, Pleas of the Crown *35; see
also King v. Dyson, 73 Car. & P. 305, n.(a), 173 Eng. Rep. 135-36, n.(a) (1831).
Courts presume that the legal process will eventually catch those who malinger
and permit their trial. See Cooper v. Oklahoma 517 U.S. 348, 365 (1996)
(observing that it would be “unusual for even the most artful malingerer to
feign incompetence successfully for a period of time while under professional
care”).
Upon detecting evidence of malingering, trial courts often order the re-
examination of a defendant and hold a subsequent competency hearing. See,
e.g., United States v. Izquierdo, 448 F.3d 1269 (11th Cir. 2006); United States
v. Greer, 158 F.3d 228 (5th Cir. 1998). For example, in Izquierdo, the trial
court ordered the psychiatric re-evaluation of the defendant after hearing
testimony from another inmate that the defendant told him he “planned ‘to act
crazy’” to be found mentally incompetent. Izquierdo, 448 F.3d at 1273-74. The
trial court then held a second competency hearing. Id. at 1275. Similarly, in
Greer, the trial court held a second competency hearing after receiving a report
from the defendant’s treating doctor that he had malingered. Greer, 158 F.3d
at 230-31. The Fifth Circuit subsequently upheld the trial court’s application
5
of an obstruction of justice enhancement to the defendant’s sentence for
feigning incompetence. Id. at 234-38. The court reasoned, “[W]hile a criminal
defendant possesses a constitutional right to a competency hearing if a bona
fide doubt exists as to his competency, he surely does not have the right to
create a doubt as to his competency or to increase the chances that he will be
found incompetent by feigning mental illness.” Id. at 237.
In Cooper, the United States Supreme Court implicitly embraced the
practice of a second competency hearing in the face of evidence of malingering.
Cooper, 517 U.S. at 365-66. The Court held unconstitutional Oklahoma’s
statutory requirement that a defendant prove his incompetence by clear and
convincing evidence partially because “a conclusion that the defendant is
incompetent when he is in fact malingering . . . is subject to correction in a
subsequent proceeding.” Id. at 365. Moreover, the public has a strong interest
in ensuring that courts carefully scrutinize a claim of incompetency to proceed
to trial. See W.R. LaFave, Criminal Law § 1.2(e) at 13 (4th ed. 2003).
We agree with the above-cited federal common law that trial courts
possess the inherent authority to order a second evaluation and competency
hearing when there is evidence of malingering. The common law governing
malingering is consistent with a plain and ordinary reading of RSA 135:17-a.
See 15A Am. Jur. 2d Common Law § 12 (2000) (noting that “common law, to be
part of the law of the state must not be inconsistent with the Federal
constitution and laws, or the laws or political institutions of the state.”). We
conclude that RSA 135:17-a does not preclude a trial court from conducting
necessary proceedings to determine whether a defendant is malingering.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err by conducting such
proceedings and that RSA 135:17-a provides no safe harbor for the artful
malingerer.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
6