THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-517
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SEAN D. BROWN
Argued: June 11, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 31, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Sean D. Brown, appeals his
convictions on four counts of the sale of a narcotic drug, see RSA 318-B:2
(2004) (amended 2008). He argues that the Superior Court (Groff, J.) erred in
joining the charges under Superior Court Rule 97-A and in excluding evidence
of a witness’s prior conviction to impeach his testimony under New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 609(a)(2). We affirm.
I
The record supports the following facts. The Nashua Police Department
arranged to have an individual cooperate to purchase drugs from the
defendant. The cooperating individual participated in controlled buys on four
occasions, January 21, January 24, January 28, and February 9, 2005. Many
of the facts underlying the controlled buys are substantially similar. Each
occurred at arranged locations within approximately one mile of one another.
Prior to each purchase, a police officer, Officer Collins, searched the
cooperating individual for weapons, contraband and money to preserve the
integrity of the controlled buy and then supplied him with a sum of money to
buy drugs. The cooperating individual met the defendant at an established
location and entered the defendant’s gray car bearing New York license plates.
After each drug buy, the cooperating individual gave the drugs to the same
police officer, who again searched him for weapons, contraband and money,
and found none.
Some differences exist in the evidence underlying the four charges. For
the first buy, the cooperating individual identified the defendant’s car as a gray
Mazda or Maxima with New York license plates. For the latter three buys,
police surveillance more specifically identified the defendant’s car as bearing
New York license plate CXV 7985. In addition, the police conducted video
surveillance during the first two buys, and the cooperating individual wore a
wiretap for the second two buys. Further, while the cooperating individual
identified the defendant as the seller for all four transactions, police officers
witnessed the defendant in the driver’s seat of the gray Mazda at the second,
third and fourth buys. On another occasion, Officer Collins conducted
surveillance of the defendant’s residence and witnessed him driving the same
gray Mazda sedan with the same New York license plates.
The defendant subsequently was charged with four counts of selling a
narcotic drug under RSA 318-B:2, which were joined for trial over his
objection. The jury found him guilty, and he appealed, arguing that the trial
court erred in joining the charges against him. We reversed his convictions in
State v. Brown, 156 N.H. 440 (2007), and remanded the case to the trial court.
We rejected the State’s argument that each controlled buy was part of a
common plan and held that the trial court erred in joining the charges. Brown,
156 N.H. at 442-44. We also rejected the State’s argument that because the
evidence for each count would have been admissible at hypothetical separate
trials under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b), the misjoinder
constituted harmless error. Id. at 444-45.
In October 2007, before retrial, we adopted a new rule for joinder of
offenses that became effective on January 1, 2008. See Super. Ct. R. 97-A.
The State again moved for joinder. Again, the defendant objected. The trial
2
court joined the charges, concluding that they were related under the new
joinder rule, and that joinder was not contrary to the best interests of justice.
During his retrial, the defendant sought to use certain prior convictions of the
cooperating individual, pursuant to Rule 609(a)(2), to impeach the cooperating
individual’s credibility. The trial court excluded the evidence. The defendant
was convicted on all four counts, and this appeal followed.
II
The defendant challenges the trial court’s decision to join the charges.
Specifically, he contends that the trial court erred in concluding that the
charges were related and that joinder would not offend the best interests of
justice. See Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I). We disagree.
Superior Court Rule 97-A governs the joinder of criminal offenses and
distinguishes between charges that are related and unrelated. When a party
moves to join related charges, the trial court is required to join them unless it
“determines that joinder is not in the best interests of justice.” Super. Ct. R.
97-A(I)(B). The rule defines three categories of related offenses:
Two or more offenses are related if they:
(i) are alleged to have occurred during a single criminal
episode; or
(ii) constitute parts of a common scheme or plan; or
(iii) are alleged to have occurred during separate criminal
episodes, but nonetheless, are logically and factually
connected in a manner that does not solely demonstrate that
the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.
Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I)(A). The trial court may join unrelated charges only upon
written motion of the defendant or with the defendant’s written consent, and
“upon a showing that failure to try the charges together would constitute
harassment or unduly consume the time or resources of the parties.” Super.
Ct. R. 97-A(I)(C). Under such circumstances, the trial court is required to join
the charges unless “joinder is not in the best interest of justice.” Id.
In this case, the trial court concluded that although the four drug
charges occurred during separate criminal episodes, they were related because
they were logically and factually connected in a manner that does not solely
demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct.
See Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I)(A)(iii). It reasoned:
3
[There were] a series of sales to the same person of the same drug
in the same amount, involving the same police officers as the
organizing force behind the sales, within a short time period. The
court does not find that the recording of only two of the
transactions is significant. It must be conceded that every joinder
of criminal indictments involves to some extent an inference of a
propensity to engage in criminal conduct, simply because a series
of crimes, rather than an isolated crime, has been committed.
However, the Court finds that, in this case, the logical and factual
connection does not solely demonstrate propensity. It is strongly
probative of intent. Indeed, if the crimes in this case may not be
joined for trial, it is difficult to conceive of any separate criminal
episodes which could be joined.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred, contending that the
common underlying conduct and the common participants in the four drug
transactions are not enough to establish the requisite logical and factual
connection. He further argues that joinder prejudiced him by allowing the
State to rely upon the number of drug sales to demonstrate propensity and to
use the stronger evidence of the later sales to improperly bolster its case for the
earlier sales.
Historically, the decision to join multiple charges has been a
discretionary matter left to the trial court. See State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118,
120 (2003). Thus, we will uphold the trial court’s ruling unless the decision
constitutes an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id. To show the trial
court’s decision is unsustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the
ruling was “clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of [the
defendant’s] case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
A
Before considering whether the trial court correctly concluded that the
drug sales were related offenses under Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii), we
first briefly outline our joinder jurisprudence to give context to the present
dispute. In Ramos, we departed from our then-existing joinder precedent
because it had proven “unworkable,” Ramos, 149 N.H. at 121, and adopted the
ABA standards for joinder and severance of criminal offenses, id. at 127.
Distinguishing between related and unrelated charges, we defined three
categories of related offenses, “same conduct,” “single criminal episode,” and
“common plan,” and also determined that unrelated offenses are those offenses
“that are not related.” Id. at 125.
Since Ramos, our opportunities for addressing relatedness have been
confined largely to the “common plan” category, and we adopted the definition
4
of common plan prescribed under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b).
See, e.g., State v. McIntyre, 151 N.H. 465, 466-67 (2004); State v. Schonarth,
152 N.H. 560 (2005); Petition of State of N.H. (State v. San Giovanni), 154 N.H.
671 (2007). In 2006, however, we expressed concern that the definition of
relatedness under Ramos may have been construed to be exclusive. See State
v. Abram, 153 N.H. 619, 627 (2006) (“we did not foreclose expansion of [the]
definition [of related under Ramos]”). While we continued to endorse Ramos,
we were troubled that our jurisprudence seemed to preclude joinder of charges
that might otherwise be appropriate for joinder. See id. We noted, however,
that “the court should not adopt new standards for joinder in criminal trials for
an issue that is not squarely before [it] and the adoption of a new rule of
criminal procedure should be accomplished through rulemaking.” Id. at 627-
28 (quotations and brackets omitted). Subsequently, in October 2007, we
adopted Superior Court Rule 97-A, which became effective on January 1, 2008.
This is our first opportunity to address the new joinder rule.
Turning to the governing law of this case, under Superior Court Rule 97-
A, some offenses that occur during separate criminal episodes are nevertheless
related if they “are logically and factually connected in a manner that does not
solely demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal
conduct.” Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I)(A)(iii). This category for joinder is distinguished
from other related offenses that “occur[ ] during a single criminal episode” or
“constitute parts of a common scheme or plan.” Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I)(A)(i), (ii).
Superior Court Rule 97-A, however, does not provide any factors or guidelines
for determining when offenses that occur during separate criminal episodes
bear a sufficient logical and factual connection so as to render them related.
We rely upon joinder rules in other jurisdictions to aid us in developing guiding
criteria for assessing whether offenses that occur during separate criminal
episodes are related under Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii).
Both state and federal jurisdictions commonly provide a procedure for
joining multiple offenses that occur during separate criminal episodes. See
Hoar, Joinder of Offenses: A New Rule for Oregon, 66 Or. L. Rev. 953, 972-81
(1987) (state and federal survey of joinder law and reviewing criteria for
assessing relatedness); 5 LaFave et al., Criminal Procedure § 17.1(a), at 2-6 (3d
ed. 2007) (discussion of state and federal joinder law and criteria for assessing
relatedness). While the specific language of Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii)
that defines related offenses that occur during separate criminal episodes is
unique, it captures core aspects outlined in similar joinder jurisprudence. See,
e.g., Hoar, supra at 974 (connected transactions may include a series of
occurrences, sometimes depending on the immediateness of their connection,
or possibly on their logical relationship); United States v. Hirschfeld, 964 F.2d
318, 323 (4th Cir. 1992) (“connected transactions” implies a “logical
relationship” and court examined the “logical and factual connections” between
the charges), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1087 (1993); United States v. Ziegler, No.
5
CR 07-30024-01, 2007 WL 2022179, at *2 (D. S.D. 2007) (examining whether
offenses of a “same or similar character” are “factually and logically related”).
Therefore, we rely upon factors enunciated in both federal and state cases to
inform the meaning of related offenses that occur during separate criminal
episodes.
We hold that whether offenses that occur during separate criminal
episodes are “logically and factually connected in a manner that does not solely
demonstrate that the accused has a propensity to engage in criminal conduct”
is largely determined by the close relationship among the offenses with respect
to both the underlying charged conduct and the evidence to be used to prove
the charges. The following factors will aid in discerning whether charges
arising from separate criminal episodes are related: (1) the temporal and
spatial relationship among the underlying charged acts; (2) the commonality of
the victim(s) and/or participant(s) for the charged offenses; (3) the similarity in
the defendant’s mode of operation; (4) the duplication of law regarding the
crimes charged; and (5) the duplication of witnesses, testimony and other
evidence related to the offenses. See United States v. Edgar, 82 F.3d 499, 503
(1st Cir.) (multiple fraud charges were similar in modus operandi, temporal
proximity and witnesses and testimony), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 870 (1996);
State v. Lewis, 488 N.W.2d 518, 525 (Neb. 1992) (court reviewed temporal and
spatial proximity between charged acts, as well as similarity of the modus
operandi and type of crime); State v. Hall, 307 N.W.2d 289, 295 (Wis. 1981) (for
separate criminal incidents to be joined, they must have a close relationship in
time, place, modus operandi, scheme or plan).
No single factor is dispositive on the question of relatedness. Rather, the
factors outlined above are intended to serve as guidelines that must be sensibly
applied in accord with the purposes of joinder:
The joint trial of offenses that share common factual
circumstances enables the state to avoid the duplication of
evidence required by separate trials, to reduce the inconvenience
to victims and witnesses, to minimize the time required to dispose
of the offenses, and to achieve a variety of other economies in
connection with prosecutorial and judicial resources.
The joint trial of offenses can also be beneficial to the
defendant. A single trial will eliminate the harassment, trauma,
expense, and prolonged publicity of multiple trials. A single trial
may result in a faster disposition of all cases, may increase the
possibility of concurrent sentences in the event of conviction, and
may prevent the application of enhanced sentencing statutes.
6
LaFave, supra, at 6 (quotation omitted); see also Ramos, 149 N.H. at 124. The
policy underlying joinder recognizes that “the government should not be put to
the task of proving what is essentially the same set of facts more than once,”
and that “the defendant should be spared the task of defending more than once
against what are essentially the same, or at least connected, charges.” Ramos,
149 N.H. at 124 (quotations omitted). However, multiple offenses that involve
different times, separate locations and distinct sets of witnesses and victims
should not be joined because separate trials would not involve substantial
duplication of evidence, repeated burdens on witnesses and victims, and
increased drain on prosecutorial and judicial resources. See id. at 123. The
factors we adopt today will enable the trial court to discern when offenses that
occur during separate criminal episodes are related in accordance with the
purposes of joinder sought to be achieved by Superior Court Rule 97-A.
Because the trial court may be required to join related offenses under Superior
Court Rule 97-A over the defendant’s objection, unless joinder is not in the
best interests of justice, we conclude that a close relationship must exist
among offenses alleged to have occurred during separate criminal episodes in
order to consider them related. See, e.g., Hall, 307 N.W.2d at 295 (for separate
criminal incidents to be joined, they must have a close relationship in time,
place, modus operandi, scheme or plan).
We recognize that under Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii), the
connection between charged offenses that occur during separate criminal
episodes cannot rest solely upon the accused’s propensity to engage in criminal
conduct. For purposes of joinder, however, offenses stemming from separate
criminal episodes may be “logically and factually connected” in a variety of
ways that do not solely demonstrate a defendant’s propensity to commit crime.
See, e.g., Smithers v. State, 826 So. 2d 916, 924 (Fla. 2002) (two murders were
meaningfully related because they occurred at same location and within two
weeks of each other, were similar in nature and in manner perpetrated, and
testimonial and confession evidence overlapped), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 1203
(2003); Lewis, 488 N.W.2d at 525 (two criminal episodes involving robbery,
kidnapping and sexual assault on two victims properly joined because same
crimes involved and they occurred within twenty-four hours at approximately
the same time of night and in the same manner).
We observe that in their initial briefs, both the State and the defendant
relied upon New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b) precedents to calculate
when charges arising from separate criminal episodes are related under
Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii). We, however, ordered the parties to submit
additional briefing on alternative approaches in the event we rejected a Rule
404(b) framework for assessing relatedness. Today, we expressly reject that
Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii) requires the State to affirmatively prove that
the charges would be mutually admissible in hypothetical separate trials under
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b) in order to comprise related offenses.
7
Cf. Brown, 156 N.H. at 444-45 (court’s analysis of whether misjoinder
constituted harmless error included reviewing whether charges would have
been mutually admissible under Rule 404(b) in separate trials). When the
State is using a defendant’s prior bad act to prove a matter that is relevant to
establishing his or her guilt of a charged crime, the exacting requirements of
Rule 404(b) are appropriate. See State v. Costello, 159 N.H. 113, 118 (2009)
(first prong of Rule 404(b) test is relevancy of the evidence for a purpose other
than proving the defendant’s character or disposition). In the context of
joinder, however, the purpose of consolidating related offenses that occur
during separate criminal episodes is not to use the defendant’s commission of
bad acts underlying one charge to establish his guilt on another. Rather, it is
to achieve efficiency and economy for both the government and the defendant.
See generally Ramos, 149 N.H. at 123-24 (justifications for joinder). The jury
ultimately must assess the defendant’s guilt for each charge independently of
the other offenses.
We also reject the defendant’s argument that the propensity language
requires the trial court to examine the prejudicial impact of joining multiple
charges when assessing whether the charges are related. Any potential
prejudice is a factor for the trial court to consider under the “best interests of
justice” prong of Rule 97-A(I)(B). See State v. Nelson, 357 So. 2d 1100, 1102
(La. 1978) (court should examine a myriad of concerns giving rise to undue
prejudice, including propensity inference, when determining whether to join
multiple charges for a single trial).
With these guiding criteria, we turn to consider whether the trial court
correctly concluded that the four drug transaction charges are related. The
charges comprised a series of controlled buys that occurred within one mile of
one another within about three weeks. Further, each transaction involved the
defendant and the cooperating individual, and occurred inside the same car in
the same manner and with the same narcotic exchanged for United States
currency. Further, each offense charged the same crime, unlawful sale of a
narcotic drug, and involved common witnesses, the same cooperating
individual and primarily the same police officers. Moreover, the testimony for
each charge would overlap regarding the contextual background of the case, as
well as the surveillance evidence linking the defendant to the gray sedan.
As the trial court acknowledged, distinctions in evidence existed between
the controlled buys with respect to identifying the car involved in the
transactions and linking the defendant as the driver of the car at the time of
the transactions. For example, the police conducted video surveillance in the
first two buys and the cooperating individual wore a wiretap in the latter two
buys. These distinctions, whether standing alone or cumulatively, do not
diminish the strong connection between the charged offenses. Cf. Hall, 307
N.W.2d at 295 (four separate criminal incidents were closely related because
8
they occurred in a span of eight days, within 6.5 miles of one another, and in
the same manner); Ford v. State, 506 N.E.2d 835, 837 (Ind. Ct. App. 1987)
(counts involving the same type of drug transaction and the same police
officers at the same location within four days of each other were properly
joined). Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not commit an
unsustainable exercise of discretion when it concluded that the four drug
offenses were logically and factually connected in a manner that did not solely
demonstrate that the defendant had a propensity to engage in criminal
conduct.
B
The defendant argues that joining the four drug charges caused him
undue prejudice because it permitted the State to argue propensity and to rely
upon the stronger evidence concerning the latter sales to improperly bolster its
case on the earlier sales. We interpret the defendant’s prejudice argument as
contending that the trial court erroneously concluded that joinder did not
offend “the best interests of justice” under Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(B).
Under Superior Court Rule 97-A, upon motion by either party, the trial
court is required to join related offenses for trial unless it determines that
“joinder is not in the best interests of justice.” Super. Ct. R. 97-A(I)(B). This is
a discretionary decision, subject to review under the unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard. See Ramos, 149 N.H. at 120. Thus, to succeed on appeal,
the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was “clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
We have yet to interpret “the best interests of justice” standard under
Superior Court Rule 97-A(I)(B). We conclude, however, that this standard at
least encompasses the considerations outlined in Ramos. Thus, charges
should be tried separately whenever it “is deemed appropriate to promote a fair
determination of the defendant’s guilt or innocence,” which includes evaluating
“whether, in view of the number of offenses charged and the complexity of the
evidence to be offered, the trier of fact will be able to distinguish the evidence
and apply the law intelligently to each offense.” Id. at 128; see also Nelson,
357 So. 2d at 1102-03 (outlining potential problems arising from joint trial on
numerous charges).
Joinder can give rise to other concerns of undue prejudice as well, which
may cause the best interests of justice to override conducting a single trial. For
example, some charges may be likely to unusually inflame the jury against the
defendant. See Alcala v. Superior Court, 185 P.3d 708, 720 (Cal. 2008).
Additionally, the State may gain an unfair advantage if a weak case is joined
with a strong case: “the joint trial of offenses creates a significant risk that the
9
jury will convict [a] defendant upon the weight of the accusations or upon the
accumulated effect of the evidence.” Ramos, 149 N.H. at 123 (quotation
omitted); see also Alcala, 185 P.3d at 720. A defendant “can also be
disadvantaged if the available defenses are inconsistent or if the defendant
wants to testify as to one offense but not as to others.” Ramos, 149 N.H. at
123 (quotation omitted). Ultimately, in determining the best interests of
justice, the purposes underlying joinder, i.e., efficiency and economy, must give
way when conducting a single trial would jeopardize a defendant’s right to a
fair trial. See State v. Mason, 150 N.H. 53, 61 (2003).
We now consider the trial court’s conclusion that joinder would not
offend the best interests of justice in light of the defendant’s assertions of
prejudice. The trial court ruled:
In this case, there is little danger of the credibility of the
confidential informant or the police officers in one episode being
bolstered by the testimony of those in the other episodes. The
confidential informant is the same and the police officers are
principally the same. If the defendant successfully impeaches the
credibility of the confidential informant or the police officers in one
instance, such impeachment will effect the credibility of the
witnesses in regard to their testimony as to all offenses. Even
considering that only two of the transactions were recorded, since
the same confidential informant is involved, there is no danger
that the testimony of different witnesses to the various episodes
could serve to bolster the testimony of different witnesses in
regard to other episodes.
In challenging the trial court’s decision, the defendant first argues that
joinder of the four drug charges allowed the State to improperly rely upon the
number of drug sales to prove his guilt, impermissibly relying upon a
propensity inference. He contends that “[a]t the beginning of her closing, the
prosecutor argued that the jury should accept [the cooperating individual’s]
testimony about the first buy, even though the police did not observe the buy
or positively identify [the defendant] as the person in the car, because ‘we had
officers who testified that the defendant was in the car on the other three
dates.’” He argues that the State improperly used the number of charges to
argue propensity during closing argument in order to bolster its case on the
first sale, which was supported by weaker evidence. Because the State does
not contest whether trial events may be relevant to our review of the trial
court’s pretrial decision on joinder, we consider the defendant’s arguments
that, in part, are based upon trial events for purposes of this case. But see
McIntyre, 151 N.H. at 470 (Broderick, C.J., dissenting) (emphasizing that
appellate review of trial court’s ruling on joinder should only be based upon the
evidence before the motion judge); cf. State v. Bassett, 139 N.H. 493, 497
10
(1995) (scope of review of Rule 404(b) pretrial ruling limited to “the time of the
State’s proffer and the court’s ruling thereon; namely, pretrial”).
We disagree with the defendant’s characterization of the State’s comment
during closing. The State acknowledged that the cooperating individual was
the only eyewitness who identified the defendant as the person in the car at the
first controlled buy. It went on to explain to the jury how to determine the
credibility of the cooperating individual’s testimony by identifying other
corroborating evidence, including police officer testimony that the defendant
was in the car on the other three occasions. This statement focused on the
other evidence that linked the defendant to the gray car in order to bolster the
cooperating individual’s account that the defendant was the person in that
same gray car during the first sale. The State did not argue that because the
defendant conducted the latter three illegal sales, he must have conducted the
first illegal sale. Nor did it argue that the stronger evidence supporting the
latter three sales overcame the weaker evidence supporting the first sale.
To the extent the defendant argues that each drug sale was not relevant
for any purpose other than propensity, we disagree. This argument assumes
that in order to justify joinder, each offense must be mutually admissible in a
hypothetical separate trial on the other offense. As stated above, mutual
admissibility is not a threshold requirement for joinder under Superior Court
Rule 97-A(I)(A)(iii). Cf. Mason, 150 N.H. at 62 (court’s analysis of whether
misjoinder constituted harmless error included reviewing whether evidence of
other charged bad acts caused undue prejudice to the defendant).
The defendant next contends that joinder permitted the State to rely
upon the stronger evidence underlying some of the drug sales to bolster the
other charges. In particular, at the pretrial motion hearing, the defendant
argued that to establish that he was the person in the gray car in the first two
sales, the State relied solely upon the account of the cooperating individual,
who lacked credibility. In contrast, the latter two sales were supported by
evidence of an audio recording that documented contact between the defendant
and the cooperating individual. Thus, according to the defendant, joining the
charges allowed the State to rely upon the stronger evidence to seek
convictions on the sales that were supported by considerably weaker evidence.
We conclude that the defendant has failed to establish that the trial
court’s decision was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. See Ramos, 149 N.H. at 120 (unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard). In its ruling, the trial court recognized that some supporting
evidence differed between the charges, such as the nature of the surveillance.
It ruled, however, that there was no possibility that testimony on some charges
would bolster the testimony of witnesses pertaining to the other drug
transactions because the cooperating individual was the key witness in each
11
transaction. Essentially, the trial court decided that because the key witnesses
were principally the same for the four drug transactions, the jury’s decision on
witness credibility would either bolster or diminish the evidence for all of the
charges together. This decision was not an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Accordingly, we conclude that the defendant has failed to establish
that the trial court erroneously concluded that joinder would not offend the
best interests of justice.
III
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in excluding
evidence of the cooperating individual’s prior conviction for witness
intimidation. He contends that witness intimidation, like perjury, constitutes a
crime of dishonesty or false statement and, thus, its admission was required
under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 609(a)(2). According to the defendant,
he was prejudiced because exclusion of the prior conviction prevented the jury
from accurately judging the cooperating individual’s credibility, a key issue in
the case.
We review the trial court’s evidentiary ruling under an unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. State v. Hebert, 158 N.H. 306, 311 (2009).
Thus, “the defendant bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial court’s
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id.
After the State concluded its direct examination of the cooperating
individual, the defendant asked the trial court for permission to impeach the
cooperating individual with prior convictions, including the witness
intimidation conviction. The trial court denied the motion, ruling that the
crimes did not show untruthfulness or dishonesty, but demonstrated
propensity. We need not address the defendant’s argument on appeal that the
crime of witness intimidation constitutes a crime of dishonesty or false
statement because we conclude that the defendant failed to provide sufficient
documentation to the trial court as required under Rule 609(a)(2).
Rule 609(a)(2) provides:
For the purpose of attacking the character for truthfulness of a
witness, . . . evidence that any witness has been convicted of a
crime shall be admitted regardless of the punishment, if it readily
can be determined that establishing the elements of the crime
required proof or admission of an act of dishonesty or false
statement by the witness.
The document recording the cooperating individual’s past convictions appears
to be a computer printout dated March 10, 2008, the day before the
12
defendant’s trial began. Presumably, this is the document that the defendant
gave to the trial court in support of his request to impeach the cooperating
individual. The document shows that the convictions occurred in
Massachusetts and lists various convictions, including witness intimidation. It
does not provide any information that identifies the precise Massachusetts law
that was violated, nor does it give any information whatsoever about the
elements of the crime or the criminal conduct that the cooperating individual
committed. We conclude that the document’s generic reference to witness
intimidation was insufficient for it to be “readily . . . determined that
establishing the elements of the crime required proof or admission of an act of
dishonesty or false statement by the witness” as required under Rule 609(a)(2).
Accordingly, the defendant has failed to establish that the trial court’s decision
to exclude the evidence constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
13