THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-027
DALE ROBINSON
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE REAL ESTATE COMMISSION
Argued: September 11, 2008
Opinion Issued: October 10, 2008
D'Amante Couser Steiner Pellerin, P.A., of Concord (R. James Steiner and
Gayle M. Braley on the brief), for the petitioner.
Dale Robinson, orally, pro se.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Suzanne M. Gorman, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Dale Robinson, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Mangones, J.) granting the motion to dismiss filed by the
respondent, the New Hampshire Real Estate Commission (Commission), and
denying his motion for summary judgment. Both motions concerned a single
issue: whether the Commission had jurisdiction to hold a hearing on a
complaint alleging that the petitioner engaged in misconduct when selling his
own property. See RSA 331-A:4, I (2004). The trial court ruled that the
Commission had jurisdiction. We reverse.
The trial court’s order recited the following facts. The petitioner became
a licensed real estate salesperson in 1963 and a licensed real estate broker in
1965. The Commission suspended his licenses in 1987, and revoked them in
1989. Since 1989, therefore, the petitioner has had neither a real estate broker
nor a salesperson license.
In 2005, the petitioner placed “For Sale” signs on property he owns in
Pembroke, and at nearby locations. The signs included the name “Homestead
Realty,” a telephone number, and an “R” emblem indicating that Homestead
Realty is a member of the National Association of Realtors. Upon seeing the
signs, Carlos and Katherine Moreira telephoned the petitioner to ask about
buying the property. They asked whether he was the realtor for the property,
to which he said, “yes.” Upon meeting them, the petitioner allegedly provided
the Moreiras with a business card that identified him as a broker at Homestead
Realty. The business card contained the same “R” emblem as the “For Sale”
signs.
The Moreiras and the petitioner entered into a purchase and sale
agreement, and the Moreiras gave him a first deposit of $1,000. The petitioner
wrote “No Broker” on the receipt. Two weeks later, the Moreiras gave the
petitioner a second deposit, a $1,000 check made payable to Homestead
Realty. The petitioner wrote a receipt on the back of a second business card,
which also identified him as a broker and included the “R” symbol. The
Moreiras subsequently paid the remainder of the down payment. Following a
dispute regarding the contract’s terms, the Moreiras filed a complaint with the
Commission, in which they alleged that the petitioner had violated the New
Hampshire Real Estate Practices Act (the Act). See RSA ch. 331-A (2004 &
Supp. 2007).
At the hearing on the Moreiras’ complaint, the petitioner moved to
dismiss the proceedings for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. After denying
the motion and conducting the hearing, the Commission concluded that the
petitioner had violated: (1) RSA 331-A:3 (2004) and RSA 331-A:34 (Supp.
2007) by directly or indirectly acting as a real estate broker without a license;
(2) RSA 331-A:26, II (2004) by disregarding the Commission’s prior order
revoking his licenses; and (3) RSA 331-A:26, XVI (2004) by misrepresenting his
membership in a state or national realty organization.
The petitioner appealed to the superior court contesting the
Commission’s assertion of jurisdiction. The superior court upheld the
Commission’s decision, and this appeal followed. The sole issue for our review
is whether the Commission had subject matter jurisdiction even though the
petitioner owned the property at issue. See RSA 331-A:4, I.
2
This jurisdictional issue involves interpreting the Act, which is a question
of law that we review de novo. See In re Juvenile 2004-0469, 151 N.H. 706,
707 (2005). We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in
the words of the statute considered as a whole. Blackthorne Group v. Pines of
Newmarket, 150 N.H. 804, 806 (2004). We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the
words used. Id. When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we
need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative intent, and we refuse
to consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to incorporate in the statute. Id. Furthermore, we
interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id. By so doing, we are better able to discern the legislature’s intent
and to interpret statutory language in light of the policy or purpose sought to
be advanced by the statutory scheme. Id.
The Act establishes a comprehensive system for regulating real estate
sales and brokerage practices. Id. Its purpose is to “regulate the practice of
real estate brokers and salespersons in order to ensure that they meet and
maintain minimum standards which promote public understanding and
confidence in the business of real estate brokerage.” RSA 331-A:1 (2004). It
was enacted to protect the public against broker fraud and incompetence.
Blackthorne Group, 150 N.H. at 806.
“The primary focus of the [Act] is to provide a licensing procedure,
whereby all persons who act in the capacity of real estate salespeople or
brokers are regulated by the strictures of the licensing law.” Finlay
Commercial Real Estate v. Paino, 133 N.H. 4, 7 (1990). Towards this end, the
Act sets forth the requirements for licensure, see RSA 331-A:10 (Supp. 2007),
and prohibits “any person, directly or indirectly, to act as a real estate broker
or real estate salesperson without a license and otherwise complying with the
provisions of this chapter,” RSA 331-A:3. Acting as a real estate broker or
salesperson without a license constitutes a class A misdemeanor. See RSA
331-A:34.
The Act defines a “[b]roker” as “any person acting for another on
commission or for other compensation . . . , or any person licensed under this
chapter who” among other things “[a]dvertises or holds oneself out as being
engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, renting or leasing real
estate.” RSA 331-A:2, III(g) (2004). A salesperson is “an individual who is
licensed under a broker to participate in any activity described in [RSA 331-
A:2, III].” RSA 331-A:2, X (2004).
The Commission administers the Act. See RSA 331-A:5 (2004). By
statute, the Commission “may investigate the actions of any person engaged in
the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate broker or real estate
3
salesperson, regardless of whether the transaction was for the person’s own
account or in the capacity as broker or salesperson,” RSA 331-A:28, I (2004),
and may impose discipline for any misconduct, see id., or seek judicial relief,
see RSA 331-A:35, IV (2004). The Commission may also cause a criminal
complaint to be filed. See RSA 331-A:35, I, II (2004).
RSA 331-A:26 (2004 & Supp. 2007) describes in thirty-eight paragraphs
“specific courses of conduct which in and of themselves constitute breaches or
violations of the standards to which the legislature requires brokers and
salespeople to be held.” Finlay Commercial Real Estate, 133 N.H. at 7. Any
licensee found guilty of engaging in the conduct described in RSA 331-A:26
“shall be subject to disciplinary action as provided in RSA 331-A:28.” RSA
331-A:26. The conduct prohibited includes: (1) violating any provision of the
Act or any order issued pursuant to the Act; and (2) misrepresenting
membership in any state or national real estate association. RSA 331-A:26, II,
XVI.
The petitioner, relying upon RSA 331-A:4, I, argues that he is exempt
from the Act’s provisions because he was selling his own property. RSA 331-
A:4, I, provides that the provisions of the Act shall not apply to: “An owner,
builder or tenant of real estate . . . with respect to property owned or leased by
the owner, builder, or tenant.” The petitioner asserts that because he is
exempt from the Act, the Commission lacked jurisdiction to conduct the
hearing on the Moreiras’ complaint. We agree. The plain meaning of RSA 331-
A:4, I, is that a property owner with respect to property owned by him is
exempt from the Act’s provisions.
The State mistakenly contends that the property owner exemption does
not apply here because the petitioner held himself out to be a real estate
broker. There is no qualifying language in the property owner exemption. See
RSA 331-A:4, I. It applies even when a property owner holds himself out to be
a real estate broker. By contrast, the exemption for corporate consultants
specifically states that it applies only when the consultant “does not hold
himself or herself out as a real estate broker.” RSA 331-A:4, VIII (2004). Had
the legislature intended the property owner exemption to apply only when the
property owner does not hold himself out to be a real estate broker, it could
have included similar language. We cannot, however, consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to incorporate in the statute. Blackthorne Group, 150 N.H. at 806.
The State also argues that the Commission had jurisdiction over the
matters before it under RSA 331-A:28, I. RSA 331-A:28, I, provides:
The commission may investigate the actions of any person
engaged in the business or acting in the capacity of a real estate
4
broker or real estate salesperson, regardless of whether the
transaction was for the person’s own account or in the capacity as
broker or salesperson. If found guilty, after a hearing, of violating
this chapter, the commission may impose any one or more of the
following sanctions:
(a) Suspend, revoke or deny a license or the renewal of
such license.
(b) Levy a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each offense.
(c) Require the person to complete a course or courses in
selected areas of real estate practice relevant to the section of this
chapter violated.
The plain meaning of RSA 331-A:4, I, however, is that the provisions of
the Act, including RSA 331-A:28, I, do not apply when a property owner is
selling his own property. Even if we were to assume, without deciding, that, as
the State contends, we must modify the plain language of RSA 331-A:4, I, by
construing it together with RSA 331-A:28, I, the State would not prevail.
When interpreting two or more statutes that deal with a similar subject
matter, we construe them so that they do not contradict each other, and so
that they will lead to reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose
of the statutes. Chase v. Ameriquest Mortgage Co., 155 N.H. 19, 22 (2007).
Thus construed, we would conclude that, at best, RSA 331-A:28, I, grants the
Commission the authority to investigate the actions of an alleged property
owner, but that RSA 331-A:4, I, prohibits the Commission from imposing
discipline if, after investigation, it confirms that the person owns the property
in question. Any other construction would render RSA 331-A:4, I, superfluous.
See Silva v. Botsch, 120 N.H. 600, 602 (1980) (construing a statute to render
some provisions superfluous is inconsistent with legislative intent).
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we hold that the petitioner was
exempt from the Act’s provisions, and the Commission, thus, lacked
jurisdiction to hold a hearing on the Moreiras’ complaint. Should the
legislature disagree with our interpretation of the Act, it is free to amend the
Act as it sees fit. Moreover, we note that the chapter as a whole contains
several internally inconsistent and confusing provisions; thus, the legislature
may wish to revise it to make it clearer.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, GALWAY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5