THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2008-858
LAND AMERICA COMMONWEALTH TITLE INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
DOROTHY KOLOZETSKI
Argued: September 23, 2009
Opinion Issued: January 29, 2010
McSwiney, Semple, Hankin-Birke & Wood, P.C., of New London (Susan
Hankin-Birke on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Melanie Bell, of Newbury, on the brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Dorothy Kolozetski, appeals the Trial Court’s
(Arnold, J.) order applying RSA 477:22 (2001) to award the proceeds of her
husband’s one-half interest in the marital residence to Land America
Commonwealth Title Insurance Company (Land America). We affirm.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or are supported
by the record. Dorothy and John Kolozetski owned real property in Newport as
joint tenants with rights of survivorship. They mortgaged their homestead to
Sugar River Bank (Sugar River). In 2005, Dorothy Kolozetski filed for divorce,
whereupon the Newport Family Division issued a non-hypothecation order. A
non-hypothecation order, with limited exceptions, enjoins any party from
“transferring, encumbering, hypothecating, concealing or in any way disposing
of any property” until the divorce decree has been executed. RSA 458:16-b, I
(2004). During the divorce proceedings, John Kolozetski forged his wife’s
signature on a notarized power of attorney. With this fraudulent power of
attorney, he obtained a loan of $150,000 from Lake Sunapee Bank (Lake
Sunapee) secured by a mortgage on the property. Lake Sunapee paid Sugar
River $50,554.25 to satisfy the first mortgage and advanced the remaining
balance to John Kolozetski. With these funds, he purchased a hot tub and two
luxury vehicles, among other items. Based upon these actions, the family
division found him in contempt of the court’s non-hypothecation order. Lake
Sunapee intervened in the Kolozetskis’ divorce proceedings. John Kolozetski
has not repaid the Lake Sunapee mortgage.
In 2007, the Kolozetskis divorced. In the final decree of divorce, the
family division noted that the property would be sold by agreement between
Dorothy Kolozetski and Lake Sunapee. The final decree also stated the
superior court would resolve the debtor-creditor issues between Dorothy
Kolozetski and Lake Sunapee.
Subsequently, Lake Sunapee filed suit in superior court to recover the
money it loaned. As a part of this action, Lake Sunapee filed a motion to
liquidate the real estate. In lieu of a forced sale, Dorothy Kolozetski and Lake
Sunapee agreed that she would convey the real property to a third party and
release her homestead rights. The real property sold for $225,000. The
superior court ordered that after taxes, fees, and other liens, $50,554.26 be
distributed to Lake Sunapee to offset its satisfaction of the Sugar River loan
and that $74,865.81 be given to Dorothy Kolozetski. The remaining
$74,865.80 was placed in an escrow account pending the outcome of this
litigation. Both Lake Sunapee and Dorothy Kolozetski claim the full amount of
the proceeds in the account. During these proceedings, Land America, a title
insurance company that provided coverage to Lake Sunapee, substituted itself
for Lake Sunapee.
The trial court found that Land America should receive the money in the
escrow account. It reasoned that John Kolozetski had effected a conveyance to
Lake Sunapee by mortgaging the property for $150,000. While he could not
legally convey the entire property without his wife’s participation as joint
tenant, the court ruled that “RSA 477:22 act[ed] to save the conveyance to the
extent of Mr. Kolozetski’s interest in the property at the time he executed the
mortgage.” The trial court found John Kolozetski had a one-half interest in the
property to which Land America was entitled.
On appeal, Dorothy Kolozetski contends that the trial court erred in
applying RSA 477:22 to award Land America one-half of the net proceeds. Her
2
argument requires us to construe RSA 477:22. The interpretation of a statute
is a question of law, which we review de novo. MacPherson v. Weiner, 158 N.H.
6, 9 (2008). When examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain
and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We
interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result and review a particular
provision, not in isolation, but together with all associated sections. Id.
RSA 477:22 provides, “A conveyance made by a person having a limited
interest in an estate, purporting to convey a greater interest than he possessed
or could lawfully convey, shall not work a forfeiture thereof, but shall pass to
the grantee all the estate which he could lawfully convey.” A plain reading of
RSA 477:22 indicates that the statute provides protection to the grantee when
a person purports “to convey a greater interest than he possessed or could
lawfully convey.” RSA 477:22. Here, we conclude John Kolozetski did just that
when he presented the forged notarized power of attorney to acquire the
mortgage.
To determine whether John Kolozetski purported to convey “a greater
interest than he possessed or could lawfully convey,” we first must establish
what he could “lawfully convey.” As a joint tenant, John Kolozetski had the
power to secure a loan with a mortgage only on his undivided one-half interest
in the property without the other tenant’s consent or knowledge. See Johnson
v. Ben. Finance Co. of Ill., Inc., 506 N.E.2d 1025, 1026-28 (Ill. App. Ct. 1987)
(holding bank had a valid mortgage lien only against husband’s one-half
interest in the property where husband forged wife’s signature on a quitclaim
deed to obtain a second mortgage). John Kolozetski, however, could not
encumber his wife’s property interest with a mortgage without her consent,
which he did not have. See, e.g., Taylor v. Canterbury, 92 P.3d 961, 965 (Colo.
2004); First Nat. Bank v. Energy Fuels Corp., 618 P.2d 1115, 1118 (Colo. 1980)
(“A joint tenant cannot alienate, encumber, or transfer the interest of other
joint tenants without their consent.”).
Further, by applying for the Lake Sunapee mortgage without his wife’s
consent, John Kolozetski unilaterally severed the joint tenancy, resulting in a
tenancy in common. His actions expressed a clear intent to terminate the joint
tenancy’s right of survivorship. Mamalis v. Bornavos, 112 N.H. 423, 426
(1972) (requiring a joint tenant’s actions to display a clear intent to sever).
Indeed, in a mortgage title theory state, such as New Hampshire, other courts
have found encumbering the property with a mortgage to which the other joint
tenant does not agree severs the tenancy. See, e.g., Schaefer v. Peoples
Heritage Sav. Bank, 669 A.2d 185, 187 (Me. 1996); 20 Am. Jur. 2d Cotenancy
and Joint Ownership § 27 (2005); 7 R. Powell, Powell on Real Property
§ 51.04[1][c] (M. Wolf ed. 2009). The severance occurs because a mortgage in
3
theory is a conditional conveyance that passes legal title to the property in fee
to the mortgagee; the mortgagor, however, retains equitable title. Bradley v.
Lightcap, 195 U.S. 1, 17-18 (1904); 54A Am. Jur. 2d Mortgages § 136 (2009).
Therefore, John Kolozetski could only convey title to his one-half undivided
interest in the tenancy in common.
We next must determine what John Kolozetski purported to convey. To
obtain the Lake Sunapee mortgage loan, John Kolozetski presented the bank
with a notarized forged power of attorney appointing him as his wife’s
“attorney, with full power of substitution and revocation, for [her] and in [her]
name, place and stead.” This fraudulent power of attorney signified that John
Kolozetski possessed his wife’s permission to give a mortgage on their entire
property held as joint tenants, not just his undivided one-half share of the
tenancy. Therefore, John Kolozetski, a joint tenant or a person with “a limited
interest in an estate,” purported to “convey a greater interest than he
possessed or could lawfully convey.”
Pursuant to RSA 477:22, the grantee receives all of the estate that the
grantor “could lawfully convey.” Here, John Kolozetski could lawfully convey
only his undivided one-half interest in the property. This one-half interest
equals one-half of the proceeds from the sale of the house after satisfaction of
the underlying loan – the contested $74,865.80 held in escrow that the
superior court awarded to Land America. The parties had agreed that the first
$50,554.26 from the sale of the house would satisfy the underlying loan.
Therefore, in light of this agreement, we decline to remand this case for
reconsideration of the underlying subrogation claim.
In addition to arguing generally that RSA 477:22 does not apply, Dorothy
Kolozetski presents a number of specific reasons why the statute does not
apply, which we will now address. The first is that John Kolozetski lacked a
“lawful interest” or a “lawfully conveyable interest” because the family court
had issued a non-hypothecation order and had not determined the relative
interests of the parties at the time he acquired the second mortgage. This
argument fails. A violation of a non-hypothecation order constitutes contempt
of court punishable by imprisonment, a fine, and/or attorney’s fees. Cf. Duval
v. Duval, 114 N.H. 422, 425 (1974) (defining civil and criminal contempt
actions); see also RSA 458:51 (2004) (permitting court to award reasonable
costs and attorney’s fees for failure to obey order or decree under RSA chapter
458). Indeed, here the marital court held John Kolozetski in contempt and
ordered him to deliver possession and control to Dorothy Kolozetski of the
identified items that he purchased with the proceeds from the mortgage. The
fact that John Kolozetski violated the non-hypothecation order, however, does
not mean that he did not possess a “lawful interest” or a “lawfully conveyable
interest.”
4
Second, Dorothy Kolozetski contends that a forged mortgage and forged
power of attorney cannot validly convey title and divest her of her rights to the
property, particularly her homestead right. To make this argument, she relies
upon a number of inapposite cases from other jurisdictions. See Southeast
Bank, N.A. v. Sapp, 554 So. 2d 1193 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1989), review denied,
564 So. 2d 1087 (Fla. 1990); Fitzgerald, Trustee v. Goff, 99 Ind. 28 (1884);
Howell v. McCrie, 14 P. 257 (Kan. 1887); David City Building & Loan Ass’n v.
Fast, 208 N.W. 964 (Neb. 1926). Here, however, Dorothy Kolozetski was not
divested of her one-half interest in the property. John Kolozetski encumbered
and passed title only to his one-half interest in the marital property when he
obtained the mortgage loan. He could not convey her interest.
Third, Dorothy Kolozetski argues that public policy dictates that a bank
should not be rewarded for its “fail[ure] to exercise due diligence” when
refinancing the marital home at the expense of the innocent spouse. Based
upon the record before us, Dorothy Kolozetski did not make this argument to
the trial court or in her notice of appeal; therefore, we decline to address it.
See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
5