THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-674
RITA SUTTON & a.
v.
TOWN OF GILFORD & a.
Argued: September 23, 2009
Opinion Issued: March 30, 2010
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Mitchell Municipal Group, P.A., of Laconia (Walter L. Mitchell and Laura
A. Spector on the brief, and Ms. Spector orally), for respondent Town of Gilford.
Patrick Wood Law Office, PLLC, of Laconia (Patrick H. Wood on the brief
and orally) for respondent Barbara Aichinger.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas J. Pappas and Mary Ann
Dempsey on the brief), for Bank of America, N.A., as amicus curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Rita Sutton, by and through her son
and attorney-in-fact, Glenn Sutton, appeals Superior Court (Smukler, J.)
orders: (1) granting respondent Barbara Aichinger’s motion for summary
judgment on Sutton’s petition for a writ of mandamus; and (2) denying Sutton’s
request for a permanent injunction to prevent construction and development of
Aichinger’s non-conforming lot. Aichinger cross-appeals superior court orders:
(1) denying her motion to dismiss the petition because Sutton failed to exhaust
her administrative remedies; (2) granting declaratory judgment to Sutton on
the grounds that Aichinger’s property had been merged pursuant to the Town
of Gilford’s (Town) zoning ordinance; (3) ruling that the Town was not estopped
from enforcing its zoning ordinance; (4) denying her request to reopen the
hearing to present evidence on the issues of municipal estoppel and merger;
and (5) denying her request for attorney’s fees. We reverse in part and affirm in
part.
I
At issue in this case is lakefront property (the property) on Governor’s
Island in Gilford, which Aichinger purchased in 2002. The property is in the
Single Family Residence (SFR) district, where lots are required to be one acre in
size, and is part of the Governor’s Island Club (Club), an association that,
among other things, enforces restrictive covenants on land use on the island.
At one time, the property was comprised of two parcels (lots 9 and 10). Lot 9,
which contained a single structure consisting of a garage and guest house, is
approximately 0.6 acres, and lot 10, which contained a residence, is
approximately 0.5 acres. Sometime in the 1980s, pursuant to a provision in
the Town’s zoning ordinance that automatically merged contiguous non-
conforming lots, the Town merged lots 9 and 10 to create a single lot, known as
lot 7. Although former lots 9 and 10 are described separately in Aichinger’s
deed, at the time she purchased the property, it was labeled “lot 7” on the tax
maps of the town and was taxed as a single lot. The records of the Club also
indicate that the property is a single lot.
In 2006, Aichinger sought clarification from the Town regarding the legal
status of lot 7. She first contacted the Town Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)
and Town Appraiser to see whether she could treat her property as separate
waterfront parcels. Specifically, she inquired whether the two adjoining parcels
had been merged by request of the previous owners. The CEO and Town
Appraiser informed Aichinger that they did not see any indication in their
records that a previous owner had voluntarily merged the property, but did not
comment on whether she could treat the parcels as separate lots. The Town
Appraiser noted that it appeared that the parcels had been automatically
merged by a mapping company, and informed her that he would recommend
that the properties be separately assessed, but that he had no authority to
proceed without the direction and approval of the Town Planning Board and
2
Board of Selectmen. The Town Appraiser and CEO then referred Aichinger’s
question to the Town Director of Planning and Land Use (Director of Planning).
In April 2006, Aichinger contacted the Director of Planning to review the
matter and to request a second tax lot ID number. On October 19, 2006, the
Director of Planning responded to Aichinger’s request by email. He stated that
he had reviewed her file, that he had found no evidence that previous owners
had voluntarily merged the lots, that lots 9 and 10 appear to have been merged
even on some of the older tax maps, but that the maps “clearly show signs that
there were once two lots,” and that he presumed that “the lots were merged
involuntarily at the time that the Town had a law requiring such automatic
mergers.” He also stated that “[t]he courts threw out that law” and that he
believed “all automatic mergers were effectively voided.” On January 15, 2007,
the Director of Planning sent a follow-up letter, stating, in relevant part:
This letter is sent to confirm that the Town Assessor and I agree
that [the parcel] is legally two (2) lots. It appears that the lots were
automatically merged only on the Town tax maps and not at the
Registry of Deeds. Such automatic mergers were required by an
old zoning ordinance that was thrown out in a court challenge and
is no longer on the books. Your deed still describes two separate
lots, not a single merged lot, which further attests to the notion
that this property was not the subject of a bona fide merger, and
the tax maps show residual evidence of the former lot layout.
Addresses for the two lots will be 554 Edgewater Drive for what
used to be lot 9 (the more northerly lot), and 558 Edgewater Drive
for what used to be lot 10 (see attached map).
Thereafter, Aichinger began work related to a plan to remove all existing
buildings on lot 7 and to construct two new single-family homes, one on former
lot 9 and one on former lot 10. Specifically, the record shows that she:
obtained a permit to demolish the existing house on 558
Edgewater Drive, obtained a new septic design and system permit
for both parcels, obtained a building permit for a new house on
558 Edgewater Drive, secured permits for a new driveway on both
parcels, blasted foundation holes for new homes on both parcels,
contracted for the construction of a new home on 558 Edgewater
Drive, received approval for construction of a new home on 558
Edgewater Drive from respondent Governor’s Island Club, and
mortgaged 554 Edgewater Drive to fund the construction for 558
Edgewater Drive. Ms. Aichinger also sought buyers for 554
Edgewater Drive.
3
In May 2007, the Director of Planning wrote to Aichinger indicating that
after consulting with town counsel, he realized that his previous advice had
been in error, and that Aichinger, in fact, owned a single, merged lot. Aichinger
appealed this decision to the Gilford Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). She
also began negotiations with the Gilford Board of Selectmen (Board of
Selectmen), contending that if the May 2007 decision of the Director of
Planning stood, the Town might be liable for money damages based upon
municipal estoppel. She also contended that RSA 647:39-a and RSA 75:9
clearly recognize that a landowner must take action to have property merged.
On June 21, 2007, prior to her ZBA appeal hearing, Aichinger entered
into a settlement agreement (Agreement) with the Board of Selectmen.
Specifically, the Town and Aichinger agreed, inter alia: (1) that “the property
consists of two separate and distinct parcels of land and the Town has and will
continue to assess them as separate tax parcels under NH RSA 76:9”; and (2)
the Town “shall take no action and shall not support any action to merge the
two lots nor . . . participate in any efforts to merge the two lots.” As a result,
Aichinger did not pursue her ZBA appeal.
In July 2007, Sutton, an abutting landowner, filed suit in superior court,
seeking: (1) an injunction to prevent Aichinger from developing the property in
violation of the Gilford Zoning Ordinance; (2) a declaratory judgment that
Aichinger was collaterally estopped from litigating whether lots 9 and 10 were
merged; (3) a declaratory judgment that the Town is not estopped from
enforcing its merger ordinance; (4) a mandamus against the Town requiring it
to enforce its zoning ordinances; and (5) attorney’s fees against the Town. In
early October, Aichinger filed an answer and counterclaim, and later moved for
summary judgment. The trial court rejected the motion relating to Counts I
(injunctive relief), II (declaratory judgment) and IV (attorney’s fees), reasoning
that a material issue of fact existed as to whether Sutton would be specially
damaged by the alleged zoning violation. The trial court granted summary
judgment on Count III (mandamus), concluding that mandamus was not an
appropriate remedy in this case because Sutton’s right to have the ordinance
enforced was not clear and apparent. Rather, the Town had the discretion to
settle with Aichinger and, in fact, had exercised its discretion in doing so in
good faith, because the Town had entered into the Agreement to reduce a
litigation risk where there existed a non-frivolous claim of estoppel.
Also in October, Aichinger obtained a building permit for the
construction of a home on 554 Edgewater Drive, former lot 9. She sought the
building permit on behalf of a party with whom she had entered into a
purchase and sale agreement for that property. The permit allowed a new
single-family home with a garage but contained the following warning:
“Subject property is currently involved in litigation any construction at this
point could be subject to removal at the owners expense should the court
4
determine that this lot is not a sep[a]rate lot. The Town of Gilford does not
recommend starting any construction until all litigation is resolved.”
Subsequently, Aichinger asked the Town CEO to amend the permit,
informing him that she intended to replace and enlarge the existing guest
cottage. By letter, she stated, in pertinent part,
. . . I am writing this letter to address the condition of the building
permit that you issued October 3, 2007 concerning the pending
litigation. Per the Gilford Zoning Ordinances I am allowed an
expansion within the limits of the property of my nonconforming
use which is my fully functional guest home. I therefore would like
the building permit to be amended to strike the warning and add
the condition that in either outcome of the litigation one lot or two
the structure being built will not have to be removed.
The CEO then informed Aichinger by letter that, “Whether this subject property
is considered a separate lot or is determined to be part of the property at 558
Edgewater, . . . you are permitted to replace, enlarge, and/or relocate a
preexisting dwelling as long as it complies with all other requirements.” The
CEO also stated in the letter that the building permit would “be amended to
reflect a structure replacement.” On October 29, the Town issued an amended
building permit without the litigation warning contained in the earlier permit.
The amended permit stated that it was for a “[n]ew single family home with
garage to replace existing single family dwelling,” and included the following
language: “Preexisting grandfathered dwelling must be demolished prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit for this replacement structure.” On
December 15, 2007, Aichinger sent an email to Sutton’s son, advising him that
a building permit had been issued for 554 Edgewater Drive. She attached to
the email a copy of the amended building permit and the correspondence from
the Town stating that Aichinger was permitted to rebuild her guest house
whether she was found to own one lot or two. Sutton did not appeal the
issuance of this building permit to the ZBA.
In March 2008, Aichinger filed a motion to dismiss Sutton’s request for
an injunction to prohibit construction and development at 554 Edgewater
Drive. She argued that the fact that the Town had issued the amended
building permit indicated that construction of the new house would not violate
the Town’s zoning ordinance, and that, therefore, as a matter of law, Sutton
had not suffered “special damages” under RSA 676:15. Aichinger further
contended that Sutton’s failure to appeal the issuance of the amended building
permit barred her from obtaining an injunction. The trial court denied the
motion to dismiss, finding that: (1) whether construction “on a nonconforming
use” would specially damage Sutton was a substantive issue to be determined
on the merits; and (2) Sutton was not required to exhaust her administrative
5
remedies before the ZBA because the issues in this case were “somewhat
unique and not limited to procedural or factual issues.”
Following a hearing on the merits in May 2008, the trial court ruled that
lots 9 and 10 had been legally merged for over twenty years, that the Town was
not municipally estopped from treating the property as one parcel, and that the
only way for Aichinger to create two lots would be to subdivide the merged
property. The trial court further ruled that Aichinger had the right to replace
the existing garage and guest cottage on lot 9 with a new structure, regardless
of the property’s merged status, and therefore denied Sutton’s request for
injunctive relief to bar the planned construction. The trial court denied the
request for attorney’s fees against the Town, the parties’ motions to reconsider,
and Aichinger’s request to reopen the hearing to introduce evidence relating to
municipal estoppel and the merger issue. This appeal and cross-appeal
followed.
II
We first address Aichinger’s contention that Sutton’s petition should
have been dismissed because Sutton failed to exhaust her administrative
remedies. Aichinger had moved to dismiss Sutton’s petition for declaratory
judgment and injunctive relief, in part, on the grounds that Sutton did not
exhaust her administrative remedies because she did not appeal either the
original or amended building permits to the ZBA in the fall of 2007. The trial
court denied the motion. Later, in its order on the merits, the trial court ruled
that the amended permit was valid because Sutton never appealed the permit,
and offered “no persuasive explanation for this failure.” The practical result of
the trial court’s two orders was essentially a ruling that the exhaustion
doctrine barred Sutton’s request to enjoin the construction authorized by the
amended building permit, but not her request for declaratory judgment that
Aichinger owns only one lot. On appeal, Aichinger appears to argue that
Sutton’s entire petition should have been dismissed because she failed to
exhaust her administrative remedies. We disagree, and hold that the
exhaustion doctrine bars Sutton’s request for an injunction to the extent that
Sutton sought to enjoin the construction authorized by the October 29, 2007
amended building permit, but does not bar her request for a declaratory
judgment that Aichinger owns only one lot.
The pleadings and affidavits before the trial court at the time it
considered Aichinger’s motion to dismiss reflect the following. In July 2007,
after Aichinger and the Town reached the Agreement in which the Town agreed
to treat Aichinger’s property as two lots, Sutton filed suit in superior court
against Aichinger, the Town, and Governor’s Island Club seeking, inter alia: (1)
an injunction to prevent Aichinger from developing the property in violation of
the Gilford Zoning Ordinance; and (2) a declaratory judgment that Aichinger
6
was collaterally estopped from litigating whether lots 9 and 10 were merged.
Three months later, in October 2007, Aichinger sought, and was issued, an
amended building permit. According to an affidavit Aichinger filed in support
of her motion to dismiss, Aichinger sent Sutton’s son an email in December
2007, advising him that a building permit had been issued, and stating her
intent to rebuild her guest house. Aichinger’s affidavit stated that the permit
contained the following language: “Preexisting grandfathered dwelling must be
demolished prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for this replacement
structure,” and authorized Aichinger to rebuild her guest house, as a five
bedroom residence, in the manner she had originally proposed.
Evidence introduced at the hearing on the merits confirmed that the
amended building permit did, in fact, authorize Aichinger to rebuild, regardless
of whether she was found to own one lot or two. Testimony and exhibits show
that when Aichinger emailed Sutton’s son in December 2007, she attached to
her email a copy of the amended building permit and the correspondence from
the Town which stated that, regardless of whether she is found to own one lot
or two, Aichinger was permitted to “replace, enlarge, and/or relocate a
preexisting dwelling as long as it complies with all other requirements.” Sutton
failed to appeal this permit. According to the trial court, she had “no
persuasive explanation” for failing to do so.
Ordinarily, challenges to decisions regarding building permits must first
be made to the zoning board of adjustment. See RSA 674:33 (Supp. 2009);
RSA 676:5 (2008); RSA 677:3 (2008). Should a party be dissatisfied with the
decision of the zoning board, the party may appeal to the superior court. See
RSA 677:4 (Supp. 2009). This legislative scheme is intended to give a local
zoning board the first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its
decisions so that the superior court may have the benefit of the zoning board’s
judgment in hearing the appeal. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72, 73 (2008).
Generally, parties must exhaust their administrative remedies before
appealing to the courts. See id. “Except in rare instances, if a party aggrieved
by the action of a city official in zoning matters fails to exhaust statutory
remedies, a petition for injunctive relief will not lie.” V.S.H. Realty, Inc. v. City
of Rochester, 118 N.H. 778, 782 (1978). This rule is “based on the reasonable
policies of encouraging the exercise of administrative expertise, preserving
agency autonomy, and promoting judicial efficiency,” and “is particularly
applicable when . . . substantial questions of fact exist concerning a city zoning
ordinance, matters that belong in the first instance to the designated local
officials.” Id. It is only in limited situations, as “where the issue on appeal is a
question of law rather than a question of the exercise of administrative
discretion,” Pheasant Lane Realty Trust v. City of Nashua, 143 N.H. 140, 141-
42 (1998), that a party is not required to exhaust administrative remedies.
7
We conclude that Sutton was required to appeal the amended building
permit to the ZBA to challenge whether the permit, authorizing Aichinger to
replace her relatively modest structure with one that could arguably be used as
a primary residence, complied with the ordinance. Sutton’s petition for
injunctive relief challenged Aichinger’s right to treat her property as two lots,
and Sutton sought an order enjoining construction on the grounds that
Aichinger was not entitled to build a second residential structure on one lot.
The amended permit, however, was not predicated, as Sutton now argues,
upon Aichinger’s owning two lots. Rather, the permit authorized the
construction of a “replacement structure” on the grounds that the guest house
was a “preexisting grandfathered dwelling.” Therefore, the only question before
the zoning board in an appeal of the October 29 permit would have been
whether a permit authorizing Aichinger to replace her “preexisting
grandfathered” 600 square foot guest house with a “replacement structure”
that has a 2295 square foot ground floor, five bedrooms, two stories, a covered
porch and an attached three-car garage, violates the ordinance. This is not a
situation, as Sutton argues, in which the issues in the case were more properly
suited to judicial, rather than administrative treatment. As we stated in
McNamara, 157 N.H. at 76, the question of whether a building permit complies
with the ordinance is not a question that is particularly suited to judicial
treatment or resolution, but is one that is routinely addressed by the local
zoning board. Therefore, because Sutton failed to appeal the amended building
permit to the ZBA, she is barred by the exhaustion doctrine from challenging in
superior court construction undertaken pursuant to that permit.
We acknowledge that Sutton’s petition sought to enjoin Aichinger from
constructing a single-family residence, and that the structure that replaced the
guest house could arguably be used as a single-family residence. Furthermore,
both the original permit, granted in response to Aichinger’s request to build a
single-family home, and the amended permit, granted in response to
Aichinger’s request to rebuild her guest house, apparently authorize the
construction of the same five bedroom structure. Nevertheless, Sutton’s
petition sought to bar construction based upon a legal argument that the
property had merged, and not upon factual issues related to replacing
purportedly grandfathered structures on a single lot. Whether the permit that
authorized Aichinger to replace her relatively modest structure with one that
could arguably be used as a primary residence was in accordance with the
local zoning ordinance is precisely the kind of issue that involves “fact[s] . . .
concerning a . . . zoning ordinance, matters that belong in the first instance to
the designated local officials.” V.S.H. Realty, Inc., 118 N.H. at 782.
We conclude, however, that the trial court did not err when it denied
Aichinger’s request to dismiss Sutton’s remaining claims. Sutton’s superior
court action to determine the status of Aichinger’s property began three
months before Aichinger obtained the amended building permit. As we have
8
stated, the amended permit is predicated upon Aichinger’s assertion that she
was entitled to rebuild her guest house whether she owned one lot or two lots.
Therefore, Sutton’s failure to appeal that permit does not bar her request for a
declaratory judgment that Aichinger owns a single, merged, lot.
Aichinger asserts that the trial court “erred by permitting [Sutton] to
continue her litigation” because she failed to appeal certain other
administrative decisions to the ZBA. We conclude that these arguments either
were not raised below, and therefore have not been preserved for our review,
see McKenzie v. Town of Eaton Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 154 N.H. 773, 776
(2007), or under the circumstances of this case, are without merit and do not
warrant further discussion, see Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
III
We turn now to Aichinger’s argument that the trial court erred when it
ruled that the property had merged pursuant to the automatic merger
provisions of the Ordinance. Aichinger asserts that the trial court erred in
ruling that the property had merged because: (1) the decision of whether to
merge nonconforming lots in the same ownership is one to be made solely by
the landowner, and such lots cannot be automatically merged by local zoning
provisions; and (2) the trial court failed to properly apply the exception
contained in the Town’s merger ordinance. We disagree.
The Gilford Zoning Ordinance, like many zoning ordinances in New
Hampshire, contains a provision that requires the merger of substandard
contiguous undeveloped lots in common ownership. 15 P. Loughlin, New
Hampshire Practice, Land Use Planning and Zoning § 11.07, at 157 (3d ed.
2000). Merger provisions generally require the combination of two or more
undeveloped lots of substandard size that are held in common ownership in
order to meet the minimum square-footage requirements of a zoned district.
See 3 A.H. Rathkopf et al., Rathkopf’s The Law of Zoning and Planning
§ 49:16, at 49-31 (2005). Substandard contiguous lots generally cannot be
developed as individual non-conforming lots unless the landowner applies for a
variance or an exception. R.J.E.P. Associates v. Hellewell, 560 A.2d 353, 355
(R.I. 1989).
Because there was no evidence presented in this case that either the
present or former owners of lots 9 and 10 had ever applied to the planning
board for a voluntary merger, the only way the property could have been
merged was pursuant to the Town ordinance’s automatic merger provision.
See Gilford Town Ordinance § 9.1.1. On appeal, Aichinger challenges the
validity of the provision. Essentially, she contends that automatic merger
conflicts with RSA 674:39-a and is, therefore, unenforceable. Relying upon
legislative history, Aichinger argues that under RSA 674:39-a, the decision to
9
merge nonconforming lots is made solely by the landowner, and such lots
cannot be automatically merged by local zoning provisions.
We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the
words of a statute considered as a whole. See Town of Amherst v. Gilroy, 157
N.H. 275, 277 (2008). We review the trial court’s interpretation of a statute de
novo. See Verizon New England v. City of Rochester, 151 N.H. 263, 266 (2004).
“When interpreting the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used and discern the legislative intent from the statute
as written. We will not consider what the legislature might have said, or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Guy v. Town of Temple,
157 N.H. 642, 653 (2008) (citation omitted). When a statute’s language is plain
and unambiguous, we need not examine its legislative history. Appeal of
Weaver, 150 N.H. 254, 255 (2003).
RSA 674:39-a reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
Voluntary merger. Any owner of 2 or more contiguous preexisting
approved or subdivided lots or parcels who wishes to merge them
for municipal regulation and taxation purposes may do so by
applying to the planning board or its designee. Except where such
merger would create a violation of then-current ordinances or
regulations, all such requests shall be approved, and no public
hearing or notice shall be required. No new survey plat need be
recorded, but a notice of the merger, sufficient to identify the
relevant parcels and endorsed in writing by the planning board or
its designee, shall be filed for recording in the registry of deeds,
and a copy mailed to the municipality’s assessing officials. No
such merged parcel shall thereafter be separately transferred
without subdivision approval.
RSA 674:39-a (2008).
The plain language of RSA 674:39-a gives property owners the right to
merge contiguous lots, but nothing in its language precludes a town from
automatically merging such lots pursuant to its zoning ordinance. Because we
find nothing ambiguous about the statutory language, we decline Aichinger’s
invitation to examine the statute’s legislative history. See Weaver, 150 N.H. at
255. We agree with the trial court that RSA 674:39-a governs voluntary
mergers by owners of two or more parcels of land, but does not prohibit a
municipality from adopting an ordinance providing for the automatic merging
of lots for zoning purposes.
Having determined that nothing in RSA 674:39-a precludes a town from
requiring the merger of contiguous, nonconforming lots in common ownership,
10
we now consider whether the trial court erred when it ruled that the Town had
automatically merged the property pursuant to its zoning ordinance. “We will
affirm the trial court’s factual findings unless they are unsupported by the
evidence and will affirm the trial court’s legal rulings unless they are erroneous
as a matter of law.” Morgenstern v. Town of Rye, 147 N.H. 558, 561 (2002)
(citations omitted).
The evidence in the record supports the trial court’s conclusion that
Aichinger’s lots had merged. First, the evidence shows that prior to entering
into the Agreement with Aichinger, the Town had treated her property as a
single lot. While the parcels are described separately in the deed, the property
is recorded as a single lot in the town assessing records and the Governor’s
Island Club Records. Furthermore, Aichinger acquired the property via a single
deed. Finally, the very same property at issue here was at issue in a case we
decided over twenty years ago. See Governor’s Island Club v. Town of Gilford,
124 N.H. 126 (1983), abrogated by Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington,
145 N.H. 727 (2001). While the issue we decided in Governor’s Island is not
the same one we are presented with today, the decision is significant for the
purposes of our merger analysis because one of the parcels at issue in that
case was the same shorefront parcel that is at issue in this case. The
recitation of the facts and legal analysis in Governor’s Island make clear that
the property has been in common ownership since 1947, that the defendant
property owner in Governor’s Island recognized that the shorefront parcel was
a single lot, and that the shorefront parcel was at that time being taxed by the
Town as a single lot. Indeed, the trial court in this case relied upon the
Governor’s Island decision in ruling that lots 9 and 10 were a single merged lot.
Aichinger argues, however, that her property falls within an exception to
the merger requirement contained in the ordinance. Before turning to the
question of whether the exception applies, we note that the merger provision at
issue in this case has been amended several times since the ordinance was
initially adopted in 1962. On appeal, the parties dispute which version of the
zoning ordinance applies to this case. The Town asserts that we should apply
an earlier version of the ordinance, which does not contain the exception upon
which Aichinger now relies. The record indicates, however, that during the
proceedings in superior court, the parties and the trial court assumed that the
current version of the ordinance applied to Aichinger’s property. Because the
issue was not litigated before the trial court, we decline to consider whether an
earlier version applies. Therefore, we apply the current version of the
ordinance, which reads, in pertinent part, as follows:
Contiguous Nonconforming Lots – When two (2) or more lots of
record have the same owner and are contiguous, and one (1) or
more of the lots is nonconforming to this ordinance as to size,
dimension or frontage, the owner shall be required to merge all
11
contiguous, nonconforming lots with contiguous lots under similar
ownership until such contiguous, nonconforming lots are made
conforming unless an exception is provided for below.
(a) Exception – If at the time the lots described above become
owned by the same owner, there is a lawful and preexisting
principal use listed in Article 4 on each lot, the owner shall not be
required to merge the nonconforming lot or lots.
(b) Exception – Whenever lots are protected from merger by the
provisions of RSA 674:39, the owner shall not be required to merge
the lots.
Gilford Zoning Ordinance § 9.1.1.
Aichinger argues that the exception to the merger requirement providing
that an owner is not required to merge contiguous lots if there is a “lawful and
preexisting principal use” on each lot applies to her property. Gilford Zoning
Ordinance § 9.1.1(a). The trial court’s order does not address whether the
exception applies, perhaps because Aichinger did not specifically argue for the
applicability of the exception at trial. However, Aichinger did argue in her
motion to reconsider that the trial court had failed to consider the exception.
Implicit in the trial court’s denial of the motion is a ruling that the exception
does not apply. Therefore, we must determine whether the evidence supports
the trial court’s conclusion that the exception does not apply because the
garage with attached guest house situated on lot 9 did not constitute a
“preexisting principal use” within the meaning of the ordinance.
The construction of the terms of a zoning ordinance is a question of law,
which we review de novo. See Anderson v. Motorsports Holdings, 155 N.H.
491, 494 (2007). Interpreting an ordinance requires us to ascertain the intent
of the enacting body. See Trottier v. City of Lebanon, 117 N.H. 148, 150
(1977). “[T]he words used in a zoning ordinance will be given their ordinary
meaning unless it appears from their context that a different meaning was
intended. We determine the meaning of a zoning ordinance from its
construction as a whole, not by construing isolated words or phrases.” Feins v.
Town of Wilmot, 154 N.H. 715, 719 (2007) (citations and quotations omitted).
To determine the meaning of “lawful and preexisting principal use,” we
turn first to the definition section of the ordinance, which defines “[p]rincipal
use” as “[t]he sole, primary, or main use of a lot or building.” Gilford Zoning
Ordinance art. 3, at 16 (2008). The only relevant permitted “principal use” in
the SFR zone listed in the ordinance is “single family residence.” Id. art. 4.
The ordinance defines a “single family residence” as a “[s]tructure for the
residence of one (1) family.” Id. § 4.7.2(g). In contrast, the ordinance lists a
12
number of “accessory uses” that are also permitted in the SFR district,
including “accessory building[s].” Id. § 4.6. An “accessory building” is a
“[g]arage, child’s playhouse, greenhouse, tool shed, or shelter, used primarily
by occupants in the main building.” Id. § 4.7.6(b).
Aichinger asserts that the record “clearly shows that there were separate
and distinct dwellings on Lots 9 and 10 before the Town of Gilford adopted its
zoning ordinance.” Thus, according to Aichinger, there was a separate
principal use on each of the lots. We disagree.
We conclude from our review of the record that the evidence supports the
trial court’s conclusion that the structure that existed on lot 9 was not a single-
family residence, and, therefore, not a “lawful preexisting principal use.” While
the record shows that the structure is insulated and heated and includes a
kitchen and bathroom, Aichinger testified that it was used primarily as a guest
house. Indeed, Aichinger applied for her amended building permit on the
grounds that she was entitled to rebuild her “guest home.” Surveys drawn up
for Aichinger in preparation for the installation of a new septic system and
driveway label the building, “existing garage and storage,” or “existing camp.”
The record contains no evidence that the structure was ever used as a single-
family residence. To the contrary, the evidence showed that the structure had
an accessory, non-principal use because it was used in conjunction with the
house on lot 10. Therefore, the structure was an “accessory building” because
it was a “shelter, used primarily by occupants in the main building.” Gilford
Zoning Ordinance § 4.7.6(b). Therefore, the record reasonably supports the
trial court’s conclusion that the “lawful and preexisting principal use”
exception to the automatic merger provision does not apply.
IV
Having determined that the trial court did not err when it ruled that
Aichinger’s property had merged pursuant to the automatic merger provision of
the ordinance, we next determine whether the status of the lot changed based
upon the representations of town officials and the Agreement between
Aichinger and the Town. Aichinger argues on appeal that the trial court erred
when it found that the doctrine of municipal estoppel did not bar the Town
from enforcing its merger ordinance. We disagree.
The doctrine of municipal estoppel is an equitable doctrine that has been
applied to municipalities “to prevent unjust enrichment and to accord fairness
to those who bargain with the agents of municipalities for the promises of the
municipalities.” Thomas v. Town of Hooksett, 153 N.H. 717, 721 (2006). The
elements of municipal estoppel are:
13
first, a false representation or concealment of material facts made
with knowledge of those facts; second, the party to whom the
representation was made must have been ignorant of the truth of
the matter; third, the representation must have been made with
the intention of inducing the other party to rely upon it; and
fourth, the other party must have been induced to rely upon the
representation to his or her injury.
Id. Moreover, a party’s reliance upon the representation must be reasonable.
Id. at 722. Each element of estoppel requires a factual determination. Id. at
721. We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless it is not supported by the
evidence or is erroneous as a matter of law. Id.
The trial court concluded that Aichinger failed to prove the first and
fourth elements of her estoppel claim. We need not consider the trial court’s
ruling on the first element, however, because we conclude that the trial court’s
finding that Aichinger failed to prove that she reasonably relied upon the
inaccurate information is supported by the evidence.
A municipal estoppel claim requires a showing that a party has been
induced to rely upon the misrepresentation to his or her injury. Id. at 721.
The reliance upon the misrepresentation must be reasonable. Id. at 722.
“Reliance is unreasonable when the party asserting estoppel, at the time of his
or her reliance or at the time of the representation or concealment, knew or
should have known that the conduct or representation was improper,
materially incorrect or misleading.” Id. The evidence supports the trial court’s
conclusion that Aichinger knew or should have known that the representations
made by town officials were materially incorrect, and, thus, any reliance was
unreasonable.
First, the record supports the trial court’s finding that Aichinger was
aware of our 1983 decision in Governor’s Island, which treated the property as
a single lot more than seventeen years before Aichinger purchased her
property. Aichinger testified that she believed that when she first approached
Town officials in the spring of 2006, she mentioned to the Director of Planning
that the Governor’s Island Club had once sued a previous owner of the
property. Therefore, Aichinger could have investigated and discovered that
published opinion. Second, the record supports the trial court’s finding that it
was unreasonable for Aichinger to rely upon the representation of the Director
of Planning that the Town’s merger requirement was, due to a court challenge,
“no longer on the books.” A review of the ordinance, as the trial court found,
would have revealed that section 9.1.1 was still in effect and applicable to the
property. See Thomas, 153 N.H. at 722 (reliance on erroneous information by
town code enforcement officer and a planning board member is unreasonable
where a statute squarely addresses the issue).
14
Next, Aichinger notes that her Agreement with the Town that the
property consists of two separate and distinct parcels of land did not alter the
trial court’s conclusion that she owns a single lot. She argues that this was
error, because the court thereby implicitly ruled that the Town was not bound
by the terms of the Agreement. We need not decide whether such a ruling is
implicit in the trial court’s order. Sutton, who was not a party to the
Agreement and is therefore not bound by it, brought a petition for declaratory
judgment and request for injunctive relief pursuant to RSA 676:15 (2008). The
trial court was therefore charged with determining the nature of Sutton’s
rights, not with the nature of Aichinger’s rights pursuant to her Agreement
with the Town. We cannot say that Sutton’s statutorily protected rights are
trumped by an Agreement to which she was not a party.
V
Aichinger argues that the trial court erroneously denied her request to
reopen the hearing to accept evidence on the issues of municipal estoppel and
merger. She contends that the trial court’s order on her motion for summary
judgment resolved certain issues in her favor, but that because the trial court
clarified on the morning of trial that those issues had not been resolved in her
favor, she did not have the opportunity to present evidence on those issues.
According to Aichinger, the trial court’s order on her motion for summary
judgment resolved the issue of merger in her favor and upheld the right of the
Board of Selectmen to enter into the Agreement. She argues that the trial
court modified these rulings in its subsequent order on the motion to dismiss
when it stated that it had not ruled that the lots had been “demerged.”
Because the order on the motion to dismiss was issued on the morning of the
trial, Aichinger contends she had relied upon the summary judgment order in
preparing for trial and was therefore not prepared to present evidence on the
issues of municipal estoppel and merger. She argues that the trial court’s
refusal to reopen denied her due process and resulted in an unconstitutional
taking. We conclude that because Aichinger’s interpretation of the trial court’s
order on the motion for summary judgment was unreasonable, the trial court
did not err in denying her a further opportunity to present evidence on the
issues of merger and municipal estoppel at the hearing.
Aichinger relies upon the following language in the trial court’s order on
the motion for summary judgment:
Unquestionably, the town was acting within its discretion in
forming the Agreement with Ms. Aichinger.
. . . .
15
The undisputed facts would not support a finding of bad faith as a
matter of law. Here, the town entered the Agreement to reduce a
litigation risk, where there existed a non-frivolous claim of estoppel
and damages based on the Planning Director’s error.
These statements were made in the context of the court’s order granting
summary judgment to Aichinger on Sutton’s request for a writ of mandamus.
The statements were relevant to the trial court’s conclusion that mandamus
would not be appropriate because the town officials involved were acting within
their discretion, and not in bad faith, when they entered into the Agreement.
The trial court’s order dismissing the mandamus claim ruled only that
mandamus, as an extraordinary remedy, was not appropriate in this case to
compel the Town to enforce the ordinance. It did not speak to Sutton’s right,
as an abutter, to do so. Nowhere in the order does the trial court suggest that
it had resolved the question of merger in Aichinger’s favor, that the existence of
the Agreement would bar Sutton’s claims, or that the Town would be
municipally estopped from enforcing the ordinance. Indeed, elsewhere in the
same order, the trial court denied Aichinger’s request for summary judgment
on the petition for declaratory judgment and request for injunctive relief. It
should have been clear to Aichinger that the trial court had not conclusively
resolved the questions of merger, municipal estoppel, or what effect, if any, the
Agreement would have on Sutton’s claims. Therefore, Aichinger alone bears
responsibility for the fact that she did not present evidence on these issues at
the hearing.
To the extent that Aichinger argues that the superior court’s ruling on
the issue of merger effectuated a taking of her property in violation of Part I,
Article 12-a of the New Hampshire Constitution, we conclude that the
argument is not sufficiently developed to warrant appellate review. Trachy v.
LaFramboise, 146 N.H. 178, 181 (2001).
VI
In conclusion, we reverse the trial court’s ruling denying Aichinger’s
motion to dismiss Sutton’s request for injunctive relief to prevent the
construction and development of former lot 9, but affirm the trial court’s ruling
that the exhaustion doctrine does not bar Sutton’s request for declaratory
judgment that Aichinger owns a single, merged, lot. We also affirm the trial
court’s rulings that: (1) Aichinger owns a single, merged lot; (2) the doctrine of
municipal estoppel does not bar the Town from enforcing its merger ordinance;
and (3) Aichinger was not entitled to reopen the merits hearing to offer evidence
regarding the issues of municipal estoppel and merger. Nothing in this opinion
should be construed to bar Aichinger from, or relieve Aichinger of the
responsibility for, obtaining any requisite municipal approvals if she wishes to
treat the property as two lots.
16
In light of our holding today, we conclude that it is unnecessary to
address whether it was proper for the trial court to dismiss Sutton’s request for
a writ of mandamus, and that Aichinger’s objection to the Town of Gilford’s
reply brief is moot. Aichinger’s request for attorney’s fees is denied.
Reversed in part; affirmed in part.
DUGGAN, J., concurred; BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under
RSA 490:3, concurred.
17