THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-622
ANTHONY L. LIVINGSTON
v.
18 MILE POINT DRIVE, LTD. d/b/a 18 MILE POINT DRIVE LIMITED
PARTNERSHIP & a.
Argued: February 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 24, 2009
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth
(Charles B. Doleac and Heather Neville on the brief, and Ms. Neville orally), for
the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Portsmouth (Russell F. Hilliard on the brief and
orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The defendants, 18 Mile Point Drive, Ltd. d/b/a 18 Mile
Point Drive Limited Partnership, Walker G. Harman and Alfred W. Bowman,
Jr., appeal the decision of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.), entered after a
bench trial, which ordered specific performance of the option held by the
plaintiff, Anthony L. Livingston, to purchase a 1.5-acre lot from the defendants.
We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The plaintiff owned twenty-two
acres of land in Meredith, which he agreed to sell to the defendants, with an
option to repurchase a 1.5-acre lot. The twenty-two acres had been in the
plaintiff’s family for many years. Originally, he sought to sell only nineteen
acres, keeping three acres for himself on which he planned to build a home.
After negotiation, he agreed to sell the entire twenty-two-acre parcel, with an
option to repurchase the 1.5-acre lot.
The parties’ agreement was memorialized in a purchase and sale
agreement (P & S) and a separate option agreement. The P & S granted the
plaintiff an option to purchase the 1.5-acre lot for one dollar, and provided that
the option would be valid for one year from the date of final subdivision
approval.
The option agreement included these same provisions. Unlike the P & S,
however, it also provided that it would cost the plaintiff one dollar to retain the
option. The option agreement also provided that the one-dollar purchase price
of the option would be credited to the purchase price for the lot itself. Thus,
the total amount of money the plaintiff was to pay for both the option and the
lot was one dollar.
The option agreement specified that if the defendants were unable to
deliver a deed to the 1.5-acre lot within five years, they would be required to
pay the plaintiff $75,000. It further specified that to exercise the option, the
plaintiff was required to give written notice to the defendants by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and that the option would become effective upon
receipt of this notice.
The parties negotiated the option agreement through their attorneys.
Attorney Patrick Wood represented the plaintiff; the defendants were
represented by Attorney Stephan Nix.
The closing took place on September 17, 2002. At the closing, the
plaintiff said, “I really want this property,” and Attorney Wood handed Attorney
Nix $1.00, saying something to the effect of, “[L]et’s take care of this right now.”
Attorney Wood wrote “Paid 17 Sept. 2002” next to paragraph five of the option
agreement, which pertained to the payment required to retain the option.
Attorney Nix wrote “rec by STN 9/17/02” under Attorney Wood’s notation,
acknowledging receipt.
The plaintiff and Attorney Wood believed that, by paying $1.00 at the
closing, the plaintiff had exercised his option to purchase the 1.5-acre lot. The
plaintiff believed that when the defendants obtained subdivision approval, the
agreement required them to convey the option lot to him.
2
On September 23, 2004, the plaintiff received a letter from Attorney Nix,
which included a copy of the defendants’ subdivision plan. The letter informed
the plaintiff that the subdivision plan was before the planning board, and
promised him that he would receive recorded copies of the plan and its
registration with the Attorney General’s Office. The letter also stated that upon
receipt of the registration with the Attorney General’s Office, “the lots will be
available for conveyance.”
The defendants’ subdivision plan was approved on December 21, 2004,
and recorded on December 27, 2004. On January 25, 2005, Attorney Nix
forwarded copies of the approved plan and registration to the plaintiff. The
defendants believed that based upon the option agreement, the term of the
plaintiff’s option began on December 27, 2004, and ended a year later, on
December 27, 2005.
In early 2005, the plaintiff contacted Attorney Wood because he noticed
that the defendants had begun conveying lots in their subdivision. In April
2005, Attorney Wood phoned Attorney Nix and sent an e-mail to him asking for
an update. Attorney Nix testified that he must have talked to Attorney Wood
after the e-mail, but could not specifically recall the conversation and had no
notes of it.
Attorney Nix did speak with defendant Harman, however, who told
Attorney Nix that it was his position that the defendants had met or exceeded
their responsibilities by giving the plaintiff notice of the subdivision approval,
and that it was up to the plaintiff to exercise his option. Harman did not
believe that the defendants should respond to the e-mail inquiry and assumed
that Attorney Wood would call again. Attorney Nix never sent Attorney Wood
copies of his correspondence with the plaintiff or copies of the approved
subdivision plan.
On June 2, 2006, the plaintiff wrote to Attorney Nix himself, stating that
it appeared obvious that the subdivision had been approved and asking why
there had been such a delay in conveying the 1.5-acre lot to him. In an August
7, 2006 letter, Attorney Nix informed the plaintiff that his earlier letters had
constituted notice of subdivision approval and that the option term had
expired, along with the plaintiff’s rights thereunder. On September 26, 2006,
Attorney Wood sought an extension of the option agreement, which was
refused. The plaintiff’s lawsuit followed.
The trial court assumed, without deciding, that, as the defendants
argued, the plaintiff did not exercise his option to purchase pursuant to the
terms in the parties’ agreement. Nonetheless, the court ruled that equity
required specific performance of the option agreement. The court found that
the defendants breached the agreement’s implied covenant of good faith and
3
fair dealing when they failed to correct any misunderstanding that the plaintiff
had about the status of the option and, specifically, when they failed to
respond to Attorney Wood’s inquiry in April 2005 as to the option’s status.
The court found that the failure to respond to Attorney Wood’s inquiry
was “a conscious tactical decision based on [the defendants’] belief that it was
up to the [plaintiff] to exercise the option and that if he did nothing, such an
exercise would probably not happen.” The defendants, the court ruled, “failed
to speak when they knew or should have known that their silence misl[e]d and
damaged the [plaintiff] by inducing him to refrain from acting in accordance
with his consistent intent to exercise the option.”
On appeal, the defendants first argue that the trial court erred by
applying “equitable considerations” to allow the plaintiff to have the benefit of
the option agreement, even though he failed to comply with it. The defendants
contend that the trial court relied upon equitable principles to relieve the
plaintiff of his obligations under the agreement. They imply that the trial court
used the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing to, in effect, rewrite the
parties’ option agreement. See Olbres v. Hampton Coop. Bank, 142 N.H. 227,
233 (1997) (rejecting trial court’s implied legal conclusion that good faith
required bank to refrain from setting off account until payments were overdue,
court notes that “courts cannot make better agreements than the parties
themselves entered into or rewrite contracts merely because they might operate
harshly or inequitably” (quotation omitted)). To the contrary, here, the trial
court merely enforced the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing when
the court ruled that the defendants breached it by acting evasively and not
cooperatively with the plaintiff.
In every agreement, there is an implied covenant that the parties will act
in good faith and fairly with one another. Richard v. Good Luck Trailer Court,
157 N.H. 65, 70 (2008). In New Hampshire, there is not merely one rule of
implied good-faith duty, but a series of doctrines, each of which serves different
functions. Great Lakes Aircraft Co. v. City of Claremont, 135 N.H. 270, 293
(1992). The various implied good-faith obligations fall into three general
categories: (1) contract formation; (2) termination of at-will employment
agreements; and (3) limitation of discretion in contractual performance. Id.
This case deals with the third category. While the third category is
comparatively narrow, its broader function is to prohibit behavior inconsistent
with the parties’ agreed-upon common purpose and justified expectations, id.,
as well as “with common standards of decency, fairness and reasonableness.”
Richard, 157 N.H. at 70 (quotation omitted).
Although we have not stated so explicitly, our prior cases reveal that we
will uphold a trial court’s determination regarding the breach of the implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing unless it is not supported by the
4
evidence or is legally erroneous. See Albee v. Wolfeboro Railroad Co., 126 N.H.
176, 179 (1985) (holding that master’s conclusion that no breach of implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing occurred did not constitute legal error);
Finlay v. Frederick, 135 N.H. 482, 489 (1992) (affirming trial court’s
determination that party did not breach implied covenant of good faith and fair
dealing in light of conflicting trial testimony and trial court’s broad discretion to
weigh witness testimony at trial); Realco Equities, Inc. v. John Hancock Mut.
Life Ins. Co., 130 N.H. 345, 350 (1988) (upholding master’s finding that party
did not breach implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing because it has
support in record and reasonable person could have so found); cf. Great Lakes
Aircraft Co., 135 N.H. at 294 (evidence supported jury’s finding that City
breached duty of cooperation, which is part of the implied covenant of good
faith and fair dealing).
The record supports the trial court’s finding that the parties’ agreed-upon
common purposes and justified expectations included the expectation that the
plaintiff would retain the 1.5-acre lot. As the trial court aptly found, the
plaintiff’s desire to retain this lot “was abundantly clear during all negotiations,
as evidenced by the original listing information and the P&S.” That the parties
expected the plaintiff to retain the lot was also evident from the fact that he
could both retain the option and buy the lot for only one dollar. The parties’
expectations, as evidenced by the agreement, were that if the defendants
obtained subdivision approval, the plaintiff would retain the lot. The
expectation was that the defendants would pursue subdivision approval with
due diligence (within five years). If, for some reason, they failed to do this, the
agreement required them to pay the plaintiff $75,000. As Attorney Nix
testified, the $75,000 payment “was sort of a hammer held over the head so my
client[s] would pursue . . . due diligence to get this subdivision done.”
The record also supports the trial court’s finding that the defendants
behaved inconsistently with this expectation and, therefore, breached the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. The defendants knew or
should have known that there was at least a potential misunderstanding about
the status of the option when Attorney Wood contacted Attorney Nix in April
2005. Rather than respond to this inquiry, however, as the trial court found,
and as the record demonstrates, the defendants “stonewalled.”
The Restatement (Second) of Contracts further supports the trial court’s
determination. Section 205 of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts provides:
“Subterfuges and evasions violate the obligations of good faith in performance
even though the actor believes his conduct to be justified.” Restatement
(Second) of Contracts § 205 cmt. d at 100 (1981). Among the types of bad faith
recognized by courts are evasion of the spirit of the bargain and failure to
cooperate in the other’s performance. Restatement (Second) of Contracts,
supra cmt. d at 100-01; see Great Lakes Aircraft Co., 135 N.H. at 294. Section
5
205 of the Restatement (Second) of Contracts offers the following illustration,
which mirrors the situation in this case:
A suffers a loss of property covered by an insurance policy
issued by B, and submits to B notice and proof of loss. The notice
and proof fail to comply with requirements of the policy as to form
and detail. B does not point out the defects, but remains silent
and evasive, telling A broadly to perfect his claim. The defects do
not bar recovery on the policy.
Restatement (Second) of Contracts, supra cmt. d, illus. 7, at 102.
Here, as in the above example, while the plaintiff’s exercise of his option
to purchase did not comply with the requirements of the option agreement “as
to form and detail,” in that it was not sent in writing and was exercised
prematurely, the defendants never pointed this out to the plaintiff. Instead,
they neglected to respond to the plaintiff’s inquiry (sent through his attorney)
and chose to respond only after the time for exercising the option had elapsed.
Under the circumstances of this case, the trial court reasonably could have
found that the defendants acted evasively and breached the covenant of good
faith and fair dealing.
To the extent that the defendants argue that, having concluded that they
breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, the trial court
erred by ordering specific performance, we disagree. “The propriety of affording
equitable relief rests in the sound discretion of the trial court to be exercised
according to the circumstances and exigencies of the case.” Blagbrough Family
Realty Trust v. A & T Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 46 (2007). We will uphold a
trial court’s equitable order unless its decision constitutes an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Id.
We cannot say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion
by ordering specific performance in this case. “Generally, a decree of specific
performance is intended to produce essentially the same effect as if the
performance due under a contract were rendered.” Poland v. Twomey, 156
N.H. 412, 416 (2007); see Restatement (Second) of Contracts, supra § 357 cmt.
a at 163. Here, the trial court’s equitable decree provided the parties with
exactly what they bargained for under the option agreement. Under the unique
circumstances of this case, we cannot say that this was an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.
The defendants mistakenly rely upon Fletcher v. Frisbee, 119 N.H. 555
(1979), to support their assertion that the trial court erred by enforcing the
option agreement. In Fletcher, we ruled that equity would give relief to a lessee
who failed to exercise an option for lease renewal within the required time if the
6
delay was slight, was not prejudicial to the landlord, and failing to grant relief
to the tenant would result in hardship that would make literal enforcement of
the renewal provision unconscionable. Fletcher, 119 N.H. at 558. Fletcher is
inapposite, however, as it did not involve a breach of the implied covenant of
good faith and fair dealing. The trial court in this case afforded the plaintiff
equitable relief not because of the Fletcher factors but because it found that
the defendants breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
The defendants next assert that the trial court erred when it admitted
and considered parol evidence to interpret the option agreement. We do not
share the defendants’ interpretation of the trial court’s decision. Our review of
the record reveals that the trial court did not admit parol evidence to vary the
terms of the option agreement, but rather to interpret the notations written on
the agreement by Attorneys Wood and Nix. These notations were not, in
themselves, contracts, but rather comprised recitals regarding the one dollar
bill tendered at the closing. See Markarian v. Bartis, 89 N.H. 370, 372 (1938);
Bunker v. Company, 84 N.H. 84, 87 (1929). As such, they are like receipts,
which may be explained by parol evidence. See Markarian, 89 N.H. at 372;
Bunker, 84 N.H. at 87-88.
Finally, the defendants contend that the trial court erred when it
precluded them from discovering communications between the plaintiff and
Attorney Wood. The decision to disallow pretrial discovery is within the sound
discretion of the trial judge, and we will uphold it unless it is an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Bennett v. ITT Hartford Group, 150 N.H. 753, 760
(2004).
The defendants first assert that the information they sought was not
privileged because it was relevant to a claim that they assert the plaintiff made
against Attorney Wood. See N.H. R. Ev. 502(d)(3). Under New Hampshire Rule
of Evidence (Rule) 502(b), “[a] client has a privilege to refuse to disclose and to
prevent any other person from disclosing confidential communications made
for the purpose of facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to the
client,” including communications between the client and his attorney. Rule
502(d) sets forth five categories of communications that are not privileged.
Rule 502(d)(3) “establishes an exception where the communication is relevant
to a dispute between client and lawyer.” N.H. R. Ev. 502 Reporter’s Notes.
Contrary to the defendants’ assertions, the trial court reasonably could
have found that the plaintiff did not make a claim against Attorney Wood.
Attorney Wood testified that “[n]o claim has been made against [him].” Based
upon this evidence, the trial court reasonably could have found that there was
no dispute between the plaintiff and Attorney Wood and that Rule 502(d)(3) did
not apply to the communications at issue.
7
Alternatively, the defendants argue that even if the communications were
privileged, the plaintiff impliedly waived the privilege by putting them at issue
in the case. An “at-issue” waiver of the attorney-client privilege is limited to
circumstances in which the privilege-holder injects the privileged material itself
into the case, such that the information is actually required for resolution of
the issue. Bennett, 150 N.H. at 761. We have applied this narrow exception to
the attorney-client privilege in the case of ineffective assistance of counsel,
because such claims went to the “core of attorney-client communications.” Id.
(quotation omitted). In Petition of Dean, 142 N.H. 889, 891 (1998), for
instance, we held that a motion for ineffective assistance of counsel, as a
matter of law, constitutes a limited waiver of the attorney-client privilege.
The defendants contend that the plaintiff injected privileged material into
the case because, in presenting his case, he relied upon Attorney Wood’s
testimony concerning his preparation for the 2002 closing, the closing itself
and his actions on the plaintiff’s behalf. The trial court reasonably could have
concluded that this was insufficient to demonstrate an “at-issue” waiver of the
attorney-client privilege. Bennett, 150 N.H. at 761.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8