THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Jaffrey-Peterborough District Court
No. 2008-198
IN RE ALEX C.
Argued: March 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Thomas E. Bocian, assistant attorney
general, orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the juvenile.
DUGGAN, J. The juvenile, Alex C., appeals the Jaffrey-Peterborough
District Court’s (Runyon, J.) finding of delinquency based upon a petition
alleging simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a (2007). He argues that the trial court
should have dismissed the petition because it did not allege a mens rea. We
reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. In October 2007, the juvenile,
along with two or three friends, accosted M.W., also a juvenile, as he walked in
a park. The juvenile and his friends were on bicycles and began riding past
M.W., hitting him with dried vegetation, which M.W. described as “dried-out
plants . . . that come up really high . . . and they were whippable [sic].” The
juvenile and his friends also threw dried berries at M.W. As a result, M.W. had
marks on his face and back, one of which was bleeding. Following the
confrontation, M.W. met his father on his way home, who called the police.
A juvenile delinquency petition was filed, alleging that the juvenile “did
cause unpriviledge [sic] physical contact to another, to wit, hitting [M.W.] with
dried sticks in the arm and face.” At the close of the State’s evidence, the
juvenile moved to dismiss, arguing that the petition failed to allege a mens rea
and that the testimony concerning the facts of the incident had been
inconsistent. The trial court found that the testimony was largely consistent,
but took under advisement the juvenile’s motion concerning the charging
document.
The trial court later issued an adjudicatory order, finding that the
juvenile had committed simple assault, and denying his motion to dismiss.
The order stated that “[t]here are undoubtedly some offenses where the alleged
mental state is significant to the nature of the offense.” It went on, however, to
say: “Simple assault is a misdemeanor . . . based on any conscious mental
state, unless it is entered into by mutual consent, and then it is a violation.”
Because there was no mutual consent in this case, the trial court found the
juvenile “was fairly warned that if he voluntarily committed the act charged, he
would be found chargeable as a delinquent, no matter what his mental state.”
The juvenile filed a motion to reconsider, which was denied. This appeal
followed.
On appeal, the juvenile argues that the trial court erred in not dismissing
the delinquency petition for failure to allege a mens rea. Such a charging
document, he contends, is constitutionally insufficient. Because this is a
question of constitutional law and statutory interpretation, our review is de
novo. State v. Abram, 156 N.H. 646, 651 (2008); State v. Horner, 153 N.H.
306, 309 (2006).
Both the New Hampshire and Federal Constitutions require that a
criminal complaint inform a defendant of the offense with which he is charged
with sufficient specificity. U.S. CONST. amends. V, VI, XIV; N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 15; see State v. Lamarche, 157 N.H. 337, 341 (2008); State v. Lachapelle,
133 N.H. 1, 3 (1990) (mem. opinion). We first address the state constitutional
claims, citing federal opinions for guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 232-33 (1983). Because the juvenile prevails on his state claims, we need
not reach the federal issues. See id. at 237.
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution provides that “[n]o subject
shall be held to answer for any crime, or offense, until the same is fully and
plainly, substantially and formally, described to him . . . .” N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 15; see RSA 601:4 (2001). To meet this constitutional standard, a
complaint must inform a defendant of the offense with which he is charged
2
with sufficient specificity to enable him to prepare for trial and at the same
time protect him from being put in jeopardy once again for the same offense.
Lachapelle, 133 N.H. at 3. It is not enough merely to state the crime with
which the defendant is being charged; the complaint must include the elements
of the offense with sufficient allegations to identify the offense in fact. Id.; see
Hamling v. United States, 418 U.S. 87, 117 (1974).
The State argues that juvenile delinquency petitions need not state a
mens rea. It relies upon RSA 169-B:6, II (Supp. 2008), which requires a
petition to set out the date, time, manner and place of alleged conduct as well
as the statutory provision allegedly violated, but does not explicitly require a
mens rea. Alternatively, the State argues that notwithstanding the petition’s
failure to allege a mens rea, the juvenile here was sufficiently on notice of the
offense charged so as to prepare an adequate defense.
Although RSA 169-B:6, II does not state that a petition must include an
alleged mens rea, RSA 169-B:2, IV (Supp. 2008) defines “delinquent” as: “[A]
person who has committed an offense before reaching the age of 17 years
which would be a felony or misdemeanor under the criminal code of this state
if committed by an adult . . . .” Here, the juvenile was charged with
misdemeanor simple assault resulting from unprivileged contact. For a person
to be guilty of such offense, RSA 631:2-a, I(a) requires that he or she act
“purposely or knowingly.” Because the mens rea of purposely or knowingly is
an element of the offense, a charging document would need to allege the
requisite mental state to be sufficient as to an adult. See State v. Davis, 149
N.H. 698, 704-05 (2003) (holding charging document sufficient where stated
elements of offense). We hold that RSA 169-B:2, IV requires the same for a
juvenile delinquency petition.
Because the petition here did not allege a mental state, it is
constitutionally deficient. The State argues, however, that the failure to allege
a mens rea did not deprive the juvenile of constitutionally adequate