THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-323
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SEAN MILLER
Argued: February 19, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 31, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Stephen D. Fuller, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Paul Borchardt, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, J. The defendant, Sean Miller, appeals his conviction of one
count of theft by unauthorized taking, following a bench trial. See RSA 637:3
(2007). On appeal, he contends that the Trial Court (Nadeau, J) erred by
denying his motion to suppress statements he made to the Deerfield police. We
reverse and remand.
The trial court found or the record supports the following facts. On April
24, 2007, the Concord Police Department received a telephone call from an
individual reporting that a car with several people inside it as well as people
going to and from it had been parked in front of his residence for approximately
ten minutes. The caller expressed concern because his neighbor had recently
been burglarized. At approximately 9:30 p.m., Concord Police Officer Levesque
arrived at the residence and observed that the car appeared to have four
occupants. When the car began to move away, Levesque activated his blue
lights and stopped it.
Levesque asked the defendant, who was driving, if he knew why he had
been stopped. The defendant responded that he did not. Levesque then
informed him that someone had reported that his car had been parked in front
of a residence for a “long period of time.” Levesque asked the defendant his
reason for parking on the street. The defendant and a juvenile passenger, J.H.,
explained to the officer that J.H.’s younger brother had been in a fight and was
in the emergency room and that the car occupants had been investigating what
had happened. Levesque asked J.H. if he and the other occupants intended to
exact revenge from the individual who hurt his brother, and J.H. responded
that they did not. Levesque asked the defendant if there was anything in the
car he should know about, including weapons, drugs, or alcohol. The
defendant responded, “No.” Levesque then told everyone to remain in the car,
and proceeded to check the defendant’s license. Officer Reed, also of the
Concord Police Department, then arrived on the scene.
Once the defendant’s license was cleared by police dispatch, Levesque
returned to the car and asked the defendant to get out. He again asked why
the defendant was in the neighborhood and whether the defendant had any
weapons on him. The defendant responded that he did not. Levesque patted
the defendant down and found no weapons. He told the defendant that he was
suspicious of his explanation because the emergency room had not reported
any recent assault victims to the police. Levesque asked whether he could
search the defendant’s car. The defendant refused, stating that he had done
nothing wrong. Levesque then told the defendant to remain with Reed and he
returned to the car to speak with the other occupants.
Levesque asked the other juvenile passenger, J.O., to get out of the car.
While asking J.O. for his name and date of birth, Levesque noticed that his
hands were in the pocket of his sweatshirt. He asked J.O. to remove his hands
and inquired whether he had any weapons on him. When J.O. failed to
answer, Levesque performed a pat-down search and discovered a loaded nine
millimeter handgun in his waistband. Levesque then asked the defendant
whether he was aware that J.O. had a gun. The defendant admitted that there
was another gun under the driver’s seat. Upon a subsequent search of the car,
the gun was found.
The defendant was taken to the Concord police station, where he was
fingerprinted, booked and classified. He was held in a cell for approximately
2
thirty minutes and then taken to an interrogation room where he was read his
rights under Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), which he waived. The
defendant was questioned by three police officers, including Levesque, who
asked him where he had obtained the gun. The defendant confessed that he
stole the gun from a Deerfield residence. The Concord police notified the
Deerfield police of the defendant’s statement and informed him that a Deerfield
police officer would be coming to speak with him.
Officer Joel Hughes of the Deerfield Police Department arrived at the
Concord police station at approximately 1:00 a.m. The defendant was still in
the interrogation room, having remained there after he confessed to the
Concord police. The Concord police told Hughes that the defendant had been
read and had waived his Miranda rights. Hughes again read the defendant his
Miranda rights, and the defendant again waived them. Hughes questioned the
defendant with the three Concord police officers present. Hughes asked if the
defendant knew why Hughes was interviewing him. The defendant replied,
“[Y]eah, because I stole the gun.” Hughes asked the defendant if Hughes’ gun
looked like the one stolen from Deerfield. The defendant responded that it did,
and he told Hughes how he had removed the gun from Deerfield Police Officer
Glenda Smith’s holster while she was away from her home.
A Rockingham County grand jury indicted the defendant for one count of
theft by unauthorized taking. See RSA 637:3. Before trial, the defendant
moved to suppress statements he made to Hughes. The trial court denied his
motion.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to
suppress statements he made to Hughes because they were fruits of an
unlawful search and illegal arrest. See U.S. CONST. amend IV; N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 19. The State concedes the defendant’s arrest was illegal and that
the resulting evidence from his car should be suppressed, but contends that
his confession to Hughes is admissible because “the act of giving the statement
was sufficiently a product of the defendant’s free will so as to break the causal
connection between the illegality and the confession.” State v. Gotsch, 143
N.H. 88, 90 (1998), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 1164 (1999) (quotation omitted). In
addition, the State contends that the defendant’s claim was not preserved for
appeal.
We first address the State’s argument that the defendant failed to
preserve the issue of whether his confession was the fruit of an illegal search.
Upon reviewing the record, we conclude that this argument lacks sufficient
merit to warrant further discussion. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322
(1993). We now turn to the defendant’s constitutional claim.
3
Our review of the trial court’s order on the motion to suppress is de novo,
except as to any controlling facts determined by the trial court in the first
instance. State v. Cowles, 152 N.H. 369, 371 (2005). We first address the
defendant’s arguments under the State Constitution and reference federal
cases only to aid in our analysis. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33
(1983).
In determining whether a confession following an illegal arrest is
voluntary, and, thus, admissible under our constitution, we balance the
following four factors: (1) whether Miranda warnings were given; (2) the
temporal proximity of the arrest and confession; (3) the presence of intervening
circumstances; and (4) the purpose and flagrancy of the official misconduct.”
Gotsch, 143 N.H. at 90. No single factor is determinative. See Brown v.
Illinois, 422 U.S. 590, 603 (1975); People v. Rodriguez, 945 P.2d 1351, 1364
(Colo. 1997); Wilkins v. State, 960 S.W.2d 429, 432 (Tex. App.), petition for
review denied (1998). “The question of attenuation inevitably is largely a
matter of degree and thus application of the test is dependent upon the
particular facts of each case.” 6 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 11.4(b), at
259 (4th ed. 2004) (quotations omitted). The State has the burden of showing
that the confession was admissible. State v. White, 119 N.H. 567, 570 (1979).
The first factor favors admissibility; the defendant was read his Miranda
rights twice, first by a Concord police officer and then by Hughes. See State v.
Belton, 150 N.H. 741, 748, cert. denied, 543 U.S. 1028 (2004).
Under the second factor, we consider whether sufficient time elapsed
between the illegal conduct and the subsequent confession. Gotsch, 143 N.H.
at 90. Generally, this factor is considered independently of other factors and
“the longer the time between the unlawful arrest and the confession, the more
likely the taint has been attenuated.” Cowles, 152 N.H. at 372. For example,
in Gotsch, we cited with approval a case in which a three-hour time period was
enough to attenuate a defendant’s illegal arrest and subsequent confession.
Gotsch, 143 N.H. at 91; see Oliver v. United States, 656 A.2d 1159, 1173 (D.C.
1995).
However, we have also noted that “the span of time, by itself, is not
determinative of admissibility.” Cowles, 152 N.H. at 372. For instance, “a
lengthy delay may be found to have exacerbated the taint because if there are
no relevant intervening circumstances, a prolonged detention may well be a
more serious exploitation of an illegal arrest than a short one.” Id. (quotation,
citation and brackets omitted).
“[I]n practice the temporal proximity factor has not itself been at all
significant as far as influencing a finding that the taint of the illegal arrest was
4
dissipated.” LaFave, supra § 11.4(b), at 291. As one commentator has
explained:
In the absence of any intervening circumstances, the temporal
proximity of the arrest and confession should have little influence
on the confession’s admissibility. Where the defendant remains in
custody and has neither been taken before a magistrate nor met
with counsel, no reason exists for admitting a later confession
since the causal chain between the illegal arrest and confession
has not been broken. When the confession occurs in close
proximity to the illegal arrest, it clearly should be excluded on the
basis of Brown . . . . If the defendant is illegally detained for a
considerable length of time, without any intervening
circumstances, another fourth amendment consideration should
operate to exclude the confession. . . . Thus, the absence of any
intervening circumstances should mandate exclusion of the
confession on either of two theories, reducing the temporal element
to a position of nonconsideration.
Comment, The Fourth Amendment and Tainted Confessions: Admissibility as
a Policy Decision, 13 Hous. L. Rev. 753, 770-71 (1976); see LaFave, supra
§ 11.4(b), at 291. Thus, “[a]s is often the case in the context of a confession
following an illegal arrest, the key in determining whether the passage of time
has purged the taint of illegal police conduct is to examine what, if any,
intervening events occurred during that time, and the nature of those events.”
People v. Turner, 631 N.E.2d 1236, 1245 (Ill. App. Ct.), appeal denied, 642
N.E.2d 1299 (Ill. 1994), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1136 (1995); see United States v.
Shaw, 464 F.3d 615, 628 (6th Cir. 2006).
“An intervening circumstance is one that dissipates the taint of the
unconstitutional police conduct by breaking the causal connection between the
illegal conduct and the confession.” Turner, 631 N.E.2d at 1245; see United
States v. Reed, 349 F.3d 457, 464 (7th Cir. 2003). The United States Supreme
Court has not defined what constitutes an intervening event. Other courts
have held that intervening events include a subsequent arrest on unrelated
charges following the initial illegal arrest, see United States v. Green, 111 F.3d
515, 521 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 973 (1997), a defendant’s
“subsequent release from custody, an appearance before a magistrate,
consultation with a lawyer, [or] subsequent convictions on unrelated charges,”
United States v. Delgadillo-Velasquez, 856 F.2d 1292, 1300 (9th Cir. 1988); see
LaFave, supra § 11.4(b), at 296-97 (citing cases).
Here, we conclude that there were no significant intervening events that
broke the causal connection between the illegal arrest and the defendant’s
second confession. The defendant confessed to Hughes approximately three
5
and one-half hours after he was arrested. The defendant was either alone or in
police custody that entire time. He did not consult with counsel or appear
before a magistrate, nor was there any other circumstance that would have
attenuated the taint from the illegal arrest. Accordingly, we conclude that both
the second and third factors favor suppression of the confession.
The Texas Court of Appeals came to a similar conclusion in Black v.
State, 762 S.W.2d 192, 194 (Tex. App. 1988), petition for review denied (1989),
concluding that the six and one-half hours that passed between the
defendant’s illegal arrest and subsequent confession were not enough to
attenuate the taint of the illegal conduct. Rather, the court considered the
circumstances of the defendant’s confinement and found that “there was no
point in time that [the defendant] was not either: (1) being interrogated; (2)
having his home and car searched; or (3) being transported to another location
for further questioning.” Black, 762 S.W.2d at 194. The court further noted
the defendant was never taken before a magistrate and never consulted an
attorney. Id. Thus, looking at the second and third factors together, the court
concluded that both supported suppression of the confession. Id.
The State argues that the second interrogation by a law officer from a
different law enforcement agency constitutes an intervening circumstance that
attenuated the taint of the defendant’s illegal arrest, relying upon Gotsch, 143
N.H. at 91. The State’s reliance upon Gotsch is misplaced.
In Gotsch, the defendant was illegally arrested by police officers in
Poughkeepsie, New York, after New Hampshire authorities had notified other
police departments that he was a suspect in a murder investigation. Gotsch,
143 N.H. at 89. After receiving Miranda warnings and waiving them, the
defendant confessed to police that he had killed his father. Id. After the
defendant stated that he felt uncomfortable in the interview room, he was
taken to a larger air-conditioned room that was furnished with, among other
things, a leather recliner and a television set. Id. He was also given pizza. Id.
Three and one-half hours later, New Hampshire authorities arrived to
interrogate him. Id. When questioned by the New Hampshire police outside of
the presence of Poughkeepsie officers and after having been given Miranda
warnings, which he again waived, he confessed to killing his father. Id. at 89-
90.
We determined that the “the improvement of the defendant’s conditions
of confinement and the interview of the defendant by a different law
enforcement agency” were “sufficient, in combination with the other three
factors, to break the causal chain between the defendant’s illegal arrest and his
statements” to New Hampshire authorities. Id. at 91.
6
Here, there were no such improvements in the defendant’s confinement
that would eliminate the taint of the illegal arrest. He remained either alone or
in the presence of police for the duration of his confinement. Further, unlike
the second interrogation in Gotsch, the defendant’s second interrogation was
conducted in the presence of all three of his initial interviewers and was
conducted less than an hour after and in the same room as his first confession.
Based upon these circumstances, the second interrogation was insufficient to
constitute a significant intervening event. See Friend v. State, 865 S.W.2d 275,
279 (Ark. 1993) (taint of illegal arrest not attenuated when “both the delay and
the intervening circumstance occurred while [defendant] was in continuous
custody of the law”). Thus, we turn to the fourth and final factor.
In analyzing the last factor, we do not merely consider whether the police
committed misconduct, but, rather, whether the misconduct at issue was
flagrant and purposeful. “In analyzing this factor, courts look to see whether:
(a) the police used threatening or abusive tactics; (b) the impropriety of the
initial misconduct was obvious; and (c) the initial [misconduct] was . . .
calculated to elicit a confession.” United States v. Stark, 499 F.3d 72, 77 (1st
Cir. 2007) (quotation and brackets omitted).
Examples of such misconduct include arrests “made without any
apparent justification, as a part of a dragnet operation, or upon a pretext” or
when the defendant was arrested “for the purpose of obtaining a confession
and the arrest was exploited for that purpose.” LaFave, supra § 11.4(b), at
293-94 (quotation omitted). Courts are less likely to suppress a confession
where the illegality of an arrest was not flagrant, such as an arrest slightly
short of probable cause after a lawful stop for investigation, an arrest made in
reliance upon an arrest warrant later determined to be invalid, or an arrest
based upon evidence that would be sufficient but for its acquisition during a
stop for investigation on grounds barely insufficient. Id. at 294.
For instance, in Brown, 422 U.S. at 603, the defendant was arrested
“solely on the basis of an unsubstantiated tip which identified [him] only as an
acquaintance of a murder victim.” Self v. State, 709 S.W.2d 662, 667 (Tex.
Crim. App. 1986). “He was not a suspect at the time.” Id. “The officer broke
into [the defendant’s] apartment, searched it, and when [the defendant] was
climbing the stairs to his apartment, he was accosted by three plainclothes
officers pointing guns at [him].” Id. “This was without warrant or probable
cause.” Id. “The officers later testified they arrested [the defendant] for the
purpose of questioning him as part of their murder investigation.” Id. “He was
arrested and taken to the police station, where he gave a confession.” Id.
In determining that the officers’ conduct had been flagrant and
purposeful, the United States Supreme Court reasoned that the “illegality . . .
had a quality of purposefulness.” Brown, 422 U.S. at 605. “The impropriety of
7
the arrest was obvious; awareness of that fact was virtually conceded by the
two detectives when they repeatedly acknowledged, in their testimony, that the
purpose of their action was ‘for investigation’ or ‘for questioning.’” Id. “The
arrest, both in design and in execution, was investigatory.” Id. “The detectives
embarked on [the] expedition for evidence in the hope that something might
turn up. The manner in which [the defendant’s] arrest was effected gives the
appearance of having been calculated to cause surprise, fright and confusion.”
Id.
Here, we agree with the trial court that the initial police misconduct was
not flagrant and purposeful. It was not “the kind of willful or purposeful
misconduct that the exclusionary rule was fashioned to deter.” Gotsch, 143
N.H. at 91-92 (quotation omitted). Even though Levesque’s expansion of the
scope of the stop was improper, his conduct did not “appear [to have] been
calculated to cause surprise, fright, and confusion,” nor did it appear to have
“a quality of purposefulness.” Brown, 422 U.S. at 605.
Instead, the misconduct in this case is similar to that in United States v.
Thomas, 83 F.3d 259, 259, 260 (8th Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 1066
(1999), in which a defendant was illegally detained after a police officer stopped
him for speeding. Even though the officer lacked reasonable articulable
suspicion to detain the defendant, the court concluded that the officer’s
conduct was neither purposeful nor flagrant misconduct. Thomas, 83 F.3d at
260. The court reasoned that the officer “had some suspicion that criminal
activity was afoot, and the violation . . . was not flagrant.” Id. Similarly, we
conclude that the expanded stop here was not a flagrant and purposeful
violation of the defendant’s constitutional rights.
The defendant argues that it was flagrant and purposeful for the Concord
police to interrogate him and obtain a confession before he was interrogated by
Hughes. To the contrary, neither the Concord interrogation nor Hughes’
interrogation of the defendant would qualify as police misconduct. The
defendant does not contend that the police coerced him in any way. He
testified that he was not forced into making a statement and that he spoke to
the police of his own free will. In fact, Hughes testified that the defendant was
“[v]ery open” and had “fun” while describing how he stole the gun, so much so
that Hughes “was taken aback at how comfortable he was.”
This is a close case, with two factors weighing in favor of suppression
and two in favor of admission. We conclude on the facts of this case that the
second and third factors deserve greater weight than the first and fourth
factors. See United States v. Pena, 924 F. Supp. 1239, 1253 (D. Mass. 1996);
State v. Miller, 894 S.W.2d 649, 656 (Mo. 1995) (en banc) (“the absence of
purposeful and flagrant misconduct cannot alone dissipate the taint in the
complete absence of temporal distance and intervening circumstances”);
8
Williams v. State, 937 S.W.2d 23, 37 (Texas Crim. App. 1996) (“Otherwise
inadmissible evidence should not be made admissible simply because the
police misconduct was not too reprehensible.”), petition for review denied
(1997). In doing so, we adopt the reasoning of the Illinois Appellate Court, in
People v. Vought, 528 N.E.2d 1095 (Ill. App. Ct. 1988), appeal denied, 535
N.E.2d 920 (Ill.), cert. denied, 492 U.S. 911 (1989), a case with marked
similarities to this case.
In Vought, the defendant’s guestroom at a hotel was subjected to an
illegal search after housekeeping staff found a briefcase containing cocaine,
and the hotel manager called the police and, believing the room to be
unoccupied, consented to a search of his room. Vought, 528 N.E.2d at 1096-
97. The defendant initially stated that the briefcase was not his, but then
confessed four hours after the arrest. Id. at 1097. The court determined that,
under Brown, the defendant’s confession should be suppressed, despite the
fact that Miranda warnings had been given and the police misconduct was not
flagrant. Id. at 1101-02.
The Vought court reasoned that there had been “no intervening
circumstances between the entry and the statements to indicate that they were
sufficiently an act of free will to purge the primary taint of the illegal invasion.”
Id. at 1101. It further reasoned that although “the police misconduct was not
flagrant, the nature of that misconduct must be considered as well.” Id. Since
the police had illegally obtained evidence with which they were able to confront
the defendant, it was likely that they “induce[d] a confession by demonstrating
it [was] futile to remain silent.” Id. at 1102. Thus, “it was most probable that
[the] defendant confessed only because he was caught red-handed.” Id.
Accordingly, there was no break in the causal connection between the illegal
search and the subsequent confession to purge the taint. Id.
Similarly, we conclude that the nature of the defendant’s arrest and the
circumstances of his confinement are crucial to this analysis. The defendant
was either alone or in the presence of police officers for the entire period during
which he was confined. Hughes questioned the defendant about the illegally
obtained gun, which, in all probability, induced him to confess. Most
importantly, Hughes interrogated him in the same room as had the Concord
police and with the Concord police present. The defendant testified that part of
the reason he spoke to Hughes was that he had already spoken to the Concord
police officers.
These circumstances suggest that the defendant found it futile to refuse
to speak to Hughes or to say anything different from what he had told the
Concord officers. See Brown, 422 U.S. at 605 n.12 (“The fact that [the
defendant] had made one statement, believed by him to be admissible, . . .
9
bolstered the pressures for him to give the second, or at least vitiated any
incentive on his part to avoid self-incrimination.”).
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that, after balancing the Gotsch
factors, those favoring suppression outweigh those favoring admission.
Because we conclude that admitting the defendant’s confession violated the
State Constitution, we need not reach the federal issue. See Ball, 124 N.H. at
237.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10