THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2008-047
RYDER DANIELS & a.
v.
TOWN OF LONDONDERRY & a.
Argued: June 18, 2008
Opinion Issued: July 15, 2008
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Jeffrey C. Spear on the brief and orally), for
the petitioners.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Matthew R. Serge on the brief and
orally), for the defendants.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Jennifer L.
Parent and Kristin M. Yasenka on the brief, and Ms. Parent orally), for the
intervenor.
GALWAY, J. The petitioners, Ryder Daniels and Gary Morrissette, appeal
an order of the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) upholding the decision of the
defendants, Town of Londonderry and the Town of Londonderry Zoning Board
of Adjustment (ZBA), allowing the intervenor, Omnipoint Communications, Inc.
(Omnipoint), to build a wireless communications tower in an agricultural-
residential zone. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts appear in the record. Omnipoint sought one use and
two area variances in order to construct a 170-foot monopole
telecommunications tower on a residential parcel (the parcel) located in
Londonderry’s agricultural-residential zone. The parcel, owned by the Meredith
P. Beal Revocable Trust, sits at the end of a residential cul-de-sac and consists
of approximately thirteen acres, with an abutting twelve acres of undeveloped
land, also owned by the Meredith P. Beal Revocable Trust. The petitioners are
abutters to the parcel and oppose Omnipoint’s applications.
Over the course of six months the ZBA conducted several public hearings
and heard testimony from Omnipoint’s attorney, project manager and site
acquisition specialist, as well as two radio frequency engineers, in support of
its applications. Omnipoint presented numerous site maps illustrating the gap
in wireless communications coverage surrounding the area, the coverage to be
achieved by the proposed tower, and the layout of the proposed compound
surrounding the tower, and submitted other pertinent exhibits. In addition,
the ZBA heard testimony from an independent radio frequency engineer, who
served as a consultant for the ZBA. It also heard testimony from two property
appraisers, one hired by Omnipoint and the other by petitioner Daniels,
regarding the results of each appraiser’s site specific impact study on property
value. Several other appraisal studies reflecting towers in other towns were
also submitted.
The ZBA ultimately granted the three variances with the following
conditions:
that the tower height shall not exceed one
hundred and forty six (146) feet, the tower shall
not be lit, the tower shall be moved to the furthest
point on the compound away from Hazelnut
Drive, the existing tree canopy outside the
compound shall be preserved for the length of the
lease, granting the Use Variance shall be
conditional upon Planning Board approval, there
shall be visual screening around the compound,
the access road shall be located as presented in
plan “locus three” and the tower shall be located
as presented in plan “locus three.”
The petitioners appealed to the trial court after unsuccessfully moving for
rehearing. The trial court affirmed the ZBA’s decision, ruling that the record
2
adequately supported a finding that the five variance criteria had been
satisfied. This appeal followed.
The superior court’s review in zoning cases
is limited. Factual findings of the ZBA are
deemed prima facie lawful and reasonable and
will not be set aside by the superior court absent
errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by a
balance of probabilities on the evidence before it
that the ZBA decision is unreasonable.
Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155 N.H. 102, 105 (2007)
(quotation omitted). The party seeking to set aside the ZBA decision bears the
burden of proof in superior court. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s decision
unless the evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Kalil v. Town
of Dummer Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 155 N.H. 307, 309 (2007).
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the ZBA’s decision was unlawful
and unreasonable because the ZBA allowed a federal law, the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (TCA), 47 U.S.C.A. § 332(c)(7) (2001), to
preempt its own findings regarding the statutory criteria, or, in the alternative,
that Omnipoint had not met the statutory requirements for a variance. We will
address each argument in turn.
II. Consideration of the TCA
The petitioners first argue that the ZBA erroneously construed the TCA
to preempt Omnipoint’s burden of satisfying the statutory criteria. Specifically,
they assert that several statements made by board members during the course
of its deliberations demonstrate an overly deferential application of the TCA.
We disagree.
“The TCA was enacted to expand the availability of wireless
telecommunications services and to increase competition in the wireless
telecommunications industry.” Nextel Comm. of Mid-Atlantic v. City of
Cambridge, 246 F. Supp. 2d 118, 122 (D. Mass. 2003). However, it “preserves
state and local authority over the siting and construction of wireless
communication facilities, subject to five exceptions specified in the Act.”
Second Generation Props. v. Town of Pelham, 313 F.3d 620, 627 (1st Cir.
2002). “If a board decision is not supported by substantial evidence . . . or if it
effectively prohibits the provision of wireless service . . . then under the
Supremacy Clause of the Constitution, local law is pre-empted in order to
effectuate the TCA’s national policy goals.” Id. “Overall, the TCA attempts to
reconcile the goal of preserving local authority over land use with the need to
3
facilitate nationally the growth of wireless telephone service.” Id. at 631
(quotations omitted).
The ZBA discussed the TCA’s role in its consideration of Omnipoint’s
applications on numerous occasions throughout the six-month hearing
process. Each time, the ZBA accurately addressed the nature of the TCA, and
the ongoing duty of Omnipoint to meet the five variance criteria. The ZBA’s
discussion at the start of its deliberations illustrates its proper understanding
of the TCA:
Larry O’Sullivan: [The TCA is] shadowing what
we’re doing here but they gotta [sic] meet these
criteria first and then we’ll forgive [sic] what the
Telecommunications Act has to do . . . . The way I
look at this is did they meet the five (5) criteria
first? And then we’ll talk about what the TCA
does, if that’s necessary.
Mike Brown: That’s a true statement. They have
to . . . you’re making a good point that even
though the TCA is an umbrella, it is something
that we have to keep in mind, the first thing that
has to happen is the Board, a consensus of the
Board, a majority of the Board who votes on this,
needs to be satisfied that all five (5) points of law
were met from a burden standpoint . . . .
. . . .
Yves Steger: What happens if they don’t meet,
let’s say, one (1) point of law. Do we deny?
Mark Officer: We judge it like we judge every
case.
. . . .
Mike Brown: Just like any other case. There’s no
difference with that standard.
Contrary to the petitioners’ assertion, the ZBA did not substitute the TCA
in place of its own judgment with respect to the five variance criteria. These
and other statements contained in the record reflect an accurate
understanding and proper consideration of the TCA. The ZBA was correct to
characterize the TCA as an “umbrella” under which a ZBA must evaluate an
application to construct a telecommunications tower, as the TCA will preempt
local law under certain circumstances. See 47 U.S.C.A. § 332(c)(7). As the
4
First Circuit Court of Appeals has noted, although the TCA does not explicitly
authorize a zoning board to consider whether a decision amounts to an
effective prohibition of the provision of wireless service, “[s]ince board actions
will be invalidated by a federal court if they violate the effective prohibition
provision, many boards wisely do consider the point.” Second Generation
Props., 313 F.3d at 630. Thus, the standards set forth in the TCA provide a
gloss over the deliberative process, and the ZBA correctly considered its
implications. It was therefore appropriate for the ZBA to contemplate whether
a decision to deny Omnipoint’s variance application would have the effect of
prohibiting towers in violation of the TCA.
Furthermore, contrary to the petitioners’ argument, statements made by
board members during the course of deliberations do not demonstrate that
those board members deemed certain variance criteria mooted by application of
the TCA. As the trial court aptly noted,
Although the ZBA members discussed their
concern that a decision to deny a request for a
telecommunications tower could constitute an
effective prohibition of wireless services and thus
constitute a violation of the TCA, contrary to the
petitioners’ claim, this concern did not result in a
misapplication of the law or an abdication of the
Board’s authority to consider the merits of the
application for a variance.
Indeed, the objectionable statements express a general concern, rather than a
final determination, that the variance criteria had not been met and denial
would amount to an effective prohibition. Thus, upon our review of the record,
we find no basis upon which to conclude that the ZBA allowed the TCA to
preempt its own findings with regard to the statutory criteria.
III. Variance Criteria
Londonderry’s Zoning Ordinance does not allow personal wireless
facilities, such as the proposed tower, in its agricultural-residential zone. See
Town of Londonderry, Zoning Ordinance, sec. 3.9.1 (2007). Omnipoint was
therefore required to obtain a use variance, as well as two area variances
relating to tower height and setback requirements. See id., secs. 2.3.1.3.4,
3.9.4.1. The petitioners assert that, even absent any misapplication of the
TCA, the ZBA erred in granting the variances because Omnipoint had not
satisfied the five statutory variance criteria. We disagree.
5
An applicant seeking a variance must demonstrate that: (1) the variance
will not be contrary to the public interest; (2) special conditions exist such that
literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary
hardship; (3) the variance is consistent with the spirit of the ordinance; (4)
substantial justice is done; and (5) granting the variance will not diminish the
value of surrounding properties. Garrison v. Town of Henniker, 154 N.H. 26,
30 (2006).
A. Unnecessary Hardship
To prove unnecessary hardship for a use variance, the applicant must
prove that: (1) a zoning restriction as applied to the property interferes with
the reasonable use of the property, considering the unique setting of the
property in its environment; (2) no fair and substantial relationship exists
between the general purposes of the zoning ordinance and the specific
restriction on the property; and (3) the variance would not injure the public or
private rights of others. Simplex Technologies v. Town of Newington, 145 N.H.
727, 731-32 (2001).
In Boccia v. City of Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 85, 94 (2004), we stated that
an applicant seeking an area variance must satisfy the following two
requirements to prove unnecessary hardship: (1) an area variance is needed to
enable the applicant’s proposed use of the property given the special conditions
of the property; and (2) the benefit sought by the applicant cannot be achieved
by some other method reasonably feasible for the applicant to pursue, other
than an area variance.
The petitioners first argue that the trial court erred in concluding that
Omnipoint had satisfied the first prongs of both Simplex and Boccia. They
assert that the facts of this case parallel those found in Garrison, and the
property should likewise be found to fall short of being “unique” for purposes
of hardship. They further assert that the trial court erred by failing to consider
the remaining Simplex prongs in its order, and argue that these factors have
not been satisfied.
As a preliminary matter, we note that no party has argued the TCA
preempts the statutory criteria here. Rather, this case requires us to reconcile
our statutory variance criteria, specifically, the hardship standard, with the
overarching standards set forth in the TCA. We have stated that to satisfy the
uniqueness factor an applicant “must show that the hardship is a result of
specific conditions of the property and not the area in general.” Garrison, 154
N.H. at 32 (quotations omitted). “[T]he burden cannot arise as a result of the
zoning ordinance’s equal burden on all property in the district.” Id. at 32-33
(quotation omitted). It “must arise from the property and not from the
individual plight of the landowner.” Id. at 33 (quotation omitted). In Garrison,
6
we upheld the superior court’s decision that the property at issue was not
unique for zoning purposes because the record did not demonstrate “that the
proposed site was different from any other property” in the particular district.
Id. at 33-34. We concluded that the fact the land is well-suited to a particular
use given its size, topography and location did not, alone, distinguish the land
from any other land in the area. Id. at 34.
Under the circumstances of this case, however, we must also consider
the implication of the TCA. The TCA provides for the preemption of local land
use law when the decision of the board would effectively prohibit the provision
of wireless services. 47 U.S.C.A. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II). The First Circuit has
determined that “a town’s refusal to permit a tower that is needed to fill a
‘significant geographic gap’ in service, where no service at all is offered in the
gap, would violate the effective prohibition clause.” Second Generation Props.,
313 F.3d at 631 (brackets omitted). The First Circuit has indicated that such a
violation would occur when the application “is the only feasible plan.” Id. at
630.
To ensure compliance with the TCA, we believe that a broader, more
inclusive view of hardship is required under these circumstances. When an
application to build a wireless telecommunications tower is designed to fill a
significant gap in coverage, the suitability of a specific parcel of land for that
purpose should be considered for purposes of determining hardship. The fact
that a proposed location is centrally located within the gap, has the correct
topography, or is of an adequate size to effectively eliminate the gap in
coverage, are factors that may make it unique under the umbrella of the TCA.
Similarly, that there are no feasible alternatives to the proposed site may also
make it unique. Thus, although a parcel of land may be similar to the
surrounding properties in terms of its general characteristics, it may still be
“unique” for purposes of hardship when considered in light of the TCA.
Consistent with this broader application of the hardship criteria, and
upon our review of the record, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
finding unnecessary hardship for both the use and area variances. With
respect to the “uniqueness” factor, the evidence before the ZBA demonstrated
the necessity of a tower, at the height ultimately approved, on the proposed
parcel, in order to fill what could be considered a significant gap in coverage.
Additionally, as the trial court noted, the ZBA “considered the expert testimony
presented and the opinion of its own consultant in determining that no
reasonable alternatives would achieve similar wireless coverage.”
In addition, the evidence before the ZBA supports its decision that there
is no fair and substantial relationship between the zoning ordinance and the
restriction here and that the variance would not injure the public or private
rights of others. The ZBA had the benefit of its personal observations during
7
simulated height tests, as well as photographic submissions illustrating the
potential impact on the view from numerous locations. There was evidence
presented that the tower and surrounding compound would not create noise or
traffic. The ZBA also required screening of the compound surrounding the
tower, as well as screening of the tower itself, and maintenance of the existing
tree canopy.
Further, we find no error in the trial court’s failure to explicitly address
each of the Simplex factors in its order. The trial court accurately set forth the
hardship standard for both use and area variances, noted relevant evidence
before the ZBA, and made generalized conclusions applicable to these factors.
Although a specific explanation of the evidence supporting its hardship
findings is preferable, given the extensive record in this case, we conclude that
the trial court adequately addressed the hardship standard.
B. Diminution of Value of Surrounding Properties
The petitioners assert that the trial court erred in upholding the ZBA’s
finding that there would be no diminution to the value of surrounding homes.
In particular, they argue that the ZBA could not have reasonably relied upon
the conclusions contained in the one site specific impact study provided by
Omnipoint because it was based upon the “demonstrably false claim” that the
tower would not be visible from the petitioners’ homes. However, the ZBA is
not bound to accept the conclusions of the study or any witness. See Vannah
v. Bedford, 111 N.H. 105, 112 (1971), overruled on other grounds by Cook v.
Town of Sanbornton, 118 N.H. 668, 671 (1978). As ZBA Chairman Brown
noted before leading the discussion on property value,
the ZBA does not have to accept the conclusions
of experts on either side on the question of value
or any other point since one of the functions of
the Board is to decide how much weight or
credibility to give that testimony or the opinions of
witnesses, including expert witnesses. Keep in
mind that the burden is on the applicant to
convince the ZBA that it is more likely than not
that the project will not decrease values.
Here, the ZBA had substantial evidence supporting its decision regarding
property values including the numerous studies submitted, the testimony of at
least one appraiser, the lack of abatement requests in comparable areas, its
own knowledge of the area, and personal observations made during the
simulated height tests, to support its conclusion. Thus, the trial court did not
err in concluding that the ZBA acted reasonably in finding Omnipoint had met
8
its burden of proving there would be no loss of value to the surrounding
properties.
C. Remaining Criteria
Lastly, the petitioners argue that the trial court erred in ruling that the
variance was consistent with the spirit of the ordinance, that it was not
contrary to the public interest, and that substantial justice would be done in
granting the variances. We disagree.
Based upon the record of the ZBA hearings, we conclude that sufficient
evidence supports these rulings. At the hearings, Omnipoint showed that the
variance would not be contrary to the spirit of the ordinance or injurious to the
rights of others because the tower would not alter the essential character of the
locality or threaten the public health, safety or welfare. The evidence presented
included that the tower would be reduced to 146 feet, would not have a light on
its top, and would be screened from view on the ground with vegetative buffer
and disguised at the top as a pine tree. The tower would be located at a point
furthest from abutting properties on Hazelnut Drive, and would not generate
noise, traffic or odors. A tower at this site would also serve the public interest
in that it would alleviate a significant gap in coverage and would be used to
provide service for at least two other wireless telecommunications companies to
limit the need for any further towers. In addition, Omnipoint showed that
substantial justice would be done in granting the variances because it was the
only reasonable way to remedy an existing gap in coverage.
Accordingly, the trial court did not err in concluding that the ZBA acted
lawfully and reasonably in finding that Omnipoint met its burden of proving
the required variance criteria.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
9