THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2008-257
STATE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,
SEIU, LOCAL 1984 & a.
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DIVISION OF PERSONNEL
Argued: November 19, 2008
Opinion Issued: February 18, 2009
Molan, Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (Glenn R. Milner on the brief
and orally), for the petitioners.
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Michael K. Brown, senior assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, the State Employees Association of New
Hampshire, SEIU, Local 1984 (SEA), William E. Evans and John R. Bush,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Conboy, J.) ruling that service credit
purchased pursuant to RSA 100-A:4, VII (Supp. 2006) (repealed 2007) does not
qualify for determining eligibility for medical benefits coverage under RSA 21-
I:30 (Supp. 2008). We affirm.
The facts in this case are not in dispute. The petitioners are two state
employees and the SEA, which describes itself as “a voluntary labor
organization and the exclusive representative for more than 10,000 state
employees who are eligible to receive certain retirement benefits from the [New
Hampshire Retirement System (NHRS)].” The two individual petitioners, Evans
and Bush, are apparently group I members of NHRS. Group I members are
“employees and teachers,” RSA 100-A:1, X(a) (2001), terms further defined in
RSA 100-A:1, V and VI (Supp. 2008). The other classification of state
employees referred to in this opinion is group II, whose members are
“permanent policemen and permanent firemen,” RSA 100-A:1, X(b) (2001),
categories further defined and delineated in RSA 100-A:1, VII (Supp. 2008), VII-
a (Supp. 2008), VII-b (2001) and VIII (2001). For reasons explained below, this
decision concerns only the benefits available to some group I members.
The respondent, the New Hampshire Division of Personnel (division), is a
division established within the department of administrative services, an
agency of the state. RSA 21-I:1, :42 (Supp. 2008). The division is charged
with, among other things, “[o]verseeing administration of all employee benefit
programs other than those related to the [NHRS].” RSA 21-I:42, VIII.
Two types of state employee benefits are relevant to the instant action:
retirement allowances payable by NHRS pursuant to RSA chapter 100-A (2001
& Supp. 2008), and “group hospitalization, hospital medical care, surgical care
and other medical benefits,” RSA 21-I:30, I, provided to state employees, state
retirees and certain of their family members pursuant to RSA 21-I:26 to :36
(2000 & Supp. 2008). Both statutory schemes use some form of the term
“creditable service” to calculate various benefits or to define eligibility for them.
For instance, RSA 100-A:5, I(b) (2001) provides that the service retirement
allowance payable thereunder to group I employee or teacher members is equal
to a certain percentage of “the member’s average final compensation multiplied
by the number of years of creditable service.”
RSA 21-I:30, which directs the state to pay a premium “toward group
hospitalization, hospital medical care, surgical care and other medical benefits
plan or a self-funded alternative” for, inter alia, retired employees of the state,
uses a similar phrase to define that term. RSA 21-I:30 provides, in part:
II. For the purposes of this section, “retired employee” means
each group II state employee who retires. “Retired employee” also
means each group I state employee who:
(a) Has at least 10 years of creditable service for the state if
the employee’s service began prior to July 1, 2003 or 20 years
of creditable service if the employee’s service began on or after
July 1, 2003, and who also is at least 60 years of age at the
time of retirement; or
2
(b) Has at least 30 years of creditable service for the state at
the time of retirement, regardless of the employee’s age; . . . .
. . . .
III. Any vested deferred state retiree may receive medical and
surgical benefits under this section if the vested deferred state
retiree is eligible. To be eligible, a vested deferred state retiree
shall have at least 10 years of creditable service with the state if
the employee’s service began prior to July 1, 2003 or 20 years of
creditable service if the employee’s service began on or after July 1,
2003. In addition, if the vested deferred state retiree is a member
of group I, such retiree shall be at least 60 years of age to be
eligible. If the vested deferred state retiree is a member of group II,
such retiree shall not be eligible until 20 years from the date of
becoming a member of group II and shall be at least 45 years of
age.
IV. Each state employee who has at least 10 years of creditable
service for the state if the employee’s service began prior to July 1,
2003 or 20 years of creditable service if the employee’s service
began on or after July 1, 2003, and who elects to take a reduced
service retirement allowance shall be defined as a “retired
employee” for the purposes of being eligible to receive medical and
surgical benefits under this section when the state employee
reaches age 60.
RSA 21-I:30.
RSA 100-A:1 defines certain “words and phrases as used in [RSA
chapter 100-A], unless a different meaning is plainly required by the
context.” RSA 100-A:1 (2001). In general, “creditable service,” RSA 100-
A:1, XVI (2001), means “service rendered while a member of the
retirement system,” RSA 100-A:1, XIV (2001), plus service under a
predecessor retirement system “for which credit was given under the
terms of one or more of the predecessor systems, and as set forth under
this chapter,” RSA 100-A:1, XV (Supp. 2008). See RSA 100-A:1, XVI
(defining “[c]reditable service” to “mean prior service plus membership
service, as provided in RSA 100-A:4”). The term “[s]ervice,” in turn, is
defined as “service as an employee, a teacher, a permanent policeman or
a permanent fireman which is paid for by an employer.” RSA 100-A:1,
XIII (2001).
3
RSA chapter 100-A also offers limited opportunities for certain members
to purchase credit for service rendered for public employers other than the
State of New Hampshire, or for certain breaks in service. See, e.g., RSA 100-
A:4, VI (Supp. 2008) (allowing purchase of credit for active service in the United
States armed services); :4, VIII (Supp. 2008) (allowing purchase of service credit
following break in service to join Peace Corps or AmeriCorps); RSA 100-A:4-b
(Supp. 2008) (allowing certain group I members to purchase credit for out-of–
state service); RSA 100-A:4-c (Supp. 2008) (allowing certain group II members
to purchase credit for out-of–state service). In 2006, the legislature enacted
RSA 100-A:4, VII, which, until its repeal in 2007, allowed certain members of
the retirement system to purchase up to five years additional credit.
Specifically, RSA 100-A:4, VII provided:
VII. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, a member
in active service in the retirement system who currently has at
least 5 years of creditable service in the state, shall be entitled to
receive credit for not less than one month nor more than 5 years of
nonqualified service credit within the meaning of section 415(n) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended,
upon payment by the member of the full actuarial cost of such
credit and upon approval of the board, subject to the following:
(a) Credit shall not be granted until the active member has
fully paid for the nonqualified service in a lump sum or by
installment payments as permitted by the board. The
actuarial cost shall be the product of the member’s annual rate
of compensation at the time of buy-in, multiplied by the sum of
the member and employer contribution rates in effect with
respect to the member at the time of buy-in, multiplied by the
number of years of nonqualified service credit bought. The
member’s payment shall be credited to the member annuity
savings fund.
(b) “Nonqualified service credit” means time that is not
otherwise purchasable under this chapter.
(c) Requests concerning the purchase of nonqualified
service credit pursuant to this paragraph shall be limited to 2
such requests per member per calendar year.
RSA 100-A:4, VII.
On October 20, 2006, the division issued Personnel Memorandum 07-01
“to clarify whether the purchase of nonqualified service credit [under RSA 100-
A:4, VII] impacts eligibility for state-paid retiree health benefits pursuant to
4
RSA 21-I:30.” The memorandum notes that the question is only relevant to
group I members because RSA 21-I:30 does not tie the eligibility of group II
members to years of creditable service. With respect to group I members, the
memorandum states:
The language in RSA [21-I:30] requires a retiring Group I employee,
in addition to meeting a number of other specified conditions, to
have a certain number of years of “creditable service for the state”
to qualify for the health care benefit. Nonqualified, non-state
service is not “creditable service for the state” and for this reason,
the purchase of nonqualified service credit would not count toward
determining the eligibility of a Group I member for the state-paid
retiree health benefit.
The petitioners brought the instant action seeking, inter alia, a
declaratory judgment “that creditable service purchase[d] by a state employee
pursuant to [RSA 100-A:4, VII] can be utilized for purposes of determining
eligibility as a retired employee pursuant to RSA 21-I:30.” (Emphasis omitted.)
The division filed a motion to dismiss, which the trial court treated as a motion
for summary judgment and granted. The court found the term “creditable
service for the state” ambiguous and looked to legislative history to decipher its
meaning. The court “acknowledge[d] that the language of RSA 100-A:4, VII is
not a model of clarity,” and found no indication in the legislative history of the
lawmakers’ intent in enacting it. From the intent expressed in the legislative
history of RSA 21-I:30, however, the court concluded that “the legislature
intended the phrase ‘creditable service for the state,’ as it is used in [that
statute], to mean service actually working for the state.” Thus, the court was
“not persuaded that nonqualified service credit may be applied to establish
eligibility to receive medical benefits in retirement” pursuant to RSA 21-I:30.
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the trial court erred in both its
interpretation of the language of the statute and in its consultation of
legislative history. “The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which
we review de novo.” In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H.
472, 479 (2006) (quotation omitted). We are guided by a number of well-settled
principles of statutory construction. “Our goal is to apply statutes in light of
the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” Soraghan v. Mt. Cranmore Ski
Resort, 152 N.H. 399, 401 (2005). “When construing the meaning of a statute,
we first examine the language found in the statute, and where possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used.” Conrad v. Hazen, 140
N.H. 249, 251 (1995) (quotation omitted). “We interpret statutes not in
isolation, but in the context of the overall statutory scheme.” Appeal of City of
Portsmouth, 151 N.H. 170, 174 (2004). “When interpreting two statutes that
deal with a similar subject matter, we construe them so that they do not
5
contradict each other, and so that they will lead to reasonable results and
effectuate the legislative purpose of the statutes.” Grand China v. United Nat’l
Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 429, 431 (2007). “[W]e will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.”
In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154 N.H. at 479 (quotation
omitted).
The parties first dispute the plain meaning of RSA 21-I:30. The division
asserts that “[p]ursuant to RSA 21-I:30, the provision of health care benefits to
retired state employees requires not just ‘creditable service’ but a term of actual
‘service for the state.’” The petitioners counter that “[t]he complete phrase
‘creditable service for the state’ is not defined by statute, but the term
‘creditable service’ is and has a precise meaning. Thus, the plain meaning of
‘creditable service for the state’ is simply the amount of ‘creditable service’ a
state employee has.”
Upon reviewing the entire statutory scheme, we find the addition of the
words “for the state” in RSA 21-I:30 neither helpful nor dispositive. First, that
section uses the phrases “creditable service,” RSA 21-I:30, II(a), III, “creditable
service for the state,” RSA 21-I:30, II(a), (b) (emphasis added), and “creditable
service with the state,” RSA 21-I:30, III (emphasis added), with no discernable
distinction in intended meaning. Thus, the petitioners argue:
[T]he [division’s] position leads to an illogical and unreasonable
result. The phrase ‘creditable service for the state’ is employed in
only two of the three categories created by RSA 21-I:30[, II]. That
is, a state employee with ‘20 years of creditable service’ (not
‘creditable service for the state’) is entitled to benefits if employed
on or after July 1, 2003 whereas the other two categories of eligible
employees, under the [division’s] view, would need to have their
creditable service be actual work time for the state.
The petitioners also point out that where the legislature has intended to limit
creditable service for purposes of eligibility for health benefits by requiring the
performance of such service in the state, it has expressly said it. See RSA 100-
A:4-b, I (“For such employee or teacher members, only creditable service
performed in the state of New Hampshire as a member of the New Hampshire
retirement system shall be counted as creditable service for the purpose of
eligibility for medical and surgical benefits as a retired employee under RSA 21-
I:30.”); RSA 100-A:4-c (same). We find no consistent indication of legislative
intent in the modification of “creditable service” by such phrases as “for the
state.”
The petitioners similarly argue that the existence elsewhere in the statute
of explicit exclusions of purchased service credit from qualification as
6
“creditable service for the state” for purposes of RSA 21-I:30 indicates that the
legislature intended to include service credit purchased under RSA 100-A:4,
VII. See RSA 100-A:4, VI(c) (providing that purchased credit for military service
“shall not be used as creditable service . . . for the purpose of eligibility for
medical and surgical benefits as a retired employee under RSA 21-I:30”); RSA
100-A:4-b, I, III (similar exclusion for credit for out-of-state service purchased
by group I members); RSA 100-A:4-c, I, IV (similar exclusion for credit for out-
of-state service purchased by group II members). The petitioners argue:
When the Legislature enacted [RSA] 100-A:4, VII it did so with
knowledge that when it intended to exclude certain purchased
creditable service from the ambit of RSA 21-I:30 it expressed this
intent by adding clear exclusionary language. Conversely, then, by
not adding in RSA 100-A:4, VII the exclusionary language found in
several other provisions, there exists unmistakable legislative
intent that such creditable service qualifies for purposes of
eligibility for medical benefits under RSA 21-I:30.
(Citation and italics omitted.)
We acknowledge that “[t]he legislature’s choice of language is deemed to
be meaningful,” Conrad, 140 N.H. at 251, and that we generally “assume[] that
whenever the legislature enacts a provision, it has in mind previous statutes
relating to the same subject matter,” Appeal of Town of Hampton Falls, 126
N.H. 805, 809 (1985) (quotation omitted). Therefore, “[u]nless the context
indicates otherwise, words or phrases in a provision that were used in a prior
act pertaining to the same subject matter will be construed in the same sense.”
Appeal of Town of Hampton Falls, 126 N.H. at 810 (quotation omitted).
Conversely, where the legislature uses different language in related statutes,
we “assume that the legislature intended something different.” Conrad, 140
N.H. at 252.
We also note the “elementary principle of statutory construction that all
of the words of a statute must be given effect and that the legislature is
presumed not to have used superfluous or redundant words.” Merrill v. Great
Bay Disposal Serv., 125 N.H. 540, 543 (1984). To accept the division’s position
that “creditable service for the state,” RSA 21-I:30, does not include purchased
“creditable service” because the former term requires “a term of actual ‘service
for the state,’” renders the explicit exclusions in RSA 100-A:4, VI(c) and RSA
100-A:4-b, I, III and :4-c superfluous. The division attempts to distinguish
military and out-of-state service credit from nonqualified service credit by
noting:
In the first instance, each statutory provision . . . [containing an
explicit exclusion] specifically requires some form of actual service,
7
albeit in a predecessor, military or out-of-state system. In this
case, there is no actual service being performed by the employee.
Instead, all they have to do is pay money to offset the cost of the
annuity.
This distinction does not help the division, however, because RSA 21-I:30 does
not mention actual service, but rather refers to creditable service for or with
“the state.” RSA 21-I:30. Thus, actual service performed for another
governmental or public employer would not come within the plain meaning of
RSA 21-I:30.
We also acknowledge, however, that to read “creditable service for [or
with] the state” as simply referring to “creditable service” as that term is
defined and used in RSA chapter 100-A renders the phrases “for the state” and
“with the state” superfluous. Similarly, the division argues that to interpret
“nonqualified service credit” purchased under RSA 100-A:4, VII as “creditable
service” reads the term “nonqualified” out of that section. If the legislature
intended to treat “nonqualified” service the same as creditable service, the
division posits, it would not have distinguished it from creditable service, but
rather would simply have allowed the purchase of creditable service. The
petitioners, on the other hand, appear to argue that because the provision
allowing purchase of “nonqualified service credit” is contained within the
statutory section entitled “creditable service,” the former is included in the
definition of the latter.
As the foregoing analysis suggests, any attempt to read consistent and
coherent meaning into every word of RSA chapter 100-A and RSA 21-I:30 may
well be a fool’s errand. Application of our standard rules of statutory
construction to the provisions at issue produces conflicting results.
Nevertheless, “all rules of statutory construction are subservient to the one
that legislative intent must prevail if it can be reasonably discovered in the
language used.” 2A N.J. Singer & J.D. S. Singer, Statutes and Statutory
Construction § 45.5, at 36 (7th ed. 2007); see McMillen Feed Mills, Inc. of S. C.
v. Mayer, 220 S.E.2d 221, 226 (S.C. 1975) (stating same principle). Indeed,
“[w]hen the intention of the Legislature can be ascertained from the statute,
words may be modified, altered, or supplied so as to compel conformity of the
statute to that intention.” State v. Holmes, 136 P.2d 220, 222 (Mont. 1943)
(quotation omitted). But cf., e.g., In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co.,
154 N.H. at 479 (stating standard rule of statutory construction that “we will
not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include”). Thus, in State v. Murgatroy, 115 N.H.
717, 718 (1975), we disregarded a mistaken reference in a statute to another
statutory section and supplied the proper statutory reference where “the
purpose, object, and intention of the legislature . . . [was] clear” and to apply
the statute as written would defeat the legislature’s intent.
8
In this case, interpreting the provisions at issue, as we must, “in the
context of the overall statutory scheme,” Appeal of City of Portsmouth, 151
N.H. at 174, we find the legislature’s intent to exclude nonqualified service
credit purchased under RSA 100-A:4, VII from the ambit of “creditable service
for the state,” as that phrase is used in RSA 21-I:30, reasonably ascertainable.
See Singer & Singer, supra § 45.5, at 36. We begin by examining the statutory
scheme for retirement allowances contained in RSA chapter 100-A.
“The retirement system is financed through contributions from both
employees and employers.” Upson v. Board of Trustees, 124 N.H. 787, 789
(1984). NHRS’ assets are held in two funds: the member annuity savings fund
and the state annuity accumulation fund. RSA 100-A:16 (Supp. 2008). Assets
are credited between the two funds “according to the purpose for which they
are held.” Id. The member annuity savings fund is the fund in which member
contributions, which are deducted from the members’ compensation “to provide
for their member annuities,” are accumulated “together with any amounts
transferred thereto from a similar fund under one or more of the predecessor
systems.” RSA 100-A:16, I(a); see RSA 100-A:1, XX (2001) (defining “[m]ember
annuity,” as “annual payments for life derived from the accumulated
contributions of the member”). Member contributions are deducted each
payroll period from each member’s compensation in an amount calculated as a
specified percentage of the member’s earnable compensation. RSA 100-A:16,
I(a). “Each of such amounts, when deducted, shall be paid to the retirement
system at such times as may be designated by the board of trustees and
credited to the individual account, in the member annuity savings fund, of the
member from whose compensation the deduction was made.” Id. When a
member retires, his or her accumulated contributions are transferred from the
member annuity savings fund to the state annuity accumulation fund. RSA
100-A:16, I(d).
The state annuity accumulation fund is:
the fund in which shall be accumulated all reserves for the
payment of all state annuities payable from contributions made by
employers, any amounts transferred thereto from a similar fund
under one or more of the predecessor systems, amounts
transferred from the member annuity savings fund, and all
amounts paid to the system by or on account of call, substitute, or
volunteer firemen and from which shall be paid all benefits payable
under the system other than those payable from the member
annuity savings fund.
RSA 100-A:16, II(a); see RSA 100-A:1, XXI (2001) (defining “[s]tate annuity” as
“annual payments for life derived from contributions by an employer”). The
9
amount of the employer’s contribution is specified in RSA 100-A:16, II(c), which
provides:
The contributions of each employer for benefits under the
retirement system on account of group I members shall consist of a
percentage of the earnable compensation of its members to be
known as the “normal contribution”, and an additional amount to
be known as the “accrued liability contribution” . . . . The rate
percent of such normal contribution in each instance shall be fixed
on the basis of the liabilities of the system with respect to the
particular members of the various member classifications as
shown by actuarial valuation, except as provided in subparagraphs
(h) and (i).
RSA 100-A:16, II(c). The accrued liability contribution is, essentially, an
additional amount “necessary to liquidate the unfunded accrued liability on
behalf of [each member] classification as determined by the actuary under [RSA
100-A:16, II(e).]” RSA 100-A:16, II(f) (Supp. 2008).
Except in the case of member contributions returned to members ceasing
employment other than through retirement or death, see RSA 100-A:11 (Supp.
2008), the funds accumulated in the member annuity savings and state
annuity accumulation funds are used solely to pay the retirement allowances of
retired members. Thus, RSA 100-A:1, XXII (2001) defines “[r]etirement
allowance” as “the sum of the member annuity and the state annuity.” NHRS
pays for medical benefits under very limited circumstances not at issue here,
but through a separate fund. Specifically, RSA 100-A:52-b provides that
NHRS:
shall pay the cost for permanent group hospitalization, hospital medical
care, surgical care, and other medical and surgical benefits, in the
employer-sponsored plan provided for active employees of a retiree’s
former employer, subject to the provisions of this section, for [a specified
segment of group I retirees not relevant here].
RSA 100-A:52-b, I (Supp. 2008). RSA 100-A:53-d, I, currently provides:
The benefits provided under RSA 100-A:52-b shall be provided by a
401(h) subtrust of the New Hampshire retirement system. The
401(h) subtrust shall be funded by allocating 25 percent of future
group I state employer contributions made for group I state
employees in accordance with RSA 100-A:16 to the subtrust until
such time as the benefits are fully funded. Thereafter, the
subtrust shall receive only that portion of each year’s contribution
as is necessary to keep the benefits fully funded.
10
RSA 100-A:53-d, I (Supp. 2008) (amended 2008); see 26 U.S.C. § 401(h) (2000).
Funds to be used for health benefits are segregated from those to be used for
retirement allowances. RSA 100-A:53-d, II provides:
All contributions made to the retirement system to provide
medical benefits under RSA 100-A:52-b shall be maintained in a
separate account, the 401(h) subtrust. All funds and
accumulated interest shall not be used for or diverted to any
purpose other than to provide said medical benefits. Similarly,
none of the funds accumulated to provide the retirement benefits
set forth in this chapter may be used or diverted to provide
medical benefits under RSA 100-A:52-a. The funds, if any,
providing medical benefits under RSA 100-A:52-b may be invested
pursuant to the provisions of RSA 100-A:15.
RSA 100-A:53-d, II (Supp. 2007) (amended 2008). Except under the limited
circumstances just described, the State itself pays the premiums under RSA
21-I:30 “within the limits of the funds appropriated at each legislative session.”
RSA 21-I:30.
Turning to the language of RSA 100-A:4, VII, two points are worth
noting. First, the section required “payment by the member of the full
actuarial cost of such credit” before the purchased service credit would be
granted. RSA 100-A:4, VII. The actuarial cost of the purchased credit was
defined to be “the product of the member’s annual rate of compensation at the
time of buy-in, multiplied by the sum of the member and employer contribution
rates in effect with respect to the member at the time of buy-in, multiplied by
the number of years of nonqualified service credit bought.” RSA 100-A:4,
VII(a). Thus, to purchase nonqualified credit, the member was required to pay
the amounts that both he and his employer would have paid into the member
annuity savings and state annuity accumulation funds, respectively, had the
member actually performed the service at the time he purchased credit for it.
Second, RSA 100-A:4, VII provided that the payment for the purchased
nonqualified service credit was to be “credited to the member annuity savings
fund.” Id.
Recalling that NHRS’ assets are to be allocated between the member
annuity savings and state annuity accumulation funds “according to the
purpose for which they are held,” RSA 100-A:16, and that the member annuity
savings fund accumulates contributions deducted from members’
compensation “to provide for their member annuities,” RSA 100-A:16, I(a), it is
clear that the money used to purchase nonqualified service credit was intended
to be used to fund the purchasing members’ retirement allowances and nothing
11
else. In addition, the intention is manifest that the State, not having received
the benefit of actual service, not itself incur any cost for the purchased credit.
For purposes of this appeal, we accept the division’s assertion that
“[b]ased on COBRA rates at the time this matter was before the trial court, it
would cost the State between $513 and $1,912 per retiree, per month to fund
RSA 21-I:30 as interpreted by the SEA.” We conclude that the legislature did
not intend nonqualified service credit purchased under RSA 100-A:4, VII to
count toward eligibility for health benefits under RSA 21-I:30 in substantial
part because the former statute mandates the payment of “the full actuarial
cost of such credit,” RSA 100-A:4, VII (emphasis added), yet defined that
actuarial cost as only the actuarial equivalent of contributions for the
members’ retirement allowances and did not include the cost of health care
benefits.
We note that the petitioners’ attorney conceded at oral argument that an
interpretation including purchased nonqualified service credit as creditable
service for the State under RSA 21-I:30 would have a significant fiscal impact,
a result we find contrary to the intent that the State bear no cost of the
purchased credit. We further note that while the parties dispute the
significance of a fiscal note attached to the bill enacting RSA 100-A:4, II, we
need not discern that significance, which is equivocal at best, nor need we rely
upon it, as the intent to bear no fiscal burden is made clear in the plain
language of RSA 100-A:4, VII itself.
We further conclude that had the legislature intended to allow the
purchase of credit qualifying for health care coverage under RSA 21-I:30, it
would not have allocated all of the purchase money to the member annuity
savings fund, a fund solely used to accumulate monies intended for the
payment of retirement annuities. As previously noted, where NHRS does pay
for all or part of the health benefits provided under RSA 21-I:30 to retired
group I members, see RSA 100-A:52, V, VI, it does so not from the member
annuity savings fund or the state annuity accumulation fund, but from a
separate fund used solely for the purpose of funding health benefits.
Ultimately, our conclusion is buttressed by a review of the Internal
Revenue Code (IRC) provisions referenced in the pertinent state provisions, as
suggested by the division at oral argument. RSA 100-A:4, VII(b) explicitly
refers to the type of service credit purchasable thereunder as “nonqualified
service credit within the meaning of section 415(n) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 [IRC], as amended.” RSA 100-A:4, VII. Section 415(n) of
the IRC defines “[n]onqualified service credit” as “permissive service credit other
than that allowed with respect to” certain governmental, educational or military
12
service. 26 U.S.C.A. § 415(n)(3)(C) (Supp. 2008). Permissive credit, in turn, is
defined in relevant part to mean:
service credit –
(i) recognized by the governmental plan for purposes of
calculating a participant’s benefit under the plan,
(ii) which such participant has not received under such
governmental plan, and
(iii) which such participant may receive only by making a
voluntary additional contribution, in an amount determined
under such governmental plan, which does not exceed the
amount necessary to fund the benefit attributable to such service
credit.
26 U.S.C.A. § 415(n)(3)(A) (emphasis added).
The division contends that because the plan referred to in 26 U.S.C.A.
§ 415(n)(3)(A)(i) is the plan providing retirement annuities administered by
NHRS and not the medical benefits plan provided for in RSA 21-I:26 to :36 and
administered by the commissioner of administrative services, see RSA 21-I:28
(Supp. 2008), nonqualified service credit has application only within the realm
of retirement annuities, not medical benefits. The distinction is not so clear,
however, as the IRC contemplates the payment of medical benefits, as well as
retirement annuities, by a pension plan, and, as noted previously, NHRS itself
funds such benefits in certain circumstances. Nevertheless, the limitations
imposed on such benefits provide ample support for our interpretation of the
state statutes at issue.
IRC section 401(h) provides, in pertinent part:
Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, and subject to
the provisions of section 420, a pension or annuity plan may
provide for the payment of benefits for sickness, accident,
hospitalization, and medical expenses of retired employees, their
spouses and their dependents, but only if —
(1) such benefits are subordinate to the retirement benefits
provided by the plan,
(2) a separate account is established and maintained for such
benefits,
13
(3) the employer’s contributions to such separate account are
reasonable and ascertainable,
(4) it is impossible, at any time prior to the satisfaction of all
liabilities under the plan to provide such benefits, for any part of
the corpus or income of such separate account to be (within the
taxable year or thereafter) used for, or diverted to, any purpose
other than the providing of such benefits,
(5) notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(2), upon
the satisfaction of all liabilities under the plan to provide such
benefits, any amount remaining in such separate account must,
under the terms of the plan, be returned to the employer . . . .
26 U.S.C. § 401(h) (emphases added). Thus, while nothing in 26 U.S.C.A
§ 415(n) appears to preclude the legislature from allowing the purchase of
nonqualified service credit that might be “recognized . . . for purposes of
calculating a participant’s [medical] benefit under the plan,” 26 U.S.C.A
§ 415(n)(3)(A)(i), had the legislature done so, it would have had to fund those
benefits through a separate account in order to comply with 26 U.S.C. § 401(h).
Nothing in RSA 100-A:4, VII or RSA 21-I:26 to :36 provides for such separate
funding.
Based upon the foregoing, we conclude that nonqualified service credit
purchased under RSA 100-A:4, VII applies as creditable service only with
respect to retirement allowances under RSA chapter 100-A. Because we reach
this conclusion based upon the plain language of RSA chapter 100-A, we need
not address the parties’ arguments regarding legislative history or
administrative gloss. See In the Matter of Liquidation of Home Ins. Co., 154
N.H. at 479 (noting that “[w]hen a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent”).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
14