THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2008-863
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LEE T. SCHWARTZ
Argued: October 21, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2010
Orville B. Fitch II, acting attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Lee T. Schwartz, appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) that he pay restitution in the amount of
$36,389.36 and denying his motion to dismiss. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On the evening of February 9,
2008, the defendant went with his friend Michael Stewart to a club in Laconia
called the Funky Monkey. Stewart was drinking heavily and using methadone.
Sometime during the evening, the defendant became angry when Stewart said
something about him in the presence of one or more police officers. The
defendant accused Stewart of “diming him out” by revealing information that
could get him into trouble. The defendant left the club without Stewart, but
Stewart called him on his cell phone and asked if he could have a ride home.
Stewart believed that he left the club near closing time, in the early morning
hours of February 10.
A short time later, Joseph Hurd, a friend of the defendant, went to a
Cumberland Farms store in Meredith with his girlfriend, Crystal Johnson.
Hurd testified that he saw the defendant in the store and the defendant offered
him and his girlfriend a ride to her house. Hurd testified that when he got into
the defendant’s pickup, he saw Stewart sitting in the front seat. He looked
“pretty beat up,” and Hurd asked him what had happened, but Stewart did not
answer. The defendant then replied that he and Stewart got into a fight
“because [Stewart] ratted [me] out about something.”
As the defendant began driving, he and Stewart argued. The defendant
asked Stewart, “[D]o you want me to kick your ass again?” When the
defendant made a wrong turn, Hurd asked to be let out. The defendant
stopped and let Hurd and his girlfriend out. As Hurd was walking away, he
heard the truck’s doors open and when he looked back he saw the defendant
standing by the passenger side of the vehicle. Hurd saw Stewart on the ground
and heard him yelling “as if he wanted me to go back.” Nonetheless, Hurd kept
walking because he “just wanted to avoid the whole scene.” Hurd testified that
he did not see the defendant punch Stewart but, he said, “it happened . . . I
know that.”
Sometime later, Stewart was picked up by one of Hurd’s relatives who
took him to the Meredith police station. Officer Wood testified that the left side
of Stewart’s face was swollen and that he had blood all over his face and shirt.
Stewart told the officer that after he left the Funky Monkey he was beaten in an
alley by two men in a silver truck. He later told Wood the men were in a white
car.
Stewart was taken to the emergency room at Lakes Region General
Hospital. He told the physician who treated him that he had been assaulted
outside the Laconia Clinic by strangers who kicked him in the face and
abdomen. A police officer at the hospital, Officer Marquis, noted that Stewart
was missing teeth, had lacerations and what appeared to be “boot marks” on
his face. Stewart had suffered a displaced fracture of his jaw and facial
lacerations that required stitches. He subsequently underwent two operations
to repair the damage to his jaw.
While at the hospital, Stewart told Officer Marquis that he had been
beaten by two males who alighted from a silver Saab. A few days later, Stewart
told Marquis that he had been attacked at the Cumberland Farms store in
2
Meredith. A surveillance video from the store in the early morning hours of
February 10 showed the defendant, Hurd and his girlfriend, and the
defendant’s truck in the store’s parking lot.
During an interview with the police on March 5, the defendant admitted
that he had been angry with Stewart the night they were together at the Funky
Monkey. When asked about the assault, he said that Stewart struck him and
that he was merely defending himself. He denied punching Stewart and stated
that he could not have struck Stewart as described because he did not have
any cuts on his hands. The police disclosed that the surveillance video from
Cumberland Farms showed the defendant was wearing gloves, which would
explain the absence of cuts. When the police told the defendant there was a
witness who saw the assault, he said, “[the] witness must be lying.” Stewart
testified at trial that he remembered the defendant opening the passenger door
of the truck and throwing him in the snowbank, and that he was covered in
blood and “pretty much [left] for dead.” He claimed, however, that he could not
remember who hit him.
The defendant was charged with one count of second degree assault,
alleging that he caused bodily injury to Stewart by striking or stomping him
repeatedly “under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value
of human life,” and one count of simple assault, alleging that the defendant
caused unprivileged physical contact to Stewart by hitting him. Following a
trial, a jury acquitted the defendant of second degree assault but convicted him
of simple assault. As part of his sentence he was ordered to pay restitution in
the amount of $36,389.36. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in sentencing him to
pay restitution for breaking Stewart’s jaw when the simple assault charge of
which he was convicted did not allege that he caused bodily injury or that he
hit Stewart in the face. Specifically, he contends that the State failed to prove
the requisite causal connection between the simple assault of which he was
convicted and the damages for which it sought restitution. The defendant
further argues that the trial court erred in not granting his motion to dismiss
the simple assault charge based upon insufficient evidence.
“Determining the appropriate restitution amount is within the discretion
of the trial court.” State v. Eno, 143 N.H. 465, 470 (1999); see RSA 651:63, I
(2007) (“Any offender may be sentenced to make restitution in an amount
determined by the court.”). “If the factual basis for restitution is disputed,
however, the State must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the loss
or damage is causally connected to the offense and bears a significant
relationship to the offense.” Eno, 143 N.H. at 470 (quotation omitted). In
reviewing the trial court’s ruling, we accept its factual findings unless they lack
support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State v. Shannon, 155 N.H.
3
135, 137 (2007). Our review of the trial court’s legal conclusions is de novo.
Id.
Courts are to presume that a defendant responsible for a victim’s loss
will pay restitution. See id. at 138-39. As set forth in RSA chapter 651 (2007
& Supp. 2009), “[r]estitution by the offender can serve to reinforce the
offender’s sense of responsibility for the offense, to provide the offender the
opportunity to pay his debt to society and to the victim in a constructive
manner, and to ease the burden of the victim as a result of the criminal act.”
RSA 651:61-a, I. “Restitution” is defined as “money . . . provided by the
offender to compensate a victim for economic loss.” RSA 651:62, V. “Offender”
is defined as “any person convicted of a criminal . . . act.” RSA 651:62, IV.
“Victim” is defined as “a person . . . who suffers economic loss as a result of an
offender’s criminal conduct.” RSA 651:62, VI. “Economic loss” is defined as
“out-of-pocket losses or other expenses incurred as a direct result of a criminal
offense, including: (a) Reasonable charges incurred for reasonably needed
products, services and accommodations, including but not limited to charges
for medical and dental care.” RSA 651:62, III(a).
The defendant argues that “because the ability to award restitution is
strictly circumscribed by the factual allegations in the charging document on
which the defendant was convicted,” the trial court erred in ordering him to
pay restitution. This argument, however, misconstrues the statutory
requirements for awarding restitution. Restitution is not an element of the
offense. Rather, it is “money . . . provided by the offender to compensate a
victim for economic loss.” RSA 651:62, V. Here, the defendant was convicted
of causing unprivileged physical contact to Stewart by hitting him. Stewart
suffered economic loss as a result of the defendant’s criminal conduct whereby
he incurred medical bills for treatment of his broken jaw. The record supports
a finding by a preponderance of the evidence that the physical injuries suffered
by Stewart were causally connected to the fact that the defendant hit him. See
State v. Armstrong, 151 N.H. 686, 687 (2005) (defendant may be held liable for
economic losses directly resulting from factual allegations that support the
conduct covered by the conviction). Further, and on the record before us, there
is no credible evidence that Stewart incurred his injuries in any other manner
than being hit by the defendant. We hold that the trial court did not err in
sentencing the defendant to pay restitution.
We next turn to the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred when
it denied his motion to dismiss the simple assault charge based upon
insufficient evidence. “To prevail . . . , the defendant must prove that no
rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences
from it in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.” State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 424 (2003). “When the
evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all rational conclusions
4
except guilt.” Id. “Under this standard, however, we still consider the evidence
in the light most favorable to the State and examine each evidentiary item in
context, not in isolation.” Id. “The proper analysis is not whether every
possible conclusion has been excluded but, rather, whether other rational
conclusions based on the evidence have been excluded.” State v. Tayag, 159
N.H. 21, 24 (2009) (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that because no one testified that he hit Stewart,
he may have been assaulted by someone else or may have sustained injuries in
a drunken fall. We do not agree that those are other rational conclusions
supported by the evidence in the record. As the trial court reasoned in denying
the defendant’s motion to dismiss, despite the lack of direct evidence of
physical contact between the defendant and Stewart, “looking at the record as
a whole, including the injuries, the statements made by [the defendant] that
were heard and recounted by Mr. Hurd . . . and the totality of the record, there
is circumstantial evidence that if accepted by the jury, if credibility issues are
resolved in favor of the State and if the evidence is taken in [a] light . . .
favorable to the State” would allow a jury to find that the State proved all the
elements of the charge beyond a reasonable doubt.
Viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the
light most favorable to the State, we hold that the only rational conclusion is
that the defendant caused unprivileged physical contact to Stewart by hitting
him.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5