THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-278
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ULYSSES MCMILLAN
Argued: February 12, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 29, 2009
Kelly A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Ulysses McMillan, appeals his
convictions for burglary, see RSA 635:1 (2007), and first degree assault, see
RSA 631:1 (2007), following a jury trial in Superior Court (Morrill, J.). We
affirm.
The record supports the following facts. In March 2007, the defendant
and Justine Mollomo co-signed a lease for an apartment. Sometime prior to
August 2007, Mollomo asked the defendant to move out. She removed all of
his clothing and personal belongings from the apartment, and he no longer had
a key. However, the defendant continued to visit the apartment on a regular
basis.
On August 3, 2007, the defendant entered the apartment by climbing up
the fire escape and entering through the bathroom window. Aaron Davis, an
acquaintance of Mollomo, was watching television in Mollomo’s living room
when he heard a loud noise, and subsequently saw the defendant coming out
of the bathroom. There was a physical altercation between the men, and Davis
was eventually able to remove the defendant from the apartment. Soon
thereafter, Davis left the apartment, and Mollomo locked the door behind him.
Within minutes of Davis’ departure the defendant returned, kicked the door in,
and assaulted Mollomo. Mollomo sustained serious injuries to her face and
neck.
At trial, the State introduced into evidence the recordings of two
emergency 911 calls made by Mollomo. Prior to trial, the court heard
argument regarding their admissibility, and, over the defendant’s objection,
ruled in favor of the State. The trial court, however, agreed to give the jury the
limiting instruction proposed by the defendant. For reasons unclear from the
record, the limiting instruction was never given to the jury.
At the close of evidence, the defendant offered a proposed jury
instruction on the elements of burglary. The trial court, however, gave its own
instruction, to which the defendant objected. The defendant was subsequently
convicted of both burglary and first degree assault. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant first contends that the trial court erred by
admitting the 911 tapes without providing a limiting instruction. This issue,
however, was not preserved for appeal.
As a general rule, we will not consider grounds of objections not
specified or called to the court’s attention at the trial. This
requirement, grounded in common sense and judicial economy,
affords the trial court an opportunity to correct an error it may
have made and is particularly appropriate where an error involves
a jury instruction.
State v. Eldredge, 135 N.H. 562, 564 (1992) (quotation omitted). Here, the
defendant did not bring to the trial court’s attention its failure to provide the
jury with the previously agreed upon limiting instruction at the time the tapes
were introduced, or any time thereafter. Therefore, this issue has not been
preserved for appeal, and we decline to address it.
The defendant next argues that the trial court’s jury instruction on the
elements of burglary was erroneous because: (1) it failed to give proper weight
2
to the defendant’s status as a leaseholder; and (2) it did not require the jury to
determine whether the defendant knew he was not licensed or privileged to
enter the premises. “The purpose of the trial court’s charge is to state and
explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the rules of law applicable
to the case.” State v. Johnson, 157 N.H. 404, 407 (2008) (brackets and
quotation omitted). When reviewing jury instructions, we evaluate allegations
of error by interpreting the disputed instructions in their entirety, as a
reasonable juror would have understood them, and in light of all the evidence
in the case. Id. We determine whether the jury instructions adequately and
accurately explain each element of the offense and reverse only if the
instructions did not fairly cover the issues of law in the case. Id. Whether or
not a particular jury instruction is necessary, and the scope and wording of the
instruction, is within the sound discretion of the trial court, and we review the
trial court’s decisions on these matters for an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id.
RSA 635:1, I, provides that a person is guilty of burglary if he enters an
occupied section of a building with purpose to commit a crime therein, unless
the premises are at the time open to the public or “the actor is licensed or
privileged to enter.” The trial court’s instruction on the “licensed or privileged”
element stated:
Now, a person who is licensed or privileged – a person who is
licensed or privileged to enter is not guilty of a burglary. A license
or privilege does not have to be explicit. A person has permission
to enter if he would naturally be expected to be in the premises in
the normal course of his habits or duties. The permission to enter
may be limited to a time when he would be reasonably expected to
be on the premises. The permission may also be limited to part of
the premises.
In deciding whether the Defendant was licensed or privileged, you
may consider among other factors his legal title, his relationship
with the other party, and the length of their separation, his current
residence, the circumstances of his prior entries, the type and
amount of his personal property within the apartment, and his
method of entry. You should consider all the evidence in this case
and decide whether the State has proven beyond a reasonable
doubt that the Defendant did not have a license or privilege to
enter the premises.
The defendant first argues that the trial court’s instruction did not
properly advise the jury as to the relevance of his leaseholder status on the
issue of license or privilege to enter. He asserts that the trial court’s
instruction improperly focused the jury’s consideration on whether he had
3
permission to enter the apartment, rather than his legal right to do so as a
leaseholder. The defendant further contends that “one who has a formal right
to enter a place cannot be convicted of burglary for exercising that right.”
To the extent the defendant raises an issue of statutory interpretation,
our review is de novo. State v. Offen, 156 N.H. 435, 437 (2007). We are the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a
statute as a whole. State v. Simone, 151 N.H. 328, 330 (2004). Our task is to
construe Criminal Code provisions according to the fair import of their terms
and to promote justice. Id. In doing so, we look first to the plain language of
the statute to determine legislative intent. Id.
RSA 635:1 does not define the phrase “licensed or privileged.” However,
we have previously interpreted the term “privileged” in this context to mean
whether a person “may naturally be expected to be on the premises often and
in the normal course of his duties or habits.” State v. Thaxton, 120 N.H. 526,
528 (1980). Further, “a person who is privileged may still commit burglary if
he enters at a time when he would not reasonably be expected to be present or
if he goes into a room as to which his privilege does not extend.” Id. at 529.
The defendant argues that, while this definition “may be proper” when a
person claims privilege by virtue of permission to enter the premises, it does
not extend to a person claiming to possess an independent “formal, legal
license” to be there. The defendant thus contends that the trial court erred in
its instruction because it allowed the jury to consider whether he would
naturally be expected to be in the apartment without giving proper weight to
his legal right to be there as a co-lessee. We disagree.
The defendant’s argument rests upon the assumption that a leasehold is
equivalent to a license to enter the premises under RSA 635:1, I. Under the
defendant’s interpretation, his interest in the apartment pursuant to the lease
is dispositive on the issue of license or privilege, leaving no room to consider
the underlying circumstances of his entry. Simply put, regardless of his actual
possession of the premises or any other relevant fact, his status as a
leaseholder would prevent a conviction for burglary. We do not believe the
legislature intended this result.
It is generally accepted that burglary statutes are intended to protect the
occupant or possessor of real property. People v. Glanda, 774 N.Y.S.2d 576,
581 (App. Div. 2004); Turner v. Com., 531 S.E.2d 619, 621 (Va. Ct. App. 2000).
At common law, “the crime of burglary was considered to be an offense against
the security of habitation or occupancy. It was not designed to protect
property or ownership, rather, the notion that people should be able to feel
secure in their homes.” State v. Hagedorn, 679 N.W.2d 666, 669 (Iowa 2004)
(brackets and ellipsis omitted); see also Turner, 531 S.E.2d at 621. Indeed,
4
many jurisdictions have determined that an ownership interest is not
conclusive on the question of license or privilege to enter the property for
purposes of burglary. See, e.g., Hagedorn, 679 N.W.2d at 670 (privilege to
enter property is not determined solely by ownership interest); State v. Lilly,
717 N.E.2d 322, 327 (Ohio 1999) (“Because the purpose of burglary law is to
protect the dweller, we hold that custody and control, rather than legal title, is
dispositive.”); Com. v. Majeed, 694 A.2d 336, 338 (Pa. 1997) (“[L]egal ownership
is not synonymous with license or privilege.”); Turner, 531 S.E.2d at 622
(defendant husband’s proprietary interest inferior to wife’s possessory interest);
People v. Scott, 760 N.Y.S.2d 828, 831 (Sup. Ct. 2003) (“Since burglary is
focused on the safety of an occupant . . . ownership rights are irrelevant.”).
In Hagedorn, the defendant husband was convicted of burglarizing the
home he had previously shared with his then estranged wife. Hagedorn, 679
S.W.2d at 667-68. On appeal, the defendant argued that he could not be
convicted of burglary for entering his own house. Id. at 669. In upholding the
burglary conviction, the court concluded:
[W]hether one has a right or privilege to enter property is not
determined solely by his or her ownership interest in the
property . . . . Rather, the focus under our burglary statute is on
whether the defendant had any possessory or occupancy interest
in the premises at the time of entry.
Id. at 670. The court thus looked at the circumstances surrounding his entry,
including that he no longer resided at the home, in determining that there was
sufficient evidence from which a jury could find that he did not have a
possessory or occupancy interest in the property at the time of the offense. Id.
at 671.
Similarly, in Turner, the defendant husband was convicted of
burglarizing the home he held jointly with his wife. Turner, 531 S.E.2d at 620.
On appeal, he argued that “the right of habitation protected by both the
common law and related burglary statutes is subordinate to title or ownership
interests.” Id. at 621. In rejecting this view, the court considered the totality of
the circumstances surrounding his entry into the home, including the
outstanding court order preventing contact with his wife, and concluded that
the “defendant’s proprietary interest was relegated to [his] wife’s superior
possessory interest and right to exclusive habitation.” Id. at 622.
We find these cases persuasive and similarly conclude that holding a
legal interest in property, such as a leasehold, is not dispositive on the issue of
license or privilege. Consistent with the majority of jurisdictions that have
confronted this issue, we believe that the fact finder must look beyond legal
5
title and evaluate the totality of the circumstances in determining whether a
defendant had license or privilege to enter.
To the extent RSA 635:1 was derived from the Model Penal Code, State v.
Robidoux, 125 N.H. 169, 172 (1984), we note that our holding is consistent
with Model Penal Code, section 221.1(1). Comment two of section 221.1(1)
states that the offense of burglary “has been limited in the Model Code to the
invasion of premises under circumstances especially likely to terrorize
occupants.” Model Penal Code § 221.1, cmt. 2 (Official Draft and Revised
Comments 1980) (emphasis added).
The defendant argues that our decision in State v. Moore, 12 N.H. 42
(1841), “supports the proposition that one cannot commit burglary by entering
premises one has a legal right to enter.” In Moore, the defendant was convicted
of burglary after entering the barroom of a public boarding house, at which he
was a guest. Moore, 12 N.H. at 42-43. In reversing his conviction, we noted:
As [the defendant] has authority to enter the house, so he may
enter any of the common public rooms. The barroom of an inn, is,
from universal custom, the most public room in the house; and
whether a traveller may, without permission, enter any of the
private rooms or not, he has clearly a right to enter the barroom.
Id. at 46 (citation omitted). While we recognized that the defendant’s authority
to enter the public area prevented his burglary conviction, we disagree that the
same type of authority extends to the circumstances of this case. As discussed
above, while the defendant had some proprietary interest in the apartment as a
co-lessee, this fact did not automatically give him license to enter under RSA
635:1. Unlike an entry into a public area, the entry here interfered with the
security and safety of the occupant, thus implicating the very interests the
burglary statute was designed to protect. See Hagedorn, 679 N.W.2d at 669.
We therefore conclude that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise
its discretion in its jury instruction. The trial court specifically instructed the
jury that it may consider “all of the evidence,” including the defendant’s legal
title to the property, in determining whether the defendant had license or
privilege to enter. The jury instruction also provided a list of relevant, although
not exclusive, factors, such as the defendant’s method of entry, his past
entries, and the length of their separation, which adequately conveyed to the
jury the meaning of the license or privilege element. Thus, the trial court
adequately and accurately explained this element of the offense.
The defendant next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion when it declined to give an instruction on the State’s burden to
prove that he knew he was not licensed or privileged to enter the apartment.
6
Although RSA 635:1, I, does not specify a mental state with respect to this
element, the defendant urges us to apply the mental state of “knowingly.” We
decline to do so.
RSA 626:2, I (2007) provides that a person is guilty of a felony “only if he
acts purposefully, knowingly, recklessly or negligently, as the law may require,
with respect to each material element of the offense.” A “material element of an
offense” is defined as “an element that does not relate exclusively to the statute
of limitations, jurisdiction, venue or to any other matter similarly unrelated to
(1) the harm sought to be prevented by the definition of the offense, or (2) any
justification or excuse for the prescribed conduct.” RSA 625:11, IV (2007). The
State concedes, and we agree, that the “licensed or privileged” element of RSA
635:1 is a material element of burglary as a justification or excuse for the
prescribed conduct. However, it argues that we should not apply a required
mental state, because to impose such a requirement would be contrary to the
purpose of the statute. We agree.
We have recognized that in some cases the mens rea requirement of RSA
626:2, I, should not apply. See State v. Polk, 155 N.H. 585, 588-89 (2007);
State v. Goding, 126 N.H. 50, 51 (1985). In Goding, we held that a required
mental state should not apply to the DWI second offense statute because of its
legislative history, plain meaning, and the relevant case law. Goding, 126 N.H.
at 51. Similarly, in Polk, we declined to apply a required mental state to an
element of the aggravated DWI statute in part because “imposing a culpable
mental state requirement may, in many cases, defeat the purpose of the statute
entirely.” Polk, 155 N.H. at 589.
Here, we have already noted that the burglary statute is intended to
protect the occupant of property. See Glanda, 774 N.Y.S.2d at 581; Turner,
531 S.E.2d at 621; Lilly, 717 N.E.2d at 327. Indeed, at common law, “the
crime of burglary was considered to be an offense against the security of
habitation or occupancy. It was not designed to protect property or ownership,
rather, the notion that people should be able to feel secure in their homes.”
Hagedorn, 679 N.W.2d at 669 (brackets and ellipsis omitted). This purpose is
echoed in the commentary to the Model Penal Code, upon which our statute is
based. See Model Penal Code § 221.1, cmt. 2 (stating that the offense of
burglary “has been limited in the Model Code to the invasion of premises under
circumstances especially likely to terrorize occupants”). Further, in describing
the unprivileged element of this offense in relation to the required “purpose to
commit a crime therein,” the Model Penal Code states that it was:
designed to isolate those situations where an intrusion for any
criminal purpose creates elements of alarm and danger to persons
who may be present in a place where they should be entitled to
freedom from intrusion. Their perception of alarm and danger,
7
moreover, will not depend on the particular purpose of the
intruder. The fact that he may be contemplating a minor offense
will be no solace to those who may reasonably fear the worst and
who may react with measures that may well escalate the criminal
purposes of the intruder.
Model Penal Code § 221.1, cmt. 3(c).
We agree with the State that this purpose “is achieved only if entry is
prohibited whenever the defendant has no license or privilege to enter,
regardless of whether he thinks he has or not.” To hold otherwise would ignore
the purpose of the statute. We do not believe the legislature intended such a
result. See Weare Land Use Assoc. v. Town of Weare, 153 N.H. 510, 511-13
(2006) (legislature will not be presumed to enact legislation “nullifying, to an
appreciable extent, the purpose of the statute”). This is because the perception
of the occupant is the same whether or not the defendant knows he is not
licensed or privileged to enter. Simply put, a defendant who believes he is
licensed or privileged, but who enters an occupied structure to commit a crime
therein, causes the same terror sought to be prevented as a defendant who
knows he is neither licensed nor privileged. Furthermore, we find it significant
that, while the legislature specified in RSA 635:2, I, that a defendant must
know he was not licensed or privileged to enter for purposes of criminal
trespass, it did not do so in RSA 635:1, I. We therefore cannot conclude it was
an unsustainable exercise of discretion to refuse the defendant’s requested
instruction.
The defendant next argues that there was insufficient evidence to convict
him of burglary in that the State failed to prove he did not have license or
privilege to enter. We disagree. In a challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond
a reasonable doubt. State v. Pepin, 156 N.H. 269, 280 (2007). In this case, the
jury heard evidence that the defendant had moved out of the apartment,
removed his personal property, and no longer had a key. Further, the jury
heard evidence regarding the nature of the defendant’s violent entry into the
apartment on the day in question. Based upon this evidence, a rational trier of
fact could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant did not
possess license or privilege to enter the apartment.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8