THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-945
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL ADDISON
Argued: April 28, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 6, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (N. William Delker, senior assistant
attorney general, & a. on the brief, and Mr. Delker orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, &
a. on the brief, and Mr. Rothstein orally, for the defendant.
Cassandra Stubbs and Brian W. Stull, of Durham, North Carolina,
staff attorneys, on the joint brief, for the American Civil Liberties Union
Foundation, as amicus curiae.
Barbara Keshen, of Concord, staff attorney, on the joint brief, for the New
Hampshire Civil Liberties Union, as amicus curiae.
Bernstein Shur, of Manchester (Andru H. Volinsky on the brief), for
Chief Justice Deborah T. Poritz (Ret.) and Professor Carol S. Steiker, as
amici curiae.
Brennan Caron Lenehan & Iacopino, of Manchester (Michael J.
Iacopino on the brief), for New Hampshire Association of Criminal
Defense Lawyers, as amicus curiae.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas,
III and Jason R.L. Major on the brief), for New Hampshire Associations of
Chiefs of Police, The New Hampshire Sheriff’s Association, The New
Hampshire Police Association, and The New Hampshire Troopers
Association, as amici curiae.
BRODERICK, C.J. This is the second opinion in which we address the
process we will follow in applying the provisions of RSA 630:5 (2007) to our
mandatory review of the defendant’s sentence of death. See State v. Addison,
159 N.H. 87 (2009).
I
The defendant, Michael Addison, was convicted of capital murder for the
killing of a law enforcement officer acting in the line of duty. See RSA 630:1,
I(a) (2007). On December 18, 2008, a jury recommended that he be sentenced
to death, RSA 630:5, IV, and four days later, the Superior Court (McGuire, J.)
imposed the recommended sentence, see RSA 630:5, V. His conviction and
sentence are before us on appeal. See RSA 630:5, X.
In Addison, we addressed the parties’ responses regarding the
recommended procedure and schedule to be followed in this appeal. In
response to our request that the parties address five enumerated questions,
they submitted joint answers to four of them but were unable to agree as to
“[t]he process that the court should follow in reviewing the sentence of death,
and in making the specific determinations required by RSA 630:5, XI.”
2
Addison, 159 N.H. at 89. While we concluded that formal rulemaking for
review of death penalty cases was not required, id. at 93, we also concluded
that “in the interest of fairness, because the parties do not have the benefit of
[any] prior interpretation of RSA 630:5 [by this court], we will determine the
standards to be applied to each of the three factors in RSA 630:5, XI prior to
our review of the merits.” Id. at 94.
Accordingly, on July 29, 2009, we issued the following order, which
states in pertinent part:
RSA 630:5, XI provides:
XI. With regard to the sentence the supreme court shall
determine:
(a) Whether the sentence of death was imposed
under the influence of passion, prejudice or any other
arbitrary factor; and
(b) Whether the evidence supports the jury’s
finding of an aggravating circumstance, as authorized
by law; and
(c) Whether the sentence of death is excessive or
disproportionate to the penalty imposed in similar
cases, considering both the crime and the defendant.
Pursuant to our opinion dated July 9, 2009, the parties are
ordered to file briefs addressing the following:
The process that the court should follow in reviewing
the sentence of death and in making the specific
determinations required by RSA 630:5, XI, and the
standards the court should apply to each of the three
factors enumerated in RSA 630:5, XI.
We will decide the standards this court should apply to RSA 630:5, XI(a)
and (b) as necessary in the merits appeal. At this juncture we address only
section XI(c), commonly known as comparative proportionality review. As we
have noted previously, “states that continue to require a comparative
proportionality review have developed standards.” Addison, 159 N.H. at 94.
However, in New Hampshire, RSA 630:5, XI(c) has not yet been construed
because the defendant’s case is the first death sentence imposed since the
provision was enacted. Thus, the issue of the standards to be applied under
RSA 630:5, XI(c) is a question of first impression. See id.
3
II
Paragraphs X to XII of RSA 630:5 establish the procedure we are
required to follow in reviewing a capital murder appeal when a defendant has
been sentenced to death. Paragraph XI specifically requires us to make three
determinations with regard to the sentence. The third of these determinations
is “[w]hether the sentence of death is excessive or disproportionate to the
penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime and the
defendant.” RSA 630:5, XI(c). This provision must be construed in light of
several decisions of the United States Supreme Court that outline
constitutionally permissible legislative choices for the administration of the
death penalty. We turn then to that history.
In 1972, the Supreme Court struck down capital punishment statutes in
Georgia and Texas that left the decision to impose the death penalty to the
uncontrolled discretion of the judge or the jury. Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S.
238 (1972). The Court held that death sentences imposed and carried out
under such statutes constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of
the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. Id.
Although five justices supported the per curiam decision, they did so for
varying reasons, with each justice writing a separate opinion.
Justice Douglas concluded that sentencing procedures which vested
juries with uncontrolled discretion in deciding whether to impose capital
punishment led to arbitrary application of the death penalty to “unpopular
minorities,” id. at 255 (Douglas, J., concurring), thereby violating the principle
of equal protection implicit in the ban on cruel and unusual punishments, id.
at 253-57 (Douglas, J., concurring). Justices Brennan and Marshall concluded
that the death penalty constituted cruel and unusual punishment in all
circumstances. Id. at 305 (Brennan, J. concurring); id. at 370 (Marshall, J.
concurring). Justice Stewart concluded that the death sentences in the case
before the Court were cruel and unusual because they were “wantonly” and
“freakishly” imposed upon a capriciously selected few, “in the same way that
being struck by lightning is cruel and unusual.” Id. at 309-10 (Stewart, J.,
concurring). Justice White concluded, based upon the infrequent imposition of
the death penalty and the lack of a meaningful basis for distinguishing cases in
which it was imposed from those in which it was not, that the discretionary
imposition of the death penalty constituted cruel and unusual punishment. Id.
at 310-14 (White, J., concurring). Accordingly, the Court reversed in part and
remanded for further proceedings. Id. at 240.
As a result of the Furman decision, many states revised their death
penalty statutes to comply with its constitutional commands. In 1976, the
Supreme Court upheld the post-Furman death penalty statutes of Georgia,
Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153 (1976), Florida, Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242
4
(1976), and Texas, Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262 (1976), but rejected as
unconstitutional the mandatory death penalty statutes of North Carolina,
Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280 (1976), and Louisiana, Roberts v.
Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325 (1976).
The Georgia statute upheld in Gregg narrowed the class of defendants
subject to capital punishment to those who committed homicide and against
whom the jury found at least one of ten statutory aggravating circumstances
beyond a reasonable doubt. Gregg, 428 U.S. at 196-97 (plurality opinion). In
addition, the Georgia statute allowed the jury to consider any other appropriate
aggravating or mitigating circumstances in determining the sentence. Id. at
197. The statute also provided for expedited direct review by the Georgia
Supreme Court of “the appropriateness of imposing the sentence of death in
the particular case.” Id. at 166. The state court was directed to determine
“[w]hether the sentence of death was imposed under the influence of passion,
prejudice, or any other arbitrary factor, and . . . [w]hether . . . the evidence
support[ed] the jury’s or judge’s finding of a statutory aggravating circumstance
. . ., and . . . [w]hether the sentence of death [was] excessive or disproportionate
to the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime and the
defendant.” Id. at 166-67 (quotation omitted).
The majority of the Court in Gregg rejected the argument that the death
penalty constitutes cruel and unusual punishment in all circumstances, id. at
187 (plurality opinion), 226 (White, J. concurring), and determined that the
Georgia statute was constitutional because it gave the sentencing authority
adequate guidance in the exercise of its discretion, id. at 195, 198 (plurality
opinion). The Court construed Furman as holding that the death penalty
“could not be imposed under sentencing procedures that created a substantial
risk that it would be inflicted in an arbitrary and capricious manner.” Id. at
188. As the Court explained, “Furman mandates that where discretion is
afforded a sentencing body on a matter so grave as the determination of
whether a human life should be taken or spared, that discretion must be
suitably directed and limited so as to minimize the risk of wholly arbitrary and
capricious action.” Id. at 189.
The Court made several observations regarding the specific features of
the Georgia death penalty statute and concluded that, unlike the procedures
before it in Furman, whereby unguided juries imposed the death sentence in a
“freakish” way, the new Georgia sentencing procedures
focus the jury’s attention on the particularized nature of the
crime and the particularized characteristics of the individual
defendant. While the jury is permitted to consider any
aggravating or mitigating circumstances, it must find and
identify at least one statutory aggravating factor before it
5
may impose a penalty of death. In this way the jury’s
discretion is channeled. No longer can a jury wantonly and
freakishly impose the death sentence; it is always
circumscribed by the legislative guidelines.
Id. at 206-07.
Concerning the requirement that the Georgia Supreme Court determine
“[w]hether the sentence of death is excessive or disproportionate to the penalty
imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime and the defendant,” id. at
167 (quotation omitted), the Court stated: “Since the proportionality
requirement on review is intended to prevent caprice in the decision to inflict
the [death] penalty, the isolated decision of a jury to afford mercy does not
render unconstitutional death sentences imposed on defendants who were
sentenced under a system that does not create a substantial risk of
arbitrariness or caprice,” id. at 203. In addition, the Court stated:
The provision for appellate review in the Georgia
capital-sentencing system serves as a check against the
random or arbitrary imposition of the death penalty. In
particular, the proportionality review substantially eliminates
the possibility that a person will be sentenced to die by the
action of an aberrant jury. If a time comes when juries
generally do not impose the death sentence in a certain kind
of murder case, the appellate review procedures assure that
no defendant convicted under such circumstances will suffer
a sentence of death.
Id. at 206.
In Proffitt v. Florida, decided the same day as Gregg, the Court upheld
the constitutionality of Florida’s post-Furman death penalty statute. Proffitt,
428 U.S. at 253 (plurality opinion). Under the Florida capital sentencing
procedure, if a defendant was found guilty of a capital offense, a separate
evidentiary hearing was held before the jury and the trial judge to determine
the defendant’s sentence. Id. at 248. The jury and trial judge were directed to
consider mitigating and aggravating circumstances in reaching a verdict on
death or life imprisonment. Id. at 248-50. The statute provided for automatic
review by the Florida Supreme Court of all cases in which a death sentence had
been imposed. Id. Although, unlike the Georgia statute, the Florida statute
did not require the state court to conduct any specific form of review, the Court
reasoned that “[s]ince . . . the trial judge must justify the imposition of a death
sentence with written findings, meaningful appellate review of each such
sentence is made possible.” Id. at 251. The Court observed that “the [Florida
Supreme Court], like its Georgia counterpart, consider[ed] its function to be to
6
guarantee that the aggravating and mitigating reasons present in one case will
reach a similar result to that reached under similar circumstances in another
case. . . . If a defendant is sentenced to die, [the Florida Supreme Court] can
review that case in light of the other decisions and determine whether or not
the punishment is too great.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
Although the Florida Supreme Court had “not chosen to formulate a rigid
objective test as its standard of review for all cases,” id. at 258, the Supreme
Court reasoned that “it does not follow that the appellate review process is
ineffective or arbitrary. In fact, it is apparent that the Florida court has
undertaken responsibly to perform its function of death sentence review with a
maximum of rationality and consistency” in that “it has several times compared
the circumstances of a case under review with those of previous cases in which
it has assessed the imposition of death sentences.” Id. at 258-59. The Court
stated that “[b]y following this procedure the Florida court has in effect adopted
the type of proportionality review mandated by the Georgia statute.” Id. at 259.
The Court concluded:
Florida, like Georgia, has responded to Furman by
enacting legislation that passes constitutional muster. That
legislation provides that after a person is convicted of first-
degree murder, there shall be an informed, focused, guided,
and objective inquiry into the question whether he should be
sentenced to death. If a death sentence is imposed, the
sentencing authority articulates in writing the statutory
reasons that led to its decision. Those reasons, and the
evidence supporting them, are conscientiously reviewed by a
court which, because of its statewide jurisdiction, can assure
consistency, fairness, and rationality in the evenhanded
operation of the state law. As in Georgia, this system serves
to assure that sentences of death will not be “wantonly” or
“freakishly” imposed.
Id. at 259-60.
In Jurek v. Texas, also decided the same day as Gregg, the Supreme
Court reviewed capital-sentencing procedures in Texas and concluded that,
although Texas had “not adopted a list of statutory aggravating circumstances
the existence of which can justify the imposition of the death penalty as [had]
Georgia and Florida,” its action in narrowing the categories of capital homicides
to intentional and knowing murders committed in five specific situations
“serves much the same purpose.” Jurek, 428 U.S. at 270 (plurality opinion).
Concluding that the Texas statute did not violate the Eighth and Fourteenth
Amendments, the Court stated:
7
By narrowing its definition of capital murder, Texas has
essentially said that there must be at least one statutory
aggravating circumstance in a first-degree murder case
before a death sentence may even be considered. By
authorizing the defense to bring before the jury at the
separate sentencing hearing whatever mitigating
circumstances relating to the individual defendant can be
adduced, Texas has ensured that the sentencing jury will
have adequate guidance to enable it to perform its
sentencing function. By providing prompt judicial review of
the jury’s decision in a court with statewide jurisdiction,
Texas has provided a means to promote the evenhanded,
rational, and consistent imposition of death sentences under
law.
Id. at 276.
Thus, the statutes upheld in Gregg, Proffitt, and Jurek contained three
provisions intended to address the concerns raised in Furman. First, each
provided for a bifurcated trial so that guilt and punishment would be
separately determined. Second, imposition of the death penalty was restricted
to cases in which certain aggravating circumstances were established and the
sentencing authority was required to consider the existence of mitigating
circumstances. This type of provision “guides and focuses the [sentencing
authority’s] objective consideration of the particularized circumstances of the
individual offense and the individual offender before it can impose a sentence
of death.” Id. at 274. Third, the statutes provided for automatic expedited
appellate review of death sentences as a check against their random or
arbitrary imposition.
In Woodson v. North Carolina, the Supreme Court held that North
Carolina’s mandatory death sentence statute was unconstitutional because it
lacked “the fundamental respect for humanity underlying the Eighth
Amendment . . . [which] requires consideration of the character and record of
the individual offender and the circumstances of the particular offense as a
constitutionally indispensable part of the process of inflicting the penalty of
death.” Woodson, 428 U.S. at 304 (plurality opinion). The Court identified
several constitutional shortcomings with the mandatory death penalty statute.
First, it held that such a statute is inconsistent with “one of the most
significant developments in our society’s treatment of capital punishment,”
which has been “the rejection of the common-law practice of inexorably
imposing a death sentence upon every person convicted of a specified offense.”
Id. at 301. Second, it held that such a statute fails “to provide a
constitutionally tolerable response to Furman’s rejection of unbridled jury
discretion in the imposition of capital sentences” in that “[c]entral to the limited
8
holding in Furman was the conviction that the vesting of standardless
sentencing power in the jury violated the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments.”
Id. at 302. Finally, it concluded that such a statute fails “to allow the
particularized consideration of relevant aspects of the character and record of
each convicted defendant before imposition upon him of a sentence of death.”
Id. at 303. As the Court explained,
[a] process that accords no significance to relevant facets of
the character and record of the individual offender or the
circumstances of the particular offense excludes from
consideration in fixing the ultimate punishment of death the
possibility of compassionate or mitigating factors stemming
from the diverse frailties of humankind. It treats all persons
convicted of a designated offense not as uniquely individual
human beings, but as members of a faceless, undifferentiated
mass to be subjected to the blind infliction of the penalty of
death.
Id. at 304; see also Roberts, 428 U.S. at 335-36 (plurality opinion).
The New Hampshire legislature also responded to the Supreme Court’s
developing death penalty jurisprudence. At the time the Court decided
Furman, New Hampshire law provided that “[t]he punishment of murder in the
first degree shall be death or imprisonment for life, as the jury may determine.”
RSA 585:4 (1955) (repealed); Laws 1915, 65:3. In State v. Martineau, we
acknowledged that we were bound by the Supreme Court’s decision in Furman,
and thus the death penalties on appeal violated the Eighth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the Federal Constitution. State v. Martineau, 112 N.H. 278,
279 (1972). Accordingly, we held that the trial court had the obligation to
vacate the death sentences. Id. at 280.
The New Hampshire legislature reacted to Furman and Martineau by
enacting a mandatory death penalty statute. See RSA 630:1, III (1974)
(repealed); Laws 1974, 34:1. As did other states, prior to the Supreme Court’s
decisions in Woodson and Roberts, New Hampshire initially misread the
holding in Furman to require that a constitutional death penalty statute had to
automatically require imposition of the death penalty upon conviction of capital
murder. In fact, in Woodson, the Supreme Court recognized that “[t]he fact
that some States have adopted mandatory measures following Furman while
others have legislated standards to guide jury discretion appears attributable
to diverse readings of this Court’s multi-opinioned decision in that case.”
Woodson, 428 U.S. at 298-99.
Following the Supreme Court’s 1976 decisions, the New Hampshire
legislature enacted a new statutory scheme establishing the procedure to be
9
followed in capital murder cases. See RSA 630:5 (Supp. 1979); Laws 1977,
440:2. Generally stated, that statute established a bifurcated process whereby
the jury would first consider a defendant’s guilt and in a separate proceeding
determine the penalty. During the sentencing hearing the jury was directed to
consider certain statutory aggravating and mitigating circumstances. If the jury
found at least one aggravating circumstance by unanimous vote, it could
impose the penalty of death. The legislation also established an automatic
review procedure before this court. Although the sentencing scheme for capital
murder enacted by the legislature in 1977 has been modified somewhat, it is
the basis of the current capital sentencing statute.
III
The current version of RSA 630:5 sets forth the procedure to be followed
in a capital murder case. Section I requires the State to provide formal notice of
its intent to seek the death penalty:
I. Whenever the state intends to seek the sentence of
death for the offense of capital murder, the attorney for the
state, before trial or acceptance by the court of a plea of
guilty, shall file with the court and serve upon the
defendant, a notice:
(a) That the state in the event of conviction will seek
the sentence of death; and
(b) Setting forth the aggravating factors enumerated in
paragraph VII of this section and any other aggravating
factors which the state will seek to prove as the basis for
the death penalty.
The court may permit the attorney for the state to amend
this notice for good cause shown. Any such amended notice
shall be served upon the defendant as provided in this
section.
Section II sets forth the requirement that a separate sentencing hearing
be held:
II. When the attorney for the state has filed a notice as
required under paragraph I and the defendant is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the offense of capital murder,
the judge who presided at the trial or before whom the
guilty plea was entered, or any other judge if the judge who
presided at the trial or before whom the guilty plea was
10
entered is unavailable, shall conduct a separate sentencing
hearing to determine the punishment to be imposed. The
hearing shall be conducted:
(a) Before the jury which determined the defendant’s
guilt;
(b) Before a jury impaneled for the purpose of the
hearing if:
(1) the defendant was convicted upon a plea of
guilty; or
(2) the jury which determined the defendant’s guilt
has been discharged for good cause; or
(3) after initial imposition of a sentence under this
section, redetermination of the sentence under this
section is necessary.
A jury impaneled under subparagraph (b) shall consist of
12 members, unless at any time before the conclusion of
the hearing, the parties stipulate with the approval of the
court that it shall consist of any number less than 12.
Sections III and IV set forth the procedure for considering aggravating and
mitigating factors at the sentencing hearing:
III. When a defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty
to the offense of capital murder, no presentence report shall
be prepared. In the sentencing hearing, information may be
presented as to matters relating to any of the aggravating or
mitigating factors set forth in paragraphs VI and VII, or any
other mitigating factor or any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b).
Where information is presented relating to any of the
aggravating factors set forth in paragraph VII, information
may be presented relating to any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b).
Information presented may include the trial transcript and
exhibits if the hearing is held before a jury or judge not
present during the trial, or at the trial judge’s discretion.
Any other information relevant to such mitigating or
aggravating factors may be presented by either the state or
the defendant, regardless of its admissibility under the rules
11
governing admission of evidence at criminal trials, except
that information may be excluded if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury. The state
and the defendant shall be permitted to rebut any
information received at the hearing and shall be given fair
opportunity to present argument as to the adequacy of the
information to establish the existence of any of the
aggravating or mitigating factors and as to appropriateness
in that case of imposing a sentence of death. The state shall
open and the defendant shall conclude the argument to the
jury. The burden of establishing the existence of any
aggravating factor is on the state, and is not satisfied unless
established beyond a reasonable doubt. The burden of
establishing the existence of any mitigating factor is on the
defendant, and is not satisfied unless established by a
preponderance of the evidence.
IV. The jury shall consider all the information received
during the hearing. It shall return special findings
identifying any aggravating factors set forth in paragraph VII,
which are found to exist. If one of the aggravating factors set
forth in subparagraph VII(a) and another of the aggravating
factors set forth in subparagraphs VII(b)-(j) is found to exist,
a special finding identifying any other aggravating factor for
which notice has been provided under subparagraph I(b)
may be returned. A finding with respect to a mitigating
factor may be made by one or more of the members of the
jury, and any member of the jury who finds the existence of
a mitigating factor may consider such a factor established for
purposes of this section, regardless of the number of jurors
who concur that the factor has been established. A finding
with respect to any aggravating factor must be unanimous.
If an aggravating factor set forth in subparagraph VII(a) is
not found to exist or an aggravating factor set forth in
subparagraph VII(a) is found to exist but no other
aggravating factor set forth in paragraph VII is found to
exist, the court shall impose a sentence of life imprisonment
without possibility of parole. If an aggravating factor set
forth in subparagraph VII(a) and one or more of the
aggravating factors set forth in subparagraph VII(b)-(j) are
found to exist, the jury shall then consider whether the
aggravating factors found to exist sufficiently outweigh any
mitigating factor or factors found to exist, or in the absence
of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating factors are
12
themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death. Based
upon this consideration, if the jury concludes that the
aggravating factors outweigh the mitigating factors or that
the aggravating factors, in the absence of any mitigating
factors, are themselves sufficient to justify a death sentence,
the jury, by unanimous vote only, may recommend that a
sentence of death be imposed rather than a sentence of life
imprisonment without possibility of parole. The jury,
regardless of its findings with respect to aggravating and
mitigating factors, is never required to impose a death
sentence and the jury shall be so instructed.
Section V requires that the trial court sentence the defendant to death if the
jury makes such recommendation:
V. Upon the recommendation that the sentence of death
be imposed, the court shall sentence the defendant to death.
Otherwise the court shall impose a sentence of life
imprisonment without possibility of parole.
Section VI sets forth mitigating factors:
VI. In determining whether a sentence of death is to be
imposed upon a defendant, the jury shall consider mitigating
factors, including the following:
(a) The defendant’s capacity to appreciate the
wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of law was significantly impaired, regardless of
whether the capacity was so impaired as to constitute a
defense to the charge.
(b) The defendant was under unusual and substantial
duress, regardless of whether the duress was of such a
degree as to constitute a defense to the charge.
(c) The defendant is punishable as an accomplice (as
defined in RSA 626:8) in the offense, which was committed
by another, but the defendant’s participation was relatively
minor, regardless of whether the participation was so minor
as to constitute a defense to the charge.
(d) The defendant was youthful, although not under
the age of 18.
13
(e) The defendant did not have a significant prior
criminal record.
(f) The defendant committed the offense under severe
mental or emotional disturbance.
(g) Another defendant or defendants, equally culpable
in the crime, will not be punished by death.
(h) The victim consented to the criminal conduct that
resulted in the victim’s death.
(i) Other factors in the defendant’s background or character
mitigate against imposition of the death sentence.
Section VII sets forth aggravating factors:
VII. If the defendant is found guilty of or pleads guilty to
the offense of capital murder, the following aggravating
factors are the only aggravating factors that shall be
considered, unless notice of additional aggravating factors
is provided under subparagraph I(b):
(a) The defendant:
(1) purposely killed the victim;
(2) purposely inflicted serious bodily injury which
resulted in the death of the victim;
(3) purposely engaged in conduct which:
(A) the defendant knew would create a grave risk
of death to a person, other than one of the
participants in the offense; and
(B) resulted in the death of the victim.
(b) The defendant has been convicted of another state
or federal offense resulting in the death of a person, for
which a sentence of life imprisonment or a sentence of
death was authorized by law.
(c) The defendant has previously been convicted of 2
or more state or federal offenses punishable by a term of
14
imprisonment of more than one year, committed on
different occasions, involving the infliction of, or attempted
infliction of, serious bodily injury upon another person.
(d) The defendant has previously been convicted of 2
or more state or federal offenses punishable by a term of
imprisonment of more than one year, committed on
different occasions, involving the distribution of a
controlled substance.
(e) In the commission of the offense of capital murder,
the defendant knowingly created a grave risk of death to
one or more persons in addition to the victims of the
offense.
(f) The defendant committed the offense after
substantial planning and premeditation.
(g) The victim was particularly vulnerable due to old
age, youth, or infirmity.
(h) The defendant committed the offense in an
especially heinous, cruel or depraved manner in that it
involved torture or serious physical abuse to the victim.
(i) The murder was committed for pecuniary gain.
(j) The murder was committed for the purpose of
avoiding or preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape
from lawful custody.
Sections VIII and IX concern life imprisonment sentences:
VIII. If a person is convicted of the offense of capital murder
and the court does not impose the penalty of death, the court
shall impose a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility
of parole.
IX. If the jury cannot agree on the punishment within a
reasonable time, the judge shall impose the sentence of life
imprisonment without possibility of parole. If the case is
reversed on appeal because of error only in the presentence
hearing, the new trial which may be ordered shall apply only to
the issue of punishment.
15
Sections X through XII set forth the requirements for review of the death
sentence by this court:
X. In all cases of capital murder where the death penalty
is imposed, the judgment of conviction and the sentence of
death shall be subject to automatic review by the supreme
court within 60 days after certification by the sentencing court
of the entire record unless time is extended for an additional
period not to exceed 30 days by the supreme court for good
cause shown. Such review by the supreme court shall have
priority over all other cases and shall be heard in accordance
with rules adopted by said court.
XI. With regard to the sentence the supreme court shall
determine:
(a) Whether the sentence of death was imposed under the
influence of passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor; and
(b) Whether the evidence supports the jury’s finding of an
aggravating circumstance, as authorized by law; and
(c) Whether the sentence of death is excessive or
disproportionate to the penalty imposed in similar cases,
considering both the crime and the defendant.
XII. In addition to its authority regarding correction of
errors, the court, with regard to review of death sentences, shall
be authorized to:
(a) Affirm the sentence of death; or
(b) Set the sentence aside and remand the case for
resentencing.
IV
Our task today is to construe RSA 630:5, XI(c), which provides: “With
regard to the sentence the supreme court shall determine . . . [w]hether the
sentence of death is excessive or disproportionate to the penalty imposed in
similar cases, considering both the crime and the defendant.” This is a matter
of statutory interpretation that we determine de novo. See State v.
Kousounadis, 159 N.H. 413, 423 (2009). The constitutionality of the statute is
not before us, and thus we presume it is constitutional. Duquette v. Warden,
16
N.H. State Prison, 154 N.H. 737, 745 (2007). The sole issue before us is one of
statutory construction.
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. Addison, 159 N.H. at 91. We look
to the plain language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that
language according to its plain and ordinary meaning, id., and we construe
provisions of the Criminal Code “according to the fair import of their terms and
to promote justice,” RSA 625:3 (2007). We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language it did not see fit to include. Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 423.
Additionally, we interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation. Id.
The current appellate review language of RSA 630:5, XI(c) is identical to
the language in the 1977 statute. That language, in turn, mirrors the
corresponding language of the Georgia statute, which the Supreme Court
declared constitutional in Gregg. The legislature intended for the 1977
amendments to the death penalty procedures in this state to comply with the
standards thought to be constitutionally mandated by the existing capital
punishment jurisprudence as set forth by the Supreme Court, including
comparative proportionality review. See N.H.H.R. Jour. 527 (1977) (committee
approved the bill “as a Constitutional updating of present statute relating to
capital murder, making it possible to punish such offenders by reestablishing
the death penalty”); N.H.S. Jour. 2701 (1977) (“It is quite clear that the law on
the books . . . is unconstitutional. . . . Probably the bill as it was amended in
the House would make the law constitutional under the most recent supreme
court decisions . . . .”); N.H.S. Jour. 2702 (1977) (Senate “trying to comply with
the courts” by amending the death penalty procedures); Senate Comm. on
Judiciary, Hr’g on HB 1137 (May 25, 1977) (Legal Assistant to the Speaker
testifying that bill intended to comply with “the new supreme court guidelines”).
We conclude that, in enacting the current death penalty statutory
scheme, the legislature intended to incorporate the then-existing jurisprudential
background of the United States Supreme Court, and we will interpret the
statutory scheme accordingly. See State v. Webb, 680 A.2d 147, 201 (Conn.
1996) (court construing comparative proportionality review provision in light of
its jurisprudential background). Moreover, given the identity of language
between the comparative proportionality provision in RSA 630:5, XI(c) and the
same sentence review provision approved in Gregg, as well as the
jurisprudential context within which the statute was enacted, the Supreme
Court’s interpretation of that Georgia provision is particularly informative.
Further, following Furman and Gregg, many states enacted identical or
similar comparative proportionality review provisions, or appellate review
17
procedures, within the same jurisprudential context as that of New Hampshire.
Thus, while United States Supreme Court jurisprudence is our paramount
guidepost in interpreting the meaning of RSA 630:5, XI(c), other states’ case
law, while not controlling, may prove helpful to our analysis. See, e.g., id. at
199-204; State v. Garcia, 664 P.2d 969, 977-79 (N.M.), cert. denied, 462 U.S.
1112 (1983); Tichnell v. State, 415 A.2d 830, 843-47 (Md. 1980), cert. denied,
466 U.S. 993 (1984); State v. Coleman, 605 P.2d 1000, 1020 (Mont. 1979),
cert. denied, 446 U.S. 970 (1980). Further, while some states that previously
conducted comparative proportionality review have since abandoned such
review, the judicial interpretation of the former statutes and procedures is
nevertheless instructive. See State v. Godsey, 60 S.W.3d 759, 782 n.15 (Tenn.
2001) (reciting states that initially conducted comparative proportionality
review but later either repealed the governing statutory provision or overruled
court decisions that mandated it). In addition, we are mindful that some
judicial interpretations of different aspects of comparative proportionality
review have changed over time. See, e.g., State v. Davis, __ S.W.3d __, __, No.
SC 89699, 2010 WL 2690371, at *22-23 (Mo. June 29, 2010) (detailing
changes in scope of case universe); Terrell v. State, 572 S.E.2d 595, 605 (Ga.
2002) (Fletcher, C.J., concurring) (comparative proportionality review under
Georgia law has changed over time), cert. denied, 540 U.S. 835 (2003); State v.
Brett, 892 P.2d 29, 66-69 (Wash. 1995) (changing the interpretation of “similar
cases”), cert. denied, 516 U.S. 1121 (1996). Ultimately, our task is to construe
the meaning of RSA 630:5, XI(c) in accord with the legislature’s intent in
enacting it.
V
Before turning to the meaning of RSA 630:5, XI(c), we underscore that
there is a substantive difference between traditional and comparative
proportionality review. Traditional Eighth Amendment proportionality analysis
is the “abstract evaluation of the appropriateness of a sentence for a particular
crime.” Pulley v. Harris, 465 U.S. 37, 42-43 (1984); see State v. Dayutis, 127
N.H. 101, 105 (1985); cf. State v. Farrow, 118 N.H. 296, 302-03 (1978). The
Supreme Court has occasionally struck down punishments as inherently
disproportionate, and therefore cruel and unusual, when imposed for a
particular crime. See Pulley, 465 U.S. at 43; Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277
(1983) (life imprisonment without possibility of parole for habitual offender
convicted of minor, nonviolent offenses disproportionate under the Eighth
Amendment); Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782 (1982) (death sentence for
felony murder when defendant did not take life, attempt to take life or intend to
take life disproportionate under the Eighth Amendment); Coker v. Georgia, 433
U.S. 584 (1977) (death sentence for rape disproportionate under the Eighth
Amendment). The death penalty “is not invariably cruel and unusual
punishment within the meaning of the Eighth Amendment; . . . neither is it
18
always disproportionate to the crime for which it is imposed.” Coker, 433 U.S.
at 591.
By contrast, comparative proportionality review “presumes that the death
sentence is not disproportionate to the crime in the traditional sense. It
purports to inquire instead whether the penalty is nonetheless unacceptable in
a particular case because disproportionate to the punishment imposed on
others convicted of the same crime.” Pulley, 465 U.S. at 43. Until Pulley was
decided in 1984, it was generally thought that any capital punishment statute
that did not provide for comparative proportionality review was constitutionally
deficient. However, in Pulley, the Supreme Court reviewed California’s death
penalty procedure, which did not include proportionality review, and noted that
its endorsement of the Georgia statutory procedures in Gregg did not mean
that “anything different is unacceptable.” Id. at 45. Regarding its holding in
Gregg, the Court stated,
While emphasizing the importance of mandatory appellate
review under the Georgia statute, we did not hold that
without comparative proportionality review the statute would
be unconstitutional. To the contrary, we relied on the jury’s
finding of aggravating circumstances, not the State Supreme
Court’s finding of proportionality, as rationalizing the
sentence. Thus, the emphasis was on the constitutionally
necessary narrowing function of statutory aggravating
circumstances. Proportionality review was considered to be
an additional safeguard against arbitrarily imposed death
sentences, but we certainly did not hold that comparative
review was constitutionally required.
Id. at 50 (citation and footnote omitted). The Court concluded that “[t]here is
. . . no basis in our cases for holding that comparative proportionality review by
an appellate court is required in every case in which the death penalty is
imposed.” Id. at 50; see also State v. Bland, 958 S.W.2d 651, 663-64 (Tenn.
1997) (“comparative proportionality review is not constitutionally required [and]
. . . state appellate court must evaluate the statutory language at issue and the
legislative intent in light of the jurisprudential background of Furman and
Gregg” in adopting an approach for state appellate review), cert. denied, 523
U.S. 1083 (1998).
Although several states subsequently amended their death penalty
statutes to repeal comparative proportionality review, our statutory provision
has remained unchanged since its enactment in 1977. See Addison, 159 N.H.
at 94. The manner in which state high courts conduct comparative
proportionality review largely is a matter left to individual states. See
McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 306-07 (1987); Getsy v. Mitchell, 495 F.3d
19
295, 306 (6th Cir. 2007), cert. denied, 552 U.S. 1244 (2008); Moore v.
Balkcom, 716 F.2d 1511, 1517-19, 1518 n.5 (11th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 465
U.S. 1084 (1984); State v. Copeland, 300 S.E.2d 63, 72 (S.C. 1982), cert.
denied, 463 U.S. 1214 (1983); Garcia, 664 P.2d at 979.
VI
The defendant argues that the purpose of comparative proportionality
review is to ensure a reasonable measure of consistency across all death-
eligible cases in New Hampshire. Quoting State v. Martini, 651 A.2d 949, 958
(N.J. 1994), the defendant argues that a “substantial distinction [must] exist[ ]
between capitally-sentenced and life-sentenced defendants, to limit capital
sentencing to those cases that are most aggravated and in which death
sentencing is the expected result, and to promote a rational, consistent, and
fair application of the death sentence.” He contends that, because New
Hampshire has rarely imposed capital punishment, retribution, rather than
deterrence, is the purpose underlying this state’s death penalty scheme.
According to the defendant, the standard for conducting comparative
proportionality review must reflect this purpose, such that a death sentence is
excessive or disproportionate, and thus must be vacated, if a great many other
similarly culpable and more culpable defendants did not receive a death
sentence, whether as a result of a jury’s sentencing decision or prosecutorial
decision-making.
The defendant proposes a two-tiered process for conducting comparative
proportionality review: first reviewing New Hampshire death-eligible cases, and
second comparing out-of-state death-eligible cases. The defendant argues that
when the court compares New Hampshire cases (tier 1), the pool should
include all death-eligible cases, even factually dissimilar ones, because “this
Court at the present time has, and for the foreseeable future will have, an
insufficiently large number of cases to permit sub-division into distinct groups
of similar cases.” He argues that when the court compares out-of-state cases
(tier 2), the pool should include all cases from American jurisdictions in which
the defendant was convicted of a factually similar murder (i.e., killing a law
enforcement officer acting in the line of duty), and the death penalty could have
been sought under that state’s law.
Under both tiers, the defendant advocates that we apply qualitative and
quantitative measures to compare his case with the pool of comparison cases
to assess proportionality. Ultimately, the defendant contends that if his death
sentence is not “clearly proportionate” by an “overwhelming margin,” or his
murder case is not at “the highest end of the culpability scale,” then we should
consider whether arbitrary factors explain the sentence.
20
The State argues that the purpose of proportionality review is to protect
the defendant against a death sentence imposed by the action of an aberrant
jury, not to ensure a reasonable measure of consistency in sentencing.
According to the State, comparative proportionality review considers whether
the defendant’s death sentence is “substantially out of line” with jury verdicts
in similar cases, such that a death sentence may be disproportionate if juries
have consistently imposed life sentences in similar cases, considering both
aggravating and mitigating factors. The State suggests that the defendant’s
death sentence is not necessarily aberrant or disproportionate in light of a life
sentence imposed in a similar capital murder case because that life sentence
may have been an act of mercy.
The State advocates for a comparison pool that is restricted to cases in
which the defendant was convicted of capital murder under post-Furman
statutes, the prosecution sought the death penalty, and a sentencing hearing
was held, regardless of whether a death or life imprisonment sentence was
imposed. The State discredits the defendant’s two-tiered approach, and argues
that because there are no similar post-Furman cases in New Hampshire in
which the defendant was convicted of the same statutory variant of capital
murder, we should “look to the decisions of the highest courts of other
jurisdictions which have undertaken proportionality review in capital cases.”
Additionally, the State argues that qualitative, precedent-seeking
analysis is the only appropriate method for conducting comparative
proportionality review because it accounts for the various aggravating and
mitigating factors that may or may not affect the outcome. According to the
State, our task is not to assess whether the death penalty was appropriate for
the defendant (i.e., the “deathworthiness” of the capital murder case). Rather,
the State argues, quoting State v. Bacon, 446 S.E.2d 542, 563 (N.C. 1994), that
our role is to determine whether the defendant’s death sentence is aberrant by
“compar[ing] the case at bar with other cases in the pool which are roughly
similar with regard to the crime and the defendant, such as . . . the manner in
which the crime was committed and the defendant’s character, background,
and physical and mental condition.” The State contends that “the goal of
proportionality review is not to determine mathematical symmetry between
capital sentences.” Ultimately, the State contends that vacating “a death
sentence as excessive or disproportionate is an exceptional remedy” and should
occur only in the most clear and extraordinary situations.
VII
The manner in which we conduct comparative proportionality review is
guided by three aspects of RSA 630:5, XI(c): (1) the meaning of “excessive or
disproportionate”; (2) the meaning and scope of “similar cases”; and (3) the
mechanics for discerning whether a death penalty is “excessive or
21
disproportionate” to the “penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the
crime and the defendant.”
We first construe the meaning of an “excessive or disproportionate” death
sentence. The terms “excessive” and “disproportionate” are not defined by the
statute. Commonly understood, the meaning of “excessive” includes
“characterized by or present in excess . . . exceeding the usual, proper, or
normal . . . very large, great, or numerous : greater than usual.” Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 792 (unabridged ed. 2002). Similarly,
“disproportionate” includes “out of proportion : UNSYMMETRICAL.” Id. at 655.
Thus, in this context, the phrase “excessive or disproportionate” generally
refers to a death sentence that exceeds the usual or that is out of proportion to
“the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime and the
defendant.”
“Excessive or disproportionate” was addressed in Gregg where the
Supreme Court reviewed Georgia’s death penalty sentencing procedures as a
whole and concluded that the discretion of the sentencing authority was
suitably directed and limited so as to minimize the risk of wholly arbitrary and
capricious action. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 189, 198 (plurality opinion). The
Court held that Georgia’s death penalty sentencing scheme satisfied the Eighth
Amendment concerns of Furman because “[n]o longer should there be no
meaningful basis for distinguishing the few cases in which the death penalty is
imposed from the many cases in which it is not.” Id. at 198 (quotation and
brackets omitted). In so doing, the Supreme Court first reviewed the
procedures set forth for guiding the jury’s sentencing decision, including the
aggravating and mitigating factors identified in the statute, id. at 197, and
concluded that the jury’s discretion in imposing the death penalty was
“controlled by clear and objective standards so as to produce non-
discriminatory application,” id. at 198 (quotation omitted).
The Supreme Court considered Georgia’s automatic appellate review
provision “[a]s an important additional safeguard against arbitrariness and
caprice,” and characterized Georgia’s comparative proportionality review
function in particular as comparing “each death sentence with the sentences
imposed on similarly situated defendants to ensure that the sentence of death
in a particular case is not disproportionate.” Id. The Court reviewed the
manner in which the Georgia Supreme Court had been conducting comparative
proportionality review, such that “if the death penalty is only rarely imposed for
an act or it is substantially out of line with sentences imposed for other acts it
will be set aside as excessive.” Id. at 205 (quotation omitted). The Supreme
Court concluded that
the proportionality review substantially eliminates the
possibility that a person will be sentenced to die by the action
22
of an aberrant jury. If a time comes when juries generally do
not impose the death sentence in a certain kind of murder
case, the appellate review procedures assure that no
defendant convicted under such circumstances will suffer a
sentence of death.
Id. at 206; see also id. at 224 (White, J., concurring) (“if the Georgia Supreme
Court properly performs the task assigned to it under the Georgia statutes,
death sentences imposed . . . wantonly or freakishly for any given category of
crime will be set aside”). Therefore, in performing comparative proportionality
review, the state appellate court monitors death sentences imposed by juries to
ensure that the particular death sentence on appeal is not the action of an
aberrant jury in relation to penalties imposed by other juries who faced similar
defendants convicted of similar crimes. See id. at 198 (plurality opinion).
We agree with the Connecticut Supreme Court that:
[T]he United States Supreme Court’s view of the appellate
process of proportionality review did not involve an inquiry
into whether it, or any other appellate court, might have
imposed the penalty if given that responsibility in any given
case. Nor was the focus on whether the particular defendant
in the case before an appellate court was more or less morally
blameworthy and deserving of the death penalty than any
other particular defendant.
Put another way, in the Supreme Court’s view the
appellate task under proportionality review was not to
determine whether the capital case before it in some way
was, on a scale of moral blameworthiness, roughly
equivalent to all other capital cases and, absent such rough
equivalence, to reverse the sentence. Nor was that review
considered to require that the capital case before the court
must affirmatively be shown, on such a scale, to have been
quantitatively different from all other cases in which the
death penalty was not imposed and, absent such an
affirmative showing, to reverse the sentence.
In the Supreme Court’s view, rather, the appellate
inquiry under proportionality review was whether the death
penalty imposed in a particular case was aberrational, within
the particular jurisdiction involved, with respect to similar
cases.
Webb, 680 A.2d at 204 (relying upon Gregg).
23
Our appellate review task under RSA 630:5, XI(c) differs from our review
of the death verdict for “passion, prejudice or any other arbitrary factor,” RSA
630:5, XI(a), and from our review for the existence of evidence supporting the
aggravating circumstances upon which the death verdict rests, RSA 630:5,
XI(b). While RSA 630:5, XI(a) and (b) focus upon the specific jury, evidence and
sentencing verdict in the defendant’s case, RSA 630:5, XI(c) requires a broader
view of the defendant’s case in relation to other juries facing similar defendants
convicted of similar crimes.
We hold that under RSA 630:5, XI(c) a death penalty is “excessive or
disproportionate” if it is aberrant from, or substantially out of line with, a
pattern of jury verdicts which demonstrate that juries generally do not impose
death in similar cases. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 205-06 (plurality opinion), 224
(White, J., concurring). This appellate monitoring function serves to ensure
that defendants will not incur a death sentence that is arbitrary and
capricious, or wanton and freakish, in relation to penalties imposed by juries in
similar cases, considering both the crime and the defendant. See Furman, 408
U.S. at 309-10 (Stewart, J., concurring); Gregg, 428 U.S. at 188, 195, 198
(plurality opinion), 224 (White, J., concurring). Accord, e.g., State v. Bordelon,
33 So. 3d 842, 868 (La. 2009); Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665; Webb, 680 A.2d at
203-04, 208; Brett, 892 P.2d at 69; Tichnell v. State, 468 A.2d 1, 17-18 (Md.
1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 993 (1984); State v. Williams, 301 S.E.2d 335,
356 (N.C.), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 865 (1983); Stamper v. Com., 257 S.E.2d
808, 824 (Va. 1979), cert. denied, 445 U.S. 972 (1980); Coleman, 605 P.2d at
1020; Coley v. State, 204 S.E.2d 612, 616-17 (Ga. 1974).
VIII
We next turn to the meaning of “the penalty imposed in similar cases,”
which dictates the inventory of cases we will rely upon to conduct comparative
proportionality review. This inquiry involves two aspects: the procedural and
substantive boundaries of “similar cases.”
Regarding the intended procedural boundary, commonly known as the
case universe, three primary options have emerged among the states. First,
generally stated, some courts have held that the “similar cases” universe
includes those cases in which a defendant may have been statutorily eligible
for a death sentence, but either the prosecutor did not charge capital murder
or seek capital punishment, or the defendant pled guilty to a lesser offense
(“death-eligible” universe). See, e.g., State v. Papasavvas, 790 A.2d 798, 804
(N.J. 2002). Second, other courts have limited the universe to cases in which a
defendant was convicted of capital murder, the prosecutor sought capital
punishment, a sentencing hearing occurred, and either a death sentence, life
imprisonment without possibility of parole, or a lesser sentence was imposed
(“death-and-life-imprisonment” universe). See, e.g., Tichnell, 468 A.2d at 17-
24
18. Third, some courts have restricted the universe to cases in which a
defendant was convicted of capital murder, the prosecutor sought capital
punishment, a sentencing hearing occurred, and a death sentence was
imposed (“death-only” universe). See, e.g., Copeland, 300 S.E.2d at 74. Our
task is to discern the case universe intended by the legislature in enacting RSA
630:5, XI(c).
The defendant advocates for a death-eligible universe. He contends that
in addition to jury verdicts, disproportionality in the imposition of death
sentences can originate in prosecutorial decisions not to seek the death
penalty. Quoting State v. Loftin, 724 A.2d 129, 147 (N.J. 1999), the defendant
argues that prosecutorial decisions may often be “understood as a calculation
of ‘deathworthiness,’ and this calculation . . . should be considered in
determining whether a particular death sentence was disproportionate.”
According to the defendant, reviewing all death-eligible cases would assure a
reasonable measure of consistent imposition of the death penalty across all
similar death-eligible cases. The State, however, urges us to adopt the death-
and-life-imprisonment universe, arguing, “[b]ased on the plain and
unambiguous language of RSA 630:5, XI(c), the history and purpose of
proportionality review, and public policy, this Court should adopt the approach
taken by the majority of jurisdictions and consider only cases in which the
defendant was convicted of capital murder, the prosecution sought the death
penalty, and a sentencing hearing was held.”
The statute does not define “similar cases,” and the term is not used
elsewhere within RSA 630:5 or otherwise within the capital murder statutory
scheme. The meaning of “similar” includes “having characteristics in common :
very much alike : COMPARABLE” and “alike in substance or essentials.”
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 2120. Thus, the
statutory term “similar cases” anticipates that the defendant’s death sentence
be compared only to cases that share characteristics, substance or essentials
that are common to or very much like those in the defendant’s capital murder
case. See RSA 630:5.
The term “similar cases” is located within the phrase “the penalty
imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime and the defendant.” RSA
630:5, XI(c) (emphasis added). References to the “punishment” or the
“sentence” to be “imposed” by the jury or judge, whether death or life
imprisonment without possibility of parole, appear throughout RSA 630:5. For
example, RSA 630:5, II provides that the trial court “shall conduct a separate
sentencing hearing to determine the punishment to be imposed” if the state
seeks the death penalty for a particular defendant who has been convicted of
capital murder. (Emphasis added.) RSA 630:5, V provides that: “Upon the
recommendation that the sentence of death be imposed, the court shall
sentence the defendant to death. Otherwise, the court shall impose a sentence
25
of life imprisonment without possibility of parole.” (Emphases added.) Under
RSA 630:5, the jury’s determination of the “penalty” to “impose” for the offense
of capital murder occurs only after a sentencing hearing during which evidence
is presented on aggravating and mitigating factors, RSA 630:5, IV. Viewing the
phrase “the penalty imposed in similar cases” in RSA 630:5, XI(c) in the context
of RSA 630:5 as a whole, the term “similar cases” refers to those in which a
penalty of either death or life imprisonment without possibility of parole was
imposed after a sentencing hearing was conducted.
Additionally, in New Hampshire, a sentence of death can be imposed only
if a jury unanimously finds the existence of predicate aggravating factors. RSA
630:5, IV. When predicate aggravating factors are not unanimously found by
the jury, it never reaches the decision of whether to impose a death sentence.
RSA 630:5, III, IV. Such cases would thus provide no guidance on whether a
defendant’s death sentence is “excessive or disproportionate” as related to
sentencing decisions of juries in similar cases that faced the life imprisonment
or death sentencing decision. Therefore, cases in which the jury determined
that predicate aggravating factors were not established by the evidence are not
“similar cases.” See Webb, 680 A.2d at 211 (because “proportionality review
requires a comparison of the decision to impose a death sentence . . .
comparison cannot be appropriately made where there was no such decision by
a fact finder”); Tichnell, 468 A.2d at 17 (the focus of comparative
proportionality review “is upon capital cases in which the sentencing authority
determined whether to impose a life or death sentence”); Flamer v. State, 490
A.2d 104, 122, 140 (Del.) (excluding cases from comparison in which jury
imposed a life sentence because no statutory aggravating circumstance was
found), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 865 (1983).
We hold that, in keeping with the plain language of the statute and the
fair import of its terms, the universe of “similar cases” is limited to those with
the following procedural characteristics: the defendant committed the offense
of capital murder; a separate sentencing hearing occurred; the jury found
predicate aggravating factors; and the penalty imposed was either death or life
imprisonment without possibility of parole. We therefore align with
jurisdictions that rely upon a death-and-life-imprisonment universe. Accord,
e.g., Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 666; Webb, 680 A.2d at 210; State v. Rhines, 548
N.W.2d 415, 455-56 (S.D.), cert. denied, 519 U.S. 1013 (1996); Satcher v.
Com., 421 S.E.2d 821, 845 (Va. 1992), cert. denied, 507 U.S. 933 (1993); State
v. Battle, 661 S.W.2d 487, 494-95 (Mo. 1983), cert. denied, 466 U.S. 993
(1984); Flamer, 490 A.2d at 139; Garcia, 664 P.2d at 978; Williams, 301 S.E.2d
at 355; Blake v. State, 236 S.E.2d 637, 644 (Ga.), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 960
(1977).
We reject the death-eligible universe urged by the defendant. He
contends that without comparing his death sentence to sentences imposed
26
upon similar defendants who committed similar murders, regardless of
whether such defendants were actually charged with capital murder,
comparative proportionality review will not achieve its purpose of assuring
evenhanded and consistent imposition of death sentences. The Supreme Court
rejected a similar argument because it was based upon a fundamental
misreading of Furman. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 199 (plurality opinion); Proffitt,
428 U.S. at 254 (plurality opinion). The petitioners in Gregg and Proffitt argued
that the arbitrary imposition of the death penalty prohibited by Furman is
inherent in a penal system that allows for prosecutorial discretion in deciding
whether to charge a capital offense, whether to seek the death penalty, and
whether to accept a plea for a lesser offense. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 199
(plurality opinion); Proffitt, 428 U.S. at 258 (plurality opinion). Furman,
however, stands for the proposition that a death penalty statute must guide
and channel the sentencing authority’s discretion in a manner that requires
examination of the individual circumstances of the crime and the character
and background of the defendant in order to protect defendants against the
arbitrary and capricious, or wanton and freakish, imposition of the death
penalty in accord with the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments. Gregg, 428
U.S. at 199 (plurality opinion); Proffitt, 428 U.S. at 258 (plurality opinion).
Thus, the focus of Furman is to protect criminal defendants from aberrant jury
death verdicts and not to regulate discretionary stages in a penal system that
remove them from consideration as candidates for the death penalty, or that
afford them leniency. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 199 (plurality opinion). Other
avenues exist for defendants to challenge the propriety of prosecutorial
decisions. See State v. Monahan, 125 N.H. 17, 26 (1984); see also State v.
Lawson, 314 S.E.2d 493, 500-01 (N.C. 1984), cert. denied, 471 U.S. 1120
(1985); Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 666 n.17. Our rejection of the death-eligible
universe is consistent with holdings in other jurisdictions that considered
similar or identical statutory language. Accord, e.g., Rhines, 548 N.W.2d at
455; Webb, 680 A.2d at 210-12; Battle, 661 S.W.2d at 494; Stamper, 257
S.E.2d at 824.
We also reject the death-only universe. Although neither party advocates
for this approach and the parties did not brief its merits, a significant number
of death penalty jurisdictions have adopted it. We have thus considered this
approach sua sponte and conclude that the legislature did not intend to
restrict the case universe to those cases in which the jury imposed a death
sentence. The plain language of RSA 630:5, XI(c) requires comparison of the
defendant’s “sentence of death” to “the penalty imposed in similar cases.”
(Emphasis added.) As earlier discussed, two penalties are possible under RSA
630:5: death or life imprisonment without possibility of parole. See RSA
630:5, IV. If the legislature had intended comparison cases to be restricted to a
death-only universe, it would have inserted the word “death” before the word
“penalty” so that we would determine whether a defendant’s death sentence is
“excessive or disproportionate” only in relation to “the [death] penalty imposed
27
in similar cases, considering both the crime and the defendant.” See
Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 423 (court will not add language that the legislature
did not see fit to include).
Moreover, a death-only universe would hinder us from performing our
comparative proportionality review function. In order to determine whether the
defendant’s death sentence is “excessive or disproportionate,” we must discern
whether there is a jury verdict pattern demonstrating that juries generally do
not impose the death sentence in similar cases. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 205-07
(plurality opinion). Considering only those capital murder cases in which
juries actually imposed a death sentence would impede our ability to determine
whether juries that faced the decision whether to impose a death sentence
generally did not do so.
Jurisdictions that rely upon a death-only universe have identified
concerns about whether an expanded universe invites speculation into the
comparative proportionality review process, thereby complicating or obscuring
such review. See Hunter v. State, 8 So. 3d 1052, 1073 (Fla. 2008) (in rejecting
a death-and-life-imprisonment universe and a death-eligible universe, the
court held that “comparison of non-death sentence cases . . . to those where
death was imposed would introduce factors completely unrelated to whether
the sentence was ‘unusual’” under state constitution), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct.
2005 (2009); State v. Palmer, 399 N.W.2d 706, 737 (Neb. 1986) (expanding
universe beyond cases with sentences of death invites appellate court to enter
into “intolerable speculation”), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 872 (1987); Copeland,
300 S.E.2d at 74-75 (court would enter a realm of pure conjecture if it
attempted to compare and contrast life verdicts with an actual sentence of
death because life verdicts represent acts of mercy and reflect the emphasis
upon individualized sentencing); Coleman v. State, 378 So. 2d 640, 647-48
(Miss. 1979) (concluding that death-only universe is a “constitutionally
adequate and judicially manageable” method and any expanded universe
would cause proportionality review to be “never ending and the benchmark for
comparison would be chronically undefined”). However, we conclude that
based upon the plain language of RSA 630:5, XI(c) and the fair import of its
terms, our legislature did not intend that the universe of similar cases be
confined to a death-only universe. See Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355 (comparing
merits of death-only universe with death-and-life-imprisonment universe).
Turning to the substantive boundary of “similar cases,” the parties
generally agree that the pool of comparison cases is, in some manner, limited
to the kind of capital murder for which a defendant was convicted; i.e.,
knowingly causing the death of a law enforcement officer acting in the line of
duty, RSA 630:1, I(a). The defendant argues that because the New Hampshire
pool is “insufficiently large” for tier 1 review, we should compare all first degree
murder convictions and, being mindful of dissimilarities, draw what guidance
28
we may from the outcomes of those cases considering the “circumstances
surrounding the killings, such as mental state and the degree of brutality or
torture employed.” For tier 2, the defendant argues that we should restrict our
review to cases involving the same kind of capital murder as in this case. The
State contends, however, that we should compare only cases “with a penalty
hearing in which the defendant was convicted of the same statutory variant of
capital murder as the case at bar.” We consider the plain language of the
statute to discern the meaning intended by the legislature, see Addison, 159
N.H. at 91, and construe the statute according to the fair import of its terms
and to promote justice, RSA 625:3.
As outlined earlier, the ordinary meaning of the term “similar” connotes
that a defendant’s death sentence be compared only to cases that share
characteristics, substance or essentials that are common to or very much like
the defendant’s case. We turn to the death penalty statutory scheme itself to
determine how the legislature identified the characteristics, substance or
essentials (hereinafter “substantive characteristics”) of a capital murder case
that a jury must consider when making its sentencing decision after a hearing
occurs under RSA 630:5.
As set forth by statute, the State can seek the death penalty only against
those defendants who have committed the “offense of capital murder.” RSA
630:5, I. The legislature has identified six kinds of capital murder in New
Hampshire, with particular qualifications:
I. A person is guilty of capital murder if he knowingly causes
the death of:
(a) A law enforcement officer or a judicial officer acting
in the line of duty or when the death is caused as a
consequence of or in retaliation for such person’s actions
in the line of duty;
(b) Another before, after, while engaged in the
commission of, or while attempting to commit kidnapping
as that offense is defined in RSA 633:1;
(c) Another by criminally soliciting a person to cause
said death or after having been criminally solicited by
another for his personal pecuniary gain;
(d) Another after being sentenced to life imprisonment
without parole pursuant to RSA 630:1-a, III;
29
(e) Another before, after, while engaged in the
commission of, or while attempting to commit aggravated
felonious sexual assault as defined in RSA 632-A:2;
(f) Another before, after, while engaged in the
commission of, or while attempting to commit an offense
punishable under RSA 318-B:26, I(a) or (b).
II. As used in this section, a “law enforcement officer” is a
sheriff or deputy sheriff of any county, a state police officer, a
constable or police officer of any city or town, an official or
employee of any prison, jail or corrections institution, a
probation-parole officer, or a conservation officer.
II-a. As used in this section, a “judicial officer” is a judge of a
district, probate, superior or supreme court; an attorney
employed by the department of justice or a municipal
prosecutor’s office; or a county attorney; or attorney
employed by the county attorney.
III. A person convicted of capital murder may be punished by
death.
IV. As used in this section and RSA 630:1-a, 1-b, 2, 3 and 4,
the meaning of “another” does not include a foetus.
V. In no event shall any person under the age of 18 years at
the time the offense was committed be culpable of a capital
murder.
RSA 630:1 (2007).
Under RSA 630:5, a criminal defendant who commits a particular kind of
capital murder, such as knowingly causing the death of a law enforcement
officer acting in the line of duty, may be subject to a capital murder sentencing
hearing. Cf. Brett, 892 P.2d at 68 (“Washington’s statute . . . does not contain
a myriad of capital crimes. It allows the death penalty only for one ‘kind’ of
murder, premeditated first degree murder with aggravating circumstances.”).
Thus, for a capital murder case to be substantively “similar” to the death
sentence on review, the defendant in the comparison case must have
committed the same kind of capital murder as set forth in RSA 630:1.
Accordingly, we hold that, in keeping with the plain language of the statute and
the fair import of its terms, the pool of “similar cases” is limited to those in
which the defendant committed the same kind of capital murder as the
30
defendant whose death sentence is under review. Gregg, 428 U.S. at 206
(plurality opinion), 224 (White, J. concurring).
We recognize that the substantive characteristics of “similar cases” also
include aggravating and mitigating factors under RSA 630:5. Significantly, a
jury considers whether to impose a death sentence for a particular kind of
capital murder only if it unanimously finds predicate statutory aggravating
factors beyond a reasonable doubt. See RSA 630:5, IV; RSA 630:5, VII
(identifying aggravating factors). If the jury finds such factors, it must consider
whether the aggravating factors sufficiently outweigh any mitigating factors, or
in the absence of mitigating factors, whether the aggravating factors are
themselves sufficient to justify a sentence of death. RSA 630:5, IV. Based
upon this consideration, the jury, by unanimous vote only, may recommend
that a sentence of death be imposed. RSA 630:5, IV. If it does so, the trial
court must impose a sentence of death. RSA 630:5, V. Therefore, the kind of
capital murder, along with the aggravating factors and any mitigating factors,
creates the unique factual framework within which the jury determines
whether death is the proper sentence; that is, the deathworthiness of the
particular defendant for the particular crime committed. See Gregg, 428 U.S.
at 197-98 (plurality opinion) (statutory aggravators and mitigators account for
the particular circumstances of the crime and the background and character of
the defendant). However, we conclude that the aggravating factors found by
the jury and any mitigating factors considered are best accounted for when
performing the mechanics of comparative proportionality review as discussed
later in this opinion. See Webb, 680 A.2d at 215.
Our holding is generally in accord with other jurisdictions’ substantive
definitions of “similar cases.” Accord, e.g., Davis, __ S.W.3d at __, 2010 WL
2690371, at *22-23; State v. Dunn, __ So. 3d __, __, No. 2001-KA-1635, 2010
WL 2011565, at *17 (La. May 11, 2010); Satcher, 421 S.E.2d at 845; State v.
Artis, 384 S.E.2d 470, 506 (N.C. 1989), vacated and remanded on other
grounds, 494 U.S. 1023 (1990); Colvin v. State, 472 A.2d 953, 967-68 (Md.),
cert. denied, 469 U.S. 873 (1984); Lawson, 314 S.E.2d at 503; Garcia, 664 P.2d
at 978; Coleman, 605 P.2d at 1021.
In summary, considering both the procedural and substantive
boundaries for “similar cases,” the comparison case inventory is restricted to
cases in which a defendant committed the same kind of capital murder as the
defendant whose death sentence is under review, a separate sentencing
hearing occurred, the jury unanimously found predicate aggravating factors,
and the penalty imposed was either death or life imprisonment without
possibility of parole.
31
IX
Having determined the meaning of “similar cases” for purposes of
creating a comparison case inventory, we address the mechanics of performing
comparative proportionality review. Because we must determine whether the
defendant’s death sentence is “excessive or disproportionate,” the mechanics
for reviewing the inventory of similar cases must enable us to discern whether
there is a pattern demonstrating that juries generally do not impose a death
sentence in similar cases, “considering both the crime and the defendant.”
Since Furman, two basic methods have developed for conducting
comparative proportionality review: the qualitative, precedent-seeking method,
and the quantitative, frequency method. See, e.g., Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 664;
Webb, 680 A.2d at 209. Although “[b]oth approaches share a common goal
which is to determine whether a particular sentence is disproportionate to the
sentences imposed for similar crimes and similar defendants,” they “are
fundamentally different in principle and application.” Bland, 958 S.W.2d at
664; see Webb, 680 A.2d at 209.
Generally stated, under the qualitative, precedent-seeking method, the
appellate court compares the specific case before it to other cases in which
defendants were convicted of the same or similar capital murders, by
examining all of the circumstances of the murder and the characteristics and
background of the defendant for each case in the “similar cases” inventory.
See Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 664; Webb, 680 A.2d at 209. In contrast, the
quantitative, frequency method involves statistical analysis, which seeks to
mathematically quantify the various factors leading to the imposition, or non-
imposition, of the death penalty, and the frequency with which the death
penalty is imposed in certain circumstances. See Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 664;
State v. Marshall, 613 A.2d 1059, 1076-82 (N.J. 1992), cert. denied, 507 U.S.
929 (1993); Papasavvas, 790 A.2d at 805. Specifically, this method involves
isolating capital murder cases into categories based upon certain aggravating
and mitigating factors to assess the frequency with which the death penalty is
or is not imposed for capital crimes within each category. See, e.g.,
Papasavvas, 790 A.2d at 805.
The defendant urges us to adopt both qualitative and quantitative
comparison methods. The defendant advocates for the court to supplement
qualitative, precedent-seeking review by using two quantitative measures: the
frequency method and a culpability ranking method. He contends that
application of these quantitative measures can be used to establish the
threshold for assessing whether his penalty is proportional to penalties
imposed in similar cases. The State argues that the legislature intended a
qualitative, precedent-seeking method as the exclusive approach for conducting
comparative proportionality review. We agree with the State.
32
The plain language of RSA 630:5, XI(c) anticipates that we conduct
comparative proportionality review in a fact-specific manner by “considering
both the crime and the defendant.” The precedent-seeking method fulfills this
statutory prescription and accords with the individualized sentencing
considerations that juries are required to engage in when deciding whether to
impose the death penalty. See Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355. Also, quantitative,
statistical approaches had not yet surfaced in published comparative
proportionality review jurisprudence in 1977, the year that the legislature
enacted RSA 630:5, XI(c) when it revised New Hampshire’s death penalty
scheme. See Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 664; Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355.
Moreover, in Gregg, the Supreme Court’s description of Georgia’s comparative
proportionality provision suggests that the appellate function incorporated a
fact-specific analysis, consistent with a precedent-seeking approach
traditionally employed by appellate courts. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 198, 205
(plurality opinion). As set forth earlier in this opinion, our legislature sought to
comply with this federal jurisprudence when it revised the death penalty
statute in 1977.
By its very nature, a quantitative, statistical method could not serve as a
substitute for individualized judicial assessment of similar cases afforded by
the precedent-seeking approach. See Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355. Indeed, a
statistical method that compartmentalizes capital murder cases into categories
may actually obscure, or at least unnecessarily complicate, the appellate task
of reviewing a death sentence imposed under a process that accounts for all of
the individual circumstances of the particular murder and the particular
defendant. See Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665 (“If a reviewing court allowed its
comparative proportionality analysis to be governed by statistical and
quantitative analysis, the concept of ‘individualized consideration’ [for death
penalty cases] . . . would be frustrated.”); Webb, 680 A.2d at 209 (noting that
the frequency, statistical method has been criticized as an unworkable attempt
to “quantify the unquantifiable”); Artis, 384 S.E.2d at 506 (court must
independently evaluate individual defendant and nature of crime committed to
conduct factual comparison).
Jurisdictions that have employed statistical methodology to conduct
comparative proportionality review did not supplant the precedent-seeking
method. Rather, they used the statistical methodology to supplement their
precedent-seeking analysis while placing greater weight on the latter. See, e.g.,
State v. Morton, 757 A.2d 184, 191-92 (N.J. 2000), cert. denied, 532 U.S. 931
(2001); Papasavvas, 790 A.2d at 807; see also State v. Pirtle, 904 P.2d 245, 277
(Wash. 1995), cert. denied, 518 U.S. 1026 (1996). We are not convinced that a
quantitative, statistical method would add value to the review process beyond
that already accounted for under the qualitative, precedent-seeking approach.
See Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355-56 (identifying risks associated with adopting
a statistical method of comparative proportionality review); Bland, 958 S.W.2d
33
at 665 (“our function in performing comparative review is not to search for
proof that a defendant’s death sentence is perfectly symmetrical, but to identify
and invalidate the aberrant death sentence”).
We hold that the precedent-seeking approach for conducting comparative
proportionality review is consistent with the plain language and fair import of
RSA 630:5, XI(c). Other jurisdictions have reached a similar conclusion based
upon similar or identical statutory language. See, e.g., Godsey, 60 S.W.3d at
785; Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665; Williams, 301 S.E.2d at 355-56.
In applying the precedent-seeking approach to the inventory of “similar
cases,” we will survey the case inventory and examine each case “considering
both the crime and the defendant,” RSA 630:5, XI(c). In doing so, we will
determine whether a germane jury pattern emerges demonstrating that the
defendant’s death sentence is excessive or disproportionate; that is, whether
juries generally do not impose a death sentence in capital murder cases similar
to the defendant’s case. This process is not limited to a comparison of the
aggravating and mitigating factors between the defendant’s case and each case
in the inventory, or a calculation of the number of death and life imprisonment
verdicts. See Artis, 384 S.E.2d at 505 (numerical disparity between life and
death verdicts among categories of murders similar to the defendant’s case is
not dispositive on proportionality review). Rather, we will review the particular
facts underlying the substantive characteristics of the case (the nature and
circumstances of the capital murder, the aggravating factors, and any
mitigating factors). These characteristics found by the jury establish the
unique footprint of the case within which the jury considered the particular
circumstances of the crime and the character and background of the particular
defendant to decide whether to impose the death penalty or life imprisonment
without possibility of parole.
Because the defendant’s death sentence is the baseline for comparison,
we will first review the entire record of the defendant’s case to gain a complete
picture of the facts and circumstances underlying the substantive
characteristics of the case. See, e.g., Bordelon, 33 So. 3d at 868 (comparative
proportionality review is “a cumulative process which focuses on a combination
of factors including the nature of the offense and the offender” (quotation,
ellipses and brackets omitted)); Godsey, 60 S.W.3d at 782 (“We examine the
facts of the crimes, the characteristics of the defendants, and the aggravating
and mitigating factors involved.”); State v. Bacon, 446 S.E.2d 542, 563 (N.C.
1994) (court considers all of the circumstances of the case including the
manner in which the defendant committed the crime, as well as defendant’s
character, background, and physical and mental condition), cert. denied, 513
U.S. 1159 (1995). Then, we will review the published decisions in each case in
the “similar cases” inventory to gain an understanding of the facts and
circumstances underlying the substantive characteristics of each case.
34
Considering the particular facts and circumstances through the lens of
the substantive characteristics found by the jury in each case, we will
determine whether a germane pattern of verdicts exists demonstrating that the
defendant’s death sentence is “excessive or disproportionate.” See Bland, 958
S.W.2d at 665 (a meaningful difference may exist between cases that reveal a
basis for a sentence less than death).
If . . . we find that juries have consistently been returning
death sentences in the similar cases, then we will have a
strong basis for concluding that a death sentence in the case
under review is not excessive or disproportionate. On the
other hand if we find that juries have consistently been
returning life sentences in the similar cases, we will have a
strong basis for concluding that a death sentence in the case
under review is excessive or disproportionate.
Bacon, 446 S.E.2d at 563 (quotation omitted).
Ultimately, we will not vacate a death sentence as “excessive or
disproportionate” unless it is aberrant from, or substantially out of line with, a
pattern of jury verdicts which demonstrate that juries generally do not impose
death in similar cases. See Gregg, 428 U.S. at 205 (plurality opinion)
(comparative proportionality review ensures that “if the death penalty is only
rarely imposed for an act or it is substantially out of line with sentences
imposed for other acts it will be set aside as excessive” (quotation omitted)); see
also Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665 (even when meaningful difference is not
apparent, a life verdict in one case does not render disproportionate the
reasoned and controlled decision to impose death in another similar case);
Brett, 892 P.2d at 69 (court holding that unless and until juries consistently
decline to impose a death sentence in similar cases, specific instances in which
a jury rendered a life imprisonment verdict will not establish that a defendant’s
death is excessive or disproportionate); Bacon, 446 S.E.2d at 566 (“fact that
one, two, or several juries have returned recommendations of life imprisonment
in cases similar to the one under review does not automatically establish that
juries have ‘consistently’ returned life sentences in factually similar cases”
(quotation omitted)).
Caution is warranted when considering the number and nature of
aggravating factors, and any mitigating factors, involved in the inventory case.
See, e.g., State v. Lord, 822 P.2d 177, 223 (Wash. 1991) (simply comparing
numbers of victims or other aggravating factors may superficially make two
cases appear similar, yet mitigating circumstances in one case may explain
jury’s verdict not to impose the death penalty), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 856
(1992). Some of the aggravating and mitigating factors identified in RSA 630:5,
VI-VII, relate to the nature of the crime committed by the defendant, while
35
others relate to the defendant’s background and character apart from the
particular crime itself. The statute does not rank by relative culpability the
types of capital murder under RSA 630:1 in relation to the aggravating and
mitigating factors under RSA 630:5. Rather, all types of capital murder, with
at least two aggravating factors found beyond a reasonable doubt are,
according to legislative judgment, equally subject to the death penalty.
Even when cases in the inventory share common aggravating or
mitigating factors with the case on appeal, the facts underlying the factors may
reveal meaningful differences. See Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665. It is left to the
jury to determine the deathworthiness of a particular defendant in light of the
circumstances of that crime and the character and background of that
defendant, informed by the particular aggravating factors and any mitigating
factors found in the case. Because the jury’s findings on the substantive
characteristics of a capital murder case give context for its determination of the
deathworthiness of a certain kind of murder, a reliable and meaningful
comparative proportionality review process must account for all of the
substantive characteristics found by the jury.
Finally, comparative proportionality review is not a search for perfect
symmetry or a mechanism for requiring uniformly consistent results. See
Bordelon, 33 So. 3d at 868; State v. Rimmer, 250 S.W.3d 12, 36 (Tenn.), cert.
denied, 129 S. Ct. 111 (2008); Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 665; Webb, 680 A.2d at
204. Perfect symmetry and uniform consistency are not possible under a
statutory scheme that requires juries to make individualized sentencing
decisions based upon the unique circumstances of a case, given the nature of
the crime and the character and background of the defendant. See Bordelon,
33 So. 3d at 868; see also Brett, 892 P.2d at 69 (“There is no constitutional or
statutory requirement to ensure an unattainable degree of identity among
particular cases which are invariably unique.”). Ultimately, no two capital
murder defendants are alike. Indeed, some discord may exist between the
statutory notion of comparative proportionality review considering “similar
cases” and the Eighth Amendment constitutional requirement for
individualized sentencing in the imposition of death sentences. See Rhines,
548 N.W.2d at 457; State v. Creech, 670 P.2d 463, 470 (Idaho 1983), cert.
denied, 465 U.S. 1051 (1984); Copeland, 300 S.E.2d at 72. “From a logical
stand point, of course, that which is unique is also incommensurable.”
Copeland, 300 S.E.2d at 72.
[C]omparative [proportionality] review cannot be permitted to
diminish the particularized qual[it]y of sentencing, since the
latter is now an absolute command of the [United States]
Constitution. By the same token, the final resolution of a
given appeal, if sentence is to be affirmed, should rest upon
36
the unique correctness of the result in the given instance
rather than its coarse resemblance to other cases.
Id. Despite this inherent tension, our holdings today provide an objective
framework for conducting statutory comparative proportionality review under
RSA 630:5, XI(c).
We agree with the parties that neither bears the burden of proof on
comparative proportionality review. The statute requires us to conduct an
independent review. RSA 630:5, XI(c). This inquiry is a question of law that we
must definitively decide de novo, and it is not amenable to traditional burdens
of proof. See Webb, 680 A.2d at 208 (“We cannot fail to decide the question by
resort to traditional notions of burdens of persuasion.” (emphasis omitted)).
Our role under 630:5, XI(c) is limited to determining whether the death
sentence imposed upon the defendant is “excessive or disproportionate” as
compared to “the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the crime
and the defendant.” See, e.g., Bland, 958 S.W.2d at 668 (“The appellate task
under [the state’s comparative proportionality review statute] is to compare
similar cases, not to gauge, in isolation, the culpability of a specific defendant
or the heinousness of a particular crime.”). Under New Hampshire’s capital
punishment scheme, the jury bears the sole responsibility to determine
whether the appropriate sentence, in light of the circumstances of the
particular murder and of the background and character of the defendant, is
death or life imprisonment without possibility of parole. See RSA 630:5, IV, V.
“[O]ne of the most important functions any jury can perform in exercising its
discretion to choose between life imprisonment and capital punishment is to
maintain a link between contemporary community values and the penal
system.” Woodson, 428 U.S. at 295 (plurality opinion) (quotations omitted); see
also Gregg, 428 U.S. at 190 (plurality opinion).
X
Our ability to conduct comparative proportionality review in the present
case is complicated by practical realities. No other defendant has been
convicted of a capital crime and sentenced to death in New Hampshire during
the post-Furman era. Further, since the legislature revised the death penalty
statute in 1977, there has been only one previous case in which the State
sought the death penalty and a separate sentencing hearing occurred. See
State of New Hampshire v. Brooks, No. 2008-0875 (N.H.) (appeal pending). In
Brooks, the defendant was convicted of capital murder and the jury imposed a
sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole. That capital
murder case, however, did not involve the killing of a law enforcement officer
acting in the line of duty.
37
The defendant’s sentence of death is thus the first sentence subject to
comparative proportionality review under RSA 630:5, XI(c). This circumstance,
however, does not by itself signify that his death sentence is excessive or
disproportionate under RSA 630:5, XI(c). See Rhines, 548 N.W.2d at 457
(“[T]he fact that [the defendant] is among the first to receive a death sentence
does not signify that his sentence is disproportionate. Otherwise, the death
penalty itself would be nullified.”). Nor does it render the comparative
proportionality provision ineffective or inoperative. Cf. Tichnell, 468 A.2d at 21
(court holding that dissimilarities among cases and limitations of in-state case
inventory “does not mean that we cannot complete the comparative review
process mandated [by statute]”).
Other state supreme courts conducting comparative proportionality
review for the first time in post-Furman death penalty cases have taken
different approaches. Some states have compared pre-Furman cases. See,
e.g., Jones v. State, 648 P.2d 1251, 1260 (Okla. Crim. App. 1982), cert. denied,
459 U.S. 1155 (1983); Gall v. Com., 607 S.W.2d 97, 113-14 (Ky. 1980), cert.
denied, 450 U.S. 989 (1981), and overruled on other grounds by Payne v. Com.,
623 S.W.2d 867, 870 (Ky. 1981); Smith v. Com., 248 S.E.2d 135, 151 (Va.
1978), cert. denied, 441 U.S. 967 (1979). The Gregg court endorsed this
approach, remarking, “This practice [of examining pre-Furman cases] was
necessary at the inception of the new [comparative proportionality] procedure
in the absence of any post-Furman capital cases available for comparison. It is
not unconstitutional.” Gregg, 428 U.S. at 204-05 n.56 (plurality opinion).
Other states have compared cases decided under former death penalty
statutes. See, e.g., Creech, 670 P.2d at 476 (comparing cases in which the
death sentences were vacated due to the unconstitutional mandatory
imposition of the death sentence, and also pre-Furman cases).
Still other courts have declined to perform comparative proportionality
review for a death sentence that represented the first of its kind in the post-
Furman era. See, e.g., State v. Shaw, 255 S.E.2d 799, 807 (S.C.), cert. denied,
444 U.S. 957 (1979), and overruled on other grounds by State v. Torrence, 406
S.E.2d 315 n.5 (S.C. 1991); see also State v. Felde, 422 So. 2d 370, 398 (La.
1982) (“there are no similar cases, and this sentence cannot be held
disproportionate to sentences in other cases”), cert. denied, 461 U.S. 918
(1983). For example, in State v. Shaw, the South Carolina Supreme Court was
required to conduct appellate review under a statutory comparative
proportionality review provision containing identical language to RSA 630:5,
XI(c). Shaw, 255 S.E.2d at 806-07. In reviewing the death sentences imposed
upon two defendants convicted of capital murder, the court noted, “We have
compared the death sentences imposed upon appellants with the sentences
imposed in all prior capital cases tried under the current death penalty
statutes and are satisfied that there are no similar cases against which the
38
proportionality of the sentences imposed upon appellants can be measured.”
Id. at 807 (footnote omitted). It concluded that:
The inability of this Court to compare this case with
any other similar cases does not require, however, that
appellants’ sentences be set aside. Any system of review that
requires a comparison of each case with all similar prior
cases must have a beginning. There will be a first case for
each type or category of capital case that may appear and
that first case necessarily cannot be compared to any other
similar cases. The first case must stand alone, otherwise
comparative sentence review would be forever impossible.
Id. The court affirmed the death sentences because the state’s death penalty
scheme complied with the constitutional guidelines outlined in Gregg, and
because it had “considered and overruled each assignment of error by
appellants,” “completed the statutorily mandated sentence review,” and
“searched the record . . . for any prejudicial error and . . . found none.” Id.; see
Copeland, 300 S.E.2d at 77 (court concluded that no similar case exists that
would permit meaningful comparative review of the death sentences before it
for review but nonetheless concluded that the sentences were appropriate and
neither excessive nor disproportionate).
Moreover, some courts have considered only in-state cases for purposes
of comparative proportionality review, reasoning that reviewing cases from
other states would “result in the comparison of death sentences that rest upon
differing considerations and standards.” Hunter, 8 So. 3d at 1073 (performing
proportionality review under state constitution). And another court reasoned
that “[i]n its jurisprudential history there is no indication that comparative
proportionality review was to be conducted on a national scale,” and that “given
that capital sentencing statutes differ from state to state, cases from other
jurisdictions are likely not ‘similar’ for purposes of comparative proportionality
review.” Godsey, 60 S.W.3d at 786.
Other courts, however, have compared cases from other jurisdictions to
conduct comparative proportionality review when no or limited similar in-state
cases are available. See, e.g., State v. Vickers, 768 P.2d 1177, 1191-92 (Ariz.
1989), cert. denied, 497 U.S. 1033 (1990); Hopkinson v. State, 664 P.2d 43,
88-91 (Wyo.), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 908 (1983), and superseded by rule as
stated in Grainey v. State, 997 P.2d 1035, 1040 (Wyo. 2000); Bell v. State, 360
So. 2d 1206, 1214 (Miss. 1978), cert. denied, 440 U.S. 950 (1979). For
example, in Hopkinson v. State, in undertaking its comparative proportionality
review function under a statutory provision identical to RSA 630:5, XI(c), the
Wyoming Supreme Court noted, “Since the passage of this statute, there have
been no other similar cases in this state.” Hopkinson, 664 P.2d at 88. The
39
court reviewed the facts of two in-state, post-Furman cases in which death
sentences had been imposed but were subsequently vacated because the
mandatory death penalty statute was declared unconstitutional. Id. at 89-90.
It observed that the in-state cases had limited value because “jury discretion
was out of the picture” and thus “[t]he cases can only be compared as to
circumstances in which a jury was willing to and did return a verdict of the
death penalty.” Id. at 90. To conduct its comparison analysis, therefore, the
court reviewed decisions from Florida and Georgia, stating that “[t]he decisions
from the courts of other states, from whence came the legislation under
consideration, are very persuasive when applying statutes which are identical
or very similar to those enacted by our own legislature.” Id.
Likewise, in Bell v. State, when reviewing the defendant’s death sentence,
the Mississippi Supreme Court was required to undertake a “[c]omparison to
similar cases to insure that the death sentence is not inflicted in a wanton or
freakish manner but in a consistent and even-handed manner.” Bell, 360 So.
2d at 1211. The court’s survey of in-state cases revealed that the last capital
punishment effected in the state was in 1964 and that in the nine years prior
to that, there were twenty cases affirming the death sentence for the crime of
murder. Id. at 1214. The court reviewed those cases and confirmed that
imposition of the death penalty would not be wanton or arbitrary under the
circumstances before it. Id. However, given the dated character of the in-state
cases reviewed (1954-1963) and the fact that the prior penalties were imposed
without full consideration of aggravating and mitigating factors as was required
under the current statute, the court elected to review similar cases in other
jurisdictions that had approved the penalty imposed and cited five cases from
Arizona, Florida, Georgia and Texas. Id. at 1214-15. The court concluded,
“Based upon the legislative determination as expressed in our capital murder
statute, our previous cases where the death penalty was upheld, and a survey
of similar cases in other jurisdictions, we cannot say that the punishment here
given is disproportionate to the crime committed.” Id. at 1215.
In the case before us, both the State and the defendant argue that we
should rely upon out-of-state cases to conduct comparative proportionality
review. RSA 630:5, XI(c) is silent on the jurisdictional scope of “similar cases.”
As discussed earlier, comparative proportionality review is not constitutionally
required under the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and,
thus, “the contours of proportionality review . . . have been left to state
determination since the [United States] Supreme Court has declined to impose
any specific model of review upon the states.” Copeland, 300 S.E.2d at 74.
Most states conduct comparative proportionality review with an in-state
comparison case inventory. See Tichnell, 415 A.2d at 854. We agree that in-
state case comparison is preferable. Local jury verdicts best express
contemporary community values regarding whether the punishment of death is
40
appropriate for a particular crime committed by a particular defendant. See
Woodson, 428 U.S. at 295 (when choosing between life imprisonment and
capital punishment, jury functions “to maintain a link between contemporary
community values and the penal system” (quotation omitted)). However, the
case before us presents the first New Hampshire death sentence that has been
imposed upon a defendant since the capital punishment sentencing scheme
was enacted after Furman and Gregg and is the first death sentence subject to
comparative proportionality review under RSA 630:5, XI(c). We must construe
provisions of the Criminal Code “according to the fair import of their terms and
to promote justice.” RSA 625:3. Accordingly, in this case we will consider
published opinions of out-of-state cases to the extent such comparison would
be meaningful for performing comparative proportionality review under the
framework set forth in this opinion. If New Hampshire’s death penalty
jurisprudence develops beyond this first death penalty case of its kind, we may
in the future find it unnecessary to consider out-of-state cases for purposes of
comparative proportionality.
Our holding today provides an objective basis for meaningfully
conducting the statutory comparative proportionality component of our
mandatory appellate review under RSA 630:5, XI(c). Death is different in kind
from all other forms of punishment, and meaningful appellate review is a
crucial safeguard to ensure that the death penalty is not imposed in an
arbitrary and capricious, or wanton and freakish, manner. See Gregg, 428
U.S. at 187 (plurality opinion) (“death as a punishment is unique in its severity
and irrevocability”); Furman, 408 U.S. at 306 (Stewart, J., concurring) (“death
differs . . . not in degree but in kind”). Comparative proportionality review
under RSA 630:5, XI(c) is one part of the appellate process afforded defendants
in this state convicted of capital murder and sentenced to death. Defendants
have a right to appeal the merits of the conviction and sentence. Additionally,
mandatory appellate review itself requires that we focus upon the specific jury,
evidence and sentencing verdict in the defendant’s case, RSA 630:5, XI(a), (b),
and then take a broader view of the defendant’s case in relation to other
sentencing verdicts rendered by juries who have faced similar defendants
convicted of similar crimes, RSA 630:5, XI(c). Comparative proportionality
review is, thus, the final step in a full appellate process encompassing a
defendant’s direct appeal and mandatory appellate review of both the capital
murder conviction and the death sentence. We will be “particularly sensitive to
insure that every safeguard is observed.” State v. Johnson, 134 N.H. 570, 577
(1991); see Parker v. Dugger, 498 U.S. 308, 321 (1991) (meaningful appellate
review plays a crucial role “in ensuring that the death penalty is not imposed
arbitrarily or irrationally”).
So ordered.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
41