THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2008-930
FOG MOTORSPORTS #3, INC.
v.
ARCTIC CAT SALES, INC.
Argued: June 11, 2009
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2009
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Steven E. Grill and Leigh
S. Willey on the brief, and Mr. Grill orally), for the plaintiff.
Robins, Kaplan, Miller & Ciresi L.L.P., of Boston, Massachusetts
(Alexander G. Henlin on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
DALIANIS, J. The plaintiff, FOG Motorsports #3, Inc. (FOG), appeals an
order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) granting a motion to dismiss by the
defendant, Arctic Cat Sales, Inc (Arctic Cat). We vacate and remand.
FOG entered into a dealership agreement with Arctic Cat, a
manufacturer of snowmobiles, on July 1, 2005. The agreement included a
forum selection clause:
Any claim, action, or other dispute between the parties as to the
terms of the Agreement, or as to the performance or
nonperformance of either party under the Agreement, or as to any
other matter arising out of the parties’ relationship, shall be
resolved by the State and Federal Courts of the State of Minnesota.
The agreement also included a choice of law clause, stating that the agreement
“shall be governed, interpreted, and construed under the laws of the State of
Minnesota, excluding that body of law known as the choice of laws.” The
agreement further provided that in the event that the relationship between
FOG and Arctic Cat was terminated, Arctic Cat had the option, but not the
obligation, to repurchase any of FOG’s remaining Arctic Cat inventory. In April
2007, FOG terminated its relationship with Arctic Cat. Arctic Cat refused to
repurchase FOG’s remaining inventory.
In November 2007, FOG commenced an action against Arctic Cat to
enforce its rights under RSA chapter 357-C (2009) (Dealership Act) and to
recover damages. Arctic Cat moved to dismiss, arguing that FOG is required to
litigate its claims in Minnesota pursuant to the forum selection clause of the
agreement. FOG objected, contending that the parties’ agreement and ensuing
relationship are governed by the Dealership Act.
The trial court ruled that even if the Dealership Act applied to the parties’
agreement, the forum selection clause was enforceable. Accordingly, it
dismissed the case without needing to decide whether the Dealership Act, in
fact, applied to the parties’ agreement and whether the choice of law provision
was enforceable. FOG appealed, arguing that the Dealership Act renders the
forum selection clause unenforceable. We too assume, without deciding, that
the Dealership Act applies and determine whether it renders the forum clause
unenforceable.
Resolving this issue requires that we interpret the Dealership Act. We
review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. In re Kirsten P., 158
N.H. 158, 160 (2008). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final
arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Id. When examining the language of the statute, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation. Liam Hooksett, LLC v. Boynton, 157
N.H. 625, 628 (2008).
“New Hampshire has, by statute, sanctioned the enforcement of forum
selection clauses provided that the parties have agreed in writing that an action
shall be brought only in another state.” Strafford Technology v. Camcar Div. Of
Textron, 147 N.H. 174, 176 (2001) (quotation and ellipses omitted); see RSA
508-A:3 (1997). “Even in these instances, a forum selection clause that confers
2
exclusive jurisdiction may still be unenforceable if enumerated statutory
exceptions apply.” Strafford Technology, 147 N.H. at 176; see RSA 508-A:3. In
particular, a court may not enforce a forum selection clause where it “is
required by statute to entertain the action.” RSA 508-A:3, I (emphasis added).
Here, the Dealership Act does require that a New Hampshire forum entertain
an action brought pursuant to the Dealership Act.
RSA 357-C:6, III provides that
Every new selling agreement . . . between a motor vehicle dealer
and a manufacturer or distributor shall include, and if omitted,
shall be presumed to include, the following language: ‘If any
provision herein contravenes the valid laws or regulations of the
state of New Hampshire, such provision shall be deemed to be
modified to conform to such laws or regulations; or if any provision
herein . . . denies or purports to deny access to the procedures,
forums, or remedies provided for by such laws or regulations, such
provisions shall be void and unenforceable; and all other terms
and provisions of this agreement shall remain in full force and
effect.
Additionally, RSA 357-C:2 provides: “Any person who engages directly or
indirectly in purposeful contacts within this state in connection with the
offering or advertising for sale of, or has business dealings with respect to, a
motor vehicle within the state shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
and the jurisdiction of the courts of this state.” (Emphasis added.)
We interpret RSA 357-C:6, III and RSA 357-C:2 to require that a New
Hampshire forum, including the superior court, entertain any action brought
under the Dealership Act and to render unenforceable any forum selection
clause that would prevent it from so doing. Thus, we hold that the trial court
erred in dismissing FOG’s suit. Based upon our holding, we remand to the
trial court to determine whether the parties’ choice of law clause is enforceable.
See Lessard v. Clarke, 143 N.H. 555, 556 (1999) (courts must consider: “(1)
the predictability of results; (2) the maintenance of reasonable orderliness and
good relationships among the States in our federal system; (3) simplification of
the judicial task; (4) advancement by the court of its own State’s governmental
interests rather than those of other States; and (5) the court’s preference for
what it regards as the sounder rule of law” (quotation omitted)). If it is not, the
trial court shall also determine whether the Dealership Act applies to the
parties’ agreement.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
3