THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2008-370
CONTINENTAL PAVING, INC. & a.
v.
TOWN OF LITCHFIELD
Argued: February 18, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 9, 2009
Hage & Hodes, P.A., of Manchester (David E. LeFevre on the brief and
orally), for the appellant.
Gottesman & Hollis P.A., of Nashua (Morgan A. Hollis on the brief and
orally), for the appellees.
HICKS, J. The appellant, Town of Litchfield (Town), appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Groff, J.), adopting an order of the Judicial Referee
(Perkins, J.), vacating a decision of the Town’s zoning board of adjustment
(ZBA) that had denied a special exception to the appellees, Continental Paving,
Inc. (Continental) and New England Power Company (NEPC). We affirm.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following facts.
Continental sought a special exception to build a gravel road over land owned
by NEPC in order to access a parcel in Londonderry owned by the Londonderry
Fish and Game Club. The road would be located in the Wetlands Conservation
District (WCD) as delineated in section 1204.00 of the Town of Litchfield Zoning
Ordinance (LZO). The proposed road would cross a wetland and would come
within sixty-seven feet of a vernal pool.
After a hearing, the ZBA denied the special exception. The ZBA’s
minutes indicate concern by some board members about the road’s proximity
to the vernal pool. The ZBA held a rehearing and received a number of
additional exhibits including a “Conservation Fact Sheet” promulgated by the
New Hampshire Audubon Society. The ZBA again denied the special exception,
referencing, among other things, a recommendation by the New Hampshire
Audubon Society that a 100-foot buffer of natural vegetation be maintained
around vernal pools. The ZBA denied a second rehearing and the appellees
appealed to the superior court. See RSA 677:4 (2008).
The trial court vacated the ZBA’s decision and granted the request for
special exception. Upon reconsideration, the court vacated its grant of a
special exception but remanded the matter to the ZBA with instructions to
grant the special exception.
On appeal, the Town argues that the trial court erred: (1) in concluding
that a determination of the relevant criteria for a special exception required
specialized scientific knowledge; (2) in concluding that the ZBA was bound to
accept the conclusions of Continental’s experts when the record supports a
finding that those experts lacked credibility; (3) in concluding that the ZBA
could not use information about vernal pools in general to educate itself,
evaluate the experts’ opinions and come to its own conclusions; and (4) by
acting as a “‘super zoning board’ and substitut[ing] its own judgment for that of
the ZBA.” The Town also argues that the ZBA’s denial of the special exception
was lawful and reasonable.
Our standard of review is well-settled:
We will uphold the trial court’s decision unless the evidence
does not support it or it is legally erroneous. For its part, the trial
court must treat all factual findings of the ZBA as prima facie
lawful and reasonable. RSA 677:6 [(2008)]. It may set aside a ZBA
decision if it finds by the balance of probabilities, based on the
evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision was unreasonable.
Chester Rod & Gun Club v. Town of Chester, 152 N.H. 577, 580 (2005)
(quotation, citation and brackets omitted).
We first review the relevant provisions of the LZO and the ZBA’s findings.
Under section 1208.00(a), roads are permitted in the WCD by special
exception. Litchfield, N.H., Zoning Ordinance § 1208.00(a). Applications for a
2
special exception must be referred for review and comment to the planning
board, the conservation commission and the health officer, and the proposed
uses must meet the criteria listed in section 1208.01,1 see id. § 1208.00, which
provides, inter alia:
Criteria for Granting a Special Exception. Special exceptions for
uses within the Wetlands Conservation District may be granted
provided that the following conditions are met. The burden of
proof shall be upon the applicant who shall furnish such
engineering and hydrological data as is reasonably necessary.
Economic advantage alone is not reason for granting a special
exception.
. . . .
b. It can be shown that the proposed use is not in conflict with
any and all of the purposes and intentions listed in Section
1200.01 of this Ordinance.
Id. § 1208.01. Section 1200.01, in turn, provides in relevant part:
Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to protect
the public health, safety and general welfare by controlling and
guiding the use of land areas which have been found to be
subjected to high water tables for extended periods of time. It is
intended that this ordinance shall:
. . .
c. Protect unique, ecologically sensitive and unusual natural
areas.
d. Protect wildlife habitats, wildlife corridors and maintain
ecological balances.
e. Protect potential water supplies and existing aquifers (water-
bearing stratum) and aquifer recharge areas.
Id. § 1200.01.
1 Although section 1208.00 actually provides that the proposed uses must “meet the criteria
listed in Section 1200.01,” the numerical reference appears to be a misprint. Section 1200.01
states the purpose and intent of the ordinance. Section 1208.01 is entitled “Criteria for
Granting a Special Exception” and one of the criteria is itself that “[i]t can be shown that the
proposed use is not in conflict with any and all of the purposes and intentions listed in Section
1200.01 of this Ordinance.”
3
Finally, section 1207.03 of the LZO requires buffers in the WCD of “at
least a fifty (50) foot wide area of undisturbed naturally vegetated upland
habitat along the delineated edge of wetlands, streams and ponds, except in
the case of basin marshes, fens, bogs and vernal pools that shall require at
least two hundred (200) foot width.” Id. § 1207.03.
At the first hearing on the respondent’s application, a board member
stated that she “ha[d] an issue” with the asserted lack of conflict with purposes
c and d of section 1200.01. The notice of decision cited lack of compliance with
only section 1200.01 c, stating:
The board sees a problem on this one since the proposal is to build
a private drive which has direct impact on the 200 ft Vernal Pool
setback requirement described as required by the LZO. The ZBA
does NOT agree that the applicant has satisfied this specific
criterion. The concern here is that the proposed roadway would
only be 60 feet from the vernal pool which is already negatively
impacted by development on other sides.
On rehearing, a ZBA member expressed concern over subsections
1200.01 c, d and e, stating, as recorded in the minutes, that “[s]he believes a
vernal pool is unique in and of itself. A road within 60 feet of the pool is not
protecting it.” The notice of decision denying the special exception on
rehearing made the following findings:
1200.01c&d&e – Vernal pool is unique in and of itself. The
Purpose of the ordinance is to conserve the pool. Having a road
within 60 ft of the pool is NOT protecting the vernal pool or the
travel pathways leading to it. The NH Audubon Society (from the
Conservation Fact Sheet – part of Exhibit I) states that having a
buffer of 100ft of natural vegetation around the pool for as great a
distance as possible back from the edge of the pool’s high water
mark will help to maintain water quality but will do little to protect
amphibians living around the pool. Vernal pool breeders require
300 yards of natural habitat around the pool to survive.
1200.01c&d&e See Exhibit H, page 7 subsection B ref Spotted
Salamanders – the entire section describes the unique and
ecologically sensitive nature of vernal pools.
This section speaks of salamanders moving an average of 409 ft
from the edge of the vernal pools in the course of several weeks to
months following [breeding]. The road 60 feet from the pool will
obstruct this.
4
Wildlife habitat (Blanding’s turtle, dragon fly, salamanders) are
endangered and reside in this area.
The Town first challenges the trial court’s finding that the determination
before the ZBA required specialized or scientific knowledge. Specifically, the
trial court stated that subsections c, d and e “all require specialized scientific
knowledge to make a determination as to whether those requirements have
been satisfied.” It also stated that “[t]he reasons used by the majority [of the
ZBA] to deny the application all require findings based on specialized or
scientific knowledge. At no time does any member of the [ZBA] identify him or
herself as having any specialized or scientific knowledge concerning this
matter.”
The Town argues that the trial court erred in finding that the
determination before the ZBA required specialized or scientific knowledge
because such a finding would divest the ZBA of its authority to determine
whether a special exception would conflict with the general purpose and intent
of a zoning ordinance. See RSA 674:33, IV (2008). Specifically, the Town
contends that the trial court’s analysis would compel the ZBA to deny a special
exception whenever an applicant fails to retain an expert with specialized
scientific knowledge and, conversely, to grant a special exception when the only
expert is one retained by the applicant.
The appellees counter that the Town “incorrectly characterizes” the trial
court’s order and instead contend that the court, consistent with the statutory
standard, simply “reviewed whether, based upon the evidence presented, the
ZBA’s decision was unreasonable.” Because we agree with the appellees that
the trial court’s ruling is sustainable under the statutory standard of review,
we need not address the merits, in the abstract, of the court’s purportedly
broad characterization of the evidence required by subsections 1200.01 c, d
and e as “specialized scientific knowledge.”
The trial court assessed the evidence that was before the ZBA in this
case and determined that the ZBA’s denial of a special exception was
unreasonable. Specifically, the court noted that Continental “presented
evidence from two scientific experts . . . [explaining how, in their opinions, its]
proposal did satisfy Sections c, d and e.” On the other hand, the only evidence
opposing the application, “other than two abutter complaints, is the 1998
Audubon fact sheet that deals with vernal pools in general.” The court noted
that the Audubon publication was “not addressed to this application and it
doesn’t speak to the applicants’ evidence that the proposal complies with and
satisfies Sections c,[ ]d and e of LZO 1200.01.” The court therefore concluded
that “[t]here is no legitimate support in the record for the denial” of a special
exception.
5
This case presents a situation similar to that in Condos East Corp. v.
Town of Conway, 132 N.H. 431, 438 (1989), where a town planning board
“simply chose blatantly to ignore . . . expert advice, even though it was
completely uncontradicted.” There, we acknowledged that “the board is
entitled to rely in part on its own judgment and experience in acting upon
applications for subdivision approval.” Id. (quotation omitted). We also noted,
however, that “although [the planning board] can rely on its personal
knowledge of certain factors in reaching its decision, its decision must be based
on more than the mere personal opinion of its members.” Id. (quotations,
citation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). We concluded that “in this case, the
record is devoid of facts supporting the board’s decision. Its plainly
unsubstantiated, conclusory opinion regarding the safety of [an access road] is
wholly insufficient to justify the board’s complete disregard of the
uncontradicted testimony of the experts.” Id. Similarly, in the instant case,
the trial court found the lay opinions of certain ZBA members, based upon
general information not specifically addressed to the subject site, to be
insufficient to counter the uncontroverted expert opinions presented by
Continental.
The Town argues, however, that the ZBA’s denial of the special exception
implies that it did not accept Continental’s experts’ conclusions and that “the
record contains sufficient evidence to support a finding that [those] experts
lacked credibility.” The Town correctly notes that the ZBA does “not have to
accept the conclusions of the experts.” Vannah v. Bedford, 111 N.H. 105, 112
(1971), overruled on other grounds by Cook v. Town of Sanbornton, 118 N.H.
668 (1978).
The Town posits a number of grounds upon which the “ZBA could have
reasonably questioned” the findings and credibility of Continental’s experts,
such as the time of year the experts performed their evaluations, and the
circumstances under which they performed their assessments or prepared
their reports. (Emphasis added.) These asserted grounds, however, are purely
speculative, as the record contains no evidence that the ZBA actually did
question the credibility or methodology of Continental’s experts, and are not
substantiated by evidence before the ZBA. For instance, the Town challenges
the opinion of one expert on grounds that “he did not delineate the wetlands
until November, after they had dried up, and he did not assess the vernal pool
as breeding habitat until after the breeding season.” There is no evidence in
the record, however, to support the implied premise for the argument; namely,
that such delineations and assessments must be made at certain times in
order to be scientifically accurate or credible. Similarly, the Town challenged
the opinion of one expert “on the basis that he did not prepare his written
report until after the ZBA denied the special exception,” and that of the other
on the basis that “he did not perform an independent evaluation, . . . he never
assessed the vernal pool, and by his own admission, he did not perform a
thorough inspection.” There was no evidence in the record, however, that
6
either opinion was biased, inaccurate or lacking in scientific basis. We
conclude that the trial court properly rejected the Town’s credibility argument
as unsupported by the evidence.
The Town next argues that the trial court erred in finding it
unreasonable for the ZBA to give weight to general information about vernal
pools. The Town asserts that “[t]he individual members of the ZBA may
properly educate themselves, based on information contained within the
record, and rely on their personal knowledge to evaluate the opinions of
Continental’s experts.”
“We have previously held that in arriving at a decision, the members of
the ZBA can consider their own knowledge concerning such factors as traffic
conditions, surrounding uses, etc., resulting from their familiarity with the area
involved.” Nestor v. Town of Meredith, 138 N.H. 632, 636 (1994) (quotation
and brackets omitted). Thus, ZBA members may base their conclusion upon
“their own knowledge, experience and observations,” in addition to expert
testimony. Biggs v. Town of Sandwich, 124 N.H. 421, 427 (1984). We reject,
however, the Town’s contention that information contained in exhibits before
the ZBA is transformed into “personal knowledge” through individual ZBA
members using such information to “educate themselves.” Rather, the exhibits
themselves were simply evidence before the ZBA. Thus, we turn to the Town’s
contention that the trial court erroneously “found that [it] was unreasonable for
the ZBA to give weight to evidence that ‘deals with vernal pools in general’ and
was ‘not addressed to this application’ or ‘doesn’t speak to the applicant’s
evidence.’” (Quoting trial court’s order.)
Continental presented the opinions of two experts, Robert Procop, a New
Hampshire certified wetland scientist with Wetland Consulting Services, and
Scott D. Smyers, a field biologist with OxBow Associates, Inc. Procop testified
that the proposed road would have no impact on any sensitive areas and little
effect on wildlife. He further opined:
While some upland and wetland areas will be impacted by the
proposed driveway, neither of these areas are considered habitat
for the species that utilize the vernal pool. The pool itself will not
be impacted by the project, and a sufficient corridor will remain to
allow amphibian movement between the pool and the remaining
upland habitat.
Procop tailored his analysis to the site at issue and explained his reasoning.
For instance, he stated that “[t]he current project will not impact the pool itself
since all work will occur at least 60 ft upslope of the pool. The amount of
traffic that would utilize the new driveway is so small that virtually no potential
exists for contaminants to enter the pool.” In addition, noting that the relevant
amphibians “typically move at night,” Procop opined that “[c]hances of
7
significant [vehicular] traffic, particularly at night when it rains, are minimal.
Contaminants entering the pool are also minimal because it is a gravel road.
Virtually, there will be no impact to this vernal pool.”
Similarly, Smyers opined that “it is unlikely that the installation of a
gravel driveway across the shallowest portion of the wetland will have any
measurable adverse impact to the amphibian habitat provided by [the] entire
wetland system.” He reasoned:
The intended use of the driveway is to access a sportsman’s club,
thus is unlikely to generate any significant traffic at any time,
especially during rainy nights, which is when many vernal pool
amphibians are most likely to travel over land and are at most risk
to mortality from vehicle traffic.
On the other hand, the information upon which the ZBA based its
findings of fact, namely, the Audubon Society conservation fact sheet and rules
promulgated by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, contained
only general information. For instance, the conservation fact sheet suggests as
a conservation measure:
Leave a buffer of natural vegetation around the pool for as great a
distance as possible back from the edge of the pool’s high-water
mark. A buffer of at least 100 feet will help maintain water quality,
but will do little to protect amphibians living around the pool.
Vernal pool breeders require at least 300 yards of natural habitat
around their pools in order to survive.
We find no error in the trial court’s conclusion that this evidence was
“not addressed to this application” and did not “speak to the applicants’
evidence that the proposal complies with and satisfies Sections c,[ ]d and e of
LZO 1200.01.” The same factors discussed generally in the conservation fact
sheet and used by the ZBA to deny the special exception, namely, water quality
and the safety of amphibians that use vernal pools to breed, were specifically
addressed by Continental’s experts and determined by them to not be
negatively affected by the proposed road. Based upon the evidence, the trial
court could reasonably have found, by the balance of probabilities, that the
ZBA’s decision was unreasonable. See Chester Rod and Gun Club, 152 N.H. at
589.
The Town also contends that by “decid[ing] factual matters in the first
instance,” id. at 584, the trial court impermissibly substituted its own
judgment for that of the ZBA. See Thomas v. Town of Hooksett, 153 N.H. 717,
724 (2006) (holding that “[t]he court may not substitute its judgment for that of
the [ZBA]”); Chester Rod and Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 583 (noting that “[w]hen
reviewing a decision of a zoning board of adjustment, the superior court acts as
8
an appellate body, not as a fact finder”). The Town cites a number of instances
in which it alleges the trial court “substituted its judgment for that of the ZBA”
by considering evidence that the ZBA apparently failed to find compelling. We
do not construe these instances as impermissible fact finding or substitution of
judgment, but rather as a proper balancing of the probabilities based upon the
evidence before the ZBA. See Chester Rod and Gun Club, 152 N.H. at 580.
Finally, the Town argues:
Given that the express purpose and intent of the WCD is to
“protect” sensitive wetlands such as the vernal pool in this case,
which has already been negatively impacted [by prior development
in the area], the ZBA could have reasonably concluded that a road
within 60 feet of the vernal pool would be contrary to the purpose
and intent [of] the WCD, and lawfully and reasonably denied the
special exception.
Having previously determined that the trial court correctly applied the
statutory standard of review, on the evidence before the ZBA, we necessarily
reject this contention.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
9