THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–northern judicial district
No. 2008-219
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DELVIN WHITE
Argued: June 11, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 9, 2009
Kelley A. Ayotte, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Abramson, J.),
the defendant, Delvin White, was convicted of one count of aggravated
felonious sexual assault and one count of felonious sexual assault. See RSA
632-A:2, I(l) (Supp. 2008); RSA 632-A:3, III (Supp. 2008). The defendant
appeals, arguing that the trial court erroneously admitted the victim’s prior
consistent statement to rehabilitate her credibility. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In March 1996, the
defendant visited the home of a friend, Wayne Guyer, and his wife, Marguerite.
The Guyers’ four children were also in the apartment. Throughout the course
of the day, the defendant and Wayne played cribbage and consumed several
beers. After dinner, the Guyers convinced the defendant to spend the night so
that he would not drive home intoxicated. Later that night, Wayne and
Marguerite watched television in the living room, while the defendant watched
television in the playroom with two of the children, M.G., age eight, and D.G.,
age fifteen.
The defendant sat between the two children. M.G. testified that the
defendant put his arm around her, put his hand under her shirt and touched
her breast. He then put his hand down M.G.’s pants, touched her genital area
and penetrated her vagina with his finger.
M.G. told the defendant that she had to speak with her father, and went
into the living room. After she told Wayne and Marguerite what had happened,
Wayne ran into the playroom to confront the defendant, calling him a “son of a
bitch.” Before Wayne said anything else, the defendant replied, “I didn’t touch
your f---ing kid.” Wayne then hit the defendant. Marguerite called 9-1-1, and
soon thereafter Officer James Curran arrived. After speaking with the adults,
Officer Curran spoke with M.G. for ten to fifteen minutes. The defendant was
arrested and Marguerite took M.G. to Elliot Hospital, where Dr. Richard King
examined her.
Dr. King testified that there were no physical signs of sexual assault, but
that their absence did not surprise him in light of M.G.’s description at the
hospital of the assault. He testified that she had said the defendant “put his
hand into her shirt and put his hand into her pants. When asked whether
M.G. said the defendant “touched” or “penetrated” her vagina, Dr. King
responded: “I’m sure an eight year old wouldn’t say penetrated.” The next day,
Detective Kevin Kelley, a juvenile investigator, conducted an in-depth interview
of M.G.
At trial, the defendant cross-examined M.G. concerning her reporting of
the incident. The defense first asked M.G. if it was her testimony that the
defendant put his finger inside her, to which she responded that he did. The
examination continued:
Q: Do you remember what you said to your dad was that Delvin
put his hand on your genital area, not in. Do you remember that?
A: Yes.
Q: And later that night when the policeman came and the
policeman talked to you that night, right?
A: Yes.
Q: And you talked to other policemen later, right?
A: Yes.
2
Q: But that night you talked to at least one policeman?
A: Yes.
Q: And you told that policeman that Delvin put his hand on your
genital area. Right?
A: Yes.
. . . .
Q: Also when you talked to the doctor, or went to the hospital, you
told somebody that Del had kissed you. Do you remember that?
A: No, I cannot remember that.
Q: Okay. But you certainly didn’t tell your dad that, did you?
A: No, I didn’t.
Q: And you didn’t tell the policeman that, right?
A: I don’t believe so.
To rehabilitate M.G.’s credibility, the State later called Detective Kelley as
a rebuttal witness. Detective Kelley testified that officers responding to the
scene of an alleged sexual assault do not generally conduct detailed interviews
of victims, but rather make an initial report and refer the matter to a trained
juvenile investigator. Detective Kelley stated that he had the opportunity to
conduct an in-depth, follow-up interview with M.G. the day after the incident.
The prosecutor then asked: “Did she at some point tell you whether or not she
had been digitally penetrated by Delvin White?” Detective Kelley responded,
“Yes, she did.” Nothing further was said concerning her statements during the
interview. Following a two-day trial, a jury found the defendant guilty of both
charges.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in admitting
M.G.’s prior consistent statement through Detective Kelley to rehabilitate her
credibility. The admissibility of prior consistent statements for rehabilitative
purposes is a matter wholly within the discretion of the trial court, and will not
be overturned absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Dewitt,
143 N.H. 24, 27 (1998); cf. State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001)
(explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
Notwithstanding New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 801(d)(1)(B), our
common law rule allows the admission of prior consistent statements for the
limited purpose of rehabilitation when a witness’s credibility has been
impeached by the use of prior inconsistent statements. Dewitt, 143 N.H at 27-
28; State v. Morales, 136 N.H. 616, 619 (1993). The prior consistent
statements, however, may not be used substantively, and a defendant is
entitled to a limiting instruction to prevent unfair prejudice. Dewitt, 143 N.H.
at 28. Even when a witness’s credibility has been attacked through the use of
prior inconsistent statements, however, “the common law rule allowing
admission of rehabilitative testimony should be used with caution.” State v.
Fischer, 143 N.H. 311, 314 (1999) (quotation omitted).
3
The State first argues that Detective Kelley’s testimony did not contain a
“statement” by M.G., and is therefore not hearsay requiring a prior consistent
statement analysis. Specifically, the State argues that the phrasing of the
question as “did she at some point tell you whether . . .,” answered solely with
a “yes” response, means only that M.G. at some point spoke about penetration,
but not that she specifically said that penetration had occurred. Because
Detective Kelley did not actually reveal M.G.’s answer, the State argues, he did
not testify to an out-of-court statement. While we agree with the State that
Detective Kelley did not actually testify to an out-of-court statement, under the
circumstances of this case, an overly literal interpretation of Detective Kelley’s
answer is not warranted in view of the court’s limiting instruction and the
State's closing argument. The court instructed the jury: “Members of the jury,
you’ve heard testimony regarding [M.G.’s] statements. . . . You may consider
the statements solely for the limited purpose of evaluating [M.G.’s] credibility
and not as proof that the facts in the statement[s] are true.” Moreover, in its
closing statement, the State argued:
And what does an eight year old know about sexual penetration
and how to explain that to a police officer that just came to her
apartment after she had just been assaulted and her dad’s been in
a furious fight? Does an eight year old know how to explain that
even to an emergency room doctor? Or does an eight year old
know better how to explain that to a seasoned detective like Kevin
Kelley who is trained specifically to figure those things out? If
those are inconsistencies, they can be explained away and you
need to explain them away.
Even though the court’s instructions and the State’s argument are not
evidence, in considering Detective Kelley’s testimony in the face of the limiting
instruction and the State’s closing argument, the only reasonable inference a
jury could draw was that Detective Kelley had asked M.G. if there had been
penetration and she replied affirmatively.
The State next argues that if the testimony did contain an out-of-court
statement, it was nonetheless admissible to dispel the inference created on
cross-examination that M.G. had not reported penetration until the day of trial.
We agree. In this case, the defendant’s cross-examination of M.G. concerning
her inconsistent statements in her description of the incident to her father,
Officer Curran and Dr. King left a clear impression that M.G. had not reported
penetration and had only recently changed her story. In light of the
defendant’s impeachment of the witness, our common law rule of rehabilitation
permitted the State to cure the damage by introducing her prior consistent
statement through Detective Kelley. Furthermore, the trial court correctly
explained the limited permissible use of the testimony in a limiting instruction,
4
thus protecting the defendant from unfair prejudice. See Dewitt, 143 N.H at
28; State v. Martin, 138 N.H. 508, 514-15 (1994).
The defendant argues, however, that this case is distinguishable from
our prior cases allowing the introduction of prior consistent statements for
rehabilitation. He argues that prior consistent statements are only admissible
when they are part of the same interview or conversation containing the prior
inconsistent statements used to impeach the witness. Although the facts of
most rehabilitation cases would satisfy that rule, see, e.g., Dewitt, 143 N.H. at
28; Martin, 138 N.H. at 514; Morales, 136 N.H. at 618, the doctrine only
requires that the prior consistent statement be introduced as “an appropriate,
narrowly tailored, and logically relevant response to a specific attack on the
witness’s credibility.” Fischer, 143 N.H. at 316. Indeed, in State v. Huard, we
held that a victim’s four prior statements to an officer could be used as prior
consistent statements to rehabilitate his credibility if he was impeached with
prior inconsistent statements. State v. Huard, 138 N.H. 256, 260-61 (1994).
The defendant is correct, however, in arguing that there are limits upon the
doctrine, and that certain factors such as the passage of time or intervening
events could make a prior consistent statement less probative as to credibility
and more prejudicial to the defendant. It is for this reason that the rule
“should be used with caution.” Fischer, 143 N.H. at 314 (quotation omitted).
This, however, is not such a case.
Here, the prior consistent statement was made the day after the incident.
There was no testimony that M.G. had denied penetration when speaking with
adults the night of the incident; rather, she simply reported that the defendant
had placed his hand “on” her private area. It was not until she spoke with an
officer trained to interview child victims of sexual assault that she specifically
mentioned penetration. As Dr. King testified, “I’m sure an eight year old
wouldn’t say penetrated.” Detective Kelley’s testimony that he discussed
penetration with M.G., therefore, was “an appropriate, narrowly tailored, and
logically relevant response” to the defendant’s inference that she had not
previously reported the penetration. Id. at 316. In light of the trial court’s
careful review of the matter on the record, as well as its limiting instruction, we
cannot say that it unsustainably exercised its discretion in admitting the prior
consistent statement for the sole purpose of rehabilitating M.G.’s credibility.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5