THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2009-390
DR. SEYMOUR KESSLER
v.
AARON GLEICH, INDIVIDUALLY AND AS GENERAL PARTNER OF FIRE
HOUSE BLOCK ASSOCIATES, L.P.
Argued: May 4, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 10, 2010
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Charles W. Grau and Matthew R.
Serge on the brief, and Mr. Serge orally), for the plaintiff.
Howard & Ruoff, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Mark E. Howard on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Aaron Gleich, individually and as general
partner of Fire House Block Associates, L.P. (FHBA), appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) requiring him to indemnify the plaintiff, Dr.
Seymour Kessler, for the attorney’s fees and costs he incurred in this
declaratory judgment action and to pay him the attorney’s fees incurred by the
New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority (NHHFA) in a related action. We
reverse in part, vacate in part and remand.
The record reveals the following facts. The plaintiff is one of several
limited partners of FHBA. Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 490 (2007). FHBA
was created to construct, own and operate a “Section 8” housing development
in Concord. Id.
FHBA financed the housing development through the NHHFA. Id. As
the sole general partner of FHBA exercising complete control over the
management of the development, the defendant executed a regulatory
agreement, as well as a mortgage and promissory note with NHHFA. Id. These
documents required the defendant to contract with an approved managing
agent for the property. Id.
Between 1997 and 2004, the defendant was repeatedly notified by
NHHFA that FHBA was in violation of the regulatory agreement for failing to
have an approved managing agent in place. Id. NHHFA further informed the
defendant that if FHBA did not comply with the terms of the regulatory
agreement, NHHFA would foreclose on the property. Id. After several
additional notifications, on October 1, 2004, NHHFA began foreclosure
proceedings. See id.
The defendant, however, never notified the limited partners of the default
or the commencement of foreclosure proceedings. Id. The plaintiff learned of
the foreclosure through his attorney and intervened to enjoin the sale of the
property at auction. Id. at 490-91. The foreclosure auction was temporarily
enjoined. Id. at 491.
In 2004, the plaintiff filed suit against the defendant seeking a
declaration that the defendant willfully breached the fiduciary duties he owed
the plaintiff and the other limited partners. Id. The trial court ruled in the
plaintiff’s favor, finding that the defendant willfully breached his fiduciary duty
of loyalty by violating the partnership agreement and by allowing the
partnership to be defaulted by NHHFA for lack of a proper managing agent. Id.
We affirmed the trial court’s decision on the merits. Id. at 489-90.
Thereafter, the plaintiff, as the prevailing party, renewed his motion in
superior court for an award of attorney’s fees and costs. Following a hearing,
the trial court granted the plaintiff’s motion and awarded him $288,281.20 in
attorney’s fees and costs. These fees included $75,406 for legal fees and
expenses incurred by NHHFA in the foreclosure action. This appeal followed.
“A prevailing party may be awarded attorney’s fees when that recovery is
authorized by statute, an agreement between the parties, or an established
judicial exception to the general rule that precludes recovery of such fees.”
Tulley v. Sheldon, 159 N.H. 269, 272 (2009) (quotation omitted). We will not
overturn a trial court’s award of attorney’s fees unless it is an unsustainable
2
exercise of discretion. Id. In applying this standard, we are mindful of the
substantial deference given to the trial court’s decision on attorney’s fees, and
we will uphold the decision if the record provides some support for it. Id.
The trial court ruled that the plaintiff was entitled to fees pursuant to the
indemnity provision of the parties’ partnership agreement (section 6.8), which
provides:
No General Partner shall have any liability or obligation to
the other General Partners, the Limited Partners or the Partnership
for any decision made or action taken in connection with the
discharge of his duties hereunder, if such decision or action is
made or taken in good faith. Moreover, the General Partners shall
not be liable to the Limited Partners because of the disallowance or
adjustment by any taxing authority of any deduction or credits
claimed in any tax return filed by the Partnership. The General
Partners shall not be liable to the Partnership or the Limited
Partners for any negative amount in their capital account, provided
same shall not have arisen out of their borrowing money from the
Partnership, any such borrowing being prohibited.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, each General Partner shall
indemnify and save harmless the Partnership, the Limited Partners
and the other General Partners from and against any claim, loss,
expense, liability, action or damage, including, without limitation,
reasonable costs and expenses of litigation and appeal (and the
reasonable fees and expenses of counsel) ari[s]ing out of his fraud,
bad faith, gross negligence, or his willful failure to comply with any
representation, condition or other agreement herein contained.
The companion to section 6.8 is section 6.7, which provides:
The Partnership will indemnify and hold harmless each of
the General Partners and their successors and assigns from any
claim, loss, expense, liability, action or damage resulting f[ro]m any
act or omission performed or omitted by any of them in their
capacities as General Partners, including, without limitation,
reasonable costs and expenses of litigation and appeal (and the
reasonable costs and expenses of attorneys engaged by the General
Partners in defense of such act or omission), but no General
Partner shall be entitled to be indemnified or held harmless for any
act or omission arising from his fraud, bad faith, gross negligence,
or his willful failure to comply with any representation, condition
or other agreement herein contained. Any indemnity under this
Section 6.7 shall be provided out of and to the extent of
3
Partnership assets only, and no Limited Partner shall have any
personal liability on account thereof.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by
interpreting section 6.8 to require him to pay the plaintiff’s attorney’s fees and
costs in the declaratory judgment proceeding. The defendant contends that
this provision applies only to claims brought by third parties against the
limited partners and does not apply to claims brought by a limited partner
against a general partner. As the defendant explains: “The prepositions ‘from
and against,’ juxtaposed as they must be against the language ‘indemnify and
save harmless,’ can only mean that the parties intended that the general
partner will protect the limited partners ‘from’ the action of another, or save
harmless ‘against’ the claim of another made against them.”
When there is an express contract for indemnity, as there is here, the
rights of the surety are not to be determined by general indemnity principles,
but by the letter of the contract for indemnity. Gulf Ins. Co. v. AMSCO, 153
N.H. 28, 34 (2005). The meaning of a contract is ultimately a question of law
for this court to decide. Id. Thus, we review the trial court’s decision de novo.
Id. at 34-35.
We interpret indemnity agreements in the same way that we interpret
contracts generally. Id. at 34. We look to the parties’ intent at the time the
agreement was made, considering the written agreement, all its provisions, its
subject matter, the situation of the parties at the time the agreement was
entered into, and the object intended. Dunn v. CLD Paving, 140 N.H. 120, 122
(1995). We assign the words and phrases used by the parties the common
meaning that would be given to them by a reasonable person. AMSCO, 153
N.H. at 34. Unless the agreement contains ambiguous terms, we limit our
review to the four corners of the document itself. Dunn, 140 N.H. at 122. We
construe express indemnity agreements strictly, particularly when they purport
to shift responsibility for an individual’s own negligence to another. See
Merrimack School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140 N.H. 9, 12 (1995).
The defendant’s assertion that the indemnification provision at issue, in
its entirety, applies only to third party claims is broader than necessary to
resolve this appeal. This appeal concerns only the award of attorney’s fees and
costs, specifically whether such fees and costs are recoverable in first party
litigation. We limit our analysis of the indemnification provision accordingly.
We have previously addressed the recovery of attorney’s fees pursuant to
indemnification agreements. In Town of Nottingham v. Newman, 147 N.H. 131,
136-37 (2001), we ruled that the agreement between one of the defendants and
the Town required her to pay the Town’s legal expenses incurred in enforcing
their agreement. The agreement stated that the defendant understood that if
4
she defaulted, thereby requiring the Town to remove her two mobile homes, she
would be responsible for all of the costs, attorney’s fees and legal expenses the
Town would incur. Newman, 147 N.H. at 132-33. We held that this language
obligated the defendant to pay the Town’s attorney’s fees incurred to enforce
the parties’ agreement. Id. at 136-37.
By contrast, in Merrimack School District, 140 N.H. at 14-15, we held
that the parties’ agreement did not obligate the indemnitor to pay the
indemnitee’s attorney’s fees incurred to enforce the indemnification agreement.
The language in that agreement was that the indemnitor agreed to “defend,
indemnify and save the [indemnitee], and its employees harmless from all
claims and demands, actions and causes of action, damages, costs, loss of
service, expenses and compensation on account of or in any way growing out of
any claim referred to above.” Merrimack School Dist., 140 N.H. at 12
(quotation omitted). The claims referred to were:
any and all claims and demands, actions and causes of action,
damages, costs, loss of service, expenses and compensation,
including but [not] . . . limited to any and all claims for personal
injury and/or death and property damage which may, in any way,
arise from or out of the operations of the defendant pursuant to
the terms of this Agreement whether such operations be performed
by the defendant itself, anyone directly or indirectly employed by it
or any other person or company retained in any way to carry on all
or a portion of the operations necessary to abide by the terms of
this agreement.
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted.) We held that the reference to any “loss”
the plaintiff might sustain “does not imply cost or expense.” Id. at 15. We
ruled that this language did not indicate the parties’ intent to include within
the scope of the indemnification agreement the attorney’s fees incurred to
enforce it. Id.; see Nova v. Penske, 952 A.2d 275, 289 (Md. 2008) (ruling that
indemnification agreement that does not specifically refer to attorney’s fees was
not intended to cover first party attorney’s fees and, thus, did not allow the
prevailing parties to recover their fees in action between the parties).
The language in the indemnity agreement in this case is more specific
than that in Merrimack because it refers to attorney’s fees, but is not as
specific as that in Newman, which actually referred to an action between the
parties.
Courts in other jurisdictions have ruled that because a promise by one
party to a contract to indemnify the other party for attorney’s fees incurred in
litigation between the two parties is contrary to the general rule that parties are
responsible for their own legal fees, see Clipper Affiliates v. Checovich, 138 N.H.
5
271, 277 (1994), the court should not infer a party’s intention to waive the
benefit of the general rule “unless the intention to do so is unmistakably clear
from the language of the promise.” Hooper Associates v. AGS Computers, 548
N.E.2d 903, 905 (N.Y. 1989) (emphasis added). The parties in Hooper had an
agreement under which the plaintiff agreed to buy computer equipment and
services from the defendant. Id. at 903. The indemnification provision
explained that the defendant was required to “indemnify and hold harmless”
the plaintiff “against and from any and all claims, damages, liabilities, costs
and expenses, including reasonable counsel fees arising out of” five specific
kinds of actions. Id. at 903-04 n.1 (quotations and emphasis omitted). The
plaintiff sued the defendant for, among other things, breach of express and
implied warranties, one of the five specified actions entitling the plaintiff to
indemnification for its attorney’s fees. Id. at 903, 903-04 n.1.
Nonetheless, the court ruled that the indemnification provision “d[id] not
contain language clearly permitting plaintiff to recover from defendant the
attorney’s fees incurred in a suit against the defendant.” Id. at 905. The court
stated that the language was “typical of those which contemplate
reimbursement when the indemnitee is required to pay damages on a third-
party claim.” Id. The court observed that the five specific kinds of actions
specified in the agreement were not exclusively or unequivocally referable to
claims between the parties themselves and, thus, did not support an inference
that the defendant promised to indemnify the plaintiff for counsel fees in an
action on the contract. Id.; see Oscar Gruss & Son, Inc. v. Hollander, 337 F.3d
186, 199-200 (2d Cir. 2003) (applying New York law, court holds that provision
requiring indemnitor to reimburse indemnitee for any legal or other expenses
incurred with respect to any claims arising in any manner out of or in
connection with the idemnitee’s services, “including, without limitation, in
connection with the enforcement of this Agreement and the indemnification
obligations set forth herein” was insufficient to require indemnitor to pay
indemnitee’s legal fees in indemnitee’s breach of contract action against
indemnitor); Nevadacare v. Department of Human Services, 783 N.W.2d 459,
470-72 (Iowa 2010) (indemnity provision that required indemnitor to indemnify
indemnitee for all costs and expenses, including attorney’s fees, related to or
arising from any breach of the parties’ contract applied only to claims brought
by third parties and not to a breach of contract claim between the parties). But
see, e.g., Dalton v. Childress Service Corp., 432 S.E.2d 98, 100-02 (W. Va.
1993) (indemnity clause, which provided for indemnification of “any and all
costs and expenses including attorney’s fees which may be incurred in
connection therewith” applied to expense incurred in defending third-party
claims and to those incurred in enforcing parties’ agreement).
We align ourselves with those courts that will not infer a party’s intention
to waive the benefit of the general rule that parties are responsible for their
own legal fees unless the intention to do so is “unmistakably clear from the
6
language of the promise.” Hooper Associates, 548 N.E.2d at 905 (emphasis
added); cf. Merrimack School Dist., 140 N.H. at 12 (express language is
unnecessary to provide indemnity for the negligence of another where the
parties’ intention to afford protection for another’s negligence is “clearly
evident” (quotation omitted)). This is in keeping with our general reluctance to
imply a duty to indemnify. See Dunn, 140 N.H. at 123.
In this case, the claims for which the agreement allows the plaintiff to
collect attorney’s fees, like the claims in Hooper, do not exclusively or
unequivocally refer to claims between the parties. Section 6.8 of the parties’
agreement allows the plaintiff to collect fees arising from the general partner’s
fraud, bad faith, gross negligence, or willful failure to comply with any
representation, condition or other agreement contained in the parties’
partnership agreement. These claims could be brought either by the limited
partners or by a third party. Had the parties wished to demonstrate their clear
intent to require the general partner to indemnify the limited partners for the
attorney’s fees and costs incurred in an action between the general and limited
partners, they could have used language such as that used by the parties in
Newman, 147 N.H. at 132-33. In Newman, the parties used language that
referred specifically to an action between them. Here, by contrast, the parties
used language that could have referred to an action between them or could
have referred to an action brought by a third party. Because the intention to
require indemnity in an action between the parties is not “unmistakably clear
from the language of the promise,” Hooper Associates, 548 N.E.2d at 905, we
decline to infer such an intention, see Dunn, 140 N.H. at 123.
Accordingly, we conclude that the indemnification provision at issue does
not require the defendant to indemnify the plaintiff for the attorney’s fees and
costs he incurred in bringing this declaratory judgment proceeding because it
does not specify that such fees and costs are recoverable in an action between
the parties. We, therefore, reverse the trial court’s award to the plaintiff of the
attorney’s fees and costs he incurred in this declaratory judgment proceeding.
While the plaintiff asserts that he is entitled to recovery of his attorney’s fees
and costs under common law, he acknowledges that the trial court did not
address this claim. We decline to do so in the first instance.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred by requiring him to
pay the plaintiff $75,406, which represents the attorney’s fees that NHHFA
incurred in the foreclosure action. The trial court ruled that the defendant was
responsible for these fees because: (1) the note and mortgage contained
provisions in which the partnership agreed to pay NHHFA’s reasonable
attorney’s fees for any action related to foreclosure as a result of default; and
(2) section 6.8 of the parties’ partnership agreement obligates the defendant to
indemnify the partnership for any expenses arising out of his willful failure to
abide by the agreement. Section 6.4(A) of the parties’ partnership agreement
7
provides, in pertinent part: “No General Partner shall have authority to
perform any act in violation of . . . any agreement between the Partnership and
NHHFA.” The defendant breached the agreement between the partnership and
NHHFA by failing to put an approved managing agent in place and, by so
doing, also breached section 6.4(A) of the parties’ partnership agreement.
We find no error in this analysis. However, we vacate the trial court’s
award of those fees to the plaintiff. As the defendant aptly notes, the note and
mortgage obligate the partnership to pay NHHFA’s reasonable attorney’s fees.
They do not obligate the plaintiff to pay them.
The plaintiff contends that the trial court’s orders in the injunction
proceeding make him responsible for NHHFA’s fees. The trial court’s rulings
are unclear. In its initial order, the trial court appears to have agreed with the
plaintiff that the court’s 2004 and 2006 orders in the foreclosure proceeding
required him to pay NHHFA’s fees. The court specifically referred to those
orders when responding to the defendant’s argument that “the only fees
recoverable for NHHFA costs and fees, if any, are the $17,000 in costs
originally claimed in 2004 during the litigation against NHHFA.”
In its order denying the defendant’s motion for reconsideration, however,
the trial court stated that “the plaintiff is correct in asserting that the
partnership is liable to NHHFA for [its] reasonable attorney’s fees expended in
attempting to collect on the indebtedness of the mortgage.” (Emphasis added.)
The trial court further ruled that while the defendant was ultimately liable for
NHHFA’s fees because of the partnership agreement, he was liable only “to the
extent that NHHFA collects its fees under the terms of its agreement with the
Partnership.” The court’s order appears to contemplate that the amount of fees
recoverable by NHHFA was as yet undetermined when it stated: “If a dispute
arises between NHHFA and the Partnership regarding the fees owed to NHHFA,
or if the defendant contests the reasonableness of those fees, the defendant
would be allowed to intervene and challenge the legitimacy of the fees and his
obligation given his ultimate liability.” (Emphasis added.) Nonetheless, the
trial court awarded the plaintiff $75,406 “for NHHFA legal fees and expenses,
auctioneer expenses, and appraisal fees.”
In light of the trial court’s arguably conflicting rulings and the record
submitted on appeal, which fails to clarify the trial court’s intent, we vacate the
award of $75,406 to the plaintiff for NHHFA’s reasonable attorney’s fees and
costs and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
8