THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-275
IN THE MATTER OF AUDREY ZIKMANIS AND MARK PEABODY
Submitted: February 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: April 8, 2010
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Jennifer L.
Parent and Jeanine M. Kilgallen on the brief), for the petitioner.
Mark Peabody, pro se, filed no brief.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Audrey Zikmanis (wife), appeals a
recommendation of the Master (Green, M.) approved by the Superior Court
(Abramson, J.) modifying the parties’ child support obligation. She argues that
the trial court erred in: (1) modifying a valid support order as a sanction for
her conduct; and (2) modifying the support obligation retroactively and
prospectively when no request for modification was pending, and without
obtaining current financial affidavits or making requisite findings as to the
parties’ abilities to pay. We vacate and remand.
The record before us evidences the following facts. The parties were
divorced in 1998; two children were born during the marriage. The Uniform
Support Order issued at the time of the divorce required the respondent, Mark
Peabody (husband), to pay $100 per month in child support. It further
provided: “The health insurance available to the obligor is limited to
Massachusetts. At the point that coverage is available in NH, he shall be
required to provide such coverage.” The decree also ordered the parties to
evenly divide liability for the uninsured medical and dental expenses of the
children.
In 2001, the trial court entered another Uniform Support Order, which it
designated an enforcement order. The order again provided that the parties
would each be liable for 50% of the children’s uninsured medical expenses; it
further found that health insurance was then only available for the husband in
Massachusetts but noted that the husband had agreed to provide coverage at
the point it became available.
The matter came before the trial court again in 2008 after the parties
each filed petitions and motions that alleged violations of the parties’ divorce
decree. The limited record before us indicates that the trial court was also
asked to consider modifying the parties’ respective parenting time with the
children and enforcing the parties’ liability for the children’s accrued uninsured
medical expenses.
After a hearing, the trial court found that, although the wife had violated
a court order, the husband’s request that she be found in contempt was moot.
The trial court then considered the wife’s request to be reimbursed for one-half
of the children’s uninsured medical expenses incurred in 2007 and 2008. The
court found that the wife’s actions “relative to the relationship between [the
husband and the younger child] have been less than helpful, and in fact,
contemptible,” and further stated: “The Court, in looking at the child’s best
interest, cannot punish the child by switching custody or mandating parenting
time that would be counterproductive to the child. The Court can, however,
indicate that there may be certain financial consequences, and the fact that
[the wife] has to pay all co-pays or uninsured expenses of $20 or less is one of
those consequences.”
We turn first to whether the order of the trial court was, as the wife
contends, a modification of a preexisting support order. The record before us
indicates that in 2001, the court issued a document entitled “Uniform Support
Order” which provided that the parties were each to pay one half of the
uninsured medical expenses of the children. Accordingly, any change in the
obligations of the parties concerning uninsured medical expenses of the
children constituted a modification of the 2001 support order.
The record before us indicates that the trial court’s modification
addressed expenses dating back to 2007, which predated the filing of the
parties’ motions and petitions for contempt. RSA 458-C:7, II (2004) specifically
provides that modification of a child support obligation shall not be effective
prior to the date that notice of the petition for modification has been given to
2
respondent. RSA 461-A:14, VIII (Supp. 2009) further provides that no
modification of a support order shall alter arrearages due prior to the date of
filing the motion for modification.
Moreover, we find no evidence in the record before us that any motion for
modification was filed by either party. Rather, it appears that the modification
of the parties’ child support obligations was ordered solely because of the wife’s
conduct. The wife argues that, because the sanction imposed modified the
husband’s child support obligation, the children were made chargeable for her
conduct. We agree. We have previously observed that the “purpose of child
support is to provide economic support for the children, not the obligee
parent.” In the Matter of Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. 498, 503 (2007).
“Regardless of the parents’ actions, the children should not be deprived of the
amount of support to which they are entitled.” Id. It was therefore error for
the trial court to reduce the child support obligations of the husband as a
sanction for the wife’s conduct. Accordingly, we vacate and remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Vacated and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
3