THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-262
THE MORTGAGE SPECIALISTS, INC.
v.
IMPLODE-EXPLODE HEAVY INDUSTRIES, INC.
Argued: November 4, 2009
Opinion Issued: May 6, 2010
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Alexander J. Walker & a.
on the brief, and Mr. Walker orally), for the petitioner.
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Jeremy D. Eggleton and William L.
Chapman on the brief, and Mr. Eggleton orally), for the respondent.
Drummond Woodsum & MacMahon, of Portsmouth (Paul L. Apple on the
brief), for Citizen Media Law Project and Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press, as amici curiae.
Public Citizen Litigation Group, of Washington, D.C. (Paul Alan Levy on
the brief), and Backus, Meyer & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (Jon Meyer on the
brief), for Public Citizen, as amicus curiae.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, Implode-Explode Heavy Industries, Inc.
(Implode), appeals an order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) granting
injunctive relief to the petitioner, Mortgage Specialists, Inc. (Mortgage
Specialists). We vacate in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Mortgage Specialists is a
mortgage lender. Implode operates a website, www.ml-implode.com, that ranks
various businesses in the mortgage industry on a ranking device that it calls
“The Mortgage Lender Implode-O-Meter.” On its website, Implode identifies
allegedly “at risk” companies and classifies them as either “Imploded Lenders”
or “Ailing/Watch List Lenders.” The website allows visitors who register on the
site and create usernames to post publicly viewable comments about lenders.
In August 2008, Implode published an article that detailed
administrative actions taken by the New Hampshire Banking Department
against Mortgage Specialists. In this article, Implode posted a link to a
document that purported to represent Mortgage Specialists’ 2007 loan figures
(Loan Chart). In response to the article, an anonymous website visitor with the
username “Brianbattersby” posted two comments regarding Mortgage
Specialists and its president.
After Mortgage Specialists became aware of the article and postings, it
petitioned for injunctive relief, alleging that publication of the Loan Chart was
unlawful because it violated RSA 383:10-b (2006) (mandating confidentiality of
all investigative reports and examinations by the New Hampshire Banking
Department) and that Brianbattersby’s postings were false and defamatory.
Mortgage Specialists requested that Implode immediately remove the Loan
Chart and postings from its website. Mortgage Specialists further demanded
that Implode disclose both the identity of Brianbattersby and the source of the
Loan Chart.
The trial court granted the requested relief and ordered as follows:
1. [Implode], and all of its agents, servants, employees, and
representatives, are enjoined from displaying, posting, publishing,
distributing, linking to and/or otherwise providing any information for
the access or other dissemination of copies of and/or images of a 2007
Loan Chart and any information or data contained therein, including on
the website operated at www.ml-implode.com and any other websites
under [Implode’s] ownership and control;
2. [Implode] is ordered to immediately disclose the identity of the individual
and/or entity that provided it with the 2007 Loan Chart;
2
3. [Implode] is ordered to immediately produce all documents that concern
petitioner that it received from the individual or entity that provided it
with the 2007 Loan Chart;
4. [Implode] is ordered not to re-post or re-publish the October 4, 2008,
and October 7, 2008, false and defamatory postings by “Brianbattersby,”
and
5. [Implode] is ordered to immediately disclose the identity of
“Brianbattersby,” including his full name, address, email address, phone
number, and any other personal information [Implode] possesses.
On appeal, Implode argues that the trial court erred in ordering the
disclosure of the sources of the Loan Chart and Brianbattersby’s postings,
ordering production of all documents concerning Mortgage Specialists received
from the Loan Chart source, and enjoining the republication of the Loan Chart
and Brianbattersby’s postings.
I. Disclosure of Sources
Implode first asserts that the trial court erred in ordering it to disclose
the identities of the Loan Chart source and Brianbattersby’s postings because
the First Amendment to the Federal Constitution and Part I, Article 22 of the
New Hampshire Constitution protect a speaker’s right to anonymity. The trial
court did not analyze Mortgage Specialists’ disclosure requests under either
constitutional provision. We first address Implode’s claims under the State
Constitution, and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124
N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
A. Loan Chart
Implode argues that the newsgathering privilege under Part I, Article 22
of the New Hampshire Constitution protects the identity of the source of the
Loan Chart. Mortgage Specialists disputes that Implode is a news
organization, and therefore argues that this constitutional protection is
unavailable to Implode. It also argues, in the alternative, that its right to
disclosure of the Loan Chart source outweighs any potential harm to the free
flow of information.
In Opinion of the Justices, 117 N.H. 386, 389 (1977), we considered
whether a news reporter could be ordered to disclose the sources of
information utilized in preparing a series of articles. In holding that the
reporter could not be so ordered, we recognized the existence of a reporter’s
privilege in civil proceedings involving the press as a non-party. Id. at 389-90;
3
see Associated Press v. State of N.H., 153 N.H. 120, 128 (2005); Petition of
Keene Sentinel, 136 N.H. 121, 127 (1992).
Our constitution quite consciously ties a free press to a free
state, for effective self-government cannot succeed unless the
people have access to an unimpeded and uncensored flow of
reporting. News gathering is an integral part of the process. One
study showed that more than ninety percent of the reporters
surveyed believed protection of identity was more important than
protection of contents.
Opinion of the Justices, 117 N.H. at 389. However, we did “not decide the
scope of the privilege, whether it was absolute, who is a reporter, what qualifies
as ‘press,’ . . . or whether libel actions would require disclosure.” Id. In Keene
Publishing Corp. v. Keene District Court, 117 N.H. 959, 961 (1977), we
acknowledged that the right of the press to gather news is “not unlimited.”
Although our cases discussing the newsgathering privilege have involved
traditional news media, such as newspapers, see, e.g., Keene Pub. Corp., 117
N.H. at 960, we reject Mortgage Specialists’ contention that the newsgathering
privilege is inapplicable here because Implode is neither an established media
entity nor engaged in investigative reporting. The trial court implicitly found
that Implode is a “legitimate publisher of information” and a member of the
press. The court further noted that it “has every reason to believe that
[Implode] is a reputable entity desirous of only publishing legitimate
information about the mortgage industry to various interested parties.”
Moreover, we observe that:
Freedom of the press is a fundamental personal right which is not
confined to newspapers and periodicals. . . . The press in its
historic connotation comprehends every sort of publication which
affords a vehicle of information and opinion. The informative
function asserted by representatives of the organized press . . . is
also performed by lecturers, political pollsters, novelists, academic
researchers, and dramatists. Almost any author may quite
accurately assert that he is contributing to the flow of information
to the public, that he relies on confidential sources of information,
and that these sources will be silenced if he is forced to make
disclosures.
Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665, 704 (1972) (quotations and citations
omitted). The fact that Implode operates a website makes it no less a member
of the press. In light of the trial court’s implicit findings, we conclude that
Implode’s website serves an informative function and contributes to the flow of
information to the public. Thus, Implode is a reporter for purposes of the
newsgathering privilege.
4
We also reject Mortgage Specialists’ alternative argument that if Implode
is considered a reporter, then Downing v. Monitor Publishing Co., Inc., 120
N.H. 383 (1980), is controlling and disclosure is warranted. In Downing, the
issue was whether the defendant-newspaper in a libel case should be required
to disclose the source of allegedly defamatory information it published. Id. at
384. In holding that it should, we also held that “there is no absolute privilege
allowing the press to decline to reveal sources of information when those
sources are essential to a libel plaintiff’s case.” Id. at 386. We established that
a “plaintiff must satisfy the trial court that he has evidence to establish that
there is a genuine issue of fact regarding the falsity of the publication.” Id. at
385-87. Critical to our ultimate ruling that source disclosure was required was
the fact that as a public official, the plaintiff was required to prove that the
defendant-newspaper acted with actual malice. Id. at 385. Here, Mortgage
Specialists does not seek damages against Implode for libel. As the trial court
found,
[Mortgage Specialists] does not “blame” [Implode] for the
publishing of the unauthorized and allegedly defamatory website
postings, and it asks for no sanctions or money damages as
against the respondent. [Mortgage Specialists] does not claim that
[Implode] had some duty or responsibility to verify the information
with respect to either the story or the Brianbattersby comments
prior to posting them on its website. [Mortgage Specialists] does
not allege that [Implode] knew or should have known that the
publication of the 2007 Loan Chart was prohibited under New
Hampshire Law.
Accordingly, Downing does not require source disclosure in this case.
We have set forth guidelines to determine whether a plaintiff can compel
a defendant-newspaper to disclose confidential sources in a libel action, see id.
at 384-87, and whether a defendant can overcome the qualified newsgathering
privilege in a criminal case, see State v. Siel, 122 N.H. 254, 259 (1982) (a
defendant may overcome the newsgathering privilege and compel disclosure of
confidential sources “only when he shows: (1) that he has attempted
unsuccessfully to obtain the information by all reasonable alternatives; (2) that
the information would not be irrelevant to his defense; and (3) that by a
balance of the probabilities, there is a reasonable possibility that the
information sought as evidence would affect the verdict in his case”). However,
we have not yet established a standard to determine whether a plaintiff can
overcome the newsgathering privilege in a civil suit where the press is a non-
party to a defamation action. In the absence of binding precedent, in
interpreting Part I, Article 22 of our State Constitution, we are guided by the
First Circuit Court of Appeals’ balancing test, which weighs the First
Amendment rights of a news organization against the rights of a litigant
5
seeking confidential information. See Bruno & Stillman, Inc. v. Globe
Newspaper Co., 633 F.2d 583, 595-98 (1st Cir. 1980).
In Bruno & Stillman, the First Circuit vacated the district court’s
decision granting the boat company-plaintiff’s motion to compel the disclosure
of confidential sources and information conveyed by them to The Boston Globe.
Id. at 584, 599, 593. The plaintiff requested such disclosure to ascertain the
parties for a defamation claim. Id. at 584. The newspaper-defendant asserted
a conditional privilege
to refuse to disclose a reporter’s confidential source until the party
seeking disclosure establishes generally that the public interest in
disclosure is compelling enough to override the disruption or
threat to the continued free flow of information to the media by
showing specifically that (1) the information sought is critical to
plaintiff's claim and (2) the information is not available from other
sources.
Id. at 594. The First Circuit agreed and instructed courts faced with requests
for the discovery of journalistic materials to “be aware of the possibility that the
unlimited or unthinking allowance of such requests will impinge upon First
Amendment rights.” Id. at 595. It remanded the case for reconsideration of
the plaintiff’s motion to compel discovery and instructed the district court to
“balance the potential harm to the free flow of information that might result
against the asserted need for the requested information.” Id. at 596. The court
cited several factors for trial courts to consider, including whether the claim is
merely “a pretense for using discovery powers in a fishing expedition,” whether
there is a need for confidentiality between the journalist and the source, the
exhaustion of other non-confidential sources, and the importance of
confidentiality to preserve the journalist’s continued newsgathering
effectiveness. Id. at 597-98. In elaborating upon its balancing test, the First
Circuit further explained that:
Each party comes to this test holding a burden. Initially, the
movant must make a prima facie showing that his claim of need
and relevance is not frivolous. Upon such a showing, the burden
shifts to the objector to demonstrate the basis for withholding the
information. The court then must place those factors that relate to
the movant’s need for the information on one pan of the scales and
those that reflect the objector’s interest in confidentiality and the
potential injury to the free flow of information that disclosure
portends on the opposite pan.
In Re Cusumano, 162 F.3d 708, 716 (1st Cir. 1998) (citations omitted).
Although the Bruno & Stillman court ordered the district court to apply this
balancing test, it “deliberately refrain[ed] from further categorizing with any
6
precision what inquiries should be made by the court or in what sequence”
because the inquiry is “one that demands sensitivity, invites flexibility, and
defies formula.” Bruno & Stillman, 633 F.2d at 598. “While obviously the
discretion of the trial judge has wide scope, it is a discretion informed by an
awareness of First Amendment values and the precedential effect which
decision in any one case would be likely to have.” Id. The court also noted
that “[g]iven the sensitivity of inquiry in this delicate area, detailed findings of
fact and explanation of the decision would be appropriate.” Id.
We hold that this balancing test applies to a trial court’s review of a
petition seeking disclosure of an anonymous source from the press to ascertain
the identity of a potential defendant in a defamation action. Here, the trial
court ordered the disclosure of the Loan Chart source without analyzing the
applicability of the qualified newsgathering privilege or conducting any
balancing of interests. We therefore vacate the trial court’s disclosure order
and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
B. Brianbattersby’s Postings
Implode also challenges the trial court’s order mandating disclosure of
the source of the Brianbattersby’s postings. Implode argues that the trial court
erred in failing to balance Brianbattersy’s First Amendment rights against
Mortgage Specialists’ need to discover his identity. In ordering disclosure of
Brianbattersby’s identity, the court found that “[t]he maintenance of a free
press does not give a publisher a right to protect the identity of someone who
has provided it with unauthorized or defamatory information.”
“[A]n author’s decision to remain anonymous, like other decisions
concerning omissions or additions to the content of a publication, is an aspect
of the freedom of speech protected by the First Amendment.” McIntyre v. Ohio
Elections Comm’n, 514 U.S. 334, 342 (1995); see Buckley v. American
Constitutional Law Foundation, Inc., 525 U.S. 182, 199-200 (1999). This
protection extends to anonymous internet speech. See Reno v. American Civil
Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844, 870 (1997). However, “the anonymity of speech
. . . is not absolute and may be limited by defamation considerations.”
Independent News v. Brodie, 966 A.2d 432, 441 (Md. 2009) (citing Beauharnais
v. Illinois, 343 U.S. 250, 266 (1952) (“Libelous utterances [are] not . . . within
the area of constitutionally protected speech . . . .”)); see Chaplinsky v. New
Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 572 (1942).
We take this opportunity to adopt a standard for trial courts to apply
when a plaintiff requests disclosure of the identity of an anonymous defendant
who has posted allegedly defamatory material on the Internet.
In so doing, we recognize the complexity of the decision to order
disclosure regarding pseudonyms or usernames in the context of
7
the First Amendment and a defamation allegation. On the one
hand, posters have a First Amendment right to retain their
anonymity and not to be subject to frivolous suits for defamation
brought solely to unmask their identity. On the other, viable
causes of actions for defamation should not be barred in the
Internet context.
Brodie, 966 A.2d at 449 (citations omitted); see Doe v. Cahill, 884 A.2d 451,
457 (Del. 2005) (The “‘sue first, ask questions later’ approach, coupled with a
standard only minimally protective of the anonymity of defendants, will
discourage debate on important issues of public concern as more and more
anonymous posters censor their online statements in response to the likelihood
of being unmasked.”); Best Western Intern., Inc. v. Doe, No. CV-06-1537-PHX-
DGC, 2006 WL 2091695, at *1 (D. Ariz. July 25, 2006) (“Those who suffer
damages as a result of tortious or other actionable communications on the
Internet should be able to seek appropriate redress by preventing the
wrongdoers from hiding behind an illusory shield of purported First
Amendment rights.” (quotations omitted)).
Recently, several courts have enunciated rules regarding disclosure of
anonymous Internet speakers. See Brodie, 966 A.2d at 447-57; Cahill, 884
A.2d at 457-61. The seminal case is Dendrite International, Inc. v. Doe
Number 3, 775 A.2d 756 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 2001). The plaintiff
corporation, Dendrite, sued several John Doe defendants for defamation,
based, in part, on the posting of statements on a website forum. Dendrite, 775
A.2d at 763. Dendrite appealed an order denying its request to conduct limited
expedited discovery to ascertain the identity of the John Doe defendants. Id. at
760. A three-judge panel of the Superior Court of New Jersey affirmed the
denial of Dendrite’s motion based upon the trial court’s finding that Dendrite
failed to establish harm resulting from the Internet comments. Id. The court
set forth the following analytical framework to be applied by trial courts in
assessing applications to compel disclosure of the identities of anonymous
Internet posters by Internet service providers:
The trial court must consider and decide those applications by
striking a balance between the well-established First Amendment
right to speak anonymously, and the right of the plaintiff to protect
its proprietary interests and reputation through the assertion of
recognizable claims based on the actionable conduct of the
anonymous, fictitiously-named defendants.
We hold that when such an application is made, the trial
court should first require the plaintiff to undertake efforts to notify
the anonymous posters that they are the subject of a subpoena or
application for an order of disclosure, and withhold action to afford
the fictitiously-named defendants a reasonable opportunity to file
8
and serve opposition to the application. These notification efforts
should include posting a message of notification of the identity
discovery request to the anonymous user on the [Internet service
provider’s] pertinent message board.
The court shall also require the plaintiff to identify and set
forth the exact statements purportedly made by each anonymous
poster that plaintiff alleges constitutes actionable speech.
The complaint and all information provided to the court
should be carefully reviewed to determine whether plaintiff has set
forth a prima facie cause of action against the fictitiously-named
anonymous defendants. In addition to establishing that its action
can withstand a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim upon
which relief can be granted . . . the plaintiff must produce
sufficient evidence supporting each element of its cause of action,
on a prima facie basis, prior to a court ordering the disclosure of
the identity of the unnamed defendant.
Finally, assuming the court concludes that the plaintiff has
presented a prima facie cause of action, the court must balance
the defendant’s First Amendment right of anonymous free speech
against the strength of the prima facie case presented and the
necessity for the disclosure of the anonymous defendant’s identity
to allow the plaintiff to properly proceed.
The application of these procedures and standards must be
undertaken and analyzed on a case-by-case basis. The guiding
principle is a result based on a meaningful analysis and a proper
balancing of the equities and rights at issue.
Id. at 760-61.
We conclude that the Dendrite test is the appropriate standard by which
to strike the balance between a defamation plaintiff’s right to protect its
reputation and a defendant’s right to exercise free speech anonymously.
Accordingly, we join those courts which endorse the Dendrite test. See Brodie,
966 A.2d at 457; Mobilisa, Inc. v. Doe, 170 P.3d 712, 719-21 (Ariz. Ct. App.
Div. 2007); Krinsky v. Doe 6, 72 Cal. Rptr. 3d 231, 241-48 (Ct. App. 2008);
Best Western, 2006 WL 2091695, at *4. We hold that the qualified privilege to
speak anonymously requires the trial court to “balanc[e] . . . the equities and
rights at issue,” thus ensuring that a plaintiff alleging defamation has a valid
reason for piercing the speaker’s anonymity. Dendrite, 775 A.2d at 761. We
accordingly vacate the trial court’s disclosure order and remand for further
proceedings consistent with the Dendrite test.
9
II. Production of Other Documents from the Loan Chart Source
Implode also argues that the trial court erred in ordering it to produce all
documents concerning Mortgage Specialists that it received from the Loan
Chart source. Implode contends that the newsgathering privilege protects it
from producing documents and information acquired through the
newsgathering process. Because the trial court did not analyze this issue in
light of the newsgathering privilege, we vacate the trial court’s production order
and remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
III. Republication of the Loan Chart and Brianbattersby’s Postings
Finally, Implode argues that the trial court erred in enjoining it from
republishing the Loan Chart and the two Brianbattersby postings because the
injunction constitutes an unlawful “prior restraint” on publication in violation
of the First Amendment to the Federal Constitution. Mortgage Specialists
counters that the publication of the Loan Chart is unlawful because it violates
the confidentiality requirements of RSA 383:10-b (2006) and constitutes an
invasion of privacy. It further asserts that the Brianbattersby postings are
unlawful because they are false and defamatory.
Generally, “[w]e will uphold the issuance of an injunction absent an error
of law, an unsustainable exercise of discretion, or clearly erroneous findings of
fact.” N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Mottolo, 155 N.H. 57, 63 (2007). In cases
involving alleged prior restraint of speech, the trial court must consider
whether publication “threaten[s] an interest more fundamental than the First
Amendment itself.” Procter & Gamble Co. v. Bankers Trust Co., 78 F.3d 219,
227 (6th Cir. 1996). “Only if a plaintiff can meet this substantially higher
standard can a court issue an injunction prohibiting publication of pure
speech.” Ford Motor Co. v. Lane, 67 F. Supp. 2d 745, 749 (E.D. Mich. 1999);
see McDermott v. Ampersand Publishing, LLC, 593 F.3d 950, 957 (9th Cir.
2010) (“[A] higher bar than usual is set for those seeking injunctive relief . . .
where there is at least some risk that constitutionally protected speech will be
enjoined.” (quotation omitted)). In considering the validity of such injunctions
under the First Amendment, we have “an obligation to ‘make an independent
examination of the whole record’ in order to make sure that ‘the judgment does
not constitute a forbidden intrusion on the field of free expression.’ ” Bose
Corp. v. Consumers Union of U.S., Inc., 466 U.S. 485, 499 (1984) (quoting New
York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 284-86 (1964)).
Courts and commentators define prior restraint as a judicial order or
administrative system that restricts speech, rather than merely punishing it
after the fact. See Meyerson, Rewriting Near v. Minnesota: Creating a Complete
Definition of Prior Restraint, 52 Mercer L. Rev. 1087, 1087, 1096 (2001). In
reviewing prior restraint cases, the United States Supreme Court has stated:
“The court has interpreted . . . [First Amendment] guarantees to afford special
10
protection against orders that prohibit the publication or broadcast of
particular information or commentary — orders that impose a ‘previous’ or
‘prior’ restraint on speech.” Nebraska Press Assn v. Stuart, 427 U.S. 539, 556
(1976). “Temporary restraining orders and permanent injunctions — i.e., court
orders that actually forbid speech activities — are classic examples of prior
restraints.” Alexander v. United States, 509 U.S. 544, 550 (1993). “[P]rior
restraints on speech and publication are the most serious and the least
tolerable infringement on First Amendment rights.” Stuart, 427 U.S. at 559.
In the seminal prior restraint case, Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697
(1931), the defendant was the publisher of a newspaper containing anti-Semitic
articles critical of local officials. In issuing a permanent injunction against the
defendant, the trial court relied upon a state statute authorizing injunction of
“malicious, scandalous and defamatory” publications. Id. at 701-02, 706. The
state supreme court affirmed, and the publisher appealed to the United States
Supreme Court. Id. at 706-07. The Court reversed, finding that the state
statute violated the freedom of the press because it was the “essence of
censorship.” Id. at 713. The Court explained that prior restraints may be
issued only in rare and extraordinary circumstances, such as when necessary
to prevent the publication of troop movements during time of war, to prevent
the publication of obscene material, and to prevent the overthrow of the
government. Id. at 716.
In the Pentagon Papers case, New York Times Co. v. United States, 403
U.S. 713, 714 (1971), the federal government sought to enjoin The New York
Times and The Washington Post from publishing a stolen classified study on
United States decision-making policy in Vietnam. Although the newspapers
sought to publish these top-secret documents during the Vietnam War and the
documents contained highly classified information that presumably threatened
national security, the Supreme Court held that even those threats to important
governmental interests could not overcome the established presumption
against prior restraint on speech. Id.
It is a “hallowed First Amendment principle that the press shall not be
subjected to prior restraints.” Matter of Providence Journal Co., 820 F.2d
1342, 1344 (1st Cir. 1986). “Of all the constitutional imperatives protecting a
free press under the First Amendment, the most significant is the restriction
against prior restraint upon publication.” Id. at 1345. When a prior restraint
takes the form of a court-issued injunction, the risk of infringing speech
protected under the First Amendment increases. Cf. Madsen v. Women’s
Health Center, Inc., 512 U.S. 753, 764 (1994) (“Injunctions . . . carry greater
risks of censorship and discriminatory application than do general
ordinances.”). The danger of a prior restraint is that it “has an immediate and
irreversible sanction” which “freezes” speech “at least for the time.” Stuart, 427
U.S. at 559; see Matter of Providence Journal Co., 820 F.2d at 1345-46. For
these reasons, “[a]ny prior restraint on expression comes . . . with a heavy
11
presumption against its constitutional validity.” Organization for a Better
Austin v. Keefe, 402 U.S. 415, 419 (1971) (quotation omitted).
“When . . . the prior restraint impinges upon the right of the press to
communicate news and involves expression in the form of pure speech —
speech not connected with any conduct — the presumption of
unconstitutionality is virtually insurmountable.” Matter of Providence Journal
Co., 820 F.2d at 1348. “As the Supreme Court made clear in Stuart, a party
seeking a prior restraint against the press must show not only that publication
will result in damage to a near sacred right, but also that the prior restraint
will be effective and that no less extreme measures are available.” Id. at 1351
(noting that “[t]he trial court failed to make a finding as to either of these
issues, an omission making the invalidity of the order even more transparent”).
“Even where questions of allegedly urgent national security, or competing
constitutional interests, are concerned, [the Supreme Court has] imposed this
‘most extraordinary remedy’ only where the evil that would result from the
reportage is both great and certain and cannot be mitigated by less intrusive
measures.” CBS Inc. v. Davis, 510 U.S. 1315, 1317 (1994) (Blackmun, J., in
chambers) (quotations, citations, and brackets omitted).
Although the injunction here prohibits republication of the Loan Chart
and postings, rather than their publication in the first instance, the injunction
is nevertheless a restriction on what Implode may publish in the future.
Accordingly, we conclude that the injunction effectively functions as a prior
restraint that “freezes” speech at least for a time.
We reject Mortgage Specialists’ argument that such restraint is justified
because publication of the Loan Chart violates the confidentiality requirements
of RSA 383:10-b and constitutes an “unlawful” invasion of privacy. Here, the
trial court made no finding that Implode unlawfully obtained the Loan Chart
and Mortgage Specialists makes no such assertion. The Supreme Court has
held that the lawfulness of publishing information does not depend upon the
nature of the information itself, but, rather, upon whether the information was
obtained lawfully by the publisher. See Smith v. Daily Mail Publishing Co., 443
U.S. 97, 101-06 (1979). Thus, the Court has invalidated prior restraints on
publication of information lawfully obtained by the publisher, even when the
information was confidential or initially obtained unlawfully by a third party.
See, e.g., The Florida Star v. B.J.F., 491 U.S. 524, 535 (1989) (acknowledging
“the ‘timidity and self-censorship’ which may result from allowing the media to
be punished for publishing certain truthful information”); Cox Broadcasting
Corp. v. Cohn, 420 U.S. 469, 496-97 (1975); New York Times Co., 403 U.S. at
714 (refusing to suppress publication of papers stolen from the Pentagon by a
third party).
In Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514, 535 (2001), the Court held that a
radio broadcaster who lawfully obtained a taped recording of a telephone
12
conversation from an unknown third party, who had made the recording in
violation of federal and state laws, could not be held liable for intentional
disclosure of illegally intercepted communications. The Court considered the
question, “Where the . . . publisher of information has obtained the information
in question in a manner lawful in itself but from a source who has obtained it
unlawfully, may the government punish the ensuing publication of that
information based on the defect in a chain?” Id. at 528. Relying upon its
decision in the Pentagon Papers case, the Court concluded “that a stranger’s
illegal conduct does not suffice to remove the First Amendment shield from
speech about a matter of public concern.” Id. at 535. The Court held that
because the publisher had played no part in the illegal interception, the
petitioner’s privacy rights were outweighed by the respondent’s interest in
publishing matters of public importance. Id. at 534-35.
Even when confidential information has allegedly been obtained
unlawfully by the publisher, courts have invalidated prior restraints on
publication. “[T]he prior restraint doctrine [is not] inapplicable because the
[information to be published] was obtained through the ‘calculated misdeeds’ of
[the publisher.]” Davis, 510 U.S. at 1318. In Procter & Gamble, the Sixth
Circuit Court of Appeals reversed a district court’s permanent injunction
prohibiting a magazine from disclosing information contained in documents
filed under seal by parties to a commercial litigation. Procter & Gamble Co., 78
F.3d at 225. The court determined that the magazine obtained the documents
in violation of a protective order, through a leak from the parties. Id. at 223.
In reversing, the Sixth Circuit held that the planned publication of the
information did not constitute a grave threat to a critical governmental interest
or to a constitutional right sufficient to justify a prior restraint. Id. at 227. The
court also found that the trial court’s inquiry into how the magazine obtained
the documents was misguided. Id. at 225. The court explained that “[w]hile
these might be appropriate lines of inquiry for a contempt proceeding or a
criminal prosecution, they are not appropriate bases for issuing a prior
restraint.” Id.
Similarly, in Lane, the district court denied Ford Motor Company’s
motion to enjoin an Internet website from posting allegedly misappropriated
trade secrets. Lane, 67 F. Supp. 2d at 746. The respondent website had
obtained “closely guard[ed] strategic, marketing, and product development
plans” from anonymous internal sources at Ford. Id. at 746. The court held
that Ford’s commercial interests in its trade secrets and the website’s allegedly
unlawful conduct in obtaining the documents could not justify a prior
restraint. Id. at 752-53. “Courts have steadfastly held that the First
Amendment does not permit the prior restraint of speech by way of injunction,
even in circumstances where the disclosure threatens vital economic interests.”
Id. at 753-74.
13
While it may be true that Mortgage Specialists’ loan information is
“confidential,” such information is certainly not more sensitive than the
documents at issue in the Pentagon Papers case. Nor are the Loan Chart and
postings more inflammatory than the anti-Semitic publications at issue in
Near. Accordingly, we conclude that Mortgage Specialists’ interests in
protecting its privacy and reputation do not justify the extraordinary remedy of
prior restraint. As the Supreme Court has recognized, “No prior decisions
support the claim that the interest of an individual in being free from public
criticism of his business practices . . . warrants use of the injunctive power of a
court. Designating the conduct as an invasion of privacy . . . is not sufficient to
support [a prior restraint].” Keefe, 402 U.S. at 419-20; see Davis, 510 U.S. at
1318 (“Subsequent civil or criminal proceedings, rather than prior restraints,
ordinarily are the appropriate sanction for calculated defamation or other
misdeeds in the First Amendment context.”); Procter & Gamble Co., 78 F.3d at
225 (“The private litigants’ interest in protecting their vanity or their
commercial self-interest simply does not qualify as grounds for imposing a
prior restraint.”); Matter of Providence Journal Co., 820 F.2d at 1345 (“If a
publisher is to print a libelous, defamatory, or injurious story, an appropriate
remedy, though not always totally effective, lies not in an injunction against
that publication but in a damages or criminal action after publication.”). We
therefore reverse the trial court’s order prohibiting republication of the Loan
Chart and Brianbattersby postings.
Vacated in part; reversed in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
14