THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Employment Security
No. 2009-705
APPEAL OF ROY W. BROOKS
(New Hampshire Department of Employment Security)
Argued: October 28, 2010
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2011
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Anthony I. Blenkinsop, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the New Hampshire
Department of Employment Security.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Roy W. Brooks, appeals a decision of the
appeal tribunal (tribunal), as affirmed by the appellate board, of the New
Hampshire Department of Employment Security (DES) finding him ineligible for
unemployment benefits because he was discharged for misconduct connected
with his work. See RSA 282-A:32, I(b) (2010). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Brooks began working for
James B. Dooley, who operated a small plumbing and heating business, as a
full-time plumber in early 2008. Brooks was a good employee with no prior
disciplinary issues. On Friday, January 2, 2009, Brooks was working on a
project at Townhomes of Beverly in Beverly, Massachusetts. Dooley called
Brooks at the end of his workday and asked Brooks to be “on-call” for the
weekend to cover any emergencies because Dooley was in Maine for the
weekend. Dooley anticipated a large number of service calls for frozen pipes
because of predicted cold weather throughout the weekend and expected
Brooks to handle these calls. Brooks testified that he was confident he would
be called during the weekend, but not again that day. Brooks left the worksite
at 3:30 p.m. and arrived at home in Manchester at approximately 4:45.
Brooks then received a call around 5:00 p.m. from Townhomes’
management company, asking him to return to deal with frozen pipes. Brooks
could not drive because of a suspended license and asked a co-worker, Phil
Sties, to drive him to Beverly. Brooks and Sties arrived at Townhomes around
6:15. After they arrived, a Townhomes maintenance worker reported smelling
alcohol on Brooks’s breath. Dooley then received a call from Townhomes
around 7:30, informing him that Brooks was under the influence of alcohol.
Dooley called Brooks, and Brooks told him that he had had “a couple drinks,”
but was not drunk. Dooley’s wife also heard the conversation over a
speakerphone, and testified that Brooks said that he “had had a couple when
he had gone home.” However, Brooks testified that he told Dooley that he had
one drink at home.
Dooley also spoke with Sties, who told Dooley that Brooks had been
drinking, but was not drunk. Brooks told Dooley he would take a breathalyzer
to prove he was not drunk, but Dooley told Brooks to leave the job site to avoid
any further confrontation. Dooley did not have a written policy regarding either
“on-call” status or reporting to work under the influence of alcohol because his
policy was for employees to use “common sense.” Dooley subsequently
terminated Brooks solely because of the Townhomes customer complaint.
Brooks applied for unemployment benefits, but DES denied his
application because he was discharged for misconduct connected with his
employment. Brooks appealed and the tribunal held a hearing at which only
Brooks, Dooley and Dooley’s wife testified. The tribunal affirmed the denial of
benefits because it concluded that Brooks reported to work under the influence
of alcohol. The tribunal found that Brooks had “a couple of drinks” based
upon the sworn testimony of Dooley’s wife and a report of a maintenance
worker that Brooks’s breath smelled of alcohol. While it was not explicitly
relied upon in the tribunal’s decision, the tribunal accepted into evidence, over
Brooks’s objection, a memorandum from Townhomes’ property manager, which
indicated that Brooks was staggering, slurring his words, and that he urinated
in the patio of one of the units. Finally, the tribunal concluded that although
Dooley did not have a written manual or employee handbook, he had a
legitimate expectation that Brooks would not report to work under the
influence of alcohol, and that Brooks should have realized that being “on-call”
meant being “ready to report for work in a condition to work.”
2
Brooks then filed a motion to re-open the tribunal decision based upon
newly discovered evidence, which was denied. Brooks subsequently appealed
to the appellate board, which sustained the tribunal’s ruling. Brooks’s motion
for reconsideration was also denied. This appeal followed.
On appeal, Brooks first argues he could not have “deliberately” violated
his employer’s rules because his employer did not have written or oral
company policies outlining the duties of an “on-call” employee regarding
alcohol consumption. He also asserts that Dooley did not sustain his burden
of proof that Brooks was under the influence of alcohol when he arrived at the
job site.
In reviewing the decision of the tribunal, we are confined to the record
and will not substitute our judgment for its judgment as to the weight of the
evidence on questions of fact. RSA 282-A:67, IV, V (2010); Appeal of Riendeau,
152 N.H. 396, 398 (2005). We will uphold the decision of the tribunal unless
its findings or conclusions are unauthorized, affected by an error of law or
clearly erroneous in view of all the evidence presented. RSA 282-A:67, V;
Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. at 398.
New Hampshire’s unemployment compensation system is predicated
upon benefits being paid to those who become unemployed through no fault of
their own. Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. at 398. No benefits are to be paid,
however, to an employee who is terminated as a result of “misconduct
connected with his work.” RSA 282-A:32, I(b).
We have previously rejected a definition of misconduct that requires
proof of willful and wanton disregard of an employer’s interests. Appeal of
Riendeau, 152 N.H. at 398. Instead, we have adopted a less stringent two-
pronged definition of misconduct applicable to RSA 282-A:32, I(b). Id. Under
the first prong, isolated or inadvertent instances of unsatisfactory conduct are
not sufficient for a finding of misconduct, but recurring careless or negligent
acts do constitute misconduct. Id. The negligence need not be of such a
degree or recurrence as to manifest wrongful intent or evil design or to show
intentional and substantial disregard. Id. However, under the second prong, a
single act may be sufficient to support a finding of misconduct if it is a
deliberate violation of a company rule that is reasonably designed to protect the
legitimate business interests of the employer. Id.
Brooks argues that the tribunal erred in finding that he was discharged
for misconduct under the second prong. He asserts that a denial of benefits
pursuant to RSA 282-A:32 requires evidence that he “acted in a manner . . .
which he knew to be contrary to established company rules.” Accordingly, he
contends that his actions did not constitute a deliberate violation of company
3
policy because Dooley did not have a written or oral policy regarding alcohol
consumption for on-call employees.
The tribunal specifically found that while Dooley did not have a written
policy or an employee handbook, he still had a “legitimate expectation that
[Brooks] be in a condition to be able to work.” Dooley testified that his policy
regarding reporting to work under the influence was “common sense,” and that
he had never had a discussion regarding alcohol with Brooks because there
“never was an alcohol problem.” The tribunal also discounted Brooks’s excuse
that he had never been “on-call” before because he “knew or should have
realized that being on call meant” being prepared to report to work in an
acceptable condition. Accordingly, the tribunal concluded that Brooks’s
actions constituted a deliberate violation of the conduct required by his
employer.
Based upon these findings, we cannot say that the tribunal incorrectly
applied the definition of “misconduct.” The tribunal took into account Brooks’s
argument that he was unaware of the expectations of an “on-call” employee
and that Dooley never provided him with a written “on-call” policy, and found it
to be “self serving.” As a factual matter, the record provides ample support for
the tribunal’s conclusion that as a mature individual and an experienced
plumber, Brooks knew or should have known that his employer had a
legitimate expectation that he would be prepared to work if called upon.
Moreover, as a matter of law, we decline to read into RSA 282-A:32 a
requirement that an employee can deliberately violate a company policy only if
such a policy is previously disclosed to the employee. Such a narrow view is
inconsistent with the statute, which does not limit “misconduct” to a violation
of an employer’s written or specifically disclosed rules. Reading such a
requirement into the statute would force employers to provide their employees
with notice of every potential form of “misconduct” that could result in their
termination and subsequent denial of benefits. Additionally, Brooks’s reading
is contrary to the purpose of the statute, which is to provide benefits to
individuals who have become unemployed through no fault of their own.
Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. at 398. Accordingly, we hold that under the
second prong of our definition of “misconduct,” company rules are not limited
to specifically disclosed rules and policies.
We also emphasize that Brooks’s argument ignores a key phrase of the
second prong of our test for finding “misconduct.” A single act may be
sufficient to support a finding of misconduct if the company rule is “reasonably
designed to protect the legitimate business interests of the employer.” Id.
Here, while the tribunal did not make any specific findings regarding this issue,
there is ample support in the record that a prohibition on reporting to work
under the influence of alcohol protected Dooley’s legitimate business interests.
4
Dooley testified that a customer complained that Brooks was under the
influence of alcohol and wanted Brooks removed from the property. He also
testified that the customer did not want Brooks on the property again in the
future. As a result of Brooks’s misconduct, the customer had to call another
plumbing company to rectify the frozen pipes. Based upon this testimony, the
tribunal could have concluded that Dooley was harmed not only by a potential
competitor being called to take over the job, but also by the risk of damaging
his relationship with a customer and harm to his reputation in general. See id.
at 399 (explaining that when a convenience store employee sold cigarettes to a
minor, the employer was harmed by a monetary fine, damage to its reputation
and the risk of losing its cigarette sales license).
Nonetheless, Brooks points to our prior case law interpreting RSA 282-
A:32. He contends that in all of the cases in which we have affirmed the
tribunal’s finding of “misconduct,” the claimant failed to comply with a written
policy. See, e.g., Appeal of N.H. Sweepstakes Commission, 130 N.H. 659 (1988)
(employee terminated for violating newly-enacted written policy that an
employee could not take company records from work premises without
supervisory approval); Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. 396 (employee terminated
for violating written company policy regarding sale of tobacco to minors). While
the claimants in these cases violated written policies, we affirmed the tribunals’
decisions because the records in both cases supported the tribunals’ findings
of misconduct. Appeal of N.H. Sweepstakes Commission, 130 N.H. at 665;
Appeal of Riendeau, 152 N.H. at 399. Our decisions in these cases did not rest
upon the fact that the policies were in writing or expressly communicated to
the employee prior to the infraction.
Brooks also relies upon our decision in Appeal of Lakeview
NeuroRehabilitation Ctr., 150 N.H. 205 (2003), and contends that we affirmed
the tribunal’s grant of benefits because the claimant had not violated any
written policy. Contrary to Brooks’s argument, we affirmed the tribunal’s
decision because its factual findings indicated that the claimant did not engage
in any misconduct at all. Id. at 209-10. Instead, the tribunal found that the
claimant “could not be faulted for his inability to perform his job functions”
because of a medical condition. Id. at 210.
Finally, Brooks argues that the tribunal erred when it concluded that
Dooley had sustained his burden of proof that Brooks was under the influence
of alcohol. Brooks asserts that the tribunal erred in basing its decision upon
unsworn, hearsay evidence. We disagree. The tribunal was within its
discretion to admit hearsay evidence because the rules of evidence do not apply
in adjudicative proceedings. RSA 541-A:33, II (2007). Additionally, as a matter
of fact, the tribunal found that Brooks reported to work under the influence of
alcohol. The finding is supported by sworn testimony that Brooks admitted to
having “a couple of drinks” and that a property manager reported the smell of
5
alcohol on Brooks’s breath. Based upon this evidence, the tribunal concluded
that the employer’s testimony was more credible than the claimant’s testimony.
The record thus supports the tribunal’s conclusion that Brooks reported to
work under the influence of alcohol and we cannot say that the determination
was clearly erroneous.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6