THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Laconia Family Division
No. 2009-751
IN THE MATTER OF
MARTIN F. KUROWSKI AND BRENDA A. KUROWSKI
Argued: January 6, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2011
Law Office of Joshua L. Gordon, of Concord (Joshua L. Gordon on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
John Anthony Simmons, Sr., of Hampton, by brief and orally, for the
respondent.
Michael Donnelly, of Purcellville, Virginia, on the brief, for the Home
School Legal Defense Association, Christian Home Educators of New
Hampshire, and Catholics United for Home Education, as amici curiae.
Welts, White & Fontaine, P.C., of Nashua (Lisa A. Biron on the brief), for
Cornerstone Policy Research, as amicus curiae.
LYNN, J. In recent years, home schooling has become a widely used
alternative to more traditional public or private schools as the vehicle for
educating children. Courts have neither the mandate nor the expertise to
determine, from among these options, which generally provides the most
suitable education. When divorced parents are unable to agree on such
educational choices for their minor children, however, courts are called upon to
make these difficult and sensitive decisions, often in a highly contentious
atmosphere – which may be all the more so if the parents’ divergent views are
affected by their individual religious beliefs. The case now before us is such a
case.
The respondent, Brenda A. Kurowski (mother), appeals an order of the
Laconia Family Division (Sadler, J.), recommended by the Marital Master
(Garner, M.), granting the request of the petitioner, Martin F. Kurowski (father),
to compel the enrollment of their minor daughter (daughter) in public school
for the 2009-2010 school year.* Although mother challenges the trial court’s
order on broad grounds, including claims that it violates her constitutional
parenting and religious rights, we affirm the decision on the narrow basis that
it represents a sustainable exercise of the trial court’s discretion to determine
the educational placement that is in daughter’s best interests.
The particular circumstances of this case bear emphasizing. The parties
have had joint parenting responsibility for daughter at all times, including the
joint authority to make decisions relating to her education. As two fit parents,
they also have equal constitutional parenting rights. Yet, over the years, they
have continually disagreed about whether daughter should be home-schooled
or enrolled in public school. Because the parties could not reach a joint
decision and father sought resolution in court, the trial court had to decide the
dispute, guided by the best interests standard set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I
(Supp. 2010). Our only role is to decide whether the trial court committed legal
error or unsustainably exercised its discretion. While this case has religious
overtones, it is not about religion. While it involves home schooling, it is not
about the merits of home versus public schooling. This case is only about
resolving a dispute between two parents, with equal constitutional parenting
rights and joint decision-making responsibility, who have been unable to agree
how to best educate daughter.
I
The facts are drawn from the record. The parties were divorced in 1999
in Massachusetts, at which time they stipulated to joint legal custody of
*
Although the trial court’s order governed placement of daughter for the 2009-2010 school year
only, and that school year is now concluded, neither party has suggested that this case is moot.
See Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 160 N.H. 253, 255 (2010). In any
event, we note that the question of mootness is not subject to rigid rules, id. at 255-56, and
conclude that a decision on the merits is justified because the case involves a matter which is
capable of repetition yet evading review. Appeal of Hinsdale Fed. of Teachers, 133 N.H. 272, 276
(1990).
2
daughter who was an infant. At all times relevant to this appeal, daughter has
resided primarily with mother. In 2002, the divorce decree was registered in
New Hampshire after mother moved to this state with daughter. At the time of
this move, daughter was about three years old.
In October 2002, the parties stipulated to a routine residential
responsibility schedule that gave father time with daughter one evening per
week and on alternate weekends from Friday evening until Sunday evening.
They also agreed to “consult with one another with respect to the educational
plans for said child.” The subsequent post-divorce proceedings were protracted
and we therefore mainly focus on the facts surrounding daughter’s education.
Daughter attended a private school for kindergarten and mother decided
to home school her for first grade. In 2005, father filed a contempt motion in
which he alleged that mother had unilaterally decided to home school
daughter. He also related his concern that daughter’s home schooling was
based upon mother’s religious practice, which had the effect of isolating
daughter from her peers. Father asked the trial court to require mother to
consult with him with respect to educational plans and involve him in any
decision-making. In her response, mother alleged, among other things, that
the parties had had many conversations about the educational plans for
daughter.
A hearing was conducted on father’s contempt motion, at which both
parties testified. Father testified that mother had failed to appropriately
consult with him. In addition, he related his concern that daughter spent time
exclusively with children who are part of her mother’s church and religion,
causing her to be uncomfortable in his family environment, and expressed his
desire that daughter attend school outside mother’s home to experience
diversity and improve her ability to accept differences in his home. Mother
testified to conversations the parties had had about daughter’s schooling,
described the nature of daughter’s home school education that was based upon
her religious convictions, and explained her objection to public schooling. At
the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court complimented the parties on their
parental devotion and encouraged them to continue to work cooperatively to
address daughter’s educational needs. In its April 2006 order, the trial court
documented the parties’ respective concerns, remarking that “[w]hen joint legal
custody breaks down because the parties are unable to reach agreements, the
Court’s powers are limited.” It noted, “The father is not requesting . . . that the
Court resolve the parties’ dispute by directing the mother to enroll the child in
the public schools or in any other private school,” and “The Court is reluctant
to substitute itself as a decision maker and counsel has not asked the Court to
do so.” Ultimately, the trial court denied father’s contempt motion, rejecting
his claim that mother had failed to consult with him on daughter’s education.
3
In January 2007, father filed a motion for modification of parenting time,
seeking to alter the parties’ October 2002 partial stipulation. In the motion,
father alleged: “At her mother’s insistence, and against [his] wishes, [daughter]
is home-schooled through a program that is affiliated with a church that both
[mother] and [daughter] attend on a regular basis”; daughter is withdrawn
during his parenting time and has difficulty integrating with his new wife and
new child; mother’s choices for daughter’s education, religion and social
environment are detrimental to daughter’s welfare; and mother repeatedly
interfered with his parental rights. According to father, daughter’s therapist
agreed that the father-daughter relationship suffered because she strongly
identified with her mother and her mother’s beliefs. He requested that the
court appoint a guardian ad litem (GAL) to represent daughter’s best interests
and recommend changes to the parenting schedule, and issue a parenting plan
describing the parties’ parental rights and responsibilities. Mother objected,
alleging that the therapist had noted daughter’s “strong and loving relationship
with both parties” and did not recommend a change in parenting time, and
that father had failed to demonstrate that the current parenting schedule was
detrimental to daughter’s physical, mental or emotional health as required for
modification under RSA 461-A:11 (Supp. 2010). In March 2007, the trial court
appointed a GAL and, without making a finding as to the truth of his
allegations, required father to “specifically identify the relief he seeks (so as to
permit the Court to determine what legal standard should apply to the
request)” and to “file a list of the specific Orders he requests.”
Father submitted a proposed parenting plan in April 2007. In November
2007, before this plan was acted upon by the court, father filed motions to
amend his proposed parenting plan and his pending motion for modification of
parenting plan. He alleged that “it is in [daughter’s] best interests to have
equal parenting time,” and he sought both to compel daughter’s enrollment in
public school and to expand his routine parenting time. Over mother’s
objection, the trial court granted his request to submit an amended proposed
parenting plan and requested the GAL “to conduct her investigation with
reference to that proposal and to [mother’s] proposal for modification if any.”
In September 2008, the GAL recommended that father be awarded
expanded parenting time, that daughter not immediately transition fully into
public school, and that daughter attend a traditional school beginning in the
winter of her fifth grade year “unless jointly decided that she should continue
with her home schooling program.” Also in September, the parties submitted
proposed parenting plans and supplemental pleadings, illustrating their
disagreement on daughter’s school placement as well as on father’s routine
parenting time. Father sought to have daughter immediately enrolled in three
public school classes, and enrolled in public school full time commencing in
January 2010. Also, father sought an immediate increase in his parenting
time to three consecutive weekends from Thursday afternoon through Monday
4
afternoon “[u]ntil January 2010 or until such time as [daughter] matriculates
to full time public school.” Mother sought to continue daughter’s home
schooling “[s]o long as she continues to perform well academically and be
enrolled in outside activities.” Additionally, mother proposed a schedule of
father’s routine parenting time to include every other weekend and each
Tuesday evening.
On September 24, 2008, the parties and the GAL agreed to a parenting
plan, which was approved by the trial court in November 2008 (2008 Parenting
Plan). Under the plan, the parties agreed to joint decision-making on all major
decisions, including daughter’s education and religious training. They also
agreed to expand father’s routine parenting time to alternating weekends from
Thursday afternoon through Monday afternoon, and one week day evening in
alternating weeks. With respect to daughter’s schooling, the plan took into
account that she was still receiving home schooling, and stated: “Irrespective
of any other meetings the parents may hold, there shall be a meeting in
January, 2010, when [daughter] is completing fifth grade, to discuss
[daughter’s] transition to public school, unless the parents agree she should
continue home schooling at that time.” In its order approving the 2008
Parenting Plan, the trial court stated that the parties had “agreed that the
Court could schedule a one day hearing after June 1, 2009 on the issue
whether the minor child should be enrolled in public school.”
In January 2009, daughter began attending three classes at public
school to augment her home school education. In February 2009, mother
moved to modify the 2008 Parenting Plan alleging that daughter was
experiencing “extreme difficulty” and that her “emotional and mental health
have been negatively impacted by the increased time with [father].” In March,
the GAL filed a motion reporting that daughter was experiencing some difficulty
with the length of father’s parenting time and that she needed help bonding
with him. Without resolving mother’s motion to modify, the trial court slightly
reduced father’s time for residential responsibility on a temporary basis so that
daughter returned to her mother on Sunday evenings. The GAL subsequently
recommended that father’s routine parenting time resume. Further pleadings
were filed by the parties, and a hearing was held on June 2, 2009, regarding
pending motions, including the school placement issue. At the hearing,
mother, father and the GAL testified, and the parties submitted several
exhibits.
On July 14, 2009, the trial court issued an order, finding that the
parents “have had a long standing disagreement whether [daughter] should be
home schooled, and that their level of communication makes it virtually
impossible for them to reach an agreement about this issue,” and ruling that
daughter would attend public school in the 2009-2010 academic year. It
denied mother’s motion to modify the 2008 Parenting Plan to the extent that
5
she was seeking a dramatic deviation from the existing orders, and ordered
some changes to the parenting schedule pursuant to the parties’ requests.
Mother moved to reconsider the order and to stay that portion of the order
requiring that daughter be enrolled in public school pending the outcome of an
appeal. The trial court denied both motions, and this appeal followed.
When reviewing a trial court’s decision on parenting rights and
responsibilities, our role is limited to determining whether it clearly appears
that the trial court engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See In
the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. 707, 713 (2007) (decided under former
statute); see also RSA 461-A:2, I(d) (Supp. 2010) (stating that purposes of RSA
chapter 461-A include “[g]rant[ing] . . . courts the widest discretion in
developing a parenting plan”). We consider only “whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made,” and we will not disturb the trial court’s determination if it could
reasonably have been made. In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. at 713
(quotations omitted).
The trial court’s discretion necessarily extends to matters such as
assigning weight to evidence and assessing the credibility and demeanor of
witnesses. See id. Conflicts in the testimony, questions about the credibility of
witnesses, and the weight assigned to testimony are matters for the trial court
to resolve. See id. Indeed, resolution of the best interests of a child depends to
a large extent upon the firsthand assessment of the credibility of witnesses,
and the findings of the trial court are binding upon this court if supported by
the evidence. In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275, 281 (2006).
To the extent an appealing party argues that the trial court committed error
involving questions of law, we review such issues de novo. See In re Alex C.,
161 N.H. __, __ (decided November 30, 2010).
II
Mother first argues that the trial court erred in utilizing the best interests
standard to resolve the school placement issue without first finding that father
proved one of the statutory circumstances necessary for modification of a
parenting plan under RSA 461-A:11. This argument rests upon her
characterization of the trial court’s decision as a ruling on “the petitioner’s
request to modify the parenting order.” In its July 2009 order, the trial court
approached the school placement issue as one in which the parties, who have
joint decision-making authority concerning daughter, had never reached an
agreement, and resolved the dispute by applying the bests interests standard.
See RSA 461-A:4, :6 (Supp. 2010). When mother challenged the trial court’s
failure to apply RSA 461-A:11 in her motion for reconsideration, the trial court
determined that that statute did not apply to the question of school placement.
It reasoned, in part:
6
Although the current [2008] Parenting Plan acknowledges
that [daughter] was home schooled for the 2008-2009 school year,
it does not require that she be home schooled in future years. The
Plan requires the parties to meet in January 2010 to discuss the
“transition to public school” for [daughter], and . . . it provides for
alternatives for the February and April school vacations depending
whether [daughter] is home schooled or is attending public school
“in the future.” Even assuming, therefore, that enrolling [daughter]
in public school for the 2009-2010 academic year modifies the
recent practice, it does not modify the existing Orders.
Mother argues that the trial court’s school placement order did in fact modify
“parental rights and responsibilities,” see RSA 461-A:1, IV (Supp. 2010), which
include the right to determine where one’s child attends school. Therefore, she
contends, the trial court “was bound to first consider whether any
circumstances permitting modification under RSA 461-A:11 existed.” We
disagree.
Under RSA 461-A:11, “[t]he court may issue an order modifying a
permanent order concerning parental rights and responsibilities under [certain
statutorily enumerated] circumstances.” RSA 461-A:11 (emphasis added). By
its plain terms, RSA 461-A:11 governs requests to modify a permanent order
concerning parental rights and responsibilities. RSA 461-A:11; see In the
Matter of Muchmore & Jaycox, 159 N.H. 470, 473 (2009). Therefore, unless
the trial court’s ruling on school placement in this case modified a permanent
order that decided or incorporated a parenting plan establishing parental rights
and responsibilities relating to daughter’s education, satisfying the standards
of RSA 461-A:11 was not a prerequisite to the trial court’s applying the best
interests standard under RSA 461-A:6.
According to mother, the trial court’s school placement ruling modified
“the existing permanent orders, as contained in the September 2008 Parenting
Plan.” She also contends that in 2006, the trial court “determined that
[daughter’s] permanent status in home schooling would stand and that if
[father] wanted that to change the parents were to continue to work together.”
Mother argues that review of the procedural history of this case establishes
that father petitioned the trial court to order the child to attend public school
and that he bore the burden of proof under RSA 461-A:11 to secure his
request. We are not persuaded.
The parties have had joint legal custody of daughter since their divorce,
and in 2002, when daughter was three years old, they expressly agreed to
consult one another about her education. In the context of father’s 2005
motion for contempt, the parties disagreed about whether daughter should be
7
home schooled. However, in denying the contempt motion, the trial court
merely rejected father’s allegation that mother had failed to consult with him
on educational plans for daughter. It emphasized that it was not asked to
resolve the school placement dispute or to direct mother to enroll daughter in
public school or in any other private school. Although it remarked that the
evidence before it would not have supported a request to compel a different
school placement, and encouraged the parties to cooperate in deciding
daughter’s schooling, the trial court did not render a decision approving the
home schooling or otherwise decide school placement of daughter.
Later, the parties agreed to the 2008 Parenting Plan, which retained the
parents’ joint decision-making authority for major decisions such as education,
and established some expanded routine parenting time for father. With respect
to schooling, the 2008 Parenting Plan (1) required daughter to attend school in
the school district where mother, the parent with primary residential
responsibility, resides, (2) created alternative schedules for February and April
school vacations in the event daughter is home schooled or not “in the future,”
and (3) required the parents to meet in January 2010 “to discuss [daughter’s]
transition to public school, unless the parents agree she should continue home
schooling at that time.”
The 2008 Parenting Plan, agreed to by the parties and approved by the
court, certainly constitutes an order that preserved their joint decision-making
authority and governs the parties’ routine residential responsibility. See In the
Matter of Muchmore & Jaycox, 159 N.H. at 473 (parenting plan governing
parenting time schedule was incorporated within the court decree); RSA 461-
A:4 (parenting plan included within court judgment providing for parenting
time with a child). However, it does not amount to a permanent court order on
the school placement issue. At most, the plan required the parties to meet and
discuss daughter’s future schooling and established a vacation schedule
depending on her school placement. In fact, in its order approving the 2008
Parenting Plan, the trial court expressly stated that the parties reserved the
disputed issue of daughter’s school placement for resolution at a later date,
and that it would decide the issue after a hearing that was expected to be
scheduled in mid-2009. Therefore, prior to the trial court’s school placement
decision in 2009, there was no permanent court order concerning parental
rights and responsibilities that governed whether daughter would be schooled
at home or in another setting within the school district in which mother
resides.
The parties reached an impasse regarding the exercise of their joint
authority in relation to daughter’s school placement, and the trial court faced a
circumstance in which it had to resolve a parenting matter over which father
and mother shared joint decision-making authority. In its 2009 ruling, the
trial court did not modify the joint decision-making authority by, for example,
8
granting one parent the authority to decide daughter’s schooling. Indeed, in its
order denying mother’s motion for reconsideration, the trial court emphasized
that the parties continued to have the joint authority to agree to daughter’s
school placement, and that it “would ratify their agreement.”
We conclude that the trial court did not err in ruling that its 2009 school
placement decision did not modify an existing permanent order concerning that
subject matter. See State v. Parker, 155 N.H. 89, 91-92 (2007) (explaining that
interpretation of a trial court order is a question of law which we review de
novo). Accordingly, we reject mother’s argument that the trial court erred by
resolving the school placement issue under the best interests standard without
first considering whether circumstances permitting modification under RSA
461-A:11 existed.
III
Mother next argues that the trial court’s decision requiring daughter to
attend public school is subject to strict scrutiny because it infringes on the
fundamental rights of parents to make decisions for the training and education
of their children and undermines the fundamental rights of parents to direct
their children’s education in conjunction with the free exercise of religion.
According to mother, the trial court’s decision is erroneous because requiring
daughter to attend public school is not justified by a compelling state interest
and the trial court failed to consider a more narrowly tailored, less intrusive
remedy. We consider her argument under only the United States Constitution
because she does not specifically invoke a provision of the New Hampshire
Constitution in her brief. See State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632 (1986).
The United States Constitution protects the fundamental right of parents
to make decisions concerning the custody, care and control of their children,
including a child’s education and religious upbringing. See Troxel v. Granville,
530 U.S. 57, 66 (2000) (plurality opinion) (parenting rights protected under
Due Process Clause of Fourteenth Amendment); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S.
205, 213-14 (1972) (Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, and the
traditional interest of parents, protect rights of parents to make decisions
concerning the religious upbringing of their children); Pierce v. Society of
Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 534-35 (1925) (parents have liberty interest to direct the
upbringing and education of children under their control); see also In the
Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. 200, 203 (2006). Both parents
enjoy the fundamental liberty interest to direct the upbringing and education of
their children, see Jordan v. Rea, 212 P.3d 919, 926 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2009), and
there is a presumption that fit parents act in the best interests of their
children, Troxel, 530 U.S. at 68.
9
Mother cites several cases in support of her contention that the trial
court’s school placement decision is subject to strict scrutiny. However, these
cases are readily distinguishable from the case at bar; in none of the cited
cases was a court resolving a dispute between two parents with equal
constitutional parenting rights and decision-making authority regarding their
child’s education and religious training. See, e.g., id. at 60-61 (parent
challenging court decision which granted grandparents visitation rights
pursuant to statute); Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645 (1972) (father challenging
statutory presumption that unwed father was unfit to parent his child);
Peterson v. Minidoka County School Dist. No. 331, 118 F.3d 1351 (9th Cir.
1997) (parents challenging state restrictions on the parental decision to home
school); People v. DeJonge, 501 N.W.2d 127 (Mich. 1993) (same); State v.
Robert H., 118 N.H. 713 (1978) (parent challenging termination of parental
rights), overruled in part on other grounds by In re Craig T., 147 N.H. 739,
744-45 (2002).
Here, after they divorced, the parties agreed to share joint decision-
making for major decisions concerning daughter, including her education.
Each parent was equally entitled to the presumption that his or her respective
decision was consonant with daughter’s best interests. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at
68. Yet, each parent has chosen to exercise his or her respective constitutional
rights and decision-making authority in a different manner, and they
ultimately reached an impasse on the parenting decision of how to educate
daughter. The legislature established a procedure for courts to resolve
disputes between parents regarding parental rights and responsibilities. See
RSA 461-A:4, :6, :11. Because the parties could not reach a joint decision and
father sought resolution in court, the trial court was left to decide the dispute,
guided by the best interests standard set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I. See In the
Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. at 203; see also Morgan v. Morgan,
964 So. 2d 24, 31 (Ala. Civ. App. 2007) (listing cases in which court applies
best interests analysis to resolve schooling dispute between divorced parents
sharing joint legal custody of their child).
We recognize that the best interests standard “does not and cannot
abrogate a fit parent’s constitutional right to direct the upbringing of his or her
child.” Jordan, 212 P.3d at 928. However, in the context of a divorce, the trial
court has the authority to adjudicate disputes between two fit parents involving
parental rights in accordance with the child’s best interests. See RSA 461-A:4,
:6; In the Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H. at 203; Anderson v.
Anderson, 56 S.W.3d 5, 8 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1999); Jordan, 212 P.3d at 928.
Because the parents in this case reached an impasse on the exercise of their
respective parenting rights, the trial court properly utilized the best interests
standard to resolve the dispute. The trial court’s decision is not subject to
strict scrutiny review merely because the case involves the fundamental
10
parental right to make decisions for daughter’s education and the parents’
divergent religious convictions.
Our decision is consistent with that of many other courts. See Morgan,
964 So. 2d at 31 (court has authority to resolve educational dispute between
divorced parents who share joint legal custody and have equal constitutional
rights concerning their child by applying best interests standard “without
implicating the Fourteenth Amendment due-process rights of either parent”);
Jordan, 212 P.3d at 927-28 (father’s religious objection cannot be the basis of
precluding superior court from determining what educational placement is in
the child’s best interest); Yordy v. Osterman, 149 P.3d 874, 876 (Kan. Ct. App.
2007) (trial court has authority to decide between secular and religious
schools, based on best interest of child, where parents with joint legal custody
cannot agree); Andros v. Andros, 396 N.W.2d 917, 924 (Minn. Ct. App. 1986)
(declining to apply “compelling state interest” standard to review court decree
that modified visitation because decree neither affected father’s religious beliefs
nor his right to practice his religion); Hoedebeck v. Hoedebeck, 948 P.2d 1240,
1242 (Okla. Ct. App. 1997) (“This religious argument is neither new nor rare.
Any time divorced parents have different religious faiths, [argument that court’s
decision was religiously motivated] may be made by the losing party. The fact
that one parent is awarded custody of the children does not, in itself, violate
the other parent’s religious rights.”).
IV
Although mother did not raise the issue before the trial court, she now
argues that “the trial court committed plain error by ordering a change in
[daughter’s] educational setting based exclusively on the unqualified opinion
testimony of the [GAL], who admitted she is not a brain expert . . . , yet testified
regarding adolescent brain development and [daughter’s] future educational
needs.” Mother contends that “the court clearly relied on the GAL’s opinion as
if she were an expert.”
The plain error rule allows us to correct errors not raised in the trial
court under certain limited circumstances. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A; Laramie v.
Stone, 160 N.H. 419, 432 (2010). Before we may do so: (1) there must be
error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights;
and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings. Laramie, 160 N.H. at 432. Generally, to
satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected substantial rights
under the third prong, the party seeking appellate review must demonstrate
that the error was prejudicial; that is, that it affected the outcome of the
proceeding. Id. We use this rule sparingly, limiting it to those circumstances
in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id.
11
The GAL testified that she had researched the subject of adolescent brain
development and attended some seminars, learning that the human brain
undergoes tremendous changes during adolescence. She stated that “the
literature” explains that “the repeated stimulation of brain connections causes
areas of the brain to become strengthened, while not using areas of the brain
causes them to wither away . . . [and] [t]hat, to me, implicates how a child
should be spending their [sic] time. . . . [I]t raises the question about whether
or not a child should be engaged in activities which promote active brain
development and active brain skill development.” She also testified that she
was “not an expert in brain science.”
While her research contributed to the GAL’s opinion that public school is
the proper school placement for daughter, she also testified to other reasons for
her recommendation. These included the strong alignment of daughter’s
beliefs with her mother’s, daughter’s limited opportunity in her home school
experience to face situations that will be socially challenging to her, her
hindered ability to consider and discuss disparate points of view with others
who do not share her position, and her tenuous relationship with her father.
After reviewing the record and the order, we doubt that the trial court
committed any error in the manner mother contends. In any event, we are
certain that plain error affecting mother’s substantial rights did not occur for at
least three reasons. First, the GAL expressly stated that she is not an expert in
brain science. Nothing in the record or in the order suggests that the trial
court sua sponte considered the GAL’s statements on adolescent brain
development as those of a qualified expert in the face of the GAL herself
expressly denying such status. Second, the trial court’s decision was not
based exclusively upon the GAL’s testimony and, further, the foundation for
the GAL’s recommendation was based upon more than her adolescent brain
development research.
Finally, it is clear on this record that the trial court was fully aware of the
issue of independent research informing the lay opinion testimony. Mother
herself repeatedly testified to research and studies that she had reviewed which
had convinced her that home schooling was superior to public schooling.
Father objected and moved to strike all of her testimony regarding studies and
research on the basis that mother was not a qualified expert and had no
personal knowledge about the research. The trial court denied the request,
allowing her to express her opinion and ruling that “[t]he testimony about the
research goes to the weight of the opinion, rather than to the admissibility of
the opinion.” Given all these circumstances, we conclude that mother has not
established that the trial court committed plain error that affected the outcome
of the proceeding.
12
V
Mother’s remaining arguments involve allegations of error regarding the
trial court’s specific reasoning, findings and rulings. Accordingly, we set forth
the essential features of the trial court’s decision in order to give context to her
arguments.
The trial court related some of the history between the parties with
respect to daughter’s schooling, and the general nature of the testimony and
evidence before it, including the GAL’s report and testimony, and the testimony
of father and mother. It found that daughter’s home school experience
consisted of performing school work at home, taking private music lessons, and
attending a monthly theater class and weekly classes in art, Spanish and
physical education at a public school in Meredith. With respect to the school
work daughter performed at home, the trial court found that the curriculum
included “math, reading, English, social studies, science, handwriting and
spelling, Spanish and bible class.” It found that this curriculum, approved by
the school district, was “comparable to the public school curriculum at the
same age, except for the bible class.” Regarding daughter’s home school
process, the trial court found that daughter completes “her work on a
computer at her mother’s residence, and her mother assists her by preparing
the classes and being familiar with the content and being available while she
does the work.”
The trial court found that “[daughter] is generally likeable and well liked,
social and interactive with her peers, academically promising, and intellectually
at or superior to grade level.” It also determined that daughter “is doing very
well academically and scores above-average in most classes when compared
with the national average for children of her class and age group,” that she
fulfills the public school requirements for theatre and music, and that she
engages in many social activities that are not related to her church or faith.
Noting that the relative academic merits of daughter’s home schooling as
compared to public schooling were not disputed by the parties, the trial court
stated that “the debate centers on whether enrollment in public school will
provide [daughter] with an increased opportunity for group learning, group
interaction, social problem solving, and exposure to a variety of points of view.”
It identified the guideposts it utilized to resolve the parents’ dispute:
the Court is guided by the premise that education is by its nature
an exploration and examination of new things, and by the premise
that a child requires academic, social, cultural, and physical
interaction with a variety of experiences, people, concepts, and
surroundings in order to grow to an adult who can make intelligent
decisions about how to achieve a productive and satisfying life.
13
The trial court remarked that it considered the impact that daughter’s religious
convictions had on her “interaction with others, both past and future.”
Ultimately, by a standard of preponderance of the evidence, the trial court
concluded that “it would be in [daughter’s] best interests to attend public
school.”
The trial court declined “to impose any restrictions on either party’s
ability to provide [daughter] with religious training or to share with [daughter]
their own religious beliefs.” Also, in its order denying mother’s motion for
reconsideration, it emphasized that the parties had the “authority to agree to
continue the hybrid approach they have been using (home school plus some
public school classes), and authority to agree that [daughter] attend a
Christian school or other school with a religious educational program,” and
that “if they were to agree to either alternative, [it] would ratify their
agreement.”
Mother contends the trial court was improperly influenced by the
testimony of the GAL, who was allegedly biased against religion. To illustrate
the GAL’s alleged bias, mother points to statements that the GAL made during
her testimony, a GAL report identifying religious issues and father’s views, and
the GAL’s decisions not to interview mother’s Christian personal references and
not to review Christian-based home school research that she provided.
With respect to the GAL’s testimony, mother isolates the following
statements: “My recommendations have been somewhat swayed by the way
she – the way her religion causes [daughter] to shut out points of view and
areas of consideration, and shut out the thinking about points of view”; and
daughter is “very adultified and highly identified with her mom’s views and her
mom’s – the rigidity of her mom’s religious beliefs and how that orders her
thinking really causes me to believe that [daughter] would be best served by
starting public school as soon as possible.” Viewing these statements in light
of the GAL’s entire testimony, we conclude that the GAL was expressing her
concern about daughter’s ability to mentally process, as well as appropriately
communicate with others who have, differing viewpoints. The GAL did not
disparage the fact that daughter and mother have a certain religious faith or
the tenets of that faith. We render the same conclusion regarding the content
of the GAL report.
With respect to the GAL’s investigative decisions, mother testified to her
recollection of the GAL’s statements and conduct, and the GAL disputed
mother’s testimony. For example, mother testified that the GAL decided not to
interview several of her personal references solely because they either attended
mother’s church or shared her faith. She also testified that the GAL refused to
review the home school literature she provided and “said it’s all Christian-
14
based. I don’t want to hear it.” Mother averred that she believed that the GAL
was “basing her opinion on concerns of [mother’s] faith.”
In contrast, the GAL testified that she had reviewed some home school
material mother had provided, and interviewed some of the people whom
mother had requested, such as daughter’s gymnastics instructor and piano
teacher. She denied harboring any bias against daughter’s or mother’s
religious beliefs. Indeed, regarding her investigative decisions, the GAL stated
that she had sought to “keep separate the issues of church and state” and
focus only on the “best interest of this child, and it’s not necessarily about
religion.” The GAL also denied other allegations attributed to her by mother, or
otherwise explained her conduct and statements in a manner that indicated
the absence of religious bias.
In its order, the trial court found “the [GAL’s] recollection and testimony
reliable, and . . . considered this finding in analyzing the reliability of the rest of
[mother’s] testimony.” In its order denying mother’s motion for
reconsideration, the trial court rejected mother’s claim of GAL bias, reiterating
that it had credited the GAL’s recollection as to her statements made and
behaviors exhibited during the investigation. Resolving conflicts in the
testimony and questions about the credibility of witnesses, and determining
the weight to be given testimony, are within the trial court’s discretion. In the
Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. at 713. Mother has not persuaded us that
the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in that regard.
Mother also contends that the trial court’s decision impermissibly
preferred father’s viewpoint on the need for tolerance and diversity over her and
daughter’s religious convictions, implied that “it was improper for [mother] to
encourage [daughter] to adopt her religious beliefs,” and suggested that
daughter needed to be exposed “to other religious views contrary to the faith of
her parents.” She argues that the trial court “was wrong to opine that
[daughter] may be too ‘rigid’ on ‘questions of faith[,]’ and too ‘vigorous [in]
defense of her religious beliefs.’”
When applying the best interests standard to decide a parenting rights
and responsibilities matter, the trial court may consider a parent’s religious
training of his or her child solely in relation to the welfare of the child. See
Sanborn v. Sanborn, 123 N.H. 740, 748-49 (1983); see also Jordan, 212 P.3d
at 928 (father’s religious objection cannot be the basis of precluding the
superior court from determining what educational placement is in the child’s
best interests). The trial court can restrict a parent’s religious training of his or
her child only if substantial evidence shows that the child’s welfare was in fact
jeopardized by that religious training. See Chandler v. Bishop, 142 N.H. 404,
413-15 (1997); Sanborn, 123 N.H. at 749; see also Hoedebeck, 948 P.2d at
1242 (“the court may not decide that one religion is better or worse than
15
another, but it does have the duty to determine the best interests of the
children”). We review the trial court’s order in light of the record to determine
whether it decided daughter’s best interests regarding her school placement on
impermissible religious grounds in the manner alleged by mother. See
Sanborn, 123 N.H. at 748 (reviewing court’s decree in light of the record).
There is no doubt that mother’s and child’s religious convictions have
been a pervasive part of the parties’ school placement dispute. Mother’s
decision to home school was, at least in part, motivated by her religious
convictions. Father’s decision to place daughter in public school arose, at least
in part, from his concern that her home school experience did not allow her
adequate exposure to differing viewpoints, including people who do not share
her religious faith. In its order, the trial court referred to the evidence
presented that involved mother’s and daughter’s religious beliefs, including:
the GAL’s account of daughter’s interaction with her counselor in which
daughter “appeared to reflect her mother’s rigidity on questions of faith”; the
GAL’s concerns about the impact of daughter’s religious beliefs on her
relationship with her father; the father’s desire to expose daughter to different
viewpoints to decrease his daughter’s “rigid adherence” to her mother’s
religious beliefs; and mother’s acknowledgement of the strength of her and
daughter’s religious beliefs. The trial court also remarked that daughter’s
strong adherence to religious convictions that align with her mother’s beliefs
likely was the effect of “spend[ing] her school time with her mother and the vast
majority of all of her other time with her mother.”
Although some of the evidence recited by the trial court had a religious
context, the trial court remarked that when ruling on the school placement
dispute, it had “not considered the merits of [daughter’s] religious beliefs, but
considered only the impact of those beliefs on her interaction with others, both
past and future.” When denying mother’s motion for reconsideration, the trial
court further set forth the context in which it considered the evidence involving
mother’s and daughter’s religion: “Evidence of some of the specific tenets of
[mother’s] faith [was] only admitted because of statements and behaviors of
[daughter] suggesting that [daughter’s] application of the logical consequences
of those tenets was impacting her feelings toward her father and might impact
her development in other areas”; and “The evidence about faith is only relevant
because [daughter] was unhappy that her father does not love her enough to
want to spend eternity with her by adopting her faith. The specific tenets of
[mother’s] faith are not the subject of the Court’s inquiry.” The record supports
these statements.
Specifically, evidence was presented that daughter exhibited difficulty
interacting with others, particularly her father, when they did not agree with
her religious convictions. For example, the GAL testified to a situation in
which daughter became angry with her therapist when the therapist did not
16
read certain religious materials provided by daughter and “closed down in the
[therapy] session.” Father testified regarding some conversations he tried to
have with daughter about her religious beliefs, and explained “if somebody
doesn’t believe in [daughter’s] religion, if somebody does something differently
from what she has been told by her mom is either right or wrong, based on this
religion, she has a real, real hard time with it.” He also testified, “if there’s ever
anything that goes against what she believes in, she doesn’t really know how to
respond and she automatically thinks that somebody’s attacking her or
somebody is going up against her,” and, “when you have a serious discussion
with [daughter] . . . when you question her beliefs, or you present another idea
to her about a religious belief, she doesn’t know what to do. She clams up.
She turns away. You know, she just really can’t go any further.”
In its order, the trial court did not express a belief that daughter needed
to be exposed to other religions that were contrary to or different from the
beliefs of her parents. Instead, it considered the importance of daughter
having the ability to openly communicate with others who have a different
viewpoint on a subject matter, whether or not the topic is religious in nature.
It also considered the benefits of group learning, group interaction, social
problem solving and exposure to a variety of points of view. We reject mother’s
contention that the trial court expressed disapproval of her actions in
encouraging daughter to share her religious views. Rather, the trial court
found that daughter’s firm religious convictions likely stemmed from the
amount of time she spends with her mother, considering that daughter
primarily resided with, and had been primarily educated by, her mother. See
Hoedebeck, 948 P.2d at 1242 (“To fail to consider the impact of certain actions
the parents take, simply because the actions are labeled religious would be to
exempt such acts from consideration, no matter the impact on the children.”).
The trial court did not express disfavor regarding the religious nature of
daughter’s beliefs or disapproval regarding her vigorous defense of her religious
beliefs. Nor did the court criticize the merits of mother’s and daughter’s
religious convictions. See Chandler, 142 N.H. at 410 (marital master’s religious
references related to manner in which father chose to impart religious beliefs to
child, not to expression or content of religious beliefs); compare Sanborn, 123
N.H. at 748-49 (court decree advanced preference for father’s religion because
it made provision for his religious holidays but not for mother’s). Indeed, as
the trial court emphasized, its order did not impose any restrictions on either
parent’s ability to provide daughter with religious training or to share with
daughter his or her own religious beliefs. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court properly considered daughter’s religious beliefs only in the context of
her welfare when resolving the school placement dispute between the parents.
See Von Tersch v. Von Tersch, 455 N.W.2d 130, 135 (Neb. 1990) (because
language of order indicates that court compelled attendance in public school
for secular reasons only, court order did not give rise to First Amendment,
17
freedom of religion issue); Yordy, 149 P.3d at 876 (when resolving parenting
dispute on child’s school placement by disregarding conflicting religious
preferences and focusing upon other important factors, court order did not
offend First Amendment Establishment Clause).
Mother next argues that the trial court erroneously applied the best
interests standard by basing its decision upon an unsupported definition of the
purpose of education. In its order, in identifying the parameters it utilized to
resolve the parents’ school placement dispute, the trial court stated that
“education is by its nature an exploration and examination of new things,” and
that “a child requires academic, social, cultural, and physical interaction with a
variety of experiences, people, concepts, and surroundings in order to grow to
an adult who can make intelligent decisions about how to achieve a productive
and satisfying life.” In denying mother’s motion for reconsideration, the trial
court explained that it “intended to illuminate the difference between the
experience of home schooling and the experience of public schooling, based on
the evidence, rather than to suggest or apply a different educational standard.”
Nevertheless, mother contends that the trial court, sua sponte, invented its
own definition of the purpose of education without citing any legal authority,
and that the definition is at odds with the purpose of public school education
under RSA 193-E:2 (2008) and fails to account for the educational
requirements for home school education under RSA 193-A:4, I (2008).
Without deciding whether the trial court was bound to resolve the school
placement dispute in accordance with RSA chapter 193-E (2008 & Supp. 2010)
and RSA chapter 193-A (2008 & Supp. 2010), we conclude that its references
to the nature of education and foundational skills necessary for a child to
become a productive and satisfied adult were not inconsistent with RSA 193-
E:2 or RSA 193-A:4, I. RSA 193-E:2 sets forth the criteria for an adequate
education provided through the public school system, including “[s]kills for
lifelong learning . . . to enable them to learn, work, and participate effectively in
a changing society.” RSA 193-E:2, VII. Also, the legislature declared that
public elementary and secondary education shall provide “all students with the
opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to prepare them for
successful participation in the social, economic, scientific, technological, and
political systems of a free government, now and in the years to come.” RSA
193-E:1, I. The parameters the trial court enumerated to guide its decision do
not in any way contravene RSA 193-E:2.
Turning to RSA 193-A:4, I, the statute defines home education to consist
of certain academic areas, such as science, mathematics, reading and writing.
As the trial court noted, however, the dispute between the parties in this case
did not revolve around the relative academic merits of public and home
schooling. Their dispute centered upon which academic experience would be
in daughter’s best interests. We fail to see how the parameters set forth by the
18
trial court to resolve the matter did not account for the definition of home
education under RSA 193-A:4, I.
The factors the trial court considered to guide its school placement
decision in light of daughter’s best interests are consistent with RSA 461-A:6, I.
See RSA 461-A:4. The court’s order refers to such factors as group learning,
social problem solving, exploration and examination of new things, and
academic, social, cultural and physical interaction with a variety of
experiences, people, concepts and surroundings, as well as securing
foundational skills necessary to become a productive and satisfied adult.
These criteria are in accord with the factors set forth in RSA 461-A:6, I,
including “[t]he relationship of the child with each parent,” “[t]he child’s
developmental needs,” and “[t]he quality of the child’s adjustment to the child’s
school and community and the potential effect of any change,” as well as “[a]ny
other additional factors the court deems relevant.” RSA 461-A:6, I(a), (c), (d),
(l). We conclude that mother has failed to demonstrate that the parameters
used by the trial court to guide its decision constituted legal error or an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, mother contends that the trial court erred because it presumed
that public school is “automatically in a child’s best interests” and
demonstrated a “per se” bias for public school over home school. Her
argument is based, in part, upon her allegation that the trial court’s decision
compelling daughter to attend public school was inconsistent with its factual
findings and with the evidence regarding her home school experience. She
points to the trial court’s findings that she was in complete compliance with
home schooling laws, and its acknowledgement that daughter academically
excelled in the home school environment and was well-socialized. She also
contends that the evidence established that daughter could communicate and
think effectively and critically, solve problems, and acquire skills for lifelong
learning in the home school environment. We conclude, however, that neither
its order nor the record reveals that the trial court exhibited a presumptive bias
in favor of public schooling, and that the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain its discretionary judgment.
With respect to her home school experience, there was evidence that
daughter learned many of her academic subjects, such as math, reading,
English and social studies, primarily by watching recorded lessons by herself
on a computer at home, completing worksheets or workbooks and asking her
mother questions as needed. Evidence established that there was no
interactive quality between daughter and the person providing instruction in
the recorded lesson. Testimony illustrated that her mother reviewed her work,
engaged in some discussion with daughter, and replayed a recorded lesson as
necessary. This process encompassed approximately three to three and one-
half hours per day, and there was evidence that daughter was “bored” with,
19
and “lonely” in, this educational environment. Regarding her public school
classes, there was evidence that daughter actively participated and adapted
well.
Regarding the impact of daughter’s religious beliefs on her interaction
with others, testimony showed that she would “shut down” and “clam[ ] up”
when a person challenged or disagreed with her convictions. The GAL testified
to a situation in which daughter became angry with her therapist when the
therapist did not read certain religious materials provided by daughter and
“closed down in the [therapy] session.” The GAL testified that daughter’s
relationship with her father was somewhat tenuous as a result of their different
religious beliefs. Father testified to several instances in which daughter
exhibited difficulty discussing different points of view with him on issues
involving her religious convictions.
The GAL testified that a public school environment would offer daughter
opportunities to navigate experiences in both social and academic situations
with others who have differing viewpoints, and learn to openly discuss
differences without wanting to “shut down” or “close[ ] down.” The trial court
noted the GAL’s conclusion that
[daughter’s] interests, and particularly her intellectual and
emotional development, would be best served by exposure to a
public school setting in which she would be challenged to solve
problems presented by a group learning situation and by the social
interactivity of children of her age.
It is not our role to calculate how much weight the trial court should
afford specific evidence, second guess its decision on matters of witness
credibility, or substitute our judgment for that of the trial court on a
discretionary ruling. See In the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. at
281; In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. at 713. Rather, we review only
“whether the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the
discretionary judgment made,” and we will not disturb the trial court’s
determination if it could reasonably have been made. See In the Matter of
Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. at 713 (quotations omitted). The evidence concerning
daughter’s experiences in her home school and public school settings, along
with the evidence demonstrating the impact of her religious convictions upon
her interaction with others, including her father, provide an objective basis for
the trial court’s decision and we cannot say that it is unreasonable.
The trial court’s acknowledgement that daughter successfully
participated in several activities outside of her home, performed well
academically with home education, and is “generally likeable and well liked,
social and interactive with her peers” does not render its decision that
20
attending public school was in daughter’s best interests an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Nor are we persuaded that evidence demonstrating
daughter’s abilities to, for example, communicate and think effectively and
critically, establishes that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion.
We emphasize that the trial court did not need to decide that home schooling
was somehow deficient or detrimental to daughter in order to determine that
her placement in public school was consonant with her best interests. Nor
does the fact that the trial court reasonably could have reached a different
decision based upon the evidence before it mean that its decision constitutes
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Cf. Appeal of Osram Sylvania, 142
N.H. 612, 617 (1998) (“Whether or not we would have reached a different
conclusion, based upon the weight of the evidence, is of no consequence since
we will not substitute our judgment for that of the [lower tribunal]” on a matter
of judicial discretion); Cumberland Farms v. Pierce, 104 N.H. 489, 497 (1963)
(“The problem therefore is not whether this court or some other tribunal would
have reached a different conclusion from that reached by the [tribunal whose
decision is on review], but whether, taking the evidence as a whole, the
[tribunal] could reasonably have found as it did” on a matter of judicial
discretion).
We conclude that the evidence provides an objective basis sufficient to
sustain the trial court’s discretionary judgment that it was in daughter’s best
interests to attend public school for the 2009-2010 school year. Accordingly,
mother has failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s decision constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154
N.H. at 713.
Mother’s remaining arguments either do not warrant judicial review
because they lack developed legal argument, Douglas v. Douglas, 143 N.H.
419, 429 (1999), or are without merit and do not warrant further discussion,
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
21