THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-402
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SOILUIS NIEVES
Argued: March 31, 2010
Opinion Issued: May 6, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Soiluis Nieves, was charged with possession
of a controlled drug with intent to sell and conspiracy to commit sale of a
controlled drug. See RSA 318-B:2 (Supp. 2008); RSA 629:3 (2007). The State
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Hicks, J.) granting the defendant’s
motion to suppress evidence seized under the “plain view” exception to the
warrant requirement. We reverse and remand.
The following facts were found by the trial court in its order on the
defendant’s motion to suppress. In April 2008, Detective Kevin Rourke of the
Nashua Police Department worked with a confidential informant on a drug
investigation. The investigation focused on Radhames Melo and the defendant;
the police suspected that both men were dealing drugs. Allegedly, the
defendant, at Melo’s direction, repeatedly traveled from New Hampshire to New
York City and then to the Dominican Republic, where he picked up
approximately 500 grams of heroin. The defendant swallowed the drugs,
returned to New Hampshire, and met Melo at a hotel, where he expelled them.
Following one of these trips, Detective Rourke and the confidential
informant completed two drug purchases from Melo and the defendant. The
second took place at the defendant’s apartment, located in a multi-family
house on Perham Street in Nashua. Detective Rourke gave the informant
money to buy heroin and watched him enter the apartment; shortly thereafter,
the informant left and delivered a package of heroin to Detective Rourke. A
surveillance team monitored the informant’s movements, and the police
confirmed that the substance was heroin.
Detective Rourke applied for and received a search warrant for the
defendant’s apartment. The warrant permitted the seizure of “Identification,
documents and records relating to the trafficking of Narcotic drugs as well as
other contraband listed in Attachment ‘A’, cellular phones and the information
contained Therein, contrary to Revised Statutes Annotated 318-B:2.”
Attachment A listed many items, including United States currency, drug use
paraphernalia, firearms, documents identifying the apartment’s occupants, and
records relating to drug trafficking. Neither the warrant nor Attachment A
specifically permitted the officers to search for, or seize, “drugs”; the word
“heroin” does not appear in the warrant or attachment.
On May 1, 2008, Detective Rourke and several other police officers
executed the search warrant. They discovered thirty-one individually wrapped
bags of heroin inside the pocket of a vest hanging in a bedroom closet. The
police confiscated the drugs and arrested the defendant shortly thereafter.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to suppress the heroin, arguing that
the police unlawfully seized it under the plain view exception because they did
not inadvertently discover it. The State contended that the police properly
seized the heroin, noting we have “left undecided the issue of whether
contraband can be seized when its discovery is not inadvertent.” The State
conceded that the discovery of the heroin was not inadvertent.
The trial court granted the defendant’s motion to suppress, reasoning
that, given our plain view jurisprudence, “it is unclear, at best, whether the
New Hampshire Supreme Court would be willing to abandon the inadvertency
requirement when faced with a case like the one at hand.” The trial court ruled
that, “as it stands, New Hampshire law requires trial courts to apply the
inadvertence prong to all plain view seizures.” This appeal followed.
2
In reviewing the trial court’s rulings, we accept its factual findings unless
they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State v. Steeves, 158
N.H. 672, 675 (2009). We review the trial court’s conclusions of law de novo.
Id.
Warrantless seizures are per se unreasonable under Part I, Article 19 of
the State Constitution, unless they fall within the narrow confines of a
judicially crafted exception. State v. Davis, 149 N.H. 698, 700 (2003). The
State bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the
seizure falls within a recognized exception, such as the plain view exception.
Id. at 700-01.
The United States Supreme Court first set forth “criteria that generally
guide ‘plain-view’ seizures” in a plurality opinion in Coolidge v. New Hampshire,
403 U.S. 443, 465-73 (1971). Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 134 (1990).
Under this exception, the State must prove that: (1) the initial intrusion which
afforded the view was lawful; (2) the discovery of the evidence was inadvertent;
and (3) the incriminating nature of the evidence was “immediately apparent.”
Davis, 149 N.H. at 700-01; see Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 466, 469. The police
must have probable cause to believe that the evidence is incriminating under
the third prong of the analysis. See Arizona v. Hicks, 480 U.S. 321, 326
(1987); State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 234-35 (1983) (requiring probable cause
under state constitutional analysis). In Horton, however, the Court held that
inadvertency would no longer be required under the Federal Constitution.
Horton, 496 U.S. at 130. Therefore, the defendant’s sole claim is under the
State Constitution.
With respect to the second prong, which requires that the discovery be
inadvertent, the Coolidge Court reasoned that
where the discovery is anticipated, where the police know in advance the
location of the evidence and intend to seize it . . . [t]he requirement of a
warrant to seize imposes no inconvenience . . . or at least none which is
constitutionally cognizable in a legal system that regards warrantless
searches as “per se unreasonable” in the absence of “exigent
circumstances.”
If the initial intrusion is bottomed upon a warrant that fails to
mention a particular object, though the police know its location and
intend to seize it, then there is a violation of the express constitutional
requirement of “Warrants . . . particularly describing . . . [the] things to
be seized.” The initial intrusion may, of course, be legitimated not by a
warrant but by one of the exceptions to the warrant requirement . . . .
But to extend the scope of such an intrusion to the seizure of objects —
not contraband nor stolen nor dangerous in themselves — which the
3
police know in advance they will find in plain view and intend to seize,
would fly in the face of the basic rule that no amount of probable cause
can justify a warrantless seizure.
Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 470-71.
In Horton v. California, the United States Supreme Court eliminated the
inadvertency requirement, holding that “even though inadvertence is a
characteristic of most legitimate ‘plain-view’ seizures, it is not a necessary
condition.” Horton, 496 U.S. at 130. While “[a] search compromises the
individual interest in privacy,” “a seizure deprives the individual of dominion
over his or her person or property.” Id. at 133. As the seizure of a piece of
evidence may “invade the owner’s possessory interest,” the Court reasoned that
“[i]f ‘plain view’ justifies an exception from an otherwise applicable warrant
requirement . . . it must be an exception that is addressed to the concerns that
are implicated by seizures rather than by searches.” Id. at 134.
The Court in Horton noted that the plurality opinion discussing the plain
view doctrine in Coolidge “did not command a majority” and that the
discussion was “not a binding precedent.” Id. at 136 (quotation omitted). The
Court noted two flaws in the reasoning of Coolidge:
First, evenhanded law enforcement is best achieved by the application of
objective standards of conduct, rather than standards that depend upon
the subjective state of mind of the officer. The fact that an officer is
interested in an item of evidence and fully expects to find it in the course
of a search should not invalidate its seizure if the search is confined in
area and duration by the terms of a warrant or a valid exception to the
warrant requirement. If the officer has knowledge approaching certainty
that the item will be found, we see no reason why he or she would
deliberately omit a particular description of the item to be seized from the
application for a search warrant . . . . On the other hand, if he or she
has a valid warrant to search for one item and merely a suspicion
concerning the second, . . . we fail to see why that suspicion should
immunize the second item from seizure if it is found during a lawful
search for the first.
. . . .
Second, the suggestion that the inadvertence requirement is
necessary to prevent the police from conducting general searches, or
from converting specific warrants into general warrants, is not
persuasive because that interest is already served by the requirements
that no warrant issue unless it particularly describes the place to be
searched and the persons or things to be seized, and that a warrantless
4
search be circumscribed by the exigencies which justify its initiation.
Scrupulous adherence to these requirements serves the interests in
limiting the area and duration of the search that the inadvertence
requirement inadequately protects. Once those commands have been
satisfied and the officer has a lawful right of access, however, no
additional Fourth Amendment interest is furthered by requiring that the
discovery of evidence be inadvertent.
Id. at 138-40 (quotation, citations and brackets omitted).
Justices Brennan and Marshall dissented, asserting that “the majority
ignores the Fourth Amendment’s express command that warrants particularly
describe not only the places to be searched, but also the things to be seized.”
Id. at 142. The dissent acknowledged “that the inadvertent discovery
requirement furthers no privacy interests,” but noted that it “protect[s]
possessory interests.” Id. at 147.
The rationale behind the inadvertent discovery requirement is simply
that we will not excuse officers from the general requirement of a warrant
to seize if the officers know the location of evidence, have probable cause
to seize it, intend to seize it, and yet do not bother to obtain a warrant
particularly describing that evidence.
Id. at 144-45. “[T]o the individual whose possessory interest has been invaded,
it matters not why the police officer decided to omit a particular item from his
application for a search warrant.” Id. at 146. An officer with probable cause to
seize an item who fails to mention that item in an application for a search
warrant, but seizes that item nonetheless, acts unreasonably as a matter of
law. Id. Accordingly, “[s]uppression of the evidence so seized will encourage
officers to be more precise and complete in future warrant applications.” Id.
The dissent noted that
there are a number of instances in which a law enforcement officer might
deliberately choose to omit certain items from a warrant application even
though he has probable cause to seize them, knows they are on the
premises, and intends to seize them when they are discovered in plain
view.
Id.
The State urges us to follow Horton and abolish the inadvertency
requirement under our state constitutional analysis. Alternatively, relying
upon the plurality opinion in Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 469-71, the State argues
that we should exempt objects that are “contraband,” “stolen,” or “dangerous in
themselves” from the inadvertency requirement. The defendant contends that:
5
(1) the State “misconstrues” the intent of the language in Coolidge; and (2) Part
I, Article 19 provides greater protections of possessory interests than does the
Fourth Amendment.
Our case law concerning the inadvertence requirement is “not ‘settled.’”
Davis, 149 N.H. at 701 (quoting State v. Cote, 126 N.H. 514, 526 (1985)).
While we currently require the discovery to be inadvertent under our state
constitutional analysis, see Davis, 149 N.H. at 700-01, we have also stated that
inadvertency is not required for guns as they are “dangerous in themselves.”
State v. Slade, 116 N.H. 436, 439 (1976) (citing Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 439).
Some state courts have followed Horton and completely abolished the
inadvertency requirement. See, e.g., State v. Loh, 914 P.2d 592, 600 (Mont.
1996); State v. Julius, 408 S.E.2d 1, 7 (W. Va. 1991). Hawaii and
Massachusetts have declined to follow Horton and continue to require
inadvertency. See Com. v. Balicki, 762 N.E.2d 290, 298 (Mass. 2002); State v.
Meyer, 893 P.2d 159, 165 n.6 (Haw. 1995). A few courts have recognized the
exception for objects that are “contraband,” “stolen,” or “dangerous in
themselves” set out in Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 471. See, e.g., State v. Eady, 733
A.2d 112, 116 n.7 (Conn.), cert. denied, 528 U.S. 1030 (1999); State v. Nieves,
782 A.2d 203, 207 n.6 (Conn. App. Ct. 2001); Com. v. LaPlante, 622 N.E.2d
1357, 1361 n.9 (Mass. 1993) (inadvertency requirement does not apply to
stolen goods). But see Balicki, 762 N.E.2d at 298 (finding that inadvertency
requirement “continues to protect the possessory interests conferred on our
citizens by” state constitution).
We hold today that, with respect to drugs, weapons, and other items
“dangerous in themselves,” there is no longer an inadvertency requirement
under our State Constitution. Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 471; see Eady, 733 A.2d at
116 n.7; Com. v. Hason, 439 N.E.2d 251, 256 (Mass. 1982). Thus, we need not
consider the State’s argument that we should adopt Horton.
Like the Fourth Amendment, Part I, Article 19 protects both the rights to
privacy and to possessory property interests. See Horton, 496 U.S. at 143
(Brennan, J., dissenting). Although the inadvertency requirement does not
further privacy rights, it protects an individual’s possessory interest in his or
her property. Id. at 147. Accordingly, even though the observation or seizure
of an article in plain view “would [not] involve any invasion of privacy . . . [a]
seizure of the article . . . would obviously invade the owner’s possessory
interest.” Id. at 133-34 (citations omitted). The need to protect such
possessory interests in drugs, weapons, and other items “dangerous in
themselves,” however, is not compelling. See Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 471; Slade,
116 N.H. at 439.
6
Retaining the inadvertency requirement for such items will not deter
police misconduct, as the police have no incentive not to include such items for
which they have probable cause. “If the officer has knowledge approaching
certainty that the item will be found, we see no reason why he or she would
deliberately omit a particular description of the item to be seized from the
application for a search warrant,” as “[s]pecification of the additional item
could only permit the officer to expand the scope of the search.” Horton, 496
U.S. at 138-39; see also 2 W. LaFave, Search and Seizure § 4.11(e), at 805-06
(4th ed. 2004) (noting that most plausible reason why police do not include
item in warrant for which police have probable cause is “oversight or . . . an
abundance of caution or . . . a misapprehension of what it takes to obtain a
search warrant covering that evidence”).
Moreover, the warrant requirement provides “two distinct constitutional
protections”: it eliminates searches not based upon probable cause by
requiring the scrutiny of a detached and neutral magistrate; and it prevents “a
general, exploratory rummaging in a person’s belongings” by requiring
particularity. Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 467. Although we abolish the inadvertency
requirement for drugs, weapons, and other items dangerous in themselves, the
initial intrusion under the plain view exception must still be justified by a
warrant or an exception to the search warrant requirement. Id. “[G]iven the
initial intrusion, the seizure of an object in plain view is consistent with [the
particularity requirement], since it does not convert the search into a general or
exploratory one.” Id. Eliminating inadvertency will not convert otherwise
lawful searches into general exploratory searches, as all searches are already
limited by search warrants or exceptions to the warrant requirement. See
Horton, 496 U.S. at 139-40.
Finally, retaining the inadvertency requirement for drugs, weapons, and
other items dangerous in themselves would do little to further the principles
underlying Part I, Article 19.
Where, once an otherwise lawful search is in progress, the police
inadvertently come upon a piece of evidence, it would often be a needless
inconvenience, and sometimes dangerous – to the evidence or to the
police themselves – to require them to ignore it until they have obtained a
warrant particularly describing it.
Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 467-68.
The defendant argues that we should follow the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, see Balicki, 762 N.E.2d at 298, and retain the inadvertency
requirement under our State Constitution. In Balicki, the police suspected
that the defendants were forging invoices from their employer, a vocational
high school, to purchase household items with public funds for their personal
7
use. Id. at 293. The police obtained a search warrant for the defendants’
home, which authorized the seizure of seventeen specific items. Id. at 292-95.
When the police executed the search warrant, Detective Lieutenant Patenaude
“directed [a] photographer to photograph and videotape each room in the home
and anything he identified to the photographer as having potential evidentiary
value.” Id. at 294-95. Detective Dunn
saw items in the house for which he remembered seeing specific invoices,
but about which he had not completed his investigation. He directed
officers to seize those items even though they were not listed in the
warrant. There were other items that he thought were interesting or
suspicious, and he directed the photographer either to photograph or
videotape them. In some instances, the items were moved for the
purpose of videotaping or photographing.
Id.
After the officers executed the search warrant, Detectives “Patenaude,
Dunn, the photographer, and representatives of the district attorney’s office
reviewed the videotape and photographs. Items recorded on the film or
videotape that were not seized were the subject of further investigation.” Id. at
296.
Detective Dunn then applied for a second search warrant, requesting
“permission to seize many items that had been videotaped or photographed
during the [previous] search.” Id. Detective Dunn sought and received
permission to photograph items listed in the warrant; when the officers
executed the warrant, they seized many of the items listed, and again
photographed and videotaped the defendants’ home. Id. Based upon these
facts, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court “decline[d] to eliminate the
inadvertence requirement from” its state constitutional jurisprudence. Id. at
298.
In Balicki, the police appeared to rely upon the plain view exception to
conduct a general exploratory search of the defendants’ home for stolen items.
We are not confronted with facts similar to those presented in Balicki. Today,
we abolish the inadvertency requirement under our State Constitution only for
drugs, weapons, and other items dangerous in themselves. See Coolidge, 403
U.S. at 471. Accordingly, we need not determine at this time whether to fully
embrace the holding in Horton.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8