THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
New London District Court
No. 2009-315
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JACOB DAVIS
Argued: April 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: December 17, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Michael J. Cornelio, of New London, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3. The
State appeals the decision of the New London District Court (McSwiney, J.)
granting a motion of the defendant, Jacob Davis, to suppress blood test results
obtained by the police from the New London Hospital. We reverse and remand.
The relevant facts are not in dispute. On September 26, 2008, Officer
Valerie Peters of the Sutton Police Department responded to a report about an
intoxicated student at the Kearsarge Regional High School. Shortly after she
arrived, the defendant was taken by ambulance to New London Hospital. While
at the school, Peters learned that the defendant had driven a teacher’s
automobile shortly before she was called to the high school, and that while
driving he had backed into a tree. She also learned that the student who was
with him had been so concerned about his apparent intoxication that he had
refused to allow the defendant to continue driving.
Peters proceeded to the New London Hospital Emergency Room, where
she interviewed the defendant and asked him to submit to alcohol testing
under the Implied Consent statute, RSA 265-A:4 (Supp. 2010). He refused.
Meanwhile, as part of its treatment of the defendant, the hospital drew his
blood and tested it to determine his blood alcohol concentration. After being
released from the hospital, the defendant was charged with unlawful
possession of alcohol and driving while intoxicated (DWI).
On October 2, 2008, Peters filed a Request for Hospital Blood Records on
a Sutton police form indicating that she was investigating the defendant for
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or
controlled drug. The form stated that Peters was, “pursuant to New Hampshire
RSA 329:26 . . . requesting the release of any blood and urine samples and
copies of any laboratory tests for blood alcohol content taken from this subject
while in the care of the New London Hospital.” The following day, Chief John
Sims of the Sutton Police Department submitted a second request for the
release of blood alcohol results on a New London Hospital form. The form
indicated that Sims was investigating the defendant for the crime of operating a
motor vehicle while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or controlled
drug, and that he was, “[p]ursuant to New Hampshire RSA 329:26 . . .
requesting the release of any blood samples taken from [the defendant] on or
about [September 26, 2008], and copies of the results of any laboratory tests
that reveal the blood alcohol and/or controlled drug levels content of those
blood samples.” At no time did the State seek a search warrant for the results
of the blood test.
Thereafter, the hospital released a laboratory report to the police showing
that the defendant had a blood alcohol level of .295 percent. The police
subsequently charged the defendant with aggravated DWI pursuant to RSA
265-A:3, III (Supp. 2010).
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion to suppress, in which he
argued that seizure of his medical records without a warrant violated Part I,
Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and his right to privacy under
the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). The
State objected, arguing that RSA 329:26 (Supp. 2010) gave the police the
authority to obtain the test results, and that the defendant had no reasonable
expectation of privacy in the results. After a hearing, the district court granted
the motion to suppress. This appeal followed.
2
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept
the trial court’s findings unless they are unsupported by the record or are
clearly erroneous. State v. Robinson, 158 N.H. 792, 795 (2009). We review the
trial court’s legal conclusions de novo. Id.
The State argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that the State’s
failure to obtain a search warrant for the defendant’s blood test results violated
the defendant’s rights under Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution, State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance only, id.
at 232-33.
Part I, Article 19 of our State Constitution provides: “Every subject hath
a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches and seizures of his person,
his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.” Evidence that is obtained in
violation of Part I, Article 19 may be subject to exclusion from evidence in a
criminal trial. State v. Canelo, 139 N.H. 376, 386-87 (1995).
To determine whether a warrantless search may give rise to a violation of
the State Constitution, we apply an expectation of privacy analysis. State v.
Goss, 150 N.H. 46, 48-49 (2003). A warrantless search implicates Part I,
Article 19 only if the defendant has exhibited an actual (subjective) expectation
of privacy and that expectation is one that society is prepared to recognize as
“reasonable.” Id. at 49. Without an invasion of the defendant’s reasonable
expectation of privacy, there has been no violation of the defendant’s rights
under Part I, Article 19. Robinson, 158 N.H. at 796.
It is well settled that the government’s withdrawal of blood from a
person’s body without a warrant or consent is a search and seizure under Part
I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution. State v. Steimel, 155 N.H.
141, 147 (2007). Here, however, the blood was drawn by the hospital for
medical purposes. As there was no state involvement in its withdrawal or
testing, the drawing of the defendant’s blood did not implicate Part I, Article 19.
See State v. Nemser, 148 N.H. 453, 454 (2002) (protections against
unreasonable searches and seizures apply only to state action).
The question remains, however, whether the State’s request for, and
acquisition of, the blood test results without a search warrant violated Part I,
Article 19. See State v. Summers, 142 N.H. 429, 432 (1997). We will assume,
as the defendant argues, that the proper inquiry is whether the defendant had
a subjective expectation of privacy in the results of his blood test, and whether
that expectation is one that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable.
Goss, 150 N.H. at 48-49. We need not decide whether the defendant had a
3
subjective expectation of privacy in his blood alcohol test results because we
conclude that it is not one which society considers reasonable.
Courts in other jurisdictions addressing whether a reasonable
expectation of privacy exists in blood test results in the DWI context have
reached different conclusions. Several courts have found that society does not
recognize a reasonable expectation of privacy under the Fourth Amendment in
“blood alcohol test results obtained and recorded by a hospital as part of its
consensual treatment of a patient, where those results are requested by law
enforcement for law enforcement purposes only in the investigation of an
automobile accident.” Hannoy v. State, 789 N.E.2d 977, 991 (Ind. Ct. App.
2003); see also Tims v. State, 711 So. 2d 1118, 1122-24 (Ala. Crim. App. 1997);
People v. Perlos, 462 N.W.2d 310, 319-21 (Mich. 1990); State v. Guido, 698
A.2d 729, 733-34 (R.I. 1997); State v. Hardy, 963 S.W.2d 516, 523-27 (Tex.
Crim. App. 1997); State v. Jenkins, 259 N.W.2d 109, 113 (Wis. 1977). Others
have held that the government’s acquisition of medical records under
circumstances similar to those in this case violates the defendant’s rights
under state constitutional provisions prohibiting unreasonable searches and
seizures, see, e.g., Com. v. Shaw, 770 A.2d 295, 299 (Pa. 2001), or state
constitutional provisions that guarantee a right to privacy, see, e.g., King v.
State, 535 S.E.2d 492, 494-97 (Ga. 2000); State v. Nelson, 941 P.2d 441, 446-
50 (Mont. 1997).
While the decisions of courts in other jurisdictions are not binding upon
us, we find persuasive the reasoning of those cases that focused upon the
unique circumstances presented when the government requests and acquires
the results of blood tests administered for the purpose of diagnosis and
treatment of injuries sustained in an automobile accident. See Tims, 711 So.
2d at 1122-24; Hannoy, 789 N.E.2d at 990-92; Perlos, 462 N.W.2d at 315-21;
Hardy, 963 S.W.2d at 523-27. We also agree that, “although not determinative,
one source in analyzing the reasonableness of an expectation is to look to the
Legislature,” Perlos, 462 N.W.2d at 319, and that whether a privilege exists
may be some evidence of societal expectations, Hardy, 963 S.W.2d at 524.
Here, the physician-patient privilege did not exist at common law. State
v. Elwell, 132 N.H. 599, 603 (1989) (decided under prior law). It “was created
in our State by statutory enactment in 1969, Laws 1969, ch. 386, and has
been incorporated into the rules of evidence, N.H. R. Ev. 503.” Id. Interpreting
an early version of the statute, we held that a blood sample taken by hospital
staff at the request of a physician in the course of treatment fell within the
physician-patient privilege and could not be used as evidence in the
defendant’s trial for negligent homicide. Id. at 606. In 1996, however, the
legislature amended the statute to exempt from the privilege the type of
evidence at issue in Elwell. See Laws 1996, 267:2. The current version of the
statute delineating the physician-patient privilege states, in relevant part:
4
The confidential relations and communications between a
physician or surgeon licensed under provisions of this chapter and
the patient of such physician or surgeon are placed on the same
basis as those provided by law between attorney and client, and,
except as otherwise provided by law, no such physician or surgeon
shall be required to disclose such privileged communications. . . .
This section shall also not apply to the release of blood or urine
samples and the results of laboratory tests for drugs or blood
alcohol content taken from a person for purposes of diagnosis and
treatment in connection with the incident giving rise to the
investigation for driving a motor vehicle while such person was
under the influence of intoxicating liquors or controlled drugs. The
use and disclosure of such information shall be limited to the
official criminal proceedings.
RSA 329:26. By its plain language, the statute now exempts from the
physician-patient privilege blood alcohol test results of a person being
investigated for driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled
drugs where the blood alcohol tests were administered for the purpose of
diagnosis and treatment. See State v. Nickerson, 147 N.H. 12, 13 (2001).
By carving out an exception to the physician-patient privilege under this
narrow set of circumstances, the legislature has reflected the societal “belief
that when people drive, they encounter a diminished expectation of privacy.”
Perlos, 462 N.W.2d at 320. The existence of the Implied Consent law further
supports this conclusion. RSA 265-A:4 provides, in pertinent part:
Any person who . . . drives or attempts to drive a vehicle
upon the ways of this state . . . shall be deemed to have given
consent to physical tests and examinations for the purpose of
determining whether such person is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled drugs, and to a chemical, infrared
molecular absorption, or gas chromatograph test or tests of any or
all of any combination of the following: blood, urine, or breath, for
the purpose of determining the controlled drug content of such
person’s blood or alcohol concentration if arrested for any offense
arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person
was . . . driving, attempting to drive, or in actual physical control of
a vehicle . . . while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
controlled drugs or while having an alcohol concentration in excess
of the statutory limits . . . .
Indeed, if a person refuses the request of a law enforcement officer to submit to
physical tests or to a test of blood, urine or breath, the person’s license to drive
will be suspended. See RSA 265-A:14 (Supp. 2010).
5
We reject the defendant’s argument that RSA 332-I:1, I (Supp. 2010)
supports the conclusion that he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his
medical records. The statute states, in relevant part, that “[a]ll medical
information contained in the medical records in the possession of any health
care provider shall be deemed to be the property of the patient.” RSA 332-I:1,
I. While the statute deems the information contained in medical records to be
the property of the patient, it does not necessarily follow that this is property in
which the defendant has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Indeed, such a
reading would be at odds with RSA 329:26. Furthermore, the legislative
history supplied by the State illustrates that RSA 332-I:1, I was enacted in
response to concerns that some patients were having difficulty obtaining copies
of their medical records, and was intended to facilitate patients’ access to
medical records. Senate Comm. on Pub. Institutions, Health and Human
Services, Hr’g on H.B. 511 (March 22, 1989). The legislative history does not
contain any suggestion that the legislature intended to create a new right of
privacy, independent of the physician-patient privilege. To the extent that the
defendant may have a reasonable expectation of privacy in his medical records
generally, see In Re Search Warrant (Med. Records of C.T.), 160 N.H. 214, 226
(2010), we conclude that society does not recognize a reasonable expectation of
privacy in blood alcohol test results obtained and recorded by a hospital as
part of its consensual treatment of a patient, where those results are requested
by law enforcement for law enforcement purposes in connection with an
incident giving rise to an investigation for driving while under the influence of
intoxicating liquors or controlled drugs. See RSA 329:26.
We also disagree with the defendant that the United States Supreme
Court’s decision in Ferguson v. Charleston, 532 U.S. 67 (2001), leads to a
different result. At issue in Ferguson was a policy implemented by the police, a
state hospital, and local officials to obtain evidence that could be used to
prosecute pregnant women who tested positive for drugs. Ferguson v.
Charleston, 532 U.S. at 69-71. Under the policy, the state hospital tested
urine samples of maternity patients suspected of drug use. Id. at 70-73. The
Supreme Court held that without the patient’s informed consent, a state
hospital’s performance of diagnostic tests to obtain evidence of a patient’s
criminal conduct for law enforcement purposes was an unreasonable search
under the Fourth Amendment. Id. at 84-86.
In this context, the Supreme Court stated that “[t]he reasonable
expectation of privacy enjoyed by the typical patient undergoing diagnostic
tests in a hospital is that the results of those tests will not be shared with
nonmedical personnel without her consent.” Id. at 78. However, the Supreme
Court also noted that the existence of a statutory mandatory reporting
requirement “might lead a patient to expect that members of the hospital staff
might turn over evidence acquired in the course of treatment to which the
patient had consented,” id. at 78 n. 13, and declined to address a case in
6
which doctors independently complied with reporting requirements, id. at 85 n.
24. The Supreme Court also stated that “[w]hile state hospital employees, like
other citizens, may have a duty to provide the police with evidence of criminal
conduct that they inadvertently acquire in the course of routine treatment,
when they undertake to obtain such evidence from their patients for the
specific purpose of incriminating those patients, they have a special obligation
to make sure that the patients are fully informed about their constitutional
rights . . . .” Id. at 84-85. Thus, it is clear that the Supreme Court found a
violation of the Fourth Amendment because the testing was done for, and in
conjunction with, law enforcement. Because there was no law enforcement
involvement in the taking or testing of the defendant’s blood sample in this
case, Ferguson does not apply.
Thus, we conclude that the State’s request for, and acquisition of, the
blood test results without a search warrant under the circumstances presented
in this case does not implicate Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire
Constitution. Furthermore, because the State Constitution is at least as
protective of the right to be free from unreasonable searches as the Federal
Constitution, State v. MacElman, 149 N.H. 795, 801 (2003), we reach the same
conclusion under the Federal Constitution as we do under our State
Constitution.
Finally, we note that the defendant concedes that the trial court erred
when it found that the State was prohibited from obtaining the blood tests
results under the provisions of HIPAA. Therefore, we express no opinion on
this issue.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court erred when it granted the
defendant’s motion to suppress.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7