THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-467
AKWA VISTA, LLC
v.
NRT, INC. d/b/a COLDWELL BANKER RESIDENTIAL BROKERAGE & a.
Argued: May 13, 2010
Opinion Issued: July 23, 2010
Cleveland, Waters and Bass, P.A., of Concord (William B. Pribis on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Preti, Flaherty, Beliveau & Pachios, PLLP, of Concord (Peter G. Callaghan
on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, J. The defendants, NRT, Inc. d/b/a Coldwell Banker
Residential Brokerage (Coldwell Banker) and Frank C. Schoenthaler, appeal the
Superior Court’s (Smukler, J.) denial of their motion for judgment
notwithstanding verdict (JNOV) and remittitur upon the jury verdict against
them for breach of contract and negligent misrepresentation and upon the jury
verdict against them for their counterclaims against the plaintiff, Akwa Vista,
LLC. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In 2002 and 2003, Akwa
Vista, a real estate developer, sought to develop a 400-acre parcel on Lake
Winnipesaukee. In 2003, Schoenthaler, a Coldwell Banker real estate agent,
approached Richard Mailloux, the owner of Akwa Vista, at a planning board
meeting and told him that Coldwell Banker wanted the exclusive right to sell
the lots of the subdivision Akwa Vista planned to create on the 400-acre parcel.
Schoenthaler stated that Coldwell Banker was “a national company” that did
“millions of dollars worth of volume per day,” and that he “would spend
[$]1,080,000 to market the property.” He also told Mailloux that he “had tons
of builders that he constantly did business with.” Of these builders,
Schoenthaler represented that there were four to six who would purchase
twenty-six lots for a minimum of $4 million. Schoenthaler told Mailloux that
he could deliver the builder-buyers as soon as Mailloux’s purchase of the
property closed in early April 2004.
The parties then executed a written contract entitled “EXCLUSIVE RIGHT
TO SELL AGREEMENT” (Agreement). This agreement, dated and signed on
March 4, 2004, by Mailloux for Akwa Vista and Schoenthaler for Coldwell
Banker, stated, in pertinent part:
Whereas [Coldwell Banker] has secured four (4) to six (6) home
builders who are committed to purchasing twenty-six (26)
residential building lots from [Akwa Vista] at an aggregate price of
$4,000,000, [Akwa Vista], in recognition of [Coldwell Banker’s]
efforts as herein before described, has agreed to list the sale
exclusively with [Coldwell Banker] the 163 residential building lots
in Akwa Vista Subdivision . . . , excluding the eight (8) building lots
reserved for the Mailloux family . . . on the terms and conditions
hereinafter set forth.
Shortly after the parties signed the agreement, Akwa Vista closed on the
property. Schoenthaler, however, failed to deliver any buyers for the
subdivision. When asked repeatedly about the promised buyers, Schoenthaler
consistently assured Akwa Vista of their existence, but gave different
explanations for his failure to produce them.
Akwa Vista sued Schoenthaler and Coldwell Banker, alleging, among
other things, breach of contract and negligent misrepresentation. The
defendants brought similar counterclaims against Akwa Vista. Following a
four-day trial, the jury returned a verdict in Akwa Vista’s favor and against the
defendants on their counterclaims, awarding Akwa Vista $850,000. The trial
court denied the defendants’ motion for JNOV and remittitur.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred when it denied
their motion for JNOV because: (1) no reasonable jury could conclude that
2
there was a breach of contract resulting in damages to Akwa Vista; (2) Akwa
Vista failed to prove the elements of negligent misrepresentation; and (3) the
jury verdict in favor of Akwa Vista on the defendants’ counterclaims was
against the weight of the evidence. They argue that the trial court erred in
denying their motion for remittitur because the damages awarded were
speculative, manifestly exorbitant and against the weight of the evidence.
I. JNOV
A motion for JNOV relates to the sufficiency of the evidence and presents
a question of law. Gowen v. Brothers, 121 N.H. 377, 380 (1981). A party is
entitled to JNOV only when the sole reasonable inference that may be drawn
from the evidence, which must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party, is so overwhelmingly in favor of the moving party that no
contrary verdict could stand. See Boynton v. Figueroa, 154 N.H. 592, 602
(2006). In deciding whether to grant the motion, the trial court cannot weigh
the evidence or inquire into the credibility of witnesses. Id. If the evidence
adduced at trial is conflicting, or if several reasonable inferences may be
drawn, the court must deny the motion. Id. Our standard of review of a trial
court’s denial of a motion for JNOV is extremely narrow. Blouin v. Sanborn,
155 N.H. 704, 706 (2007). We will not overturn the trial court’s decision
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
A. Breach of Contract
The defendants first argue that the language “Whereas [Coldwell Banker]
has secured four (4) to six (6) home builders who are committed to purchasing
twenty-six (26) residential building lots from [Akwa Vista] at an aggregate price
of $4,000,000” was merely a recital and not part of the contract. Specifically,
they urge us to adopt as law that “[r]ecitals in a contract, such as ‘whereas’
clauses, are merely explanations of the circumstances surrounding the
execution of the contract, and are not binding obligations unless referred to in
the operative provisions of the contract.” 17A C.J.S. Contracts § 317, at 340
(1999). Even if we were to do so, however, the defendants’ argument still fails.
The jury could have found that the provisions of the whereas clause in this
case are referred to throughout operative provisions of the contract, indicating
that they were not merely explanations of the circumstances, but that the
parties intended that they constitute binding obligations. For example, clause
seven refers to Coldwell Banker’s obligation to “produce a minimum of twenty-
six (26) Lot sales at the commencement of this Agreement.” Other parts of the
whereas clause, including Akwa Vista’s obligation “to list the sale exclusively
with [Coldwell Banker],” are referred to in clauses two and four.
Alternatively, the defendants argue that they performed on the contract
by producing the buyer-builders as promised. Even assuming the jury could
3
have inferred from the evidence that this is true, there is ample evidence
supporting the opposite conclusion. For example, the defendants contend that
they did produce two buyers ready to purchase sufficient lots at a sufficient
price, but that Akwa Vista did not accept the buyers’ offers. Representatives
from these purported buyers, however, testified at trial that they had not
actually signed any offer to purchase lots from Akwa Vista. In addition, the
evidence showed that the lots which these builders were allegedly going to
purchase were never specified and Mailloux never met the builders, despite his
repeated requests to Schoenthaler to do so. As noted above, we must view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See Figueroa,
154 N.H. at 602. The conflicting evidence cited by the defendants fails to meet
their burden of establishing that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion. See Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H. 616, 622 (2008) (jury is free to
accept or reject conflicting evidence and to determine the weight and credence
to give evidence).
Next, the defendants contend that Akwa Vista failed to prove that it
suffered any harm caused by the alleged breach. However, the record reveals
sufficient evidence upon which a verdict in favor of Akwa Vista could stand.
Akwa Vista presented evidence of the expenses it incurred as a result of its
reliance upon the contract. Specifically, Mailloux testified that Akwa Vista had
incurred carrying costs associated with its continued ownership of the twenty-
six lots, that it had incurred interest costs associated with obtaining
replacement financing, and that it had incurred a loss of value on the unsold
lots.
The defendants next argue that Akwa Vista’s election to affirm the
contract precludes its claim of breach. Relying upon Green v. Sumner
Properties, LLC, 152 N.H. 183, 184-85 (2005), the defendants argue that Akwa
Vista’s continued participation in the contract means that it cannot both retain
its benefits and sue for breach. The defendants’ application of Green to the
facts of this case, however, is incorrect.
In Green, a landlord induced a tenant and the tenant’s prospective
roommate to rent a two-bedroom apartment, but when they arrived to move in,
there was a stranger occupying one of the bedrooms. Green, 152 N.H. at 183.
The tenant and his roommate stayed, sharing the remaining bedroom, and the
tenant sued for misrepresentation, seeking to recover half the amount of rent
paid under the lease. Id. at 184. The landlord argued that, by staying in the
apartment, the tenant had ratified the lease and, therefore, he could not sue
under its terms. Id. We rejected this argument, stating:
While ratification may deprive a party of contractual remedies, it
does not deprive the party of tort remedies. A party entering into
an agreement in reliance upon a misrepresentation of a material
4
fact has two choices. He may justifiably elect to rescind or
disaffirm the agreement and refuse to proceed further with the
transaction, or he may elect to affirm the contract, keep its
benefits, perform his obligations thereunder, and sue for damages
for misrepresentation. Thus, even if we assume that the tenant
ratified the lease, he was still entitled to seek tort damages for the
landlord’s misrepresentation.
Green, 152 N.H. at 184-85 (quotations, citations and brackets omitted).
Here, the record indicates that Akwa Vista neither rescinded nor affirmed
the contract, but continued to ask Schoenthaler about the status of the
promised builder-buyers, and was repeatedly assured that the buyers were
available and ready to purchase. When pressed by Akwa Vista to meet with the
buyers, Schoenthaler consistently reassured Akwa Vista that it would be able
to do so soon, but then presented various excuses why the meetings were not
occurring. The defendants argue that these facts support that Akwa Vista
continued with the contract and retained its benefits in spite of the defendants’
breach. However, the jury could reasonably have found, based upon these
same facts, that Akwa Vista was not acquiescing in the defendants’ failure to
deliver buyers, but that it was simply providing the defendants with more time,
based upon Schoenthaler’s reassurances, to perform as promised. Accordingly,
Green’s limitation upon a plaintiff’s remedies does not apply here.
The defendants also argue that the contract violated the statute of
frauds. We agree with Akwa Vista, however, that this argument was not
preserved. The statute of frauds is an affirmative defense that must be timely
raised. See Blanchard v. Calderwood, 110 N.H. 29, 33 (1969). Here, the
defendants did not raise it in their special plea and brief statement of defenses,
nor did they raise it at any other time before or during trial. Cf. Super. Ct. R.
28 (failure to plead affirmative defenses in special plea and brief statement
constitutes waiver). Based upon all of the above, the defendants have failed to
establish that the trial court erred in denying the defendants’ motion for JNOV
on Akwa Vista’s breach of contract claim.
B. Negligent Misrepresentation
The defendants next assert that the trial court erred by denying their
motion for JNOV on Akwa Vista’s negligent misrepresentation claim. To
prevail, Akwa Vista was required to prove that the defendants made a
representation with knowledge of its falsity or with conscious indifference to its
truth with the intention to cause Akwa Vista to rely upon it and that Akwa
Vista justifiably relied upon it. See Snierson v. Scruton, 145 N.H. 73, 77
(2000).
5
The defendants contend that Akwa Vista did not rely upon statements or
representations made by defendant Schoenthaler regarding his promise to
secure builders. There was, however, ample evidence to the contrary. Mailloux
testified that he relied upon the defendants’ representations in proceeding with
his business in the manner that he did and in allocating his financing for
aspects of the development. Another witness testified that “[w]e had every
reason to believe that . . . [the builders] were coming . . . we had depended on
it, and we needed them to come.” She also testified that Akwa Vista had
expected to receive $4 million from builders at the closing on its purchase of
property, and that they had depended upon that money.
Alternatively, the defendants contend that Akwa Vista’s reliance was not
justifiable. We conclude, however, that a reasonable jury could have concluded
otherwise. The record indicates that Schoenthaler repeatedly stated that he
had a pool of builders from which to choose and that they were ready to go
forward. Testimony established that, when Akwa Vista repeatedly asked why
he had not delivered buyers, Schoenthaler repeatedly represented that he
would, making statements such as, “They’re there. . . . Oh, I’m on the phone
with one right now. . . . [T]hey’re ready.” In addition, testimony showed that he
also represented that some builders would be ready to pay in cash.
The defendants next contend that Akwa Vista failed to prove it suffered
damages as a result of any alleged misrepresentation. We conclude that there
is evidence in the record from which the jury could find that Akwa Vista
suffered damages as a result of the defendants’ misrepresentation. Specifically,
Mailloux testified that had Akwa Vista received the $4 million at the closing, it
would have been able to pay back a greater amount of the money it had
borrowed to finance the project, thereby saving it a substantial amount in
interest payments.
To the extent that the defendants argue that if there was a
misrepresentation, they rescinded it, we find that there is evidence in the
record from which the jury reasonably could have concluded otherwise.
Accordingly, the defendants have failed to establish that the trial court erred in
denying the defendants’ motion for JNOV on Akwa Vista’s negligent
misrepresentation claim.
C. The Defendants’ Counterclaims
The defendants argue that the trial court erred by denying their motion
for JNOV on their counterclaims because the jury verdict was against the
weight of the evidence. The defendants’ counterclaims alleged: (1) breach of
contract; (2) breach of the implied duty of good faith and fair dealing; (3) unfair
and deceptive business practices; and (4) intentional or negligent
misrepresentation. The defendants’ particular arguments concerning their
6
counterclaims all rest upon the contention that Akwa Vista was underfinanced.
There is evidence in the record, however, from which the jury could conclude
that Akwa Vista was not underfinanced and had resources available to it from
which it could obtain additional financing. While the defendants point to
evidence in the record they claim supports their contention, their arguments go
to the weight and credibility of evidence, which are beyond the scope of what
the trial court can review on a motion for JNOV. With the evidence viewed in
the light most favorable to Akwa Vista, the defendants cannot meet their
burden of establishing that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in denying their motion.
II. Remittitur
Finally, the defendants argue that the trial court erred when it denied
their motion for remittitur because the damages awarded were speculative,
manifestly exorbitant and against the weight of the evidence.
New Hampshire law does not require that damages be calculated with
mathematical certainty, and the method used to compute them need not be
more than an approximation. Blouin, 155 N.H. at 707. Whether remittitur
should be granted is within the trial court’s sound discretion. Id. Direct review
of a damages award is the responsibility of the trial judge, who may disturb a
verdict as excessive (or inadequate) if its amount is conclusively against the
weight of the evidence. Id. The court may also order remittitur if the verdict is
“manifestly exorbitant.” Id. (quotation omitted). The amount of a verdict is
conclusively against the weight of the evidence only if no reasonable jury could
have reached it. Id.
Once the trial court has reviewed the amount of the verdict under this
standard, we will not disturb its finding unless no reasonable person could
have made it. Id. Our task upon review is not to attempt to ascertain the one
and only correct verdict. Id. Absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion,
we will not reverse the trial court’s decision. Id. The party seeking to modify
the verdict bears a heavy burden. Id.
The jury was instructed on the issue of damages for all claims and
counterclaims as follows:
Your award must be based upon evidence and not upon
speculation, guess, or conjecture. The purpose of any damages
awarded is to put the party in the same position it would have
been if the other party was not legally at fault. You should
compare the position of the party as a result of the other party’s
legal fault to the position it would have been in had the other party
not been at fault.
7
At trial, Akwa Vista presented evidence that it incurred expenses that it would
not have incurred had the defendants not breached their contract to secure
buyer-builders for $4 million in lot sales or had their representations regarding
buyer-builders been true. Specifically, Mailloux testified that Akwa Vista had
incurred carrying costs associated with its continued ownership of twenty-six
lots totaling $722,000. He also testified that it had incurred interest costs
associated with obtaining replacement financing totaling $125,000 and that it
had incurred a loss of value on lots not sold totaling approximately $1 million.
In arguing that Akwa Vista did not establish that it actually paid the
interest it claimed and that much of the damages awarded were due to Akwa
Vista’s own conduct and failure to mitigate, the defendants failed to meet their
burden of proof. Although the defendants point to evidence tending to support
these arguments, the jury was free to accept or reject conflicting evidence and
to determine the weight and credence to give evidence in making its award.
O’Neill, 157 N.H. at 622. From the evidence noted above, a reasonable juror
could have reached the verdict awarded to Akwa Vista. Thus, the defendants
have failed to establish that the verdict was conclusively against the weight of
the evidence, and we cannot say that the trial court erred in denying the
defendants’ motion for remittitur.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8