THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-791
CITY OF MANCHESTER
v.
SECRETARY OF STATE & a.
RYAN CASHIN & a.
v.
CITY OF MANCHESTER
Argued: June 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 10, 2010
City Solicitor’s Office, of Manchester (Peter R. Chiesa on the brief and
orally), for the City of Manchester.
Backus, Meyer & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (Robert A. Backus on the
brief and orally), for the petitioners, Ryan Cashin & a.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for defendants Secretary of State, Attorney
General and Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Revenue
Administration.
Joseph Kelly Levasseur, of Manchester, by brief, for the intervenor, N.H.
Advantage Coalition.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III on
the brief), for Concord Taxpayers Association, as amicus curiae.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Dean B. Eggert and
Gregory M. Sargent on the brief), for New Hampshire School Administrators
Association, as amicus curiae.
Fred S. Teeboom, non-lawyer representative appearing by approval of the
Supreme Court under Rule 33(2), on the brief and orally, for Nashua Taxpayers
Association, as amicus curiae.
HICKS, J. These consolidated cases challenging the legality of a
proposed amendment to the City of Manchester’s charter are before us on
interlocutory transfer without ruling from the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.). See
Sup. Ct. R. 9. We conclude that the amendment is invalid.
The following facts are recited in the interlocutory transfer statement or
are supported by the record. On July 30, 2008, the city clerk for the City of
Manchester (City) received a charter amendment petition that proposed
amending the City’s charter to limit annual budget increases “to the change in
the National Consumer Price Index – Urban as published by the United States
Department of Labor for the calendar year immediately preceding the year of
the budget adoption” (the spending cap). After the petition was supplemented
with additional valid signatures, the deputy city clerk found that it was
sufficient to require a public hearing pursuant to RSA 49-B:5, IV(a) (2003). In
accordance with RSA 49-B:5-a, the City filed a certified copy of the preliminary
report relative to the proposed charter amendment with the secretary of state,
the attorney general and the commissioner of the department of revenue
administration for their review “to insure that [the proposed amendment] is
consistent with the general laws of this state.” RSA 49-B:5-a, I (Supp. 2006)
2
(amended 2008). The secretary of state replied, on behalf of himself, the
attorney general’s office and the department of revenue administration, that
they did not object to the proposed amendment. On July 6, 2009, the City
appealed that determination pursuant to RSA 49-B:10, IV (2003).
On August 20, 2009, a petition for declaratory judgment and injunctive
relief challenging the legality of the proposed amendment was filed by
petitioners Ryan Cashin, Richard Rothwell, Joseph Gallagher, David
McCloskey, Benjamin Clifford, Kathy Desjardin, Scott Nichols, Maxine Mosley,
Josiette White, Michael Farley and Bonnie Doherty (the Cashin petitioners), on
their own behalf as voters and citizens of Manchester and as part of the non-
profit organization Keep Manchester Moving.
On September 8, 2009, New Hampshire Tax Advantage Coalition
(NHTAC) moved to intervene in both the City’s appeal and the declaratory
judgment action. On September 15, 2009, the trial court authorized an
interlocutory transfer without ruling to this court of certain questions in the
City’s appeal. Subsequently, the trial court consolidated the declaratory
judgment action with the City’s appeal and the interlocutory transfer statement
was supplemented accordingly.
The trial court transferred the following questions of law:
A. Whether the statutory scheme for municipal budget process
enacted under RSA 49-C:23 preempts the proposed charter
amendment?
B. Whether the proposed charter amendment illegally impairs the
mayor’s duty under RSA 49-C:16 to present the city’s board of
mayor and aldermen with an original budget based upon the
financial needs of the city?
C. Whether the proposed charter amendment illegally impairs the
powers and duties vested in the city’s elected body by RSA 44
and 47?
D. Whether RSA 49-B expressly prohibits the legislation of a tax
cap?
(Capitalization omitted.) On October 6, 2010, we issued an order amending the
interlocutory transfer statement, on our own motion, to add the following
question of law:
Whether the two-thirds override provision of the proposed charter
amendment conflicts with RSA 49-C:12, I.
3
(Capitalization omitted.) We also ordered supplemental briefing to address the
added question.
On appeal, the City and the Cashin petitioners argue that the charter
amendment: (1) is preempted by the comprehensive statutory scheme
governing the budget process for cities; (2) interferes with the mayor’s duty to
present a budget to the board of mayor and aldermen; and (3) exceeds the
scope of a permissible charter amendment under RSA chapters 49-B and 49-C.
In addition, the City argues that the amendment impermissibly impairs the
powers and duties of the City’s elected body under RSA chapters 44 and 47
and the Cashin petitioners argue that, like the amendment at issue in City of
Claremont v. Craigue, 135 N.H. 528 (1992), the charter amendment here
“derogates from the plenary authority granted to the governing body of a city
rather than the voters.” In their supplemental briefs, the City and the Cashin
petitioners argue that the charter amendment also conflicts with RSA 49-C:12,
I.
The NHTAC argues that the charter amendment “is simply a change to
the structure and formation of the City’s annual budget procedure.” It further
argues that RSA 49-C:23 merely “lay[s] out a basic structural form for a city
charter to follow” and asserts that nothing in that statute prohibits the City
from placing a spending cap in its charter. In its supplemental brief, NHTAC
argues that the charter amendment does not conflict with RSA 49-C:12, I.
The State agencies note that while they reviewed the proposed charter
amendment as required by statute, see RSA 49-B:5-a, I, they “do not advocate
for or against the proposed Charter Amendment, and do not have a direct
interest in the outcome of this matter.” They nevertheless filed a brief offering
“their interpretation of the issues raised by the City in the proposed Charter
Amendment at issue.” That interpretation is essentially that the amendment:
(1) neither expressly contradicts nor otherwise runs counter to the legislative
intent underlying either RSA 49-C:23 or RSA 49-C:16; (2) does not “impair[]
the powers and duties of the elected body under RSA ch[apters] 44 and 47
preserved by RSA 49-C:15”; and (3) “falls within the scope of permissible
charter processes under RSA ch[apter] 49-C.” The State agencies also filed a
supplemental brief contending that the charter amendment does not conflict
with RSA 49-C:12, I.
We begin with the first transferred question, regarding preemption by
RSA 49-C:23. Both the City and the Cashin petitioners argue that RSA 49-
C:23 invalidates the charter amendment at issue. The City frames its
argument in terms of preemption, while the Cashin petitioners argue that the
City lacked authority to adopt the amendment. Our cases examining the
validity of municipal charter amendments have employed both modes of
4
analysis, sometimes interchangeably. See, e.g., Town of Hooksett v. Baines,
148 N.H. 625, 626 (2002) (stating that resolution of the issue of “whether the
town has the authority under RSA chapter 49-B to impose term limits upon
elected officials . . . necessarily involves an inquiry into whether the town’s
ability to enact such legislation has been preempted by either State statute or
constitutional provision”). However, since the transferred question couches the
issue in preemption terms, we elect to address it under that rubric.
“The preemption doctrine flows from the principle that municipal
legislation is invalid if it is repugnant to, or inconsistent with, State law. Thus,
preemption will occur when local legislation either expressly contradicts a
statute or otherwise runs counter to the legislative intent underlying a
statutory scheme.” Town of Hooksett, 148 N.H. at 627 (quotation and citation
omitted). The preemption issue is, then, “essentially one of statutory
interpretation and construction.” Lakeside Lodge v. Town of New London, 158
N.H. 164, 168 (2008) (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we apply the following
well-settled rules:
Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by
the entire statutory scheme. When construing the meaning of a
statute, we first examine the language found in the statute, and
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
words used. We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the
context of the overall statutory scheme.
Coco v. Jaskunas, 159 N.H. 515, 518-19 (2009) (quotations and citation
omitted).
The statutory scheme at issue implements the so-called “home rule
amendment,” Part I, Article 39 of the State Constitution. City of Manchester
Sch. Dist. v. City of Manchester, 150 N.H. 664, 666 (2004). That amendment
provides in part:
The legislature may by general law authorize cities and
towns to adopt or amend their charters or forms of government in
any way which is not in conflict with general law, provided that
such charters or amendments shall become effective only upon the
approval of the voters of each such city or town on a referendum.
N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 39.
The legislation implementing the home rule amendment is embodied in
RSA chapters 49-B, 49-C and 49-D. See City of Manchester Sch. Dist., 150
N.H. at 667. RSA chapter 49-B “provides the statutory framework through
5
which cities and towns may amend their actual forms of government, and
grants them the power necessary to carry out such changes.” Town of
Hooksett, 148 N.H. at 628 (quotation omitted). In turn, “RSA chapters 49-C
and 49-D work in conjunction with RSA chapter 49-B by providing a limited
list of forms of government that are available to municipalities.” City of
Manchester Sch. Dist., 150 N.H. at 669. Specifically, a municipality “may
establish either a town or city government,” RSA 49-B:2, I (Supp. 2009), and
must prepare its charter according to the framework statutorily mandated for
that municipal form. See RSA ch. 49-C (2003 & Supp. 2009) (city); RSA ch.
49-D (2003 & Supp. 2009) (town). We take judicial notice that Manchester’s
charter denominates it as a city and that the City has chosen the mayor-board
of aldermen form of government as permitted under RSA chapter 49-C. See
City of Manchester Sch. Dist., 150 N.H. at 668. Thus, the mayor and board of
aldermen comprise the City’s elected body. See RSA 49-B:2, IV(b) (2003); RSA
49-C:8 (2003).
We have noted that “RSA chapter 49-C sets forth an exhaustive blueprint
for [the mayor-board of aldermen] form of government.” City of Manchester
Sch. Dist., 150 N.H. at 668. In particular, it mandates that the city’s charter
contain certain provisions relating to the city’s budget. See RSA 49-C:23
(Supp. 2009). RSA 49-C:23 provides in part:
Budget Process and Fiscal Control. The charter shall provide for
the following:
I. A budget submission date and a date by which an annual
budget shall be finally adopted by the elected body. Failing final
adoption by the established date, the budget shall be determined
as provided in the city charter, or as originally submitted by the
chief administrative officer if no such provision is made in the city
charter.
II. One or more public hearings on the budget before its
final adoption. A copy of the proposed budget and notice of the
public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance of
any public hearing.
RSA 49-C:23.
The Cashin petitioners assert that the spending cap in the charter
amendment conflicts with this provision, in particular, with the duty and sole
authority of the City’s elected body to approve the City’s budget. NHTAC
contends that this provision is “nothing more than a structural plan or
roadmap for the city to follow when initiating its own form of budget ordinances
the city should follow when putting its charter together” and does not set forth
6
“all inclusive legislative mandates preempting the city from establishing
spending restrictions on its government.” For purposes of this appeal, we need
not determine how extensive or “inclusive” the mandates of RSA 49-C:23 are;
we previously determined, however, that this provision “makes explicit the
legislature’s intent that the [city’s elected body] approve the annual budget.”
City of Claremont, 135 N.H. at 531. Accordingly, we must examine whether
the proposed amendment conflicts with this intent.
NHTAC and the state agencies argue that a spending cap is not
inconsistent with the board of mayor and aldermen’s authority to adopt a
budget because that body retains authority to override the cap by a two-thirds
majority. NHTAC also asserts that “[t]here is nothing in state law that forces
the City to pass its budget by a simple majority.” The Cashin petitioners
assert, to the contrary, that RSA 49-C:12, I (2003) requires “decisions
concerning the business to come before a board of mayor and alderm[e]n . . . to
be by majority vote” and “disallow[s] super-majority votes in . . . [general
business] matters.” We agree.
RSA 49-C:12, I, provides:
I. The mayor shall preside over all meetings of the elected
body, and the city clerk shall act as a clerk of the body. All
meetings of the elected body shall be public in accordance with
RSA 91-A. Regular meetings shall be held at such hours on such
days of the week, at such intervals, as the charter may designate
and special meetings upon such notice as is required in the
charter. The elected body shall establish its own rules, and a
majority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the
business of the board. The mayor shall have the right to introduce
bills and initiate other measures at the meetings and to speak at
meetings upon pending measures without resigning the chair. In
cases where the mayor is directly elected, the mayor shall not be
counted to make a quorum of such board, nor vote as a member of
the board except in case of equal division.”
RSA 49-C:12, I; see RSA 45:9 (2003) (stating mayor shall have no vote in action
of board of aldermen “except in case of an equal division.”); cf. RSA 49-C:12, II
(2003) (city may by charter amendment allow mayor to vote at city council
meetings).
The admonition that the mayor may not vote “except in case of equal
division” manifests the legislature’s intention that aldermanic boards conduct
ordinary business by the vote of a simple majority. Other statutory provisions
mandating a two-thirds majority in specific instances bolster this conclusion.
See N. Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction 417 (7th ed. 2007) (“The
7
force of the maxim [expressio unius est exclusio alterius] is strengthened where
a thing is provided in one part of the statute and omitted in another.”); cf. State
v. Guertin, 89 N.H. 126, 128 (1937) (noting that where the legislature used the
word “regulate” six times in a statute “with other words limiting its scope, it is
to be assumed that the Legislature, when using the word without limitation
intended to use it broadly”). For example, RSA 49-C:23 itself directs that a city
charter set forth “[p]rocedures for appropriation of funds, after notice and
public hearing and by a 2/3 vote, for purposes not included in the annual
budget as adopted.” RSA 49-C:23, VI (Supp. 2009); see RSA 45:9 (2003) (two-
thirds majority of board of aldermen required to override mayor’s veto); RSA
47:11-a, III (2003) (mass transportation); RSA 47:27, I (2003) (siting of oil
refinery in a city); RSA 48:20, III (2003) (establishment of office of director of
human services). Thus, as the Cashin petitioners assert, “when the legislature
wanted to deviate from the general requirement in RSA 49-C:12, I for a majority
vote of a quorum to adopt a measure, it did so by a specific provision for such a
super-majority vote.”
Having interpreted RSA 49-C:12, I, to require a simple majority vote
unless otherwise specified by statute, we conclude that the proposed charter
amendment is inconsistent with state law. Because the amendment constrains
the board to either abide by the spending cap or act by a two-thirds majority to
override it, it conflicts with the board’s authority to adopt a budget, see RSA
49-C:23, by the vote of a simple majority, see RSA 49-C:12, I. We conclude,
therefore, that the spending cap is preempted by RSA 49-C:12, I, and RSA 49-
C:23. Accordingly, we answer the first and the added transferred questions
affirmatively and, in light of this conclusion, we need not address the parties’
other arguments or the remaining transferred questions of law.
Remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
8