THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-878
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID J. PANDELENA
Argued: October 14, 2010
Opinion Issued: December 22, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Diana E. Fenton, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, David J. Pandelena, appeals the revocation
of his driver’s license by the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) upon a finding that he
violated probation. See RSA 263:56-b, IV (Supp. 2009). We affirm.
In February 2009, the defendant was convicted of the sale of a controlled
drug in violation of RSA 318-B:2 (2004), and he pleaded guilty to a charge of
conspiracy to commit the sale of a controlled drug in violation of RSA 629:3
(2007). The trial court sentenced him to one to five years in state prison, with
the maximum prison time suspended for five years, and awarded him pretrial
confinement credit of 465 days. The defendant was also sentenced to five years
of probation and a $1000 fine, which was suspended for a period of five years.
The rules of his probation required that he submit to random urinalysis for
drug testing, and that he be of good behavior, to include refraining from
conduct resulting in his arrest. The defendant’s mittimus further stated that:
“Violation of probation or any of the terms of this sentence may result in
revocation of probation and imposition of any sentence within the legal limits
for the underlying offense.”
In June 2009, the defendant was involved in a motor vehicle accident
that resulted in his arrest for driving under the influence of drugs in violation
of RSA 265-A:2 (Supp. 2009). In July 2009, a probation officer filed a notice of
violation with the court relative to the defendant’s arrest. A supplemental
notice of violation was later filed based upon a urine sample from the
defendant that tested positive for methadone. After an evidentiary hearing on
November 9, 2009, the trial court concluded that the defendant violated the
terms of his probation by engaging in illegal drug use and driving under the
influence of drugs. Based upon these violations, the trial court sentenced the
defendant to two and one-half to seven years in state prison, stand committed,
with pretrial confinement credit of 598 days. In addition, pursuant to RSA
263:56-b, IV, the trial court ordered that the defendant’s driver’s license be
suspended for a period of three years upon his release from prison. This
appeal ensued.
The sole issue for our review is whether the trial court erred when it
imposed a license revocation under RSA 263:56-b, IV as part of the defendant’s
probation violation sentence. As this question was not raised below, the
defendant relies upon the plain error rule in support of his argument that the
trial court had no authority to order license revocation.
Under the plain error rule, we may consider errors not raised before the
trial court. State v. Matey, 153 N.H. 263, 266 (2006). “A plain error that
affects substantial rights may be considered even though it was not brought to
the attention of the trial court or the supreme court.” Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
“However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use limited to those
circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.” State
v. Russell, 159 N.H. 475, 489 (2009). To find plain error: “(1) there must be an
error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights;
and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. We have looked to federal plain error
analysis in applying our plain error rule. Id. at 489-90.
Because a trial court’s sentencing authority is statutory, we determine
whether there was error by engaging in statutory interpretation. See State v.
Almodovar, 158 N.H. 548, 552 (2009). “The interpretation of a statute is a
2
question of law, which we review de novo.” State v. Kousounadis, 159 N.H.
413, 423 (2009). “In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter
of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered
as a whole.” State v. Gallagher, 157 N.H. 421, 422 (2008). “When the
language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to
modification.” State v. Crie, 154 N.H. 403, 407 (2006).
RSA 263:56-b, IV provides:
The driver’s license of any person who is 18 years of age or older
on the date of the incident, and who is convicted of the offense of
sale or possession with intent to sell controlled drugs as defined in
RSA 318-B:1 . . . may be revoked, at the discretion of the court, for
any period of time, including for life. The court of relevant
jurisdiction shall have the discretion to determine when the
revocation shall begin.
Because the defendant was convicted under RSA 318-B:2 for the sale of a
controlled drug, the trial court clearly had the statutory authority to revoke the
defendant’s license as part of his sentence for the drug conviction. Moreover, if
the trial court had included the license revocation as part of the defendant’s
original suspended sentence, and later imposed that suspended sentence due
to the defendant’s probation violation, this would not have been error. See RSA
651:21 (2009) (“Upon revocation of any suspended sentence the court may
order that the defendant serve such sentence in full or in such parts and at
such times as is deemed best . . . .”). Nevertheless, because license revocation
was not imposed as part of the defendant’s original suspended sentence, but
rather, was imposed as part of his sentence for a probation violation, our
inquiry does not end here.
In State v. Hancock, 156 N.H. 301 (2007), we considered whether the
trial court had the statutory authority to sentence a defendant to probation in
addition to the maximum allowable fine and maximum allowable period of
incarceration. In concluding that the trial court may not sentence a defendant
to probation if it also imposes both statutory maximums, we looked to the
language of RSA 651:2, VII (2007), which provides: “When a probation or
conditional discharge is revoked, the defendant may be fined . . . if a fine was
not imposed in addition to the probation or conditional discharge. Otherwise
the defendant shall be sentenced to imprisonment . . . .” Because the trial
court had imposed the maximum fine and maximum period of incarceration,
there would have been no statutory mechanism to enforce probation. Thus, we
interpreted RSA 651:2, VII to mandate that probation violations be punished
“exclusively through imposing a fine, under RSA 651:2, IV, or imprisonment
under RSA 651:2, II.” Id. at 303 (emphasis added); see also RSA 651:2, VII.
3
Despite this holding, the State argues that Hancock is not controlling on
the issue of whether a civil penalty, such as a license revocation, is a
permissible penalty for a probation violation. Specifically, the State argues
that, when read in conjunction with RSA 263:56-b, IV (authorizing license
revocation for certain drug offenses), RSA 651:1, II (2007) provides an
exception to the express statutory limitation on probation violation sentences
contained in RSA 651:2, VII. We disagree.
RSA 651:1, II states:
This chapter does not deprive the court of any authority conferred
by law to decree a forfeiture of property, suspend or cancel a
license, remove a person from office, or impose any other civil
penalty. Any appropriate order exercising that authority may be
included as part of the judgment of conviction.
In State v. Buckingham, 121 N.H. 339 (1981), we considered whether the trial
court was statutorily authorized to revoke a defendant’s license as part of a
sentence for negligent homicide. In concluding that the trial court lacked such
authority in the first instance, we noted that:
The State argues that trial judges have the authority to suspend
licenses by virtue of RSA 651:1, II, which provides that the chapter
does not deprive courts of any lawful authority to cancel or
suspend a license. This provision, however, grants no authority to
suspend or revoke licenses; it provides only that the chapter does
not abridge such existing lawful authority derived from other
sources.
Id. at 343 (holding that the language of former RSA 262-A:62, I (Supp.1979)
permitted license revocation only upon a jury finding that the negligent
homicide occurred as a consequence of the defendant being under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled drug). Although here we
consider the trial court’s sentencing authority for probation violations, rather
than its sentencing authority for an underlying criminal conviction, the
Buckingham analysis of RSA 651:1, II is nonetheless applicable. Accordingly,
there must be statutory authority, apart from RSA 651:1, II, which permits the
trial court to revoke a defendant’s license for violating his probation. At the
present time, no such statutory authority exists.
While RSA 263:56-b, IV does afford the trial court the authority to revoke
a license upon a defendant’s conviction for the sale of a controlled drug,
nothing within the statute authorizes the trial court to impose a license
revocation for a violation of probation. Moreover, as previously noted, RSA
651:2, VII provides that violations of probation may be punished only through
4
the imposition of a fine or a term of imprisonment. See Hancock, 156 N.H. at
303; see also RSA 651:2, VII. “We will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add words to the statute that the legislature did not see fit to
include.” Hancock, 156 N.H. at 305. Thus, the trial court’s revocation of the
defendant’s license for violation of his probation was error.
We next consider whether the error was plain. See Russell, 159 N.H. at
489. “Plain is synonymous with clear or, equivalently, obvious.” United States
v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 734 (1993) (quotations omitted). “When the law is not
clear at the time of trial and remains unsettled at the time of appeal, a decision
by the trial court cannot be plain error.” State v. Panarello, 157 N.H. 204, 209
(2008). Our case law has not expressly reconciled the issue of the proper
application of RSA 651:2, VII with the language regularly used in sentencing
orders to the effect that “[v]iolations of probation or any of the terms of this
sentence may result in revocation of probation and imposition of any sentence
within the legal limits for the underlying offense.” Accordingly, we hold that
the error in this case was not plain.
In State v. Matey, 153 N.H. 263 (2006), the defendant was convicted of a
class B felony for possession of a controlled drug. The defendant received a
deferred sentence of imprisonment and was placed on probation for four years.
Id. at 264. The defendant later violated his probation and, as a result, the trial
court sentenced him to prison for twelve months and probation for three years
upon his release. Id. at 264-65. The defendant appealed, arguing that the trial
court impermissibly extended his probation beyond the term initially imposed
by the trial court for the underlying drug conviction. Id. at 265.
The State argued that under State v. White, 131 N.H. 555 (1989), a
defendant who violates his probation “may legally be given any sentence within
the statutory limits for the underlying offense, including not only a term of
incarceration, but also an additional term of probation.” Matey, 153 N.H. at
267. The defendant conceded that this would be true but for our decision in
State v. Ingerson, 130 N.H. 112 (1987), in which we held that the trial court
erred in calling forward indefinite sentences. Matey, 153 N.H. at 267-68. The
defendant argued, based on Ingerson, that the subsequent increase in his
probation effectuated an illegal increase in the call forward period for the
underlying sentence of imprisonment. Id. at 268. Based upon a plain error
analysis, we concluded that because we had never addressed the precise issue
raised by the defendant, it was not plain error for the trial court to impose an
additional term of probation as a sanction for the probation violation. Id. at
268.
Although Matey was decided prior to Hancock, it is not “obvious” that
Hancock in fact overruled Matey. In Hancock the only sentence that could
5
have been imposed to enforce probation was a fine or imprisonment. Thus, our
holding in Hancock was arguably limited to its facts.
We now clarify that the standard language included in a defendant’s
mittimus that “[v]iolations of probation or any of the terms of this sentence may
result in revocation of probation and imposition of any sentence within the
legal limits for the underlying offense,” does not permit a trial court to sentence
a defendant to anything other than a fine or imprisonment for a probation
violation. A mittimus cannot confer on the trial court a sentencing power not
granted to it by the legislature. See Almodovar, 158 N.H. at 552 (“A trial
court’s sentencing authority is statutory.”). Further, in both White and State v.
Perkins, 121 N.H. 713, 715-16 (1981), we underscored that the trial court,
under RSA 651:2, VII, is limited to enforcing probation only through retaining a
portion of a defendant’s maximum sentence. See Hancock, 156 N.H. at 304.
Thus, the trial court is statutorily empowered to sanction a probation violation
by imposing a fine or imprisonment up to the legal limits for the underlying
offense, if the trial court has, through the mittimus language, retained a
portion of its sentencing power as an enforcement mechanism. Id.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6