THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2009-342
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KIRKMAN J. CASSAVAUGH, III
Argued: June 23, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 10, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (Smukler, J.), the
defendant, Kirkman J. Cassavaugh, III, was convicted of first degree murder in
the death of Jeremy Huard, RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (2007), and second degree
murder in the death of Jennifer Huard, RSA 630:1-b, I(a) (2007). The
defendant appeals, arguing that the trial court erred by: (1) admitting evidence
that he previously threatened to kill Jennifer; (2) admitting evidence that he
terminated his initial interview with the police; and (3) admitting evidence of a
second police interview from which statements he made invoking his right to be
silent had been redacted. We affirm.
A jury could have found the following facts. During the summer of 2006,
the defendant and Jennifer Huard were involved in a romantic relationship.
The defendant and Jennifer’s brother, Jeremy Huard, were friends. The three
often engaged in drug use together at the defendant’s trailer, which was
situated on land owned by his grandparents. The defendant and Jennifer often
argued, however, and the relationship was troubled.
During that summer, Krystal Sanborn made a telephone call to Jennifer
during which she overheard a man yelling at Jennifer in a voice filled with rage.
She heard the man call Jennifer a “whore” and say he was “going to f.....g kill
her.” Jennifer explained to Sanborn that it was the defendant who was yelling
and that they often fought.
In September 2006, Jennifer moved her belongings out of the defendant’s
trailer and into her father’s home. However, both she and Jeremy remained in
contact with the defendant. On the night of September 19, 2006, the
defendant, Jeremy, and several acquaintances were at the defendant’s trailer
consuming drugs. After the acquaintances had departed, Jennifer called the
defendant asking to be picked up from a house in Franklin. Together the
defendant and Jeremy drove to pick her up.
During the car ride back to the defendant’s trailer, the defendant and
Jennifer argued. The argument continued after they arrived at the trailer,
waking Marc Thomson, who lived in a recreational vehicle nearby. Thomson
looked out his window to see the defendant punching Jeremy and throwing
him to the ground. Thomson yelled to the defendant, “Don’t kill him, Kirk.” He
got dressed and when he again looked out his window he observed the
defendant dragging Jennifer by her feet out the door of the trailer.
Shortly thereafter, the defendant knocked on Thomson’s door and told
Thomson that he had “killed them.” He asked for Thomson’s help in dragging
the bodies to the back of his trailer in order to burn them. Thomson responded
that burning the bodies at night would attract attention and instead offered to
help by warming up his car. Thomson then drove away, leaving the defendant
at the property. Later that morning, Thomson reported to the police what had
taken place. Based on Thomson’s report, the police obtained permission from
the defendant’s grandparents to search the property. They found both bodies
in debris piles behind the defendant’s trailer.
Autopsies revealed that Jennifer died within seconds of suffering a
gunshot wound to her chest, while Jeremy died of multiple stab wounds and
contributing gunshot wounds. Jennifer also sustained a second gunshot
wound to her shoulder and there had been bleeding under the skin on the back
of her head that was consistent with having been dragged down stairs. Jeremy
suffered twelve stab wounds, as well as gunshot wounds to his face, back and
2
buttocks. Marks on Jeremy’s neck were consistent with having been strangled.
Jeremy also sustained a forehead injury, which was consistent with having
been struck with the butt end of a rifle. His body had abrasions that were
likely caused after death and which were consistent with his body having been
dragged.
According to forensic reports, Jennifer’s blood appeared in numerous
areas of the defendant’s kitchen. Jeremy’s blood was found on the defendant’s
carpet, floor mat and walls. The defendant’s bare footprint was discovered on
the floor mat, which was covered in Jeremy’s blood.
There were bullet holes in the front door of the defendant’s trailer, in a
wall beside the refrigerator, and in the defendant’s refrigerator door. A bullet
removed from Jennifer’s body was identified as having been fired from a rifle
seized from the defendant’s trailer. A second bullet, discovered in the trailer,
was identified as having been fired from the same rifle. The defendant’s finger
and palm prints were the only prints discovered on the rifle. The bullet holes
found in the refrigerator had been freshly filled with caulking and a tube of the
same caulking was discovered in the defendant’s trash.
Police conducted interviews with the defendant both before and after the
discovery of the bodies. In the initial interview, the defendant did not appear
surprised or concerned to learn that Jeremy and Jennifer were missing. He
characterized Jennifer as a “miserable bitch,” and stated that she and Jeremy
left his house on foot at approximately 4:00 a.m. that morning, after he
engaged in an argument with Jennifer. When the police began to press the
defendant about whether he had killed either Jennifer or Jeremy, however, his
demeanor changed. His breath quickened, he slumped in his chair, and he
began to look “sickly,” although he continued to deny any involvement in the
killings. He then asked to end the interview and the interview was terminated.
Police conducted a second interview after the victims’ bodies were found.
The defendant was read his Miranda rights, see Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S.
436 (1966), which he waived, and he agreed to speak with the officers. After
the conversation turned to his potential involvement in the murders of Jennifer
and Jeremy, however, the defendant invoked his right to remain silent. He was
subsequently arrested. While in the booking area the defendant was agitated
and spontaneously exclaimed, “I didn’t kill them. They attacked me.” Later, he
made the unprompted statement, “This all stemmed from me being kicked in
the balls and being pushed into my . . . TV.”
The defendant was indicted on six counts of murder in the deaths of
Jeremy and Jennifer Huard. Specifically, he was charged with one count of
first degree murder and two alternative counts of second degree murder with
respect to each victim. Before trial, the State successfully moved, over the
3
defendant’s objection, to admit the testimony of Krystal Sanborn, as well as
portions of the transcripts and videotaped recordings of the two police
interviews of the defendant. On appeal, the defendant challenges the
admission of all that evidence.
I. Witness Testimony
We first consider the admission of Krystal Sanborn’s testimony. Prior to
trial, the State moved to admit, in its case-in-chief, Sanborn’s testimony that
she heard the defendant threaten to kill Jennifer. The defense objected. After
an evidentiary hearing, the trial court ruled that the evidence was admissible
under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 404(b).
“The purpose of Rule 404(b) in a criminal trial is to ensure that the
defendant is tried on the merits of the crime as charged and to prevent a
conviction based on evidence of other crimes or wrongs.” State v. Bassett, 139
N.H. 493, 496 (1995). Rule 404(b) provides:
Evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts is not admissible to prove
the character of a person in order to show that the person acted in
conformity therewith. It may, however, be admissible for other
purposes, such as proof of motive, opportunity, intent,
preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of mistake or
accident.
N.H. R. Ev. 404(b). A three-part test has been established for determining the
admissibility of evidence under Rule 404(b): “(1) the evidence must be relevant
for a purpose other than proving the defendant’s character or disposition; (2)
there must be clear proof that the defendant committed the act; and (3) the
probative value of the evidence must not be substantially outweighed by its
prejudice to the defendant.” State v. Beltran, 153 N.H. 643, 647 (2006). “The
State bears the burden of demonstrating the admissibility of prior bad acts.”
Id. Nevertheless, “[i]n ruling on the admissibility of evidence under Rule
404(b), the trial court exercises its sound discretion, and we will find error only
if the defendant can show that the ruling was clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Bassett, 139 N.H. at 496 (citation
omitted).
The defendant challenges the admissibility of the statement under the
first and third prongs of the Rule 404(b) test, arguing that the testimony was
irrelevant except to improperly show his propensity to commit violence and
that the prejudice to his case substantially outweighed the probative value of
the evidence. The State counters that the evidence was admissible because it
was relevant to prove the defendant’s intent and because its probative value
outweighed any prejudicial effect.
4
To meet its burden under the first prong of the Rule 404(b) test, the State
must “specify the purpose for which the evidence is offered and articulate the
precise chain of reasoning by which it will tend to prove or disprove an issue
actually in dispute, without relying upon forbidden inferences of predisposition,
character or propensity.” Beltran, 153 N.H. at 647. “To be relevant [to intent],
prior bad acts must be in some significant way connected to material events
constituting the crime charged and not so remote in time as to eliminate the
nexus.” Id. at 647-48.
The defendant argues that because his defense was that someone else
committed the murders, the issue of intent was not an issue “actually in
dispute.” Id. Therefore, he contends, the testimony should not have been
admitted. We disagree.
We have considered the issue of intent with respect to a defendant’s prior
threats in several cases. For example, in State v. Pepin, 156 N.H. 269 (2007),
the defendant was charged with, among other crimes, attempted murder and
first degree assault. He argued that evidence of his prior threat to shoot and
kill the victim should have been inadmissible at trial. We held that the prior
threat was relevant to the defendant’s intent to commit the charged crime
because it was “directed at the same victim and in a similar context as the
charged offenses; i.e., his efforts to intimidate the victim when she did
something he disliked.” Id. at 278. Therefore, it was more probable than not
that when the defendant later assaulted the victim, he did so with the purpose
to cause her death or bodily injury. Id.; see State v. Brewster, 147 N.H. 645
(2002) (prior threat against victim admissible to prove harassment and criminal
threatening charges because probative of defendant’s motive and intent and
victim’s state of mind); State v. Simonds, 135 N.H. 203, 207 (1991) (prior
sexual contact with victim admissible to show intent to touch victim for sexual
gratification).
Similarly, in State v. Sawtell, 152 N.H. 177 (2005), the defendant, who
was charged with first degree murder, argued that the trial court erred by
admitting evidence of his prior threats to the victim. We held that evidence of
prior threats to the victim with a gun were relevant to prove intent because the
prior acts involved the same parties, a similar weapon, and occurred under
similar circumstances. Id. at 182; see State v. Richardson, 138 N.H. 162
(1993) (prior threats against victim admissible to prove assault because
probative of defendant’s intent to intimidate and terrorize victim).
We have held that “[w]hen intent is not conceded by the defense, and it is
an element of the crime to be proven by the State, it is sufficiently at issue to
require evidence at trial.” Pepin, 156 N.H. at 279 (quotation omitted). Here,
the defendant was charged with first degree murder pursuant to RSA 630:1-a,
I(a) (2007), and he did not stipulate to intent. Thus, pursuant to the statute,
5
the State was required to prove that the defendant acted purposely. RSA
630:1-a, II (2007); State v. Glodgett, 144 N.H. 687, 691-93 (2000) (finding that
in general, State may not introduce Rule 404(b) evidence where defendant has
stipulated to the relevant element of the charged crime). “Purposely” means
“that the actor’s conscious object is the death of another, and that his act or
acts in furtherance of that object were deliberate and premeditated.” RSA
630:1-a, II (2007). Accordingly, the State was required to establish the
defendant’s specific intent to kill Jennifer and the prior threat was relevant for
that purpose.
Moreover, the threat was delivered to Jennifer just two months prior to
her murder and was thus not so remote in time as to eliminate the nexus
between it and the charged event. See Pepin, 156 N.H. at 278 (concluding that
threat made five months before charged event was not so distant in time as to
eliminate the nexus between them); State v. Allen, 128 N.H. 390 (1986)
(concluding that threat made three years before charged event was sufficiently
proximate for threat to be relevant). Further, the threat was made under
circumstances similar to the events on the night of Jennifer’s death; that is, the
threat was made during the course of a heated argument between Jennifer and
the defendant. Evidence of the prior threat therefore went directly to whether
the defendant intended to kill Jennifer when he shot her, and whether his
actions were deliberate and premeditated. Accordingly, we hold that the trial
court properly exercised its discretion when it permitted the testimony of
Sanborn as relevant to prove intent.
The defendant next argues that the prejudicial effect of the testimony
substantially outweighed its probative value.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is
to appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror,
provoke its instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of
human action that may cause a jury to base its decision on
something other than the established propositions in the case.
Unfair prejudice is not, of course, a mere detriment to a defendant
from the tendency of the evidence to prove his guilt, in which
sense all evidence offered by the prosecution is meant to be
prejudicial. Rather, the prejudice required to predicate reversible
error is an undue tendency to induce a decision against the
defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that is
emotionally charged.
State v. Yates, 152 N.H. 245, 249-50 (2005). “We accord considerable
deference to the trial court’s determination in balancing prejudice and
probative worth of evidence under Rule 404(b).” Pepin, 156 N.H. at 278
(quotation and citation omitted). “Particularly pertinent to determining this
6
balance is whether the evidence is relevant to prove an issue that is actually in
serious dispute.” Id. at 278-79.
As noted above, the prior threat to kill Jennifer was relevant to the
defendant’s intent. “[B]ecause the issue of the defendant’s intent was central
to the trial of this matter, the probative value was significant.” State v. Ayer,
154 N.H. 500, 513 (2006). Further, we do not find that the danger of unfair
prejudice substantially outweighs the testimony’s probative value. Sanborn’s
testimony was brief and “not so unduly emotional as to inflame a jury.” State
v. Jordan, 148 N.H. 115, 118 (2002). Although Sanborn’s testimony that the
defendant threatened to kill Jennifer may have been prejudicial, “we cannot
conclude that the evidence was so inflammatory as to substantially outweigh
its probative value.” State v. Nightingale, 160 N.H. ____, ____ (decided July 23,
2010). Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise
its discretion when it admitted evidence of the defendant’s prior threat under
Rule 404(b).
We reject the defendant’s contention that the trial court erred in failing to
issue a limiting instruction during Sanborn’s testimony; because he failed to
request a limiting instruction, he cannot complain of error. See State v.
Ericson, 159 N.H. 379, 389 (2009). In light of the above rulings, we need not
consider the State’s contention that the defendant’s prior threat was
independently admissible as an admission by a party-opponent under Rule
801(d)(2)(A).
II. Transcript and Videotaped Recording of First Police Interview
We next consider the defendant’s argument that the trial court
erroneously admitted that portion of the transcript and videotaped recording of
his initial police interview in which he expressed his desire to terminate the
interview. Because trial counsel did not object to admission of the evidence,
the defendant relies on the plain error rule in support of his argument.
The State counters that precisely because defense counsel affirmatively
stated she had no objection to the admission of this evidence, the defendant
cannot now argue for a plain error analysis. Thus, the State asserts that the
invited error doctrine precludes the defendant from availing himself “of error
into which he has led the trial court, intentionally or unintentionally.” State v.
Goodale, 144 N.H. 224, 227 (1999). We disagree with this assertion.
In State v. Richard, 160 N.H. ___, ____ (decided October 6, 2010), we
recently determined that the invited error doctrine does not preclude a court
from undertaking plain error review. To hold otherwise would “remove[] any
discretionary remedy from the appellate court’s panoply of options and
subjugate[] the interests of justice to the demands of a procedural mechanism.”
7
Id. at ___ (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we will consider whether the trial
court committed plain error.
“A plain error that affects substantial rights may be considered even
though it was not brought to the attention of the trial court or the supreme
court.” Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. “However, the rule should be used sparingly, its use
limited to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would
otherwise result.” State v. Russell, 159 N.H. 475, 489 (2009). To find plain
error: “(1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must
affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness,
integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id. We have looked to
federal plain error analysis in applying our plain error rule. Id. at 489-90.
Turning to the first prong of the plain error test, we conclude that the
trial court erred when it admitted evidence of the defendant’s invocation of his
right to remain silent. It is well-settled law in this jurisdiction that “use of pre-
arrest silence in the State’s case-in-chief, in which the defendant does not
testify, is unconstitutional.” State v. Remick, 149 N.H. 745, 747 (2003). As we
noted in Remick, we find instructive the First Circuit’s analysis of pre-arrest
silence in Coppola v. Powell, 878 F.2d 1562 (1st Cir.), cert denied, 493 U.S. 969
(1989). In Coppola, the court stated that “the Fifth Amendment, in its direct
application to the Federal Government, and in its bearing on the States by
reason of the Fourteenth Amendment, forbids either comment by the
prosecution on the accused's silence or instructions by the court that such
silence is evidence of guilt.” Id. at 1568.
The State argues that the instant case is distinguishable from Remick,
because there the defendant asserted his right to silence prior to answering a
single question from police. Remick, 149 N.H. at 746-47 (concluding that a
police officer’s testimony in the State’s case-in-chief that he “went over to the
defendant to ask him what happened, and at that point he just closed his eyes
and wouldn’t talk to me,” constituted a violation of the defendant’s Fifth
Amendment privilege against self-incrimination). Thus, the State argues, there
was no concern in Remick that a jury might be confused by an abrupt
cessation in the questioning, or that the jury might, as a result, improperly
conclude that the police had failed to allow the defendant adequate opportunity
to explain himself. The State argues that where, as here, the defendant has
engaged in an extensive interrogation session with police before invoking his
right to silence, there are such concerns. Thus, the State asserts that it was
proper for the trial court to allow evidence that the defendant terminated the
interview in order to prevent confusion or alarm over potentially improper
police tactics. In support of this argument, the State cites cases from other
jurisdictions, most notably Commonwealth v. Waite, 665 N.E.2d 982 (Mass.
1996), Commonwealth v. Habarek, 520 N.E.2d 1303 (Mass. 1988), and United
8
States v. Williams, 556 F.2d 65 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 431 U.S. 972 (1977).
We find these cases distinguishable.
Waite and Habarek stand for the proposition that where the defense has
created confusion over a police interview, the State is entitled to offer evidence
to clarify that confusion, including evidence that the defendant terminated it.
Waite, 665 N.E.2d at 988 (finding that evidence of a defendant’s pre-arrest
silence was admissible because the defendant initiated his confession with
police and thus played a role in creating the confusion at trial); Habarek, 520
N.E.2d at 1306 (concluding that evidence of pre-arrest silence was admissible
because defense counsel created confusion by raising the topic at trial).
Williams concerns testimony elicited from a police officer in order to impeach
the credibility of a defendant who chose to testify at trial. Williams, 556 F.2d
at 66. Here, however, there is no assertion that either the defendant or his
counsel created confusion at trial that would necessitate clarification. Nor did
the defendant take the stand and subject himself to impeachment by the
prosecution. The State simply introduced into evidence, in its case-in-chief, a
transcript and videotaped recording of the defendant’s initial police interview,
including his specific request to terminate that interview. This was error.
We next consider whether the error was plain. Russell, 159 N.H. at 489.
We need not decide this issue because even assuming that the error was plain,
we conclude that it did not affect the defendant’s substantial rights under the
third prong of the plain error analysis. Id.
“[T]o satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected
substantial rights, the defendant must demonstrate that the error was
prejudicial, i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding.” State v. Lopez,
156 N.H. 416, 425 (2007). We conclude that, in light of the overwhelming
evidence against the defendant, admission of his invocation of his right to
remain silent did not affect the outcome of the proceeding. As noted above, the
defendant and Jennifer had a tumultuous relationship and the defendant had
previously threatened to kill her. He admitted that he was home alone with the
victims in the early morning hours before the murders. His neighbor saw him
attack Jeremy and drag Jennifer out of the trailer. The defendant admitted
killing the victims and asked his neighbor for help in disposing of the bodies.
Later that day, the victims were discovered in debris piles behind the
defendant’s trailer. Their blood was found throughout the defendant’s trailer.
The defendant’s bare footprint was found on a mat covered in Jeremy’s blood.
The gun used to shoot the victims was discovered in the defendant’s home. His
finger and palm prints were the only prints on the gun. Bullets from the gun
were found in the defendant’s trailer. Bullet holes in the refrigerator had been
freshly caulked and a tube of caulking was found in the defendant’s trash.
Accordingly, we conclude that the evidentiary error did not affect the
defendant’s substantial rights and that it does not warrant reversal.
9
III. Transcript and Videotaped Recording of Second Police Interview
Finally, we consider the defendant’s argument that the trial court
erroneously admitted the transcript and videotaped recording of his second
police interview. Prior to trial, the defendant moved to exclude the interview in
its entirety. The trial court ruled it would admit evidence of the interview, but
that the portion in which the defendant asserted his Fifth Amendment privilege
would be redacted. The defendant argues that this was error under New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403. We disagree.
Rule 403 states:
Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative value
is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice,
confusion of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by
considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless
presentation of cumulative evidence.
We review the trial court’s determination in balancing prejudice and probative
worth for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Sawtell, 152 N.H. at 181. To
demonstrate that the trial court’s decision is not sustainable, the defendant
must show that it was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his
case. State v. Santiago, 159 N.H. 753, 757 (2010).
The defendant posits three arguments based on Rule 403 considerations:
(1) the evidence was minimally probative and highly prejudicial; (2) it was
needlessly cumulative of other evidence presented at trial; and (3) it could have
misled or confused the jury. We address each argument in turn.
The defendant contends that the redacted interview ended abruptly,
which could have led the jury to infer that he asserted his right to remain
silent. He further argues that most of the interview contains no inculpatory
evidence, and amounts to little more than “casual conversation.” Thus, he
concludes that the prejudicial effect of the evidence substantially outweighs its
probative value. We disagree.
In ruling on the motion to exclude, the trial court determined that
because the defendant’s demeanor visibly changed when the conversation
turned to the murders, and because the interview appeared to reveal the
defendant lying to the police about what they would find on a search of his
property, the probative value of the evidence was not substantially outweighed
by its prejudicial effect. The trial court explained:
The state correctly asserts that a defendant’s conduct after a
homicide, including his attempts to conceal the killings as well as
10
any statements he makes, are facts that the jury will be instructed
to consider in determining whether the defendant committed first
degree murder. . . . The state must establish intent as an element
of first-degree murder. As such, insight into the defendant’s mind
through his statements and demeanor with police is an important
link in the state’s case. The jury is also entitled to hear evidence
supporting the state’s claim that the defendant lied to police
during this interview. This purported action relates directly to
credibility and consciousness of guilt. Therefore, the statements
are highly probative.
The trial court concluded that, “[w]hile the statements may be prejudicial, they
do not rise to the level of unfair prejudice because they contain nothing that
would cause the jury to decide the case on improper grounds.” We agree.
As noted above, a forensic team searched the defendant’s property soon
after the murders and found the victims’ bodies, as well as bullet holes and
blood stains throughout the defendant’s home. During the course of the
second interview, the police informed the defendant that a forensic team had
searched his property. The police then asked the defendant, “What do you
think we found?” The defendant replied, “I don’t know, but that’s just what
you said you were going to tell me.” In light of the defendant’s admitted
presence at his property on the day of the interview, where visible blood stains,
bullet holes and the victims’ bodies were discovered, a jury could find this
statement to be dishonest and therefore probative of his guilt. Accordingly, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in finding the second interview highly
probative. See State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003) (“It is reasonable to
infer consciousness of guilt from a defendant’s false exculpatory statement.”).
As to prejudice, we conclude the trial court did not err in concluding that
admission of the redacted interview was minimally prejudicial to the
defendant’s case. Although there may have been some potential for
speculation on the part of the jury as to why the interview ended abruptly,
including speculation that the defendant invoked his privilege against self-
incrimination, we find no error in the trial court’s determination that the
prejudice did not substantially outweigh the highly probative value of the
evidence.
The defendant also argues that this evidence was needlessly cumulative
of other evidence presented at trial. Specifically, he argues that police
testimony and the admission of the videotaped recording of the first police
interview were sufficient to evidence his demeanor as it pertained to a
consciousness of guilt. We disagree. We have concluded that the second
interview was highly probative of the defendant’s consciousness of guilt based
on the specific details of that interview. Because the defendant does not argue
11
that a similar conversation occurred during his first interview with police, we
do not conclude that evidence of the second police interview is cumulative of
the evidence from the first police interview.
The defendant’s final argument regarding this evidence is that admission
of his statements was unduly confusing to the jury. In support of this
argument, the defendant cites State v. Philbrook, 138 N.H. 601, 603 (1994), for
the proposition that when evidence of flight creates an improper impression, it
is error to admit it under Rule 403. We find Philbrook to be inapplicable here.
Philbrook concerned admission of the defendant’s statement that he fled after
speaking with his attorney. We held that admission of the statement was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion because the jury might infer, based on the
attorney’s statements, that the defendant’s own attorney believed him to be
guilty. Here, the evidence consists of the defendant’s own statements, which
the jury was entitled to consider as to consciousness of guilt. See Evans, 150
N.H. at 420.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
12