THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2009-305
IN THE MATTER OF ERIC W. HEINRICH AND MARY ELLEN CUROTTO
Argued: April 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2010
Victor W. Dahar, P.A., of Manchester (Eleanor Wm. Dahar on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
Brian G. Germaine, P.A., of Derry (Brian G. Germaine on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
HICKS, J. The respondent, Mary Ellen Curotto (wife), appeals the final
divorce decree issued by the Derry Family Division (Moore, J.), which denied
her request to relocate to Florida with the three minor children from her
marriage to the petitioner, Eric W. Heinrich (husband). She also contends that
the court erred in ruling that the husband was entitled to reimbursement for
an overpayment of child support and by requiring that the children be in the
care of a third-party caretaker for more than forty-eight hours before the other
parent is offered the right to care for them. We affirm in part, vacate in part,
and remand.
The record supports the following facts. The parties married in Florida in
December 1996 and have three minor sons born in 2000, 2002 and 2004.
During their twelve-year marriage, the parties moved from Florida to New
Hampshire, following employment opportunities for the husband, who works as
a professional chef. The wife worked part-time in the hospitality industry as a
waitress and bartender. In 2002, the parties relocated to Derry where two of
their three sons were born. According to the wife, the parties’ stay in New
Hampshire was to be temporary, no longer than five years, after which they
intended to return to Florida. The husband disputes this.
On November 10, 2006, the husband filed for divorce, alleging that
irreconcilable differences between the parties caused an irremediable
breakdown of the marriage. The wife filed an answer and cross-motion to
petition for divorce on March 11, 2007. In this petition, the wife asked the
court to award her primary residential responsibility for the children so that
she could “relocate the children to the State of Florida.” The wife’s extended
family lives in the St. Petersburg, Florida area and owns and operates the Bon-
Aire Motel on St. Petersburg Beach. Her family offered her a position as
assistant general manager of the hotel with a number of benefits, including
health insurance and a flexible work schedule to take care of the children. The
husband opposed this move, primarily because he did not believe it was in the
children’s best interests. The children would not be able to see him weekly and
would have to move from the only home they have known.
On April 5, 2007, a Marital Master (Cross, M.) held a hearing and issued
a temporary parenting plan that gave primary residential responsibility to the
wife but awarded the husband regular parenting time. The parenting plan
provided that RSA 461-A:12 (Supp. 2009), entitled “Relocation of a Residence of
a Child,” would govern any proposed relocation. “Pending agreement or further
order,” the court also barred relocation outside of New Hampshire and
appointed a guardian ad litem (GAL) to study, among other issues, whether
relocation would be in the children’s best interests. In August 2007, the GAL
submitted a detailed preliminary report in which she reported that “the
children are strongly bonded to both parents,” that both “are good parents,”
and that the children would “suffer a loss” if they were separated from either
parent. Based upon this report, the trial court partially modified the existing
temporary parenting plan giving the father greater parenting time and denied
the wife’s request to relocate temporarily to Florida with the children.
At the final hearing, the parties presented the court with two separately
negotiated and agreed to parenting plans, one based upon the children’s
residence in New Hampshire and the other based upon their residence in
Florida. The parties disagreed as to whether the wife should relocate with the
children to Florida and as to which legal standard governed this proposed
relocation — the best interests of the child standard set forth in RSA 461-A:4
2
(Supp. 2009) and RSA 461-A:6 (Supp. 2009) or the burden-shifting standard
set forth in RSA 461-A:12. To decide these issues, the trial court heard
testimony from the parties and witnesses and considered the GAL’s final
report. In her final report, the GAL analyzed the proposed relocation request
and recommended that it be denied and “that the children remain in New
Hampshire with both parents.” The trial court agreed.
In March 2009, the trial court issued a final order, denying the wife’s
request to relocate to Florida based upon the burden-shifting standard set
forth in RSA 461-A:12. The trial court found that the wife had demonstrated a
legitimate reason for the proposed relocation to Florida — she had a unique job
opportunity in her family’s business as well as an extended family network that
would help her raise the children in Florida. The trial court then applied the
factors set forth in Tomasko v. DuBuc, 145 N.H. 169 (2000), to determine
whether the proposed relocation was in the sons’ best interests. The court
found that:
the [wife] has not resided in the State of Florida for quite some
time, that the parties have resided in the State of New Hampshire
for over six years, two of their children have been born in this
State, all three children have known no other home other than
their home in Derry, New Hampshire, the children are well
acclimated to the Derry area, the local schools and the community,
and the [better] quality of life argument raised by the [wife] does
not overcome the negative impact to the quality of the [husband’s]
relationship with the parties’ minor children if the [wife were] to
relocate to Florida.
The court noted that the husband was “an involved father” and that his family
“has bonded” with the children. If the children relocated to Florida, the court
observed that the husband’s parenting time with the children would
“noticeab[ly] decrease” and that the children “will suffer a loss.” (Quotation
omitted.) Therefore, the trial court denied the wife’s request to relocate and
found that the New Hampshire parenting plan should apply. The wife filed a
motion for reconsideration, which the court denied. This appeal followed.
The wife first argues that the trial court erred when it applied RSA 461-
A:12 in denying her petition to relocate with the children to Florida. She
contends that RSA 461-A:12 applies only to a post-divorce relocation request to
modify an existing permanent parenting decree. Here, she asserts, there was
no permanent parenting decree in place, and, therefore, the court should have
applied the best interests of the child standard set forth in RSA 461-A:4 and
RSA 461-A:6.
3
The wife’s argument requires us to construe the pertinent statutes. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). We are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as
a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute, and, where possible,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. When the
language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to
modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will
neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did
not see fit to include. Id.
RSA 461-A:4 governs parenting plans and the determination of parental
rights and responsibilities. It directs that “[i]n developing a parenting plan
under this section, the court shall consider only the best interests of the child
as provided under RSA 461-A:6 and the safety of the parties.” RSA 461-A:4, I.
RSA 461-A:4, II states that a parenting plan may include provisions relative to
“[d]ecision-making responsibility and residential responsibility” for the
children, “[p]arenting schedule,” as well as the “[r]elocation of parents” among
other matters. RSA 461-A:4, II. RSA 461-A:4, in conjunction with RSA 461-
A:6, does not specifically address the relocation of a residence of a child. RSA
461-A:12, however, does.
RSA 461-A:12, V-VI, lays out a two-part test, known as the burden-
shifting test, for a court to apply if a parent seeks to relocate the residence of a
child. Under this test, the parent petitioning for relocation must demonstrate
that the relocation is for a legitimate purpose and is reasonable in light of that
purpose. RSA 461-A:12, V. If the petitioning parent meets this burden, the
opposing party then has the burden of proving that the relocation is not in the
best interests of the child. RSA 461-A:12, VI. RSA 461-A:12 states:
I. This section shall apply if the existing parenting plan, order on
parental rights and responsibilities, or other enforceable agreement
between the parties does not expressly govern the relocation issue.
This section shall not apply if the relocation results in the
residence being closer to the other parent or to any location within
the child’s current school district.
II. This section shall apply to the relocation of any residence in
which the child resides at least 150 days a year.
RSA 461-A:12, I, II. Nothing in RSA 461-A:12 purports to limit its applicability
to relocations proposed after a final divorce decree has been entered, and we
decline to read in such a limitation. It is a well settled rule that to the extent
that two statutes conflict, the more specific statute, here RSA 461-A:12,
controls over the general statute, RSA 461-A:4. Favazza v. Braley, 160 N.H.
___, ___ (decided June 3, 2010). RSA 461-A:4, the general parenting plan
4
statute, lists as one possible provision the “[r]elocation of parents.” RSA 461-
A:4, II(f). It does not provide any detail as to relocation of the children as RSA
461-A:12 does.
The wife next argues that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in denying her request to relocate to Florida with the children under
RSA 461-A:12. Specifically, she contends that the trial court “failed to give
proper weight to evidence and testimony proffered by [her] relative to the
opportunities” available to the children in Florida. These opportunities include
the ability of the children to attend private school, participate in their family’s
hotel legacy, and attend monthly scheduled parenting time with their father.
The wife further asserts that she would be able to provide a better lifestyle for
the children in Florida than in New Hampshire and that the parties had agreed
to move from New Hampshire to Florida after five years. By ignoring these
factors, the trial court placed too much emphasis on how the relocation would
negatively affect the husband’s relationship and parenting time with the
children. She asserts there would be no negative effect; the husband would
have the same quality of parenting time whether the children live in New
Hampshire or Florida.
As previously stated, RSA 461-A:12 provides the analytical framework to
determine whether relocation is warranted. Under RSA 461-A:12, the parent
seeking to relocate has the initial burden of demonstrating, by a preponderance
of the evidence, that the relocation is for a legitimate purpose and is reasonable
in light of that purpose. RSA 461-A:12, V. Once the parent has met this prima
facie burden, the burden shifts to the other parent to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that relocating is not in the child’s best
interests. RSA 461-A:12, VI.
Whether the wife met her prima facie burden is not at issue here. This
appeal concerns only whether the trial court properly concluded that the father
met his burden of showing the relocation was not in the children’s best
interests. We review the trial court’s analysis under our unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard. See Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172; see also State
v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard). “This means that we review only whether the record
establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary judgment
made.” In the Matter of Lockaby & Smith, 148 N.H. 462, 465 (2002) (quotation
omitted).
Here, the trial court, after reviewing the GAL’s final report, hearing
testimony from witnesses, and listening to the parties and reading their written
submissions, found that the father had established that a relocation to Florida
was not in the children’s best interests. In reaching this conclusion, the trial
5
court carefully analyzed each of the factors listed in Tomasko. These factors
include:
(1) each parent’s reasons for seeking or opposing the move; (2) the
quality of the relationships between the child and the custodial
and noncustodial parents; (3) the impact of the move on the
quantity and quality of the child’s future contact with the
noncustodial parent; (4) the degree to which the custodial parent’s
and child’s life may be enhanced economically, emotionally, and
educationally by the move; (5) the feasibility of preserving the
relationship between the noncustodial parent and child through
suitable visitation arrangements; (6) any negative impact from
continued or exacerbated hostility between the custodial and
noncustodial parents; and (7) the effect that the move may have on
any extended family relations.
Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 172.
The trial court focused upon how the relocation would affect the quality
of the relationship of the husband, “an involved father,” with his children. The
court found that this relationship would suffer because the husband’s “day to
day contact with the parties’ minor children will be eliminated.” Under the
proposed Florida plan, the husband’s contact would be limited to three-day
weekends, major holidays and the summer, a time period the court noted that
the husband “will not be able to take advantage of given[] his employment” as a
chef. The court also worried that the Florida parenting plan “would require
significant air travel, which involves a cost factor that the parties may or may
not be able to realistically afford, as well as requiring the parties to effectively
communicate, which they have been unable to do so to date.” Finally, the
court noted that the children are “well acclimated to the Derry area, the local
schools and the community.”
The wife asserts that these factors are far outweighed by the economic,
emotional, and educational benefits of the move. She would have a flexible
lucrative career with family support and the children could attend private
school in Florida. The trial court addressed this argument, stating at the
hearing, “I fully understand. Your client wants to relocate to Florida because
she is offered a job that she could not obtain in New Hampshire. She could not
get a job with the same benefits . . . and she feels that being with her family
and having her family support is in her children’s best interest.” But the trial
court found that the “quality of life argument raised by the [wife] does not
overcome the negative impact to the quality of the [husband’s] relationship with
the parties’ minor children if the [wife were] to relocate to Florida.”
6
The record supports the trial court’s findings. There is evidence that the
husband was an involved, caring father. His family gathers together regularly
at his parents’ house on Sundays to relax, play games, and swim. He is
involved in extra-curricular activities as an assistant coach, helps the children
with their homework, and attends school activities. The GAL noted that there
are times when the husband could not exercise his parenting time because of
his work schedule and relies upon a third party for day care. Nevertheless, the
GAL opined that she believed it was important for the children “to have . . .
access to their dad” regularly. The GAL noted in her report that while the
Florida parenting plan would allow the husband and children “to maintain a
relationship, . . . it will not be the same type of relationship, which exists now.
The reality is that the ability to have day to day contact with the boys will be
eliminated.” She concluded that the boys “will suffer a loss.”
We are unpersuaded by the wife’s attempts to liken this case to Zaleski v.
Zaleski, 513 N.Y.S.2d 784 (App. Div.), appeal denied 512 N.E. 2d 552 (N.Y.
1987). In Zaleski, an appellate court upheld the trial court’s grant of a
mother’s petition to relocate intrastate from Long Island to Syracuse, New York,
in order for her new husband to pursue a unique employment opportunity in
“an on-going family concern.” Zaleski, 513 N.Y.S.2d at 786. Because the wife
had proposed a liberal visitation schedule and the parties had communicated
well, the court concluded that the intrastate relocation “will not . . . effectively
curtail the visitation rights of the father or deprive him of regular access to the
children.” Id. In comparison, here the wife has proposed an interstate move of
great distance, the parties have had difficulty communicating, and the
proposed visitation schedule would greatly limit the father’s parenting time
with the children.
The wife also asserts that the trial court should not have relied upon the
GAL’s report and testimony because the GAL’s “[p]ersonal ‘[p]hilosophy’
[i]nterfered with her [r]ecommendations.” Specifically, the wife contends that
the GAL’s support of third-party care and working mothers unacceptably
influenced her report. “[T]he recommendations of a GAL do not, and should
not, carry any greater presumptive weight than the other evidence in a case.”
In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. 707, 714 (2007). The trial court here
did not rely solely upon the GAL’s report. The court considered the testimony
of both parties and their witnesses, and the submitted documents. Further,
the trial court did not commit an unsustainable exercise of discretion by
relying upon the GAL’s report. At the hearing, the GAL acknowledged her
difference of opinion as to third-party care, stating:
I think of [third-party care] as . . . a necessary evil, and you know,
so many people have to, and you do the best you can to keep your
children safe when you have to utilize [it].
7
[The wife] doesn’t want to utilize it at all . . . . I respect [that];
I just don’t agree with it.
The trial court, therefore, was able to consider these differences in philosophy
and to weigh the GAL’s report accordingly. We defer to the judgment of the
trial court in these matters because a trial court is in the best position to
assign weight to evidence and to assess the credibility of witnesses. In re
Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. 292, 296 (2006).
Based upon our review of the record, we cannot say that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in finding that it would not be in the
children’s best interests to relocate to Florida. See In the Matter of Pfeuffer &
Pfeuffer, 150 N.H. 257, 260-62 (2003); Tomasko, 145 N.H. at 173-75. We,
therefore, affirm the trial court’s ruling.
Next, the wife contends that the trial court erred in ruling that the
husband was entitled to reimbursement of $2,472 spread over twelve months.
The parties do not dispute that the husband overpaid child support from
January 2008. Prior to the final hearing, the parties submitted that all
overpayments had been settled by their partial permanent stipulation through
November 1, 2008. The court needed to calculate only overpayments after
November 2, 2008. The court, however, incorrectly calculated overpayments
for the entire period. We vacate and remand for recalculation of the
overpayments.
Finally, the wife asserts that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion in requiring the children to be in the care of a third-party caretaker
for greater than forty-eight hours before the other parent is offered the right to
care for the children. She proposes that a six-hour or shorter time period is
more acceptable. Based upon our review of the record, we cannot say that the
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in imposing a forty-eight hour
period.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred;
DALIANIS, J., concurred specially.
DALIANIS, J., concurring specially. While I concur in the court’s opinion
because of our deferential standard of review, and agree that RSA 461-A:12
(Supp. 2009) governs the petition of the respondent, Mary Ellen Curotto (wife),
to relocate with the children to Florida, I write separately to express my
concern about how the trial court applied this statute to the facts of this case.
8
Under RSA 461-A:12, a parent seeking to relocate has the initial burden
of demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the relocation is for
a legitimate purpose and is reasonable in light of that purpose. RSA 461-A:12,
V. Once the parent has met this prima facie burden, the burden shifts to the
other parent to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence that relocating is not
in the child’s best interests. RSA 461-A:12, VI.
In this case, the parties do not dispute that the respondent met her
prima facie burden. The only issue is whether the petitioner, Eric W. Heinrich
(husband), met his burden of proving that it was not in the children’s best
interest to relocate to Florida. In making this determination, the trial court
properly examined the factors set forth in Tomasko v. Dubuc, 145 N.H. 169,
172 (2000), which include:
(1) each parent’s reasons for seeking or opposing the move; (2) the
quality of the relationships between the child and the custodial and
noncustodial parents; (3) the impact of the move on the quantity and
quality of the child’s future contact with the noncustodial parent; (4) the
degree to which the custodial parent’s and child’s life may be enhanced
economically, emotionally, and educationally by the move; (5) the
feasibility of preserving the relationship between the noncustodial parent
and child through suitable visitation arrangements; (6) any negative
impact from continued or exacerbated hostility between the custodial
and noncustodial parents; and (7) the effect that the move may have on
any extended family relations.
The trial court’s analysis focused upon factor (3), the move’s impact upon
the children’s future contact with their father, and factor (4), whether the move
would enhance their emotional, financial and educational lives. Although there
was evidence that relocation would have greatly enhanced the children’s lives
(their mother would have had a lucrative job, they would have lived near
extended family and been able to attend private school), the trial court denied
the wife’s request to relocate, to my mind, principally because, if she moved,
the husband’s time with the children would “noticeab[ly] decrease.” I find this
troubling. If an involved parent’s regular contact with his or her children is
sufficient, in and of itself, to bar the other parent’s reasonable request to
relocate for legitimate reasons, will it ever be possible for one parent to relocate
when the other parent is thoroughly involved in the children’s lives?
9