THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-549
DOROTHY J. GAYLOR & a.
v.
STEPHEN T. JEFFCO, ESQ. & a.
Submitted: February 17, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2010
Dorothy J. Gaylor and Gregory A. Gaylor, by brief, pro se.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Jeffrey H. Karlin on the
brief), for the defendants.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiffs, Gregory A. Gaylor and his mother, Dorothy
J. Gaylor, appeal an order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) dismissing their
claim for criminal legal malpractice against the defendants, Stephen T. Jeffco,
Esq., Harry N. Starbranch, Jr., Esq., and Jeffco Starbranch & Soldati. We
affirm.
The record and our decision in State v. Gaylor, 158 N.H. 230 (2009),
support the following facts. In December 1997, Gregory Gaylor was indicted on
multiple theft counts and one count of willful evasion of the New Hampshire
business profits tax. Gaylor, 158 N.H. at 231. During jury deliberations,
Gaylor absconded. Id. He was convicted of over one hundred counts of theft
and tax evasion, and sentenced in absentia to a prison term and to pay
restitution. Id. In July 1999, while still a fugitive, Gaylor appealed. Id. We
dismissed his appeal because of his fugitive status. Id. He was arrested in
Switzerland in 1999 and extradited to New Hampshire in 2000, where he began
serving his sentences. Id.
In April 2001, Gaylor filed motions asking us to reconsider and to set
aside our dismissal of his appeal. Id. We denied both motions. Id. In 2003,
Gaylor unsuccessfully petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus in the superior
court, claiming ineffective assistance of counsel and actual innocence. Id. at
234. In 2006, he petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus in the United States
District Court for the District of New Hampshire challenging his state court
convictions, arguing actual innocence. Id. The federal court denied the
petition, finding that Gaylor had failed to produce any new reliable evidence
supporting his claim. Id.
In July 2007, Gaylor again sought to appeal his convictions to this court,
arguing that we should reconsider our dismissal of his original appeal in 1999.
Id. at 231. We held that Gaylor’s new appeal was untimely, and that he had
forfeited the right to appellate review when he absented himself from the
jurisdiction during the appeal period. Id. at 235.
While this appeal was pending, Gaylor moved for a new trial in the
superior court, again claiming actual innocence. After an evidentiary hearing,
the superior court denied this motion. Id. at 234.
In 2000, the plaintiffs retained the defendants’ law firm to “provide legal
services and advice in connection with state and federal collateral proceedings
challenging the criminal convictions in State v. Gregory A. Gaylor, 98-S-468-
474.” In January 2009, the plaintiffs filed a criminal legal malpractice action
against the defendants, alleging that they negligently forfeited Gaylor’s ability
to challenge his convictions in federal court. Specifically, the plaintiffs argued
that, because the defendants failed to timely file state proceedings to toll the
one-year limitations period, Gaylor lost the opportunity to file a habeas corpus
petition in federal court. As a result, his petition was dismissed as untimely.
The superior court granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss the
plaintiffs’ writ, finding that, in order to prevail, Gaylor had to prove his actual
innocence. The court ruled that the case was governed by Mahoney v.
Shaheen, Cappiello, Stein & Gordon, P.A., 143 N.H. 491 (1999), and Therrien v.
Sullivan, 153 N.H. 211 (2006), and not by Hilario v. Reardon, 158 N.H. 56
(2008). The court denied the plaintiffs’ motion for reconsideration. This appeal
followed.
2
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the superior court: (1) erred by
requiring Gaylor to prove his actual innocence; (2) violated their “state and
federal constitutional rights to due process and access to the courts;” and (3)
erroneously denied their request for a telephonic hearing on the defendants’
motion to dismiss.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations in the plaintiffs’ pleadings are reasonably susceptible of
a construction that would permit recovery. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72,
73 (2008). We assume the plaintiffs’ pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to them. Id. We test the facts
in the petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations constitute a
basis for legal relief, we must find that the dismissal was improper. Id.
We first address the plaintiffs’ argument that the superior court erred by
ruling that Gaylor had to prove his actual innocence. The plaintiffs contend
that the actual innocence requirement does not apply to allegations of legal
malpractice involving post-conviction counsel, and that the defendants’
negligence was unrelated to tactical or strategic decisions made during the
trial. We disagree.
In New Hampshire, a civil legal malpractice action requires proof of three
elements. Therrien, 153 N.H. at 213; Mahoney, 143 N.H. at 495-96. First,
there must be an attorney-client relationship that triggers an attorney’s duty to
exercise reasonable professional care, skill, and knowledge in providing legal
services to a client. Therrien, 153 N.H. at 213. Second, a breach of that duty
must occur. Id. And third, a resultant harm must be legally caused by the
breach. Id. When the alleged malpractice arises out of a criminal case,
however, we apply an augmented standard. Mahoney, 143 N.H. at 496. In
addition to the three elements listed above, the claimant must allege and prove,
by a preponderance of the evidence, his or her actual innocence. Id.
In Mahoney, after the client pled guilty to numerous felonies, he brought
a legal malpractice action against his attorneys for their representation during
his grand jury investigation. Id. at 494. We held that “tactical or strategic
decisions made by defense counsel during their representation should not be
subject to attack by clients unable to prove their actual innocence.” Id. at 498.
This requirement prevents legal malpractice actions from shifting the
responsibility for the criminal conduct and its associated consequences away
from the defendant. Id. at 497; see also Therrien, 153 N.H. at 211-12 (holding
that a criminal legal malpractice action does not accrue until the defendant
receives direct or collateral relief from his or her underlying criminal
conviction).
3
In arguing that Gaylor need not prove his actual innocence, the plaintiffs
rely upon Hilario. In Hilario, the client appealed the trial court’s dismissal of
his legal malpractice action against his attorney, who, unbeknownst to the
client, attempted to withdraw his guilty plea, which led to the forfeiture of the
client’s ability to suspend a portion of his sentence. Id. at 59. We reversed,
finding that the client need not prove his actual innocence under the
circumstances of that case because the alleged malpractice did not involve
tactical or strategic decisions bearing upon the client’s convictions and because
the client was not challenging his convictions. Id. at 64-65, 67.
We reasoned that the alleged malpractice in Hilario was distinguishable
from that in Mahoney because, in Hilario, the attorney’s action was unrelated
to the client’s culpability for the underlying criminal acts, and if that attorney
had not acted negligently, the client would not have obtained a different result
in his criminal trial. Id. at 66, 67. In Hilario, we reaffirmed the “bright-line”
rule from Mahoney that “[a] plaintiff must still demonstrate his actual
innocence when the claim is based upon an allegedly wrongful conviction or
upon professional judgments intended to avert indictment or conviction.” Id. at
65-66. At the same time, we created a narrow exception to Mahoney, limited to
those situations where the client’s malpractice claims are unrelated to
underlying guilt or innocence. Id. at 64, 66. In Hilario, the only claim of
alleged malpractice involved an attorney’s action that affected the length of the
client’s sentence. Id. at 59.
Gaylor makes no such claim here and continues to attack his underlying
convictions. In Hilario, we stated that “courts are generally concerned with
malpractice actions that, even if they do not directly challenge the underlying
conviction, tend to undermine or indirectly challenge it.” Id. at 64. The
plaintiffs’ malpractice action does exactly that, as Gaylor seeks federal habeas
corpus relief to collaterally attack his underlying convictions.
This present case is similar to the case of Self v. Emblem, No. D044728,
2005 WL 1926704, at *1 (Cal. Ct. App. Aug. 12, 2005) (unpublished opinion),1
where the client alleged that his attorney negligently failed to inform the federal
courts of a pending state court filing that would have tolled the one-year
limitations period. Id. The client argued that the actual innocence
requirement did not apply because he only challenged the right to have his
federal habeas corpus petition heard, not his conviction, and because the
attorney was not his defense counsel at trial. Id. at *3. The court found that
since the client’s own criminal acts remained the source of his conviction,
irrespective of his attorney’s alleged negligence, neither the nature of the
1We note that California Rule of Court 8.1115(a) (2010) provides that such opinions “must not be
cited or relied on by a court . . . in any other action.”
4
criminal proceedings nor the stage at which the alleged legal malpractice
occurred entitled him to avoid the actual innocence requirement. Id.
As in Self, the plaintiffs here attempt to avoid the actual innocence
requirement by asserting that the defendants, as post-conviction counsel, are
not subject to this requirement. Id. at *3. Further, they argue that they are
only challenging the defendants’ negligence, not Gaylor’s conviction. Id.
However, as in Self, the defendants’ alleged malpractice is linked to efforts to
overturn Gaylor’s conviction. Thus, the plaintiffs’ criminal legal malpractice
action is barred because they failed to allege actual innocence. See Mahoney,
143 N.H. at 498; Hilario, 158 N.H. at 64.
We next address the plaintiffs’ argument that the superior court violated
“their state and federal constitutional rights to due process to access the
courts.” This contention is merely a restatement of their first argument against
the application of the actual innocence requirement. Because the plaintiffs cite
no legal authority that there is a constitutional basis for this contention, we
find this argument to be without merit and decline to consider it further. See
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Finally, we address the plaintiffs’ argument that the superior court
erroneously granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss without first holding a
hearing. Under Superior Court Rule 58, “a party seeking a hearing on an
objection to a motion must request one within ten days after the filing of a
motion.” The superior court has the discretion to grant or deny such a request.
Furbush v. McKittrick, 149 N.H. 426, 430 (2003). Here, the plaintiffs
requested a hearing on the defendants’ motion to dismiss. However, they fail to
explain how they were prejudiced by the denial of this request. Accordingly, we
find no error. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (to show that
trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion, appellants must demonstrate
ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of their case).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5