THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Original
No. 2009-658
PETITION OF PAUL LUSSIER
(New Hampshire Retirement System)
Argued: June 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 24, 2010
Molan, Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (Glenn R. Milner on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Foley Law Office, of Concord (Peter T. Foley on the brief and orally), for
the respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Paul Lussier, seeks review of a ruling
of the board of trustees (board) of the respondent New Hampshire Retirement
System (NHRS) that he was not entitled to service credit for a four-month
period in 1994. We affirm.
The following undisputed facts are supported by the record. The
petitioner worked as a police officer in the town of Derry (town) until his
retirement in 2007 as a group II member of the NHRS. See RSA 100-A:5
(2001). In the course of preparing his retirement papers, the petitioner became
aware that he had not received credit for service time for the month of
November 1994. He had been out of work from August 2, 1994, to December
3, 1994, due to a non-work related disability, and had collected compensation
directly from the town’s insurance provider. By letter dated November 13,
2007, the petitioner wrote to the NHRS to request service credit for the month
of November 1994. On December 6, 2007, the NHRS sent a letter to the town,
with a copy to the petitioner, enclosing a “revised statement for the
employer/member contributions and interest amounts due to an adjustment
on reported wages for August 2, 1994 to December 03, 1994 that were not
reported to [the NHRS] for [Paul Lussier],” and requesting payment of the
enclosed bill. The petitioner appealed this decision.
Following a hearing, the hearings examiner concluded that because the
statute in effect during the four months at issue in 1994 only allowed school
district employees to accrue service credit during periods of short-term
disability, the petitioner was not entitled to benefits for those four months. The
hearings examiner recommended that for the period August 2, 1994, through
December 3, 1994, the board return all contributions made by the petitioner or
the town, remove any service credit granted to the petitioner from his creditable
service, and recalculate his final benefit without such creditable service. The
hearings examiner also recommended that the board not recoup the annuity
payments already paid to the petitioner, including the months of disability
credit, because the petitioner was not at fault for the error in his records or for
the higher payments resulting from it. The board approved the
recommendation, and the petitioner unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration.
The petitioner then filed his petition for a writ of certiorari.
The petitioner argues that the NHRS committed legal error because: (1)
the language of RSA 100-A:5 requires that the law in place at the time of a
member’s retirement apply to the pension application; (2) New Hampshire law
requires that remedial legislation apply to acts occurring prior to its enactment;
and (3) it failed to provide him with sufficient due process. “Our standard of
review is whether the board acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction,
authority or observance of the law, whereby it arrived at a conclusion which
cannot legally or reasonably be made, or abused its discretion or acted
arbitrarily, unreasonably, or capriciously.” Petition of Farmington Teachers
Assoc., 158 N.H. 453, 455 (2009) (quotation omitted).
The petitioner first argues that RSA 100-A:5, II(b) requires that
“creditable service” be calculated “[u]pon service retirement,” and that RSA
100-A:4, II (2001) mandates that it is the number of years of creditable service
a member has “at retirement.” Therefore, according to the petitioner, the
current version of RSA 100-A:4, III-a (Supp. 2009), which allows for time spent
out of work on disability to count as creditable service for group II members,
must apply. We disagree.
Resolution of this petition requires statutory interpretation, which is a
question of law that we review de novo. Petition of Farmington Teachers
2
Assoc., 159 N.H. at 456. “We are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. When
examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used.” Id. (quotations and citation omitted). “We
interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include. We interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The NHRS is a “qualified pension trust,” see RSA 100-A:2 (2001), funded
by both member and employer contributions, see RSA 100-A:16, I-II. Petition
of Concord Teachers, 158 N.H. 529, 530 (2009). Upon retirement, eligible
members receive a “service retirement allowance” that is calculated, in part,
based upon whether the member is a group I or group II member. See RSA
100-A:5, I (group I service retirement); RSA 100-A:5, II (group II service
retirement). RSA 100-A:5, II, setting forth the “service retirement benefits” for
group II members, provides in part,
(a) Any group II member in service who has attained age 45 and
completed 20 years of creditable service . . . may retire on a service
retirement allowance upon written application to the board of
trustees . . . .
(b) Upon service retirement, a group II member shall receive a
service retirement allowance which shall consist of:
(1) A member annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of
his accumulated contributions at the time of retirement; and
(2) A state annuity which, together with his member annuity,
shall be equal to 2-1/2 percent of his average final compensation
multiplied by the number of years of his creditable service not in
excess of 40 years.
A member’s “creditable service” is defined as “prior service plus membership
service, as provided in RSA 100-A:4.” RSA 100-A:1, XVI (Supp. 2009).
Regarding “creditable service,” RSA 100-A:4, III(a) provides that the board
“shall fix and determine . . . how much service in any year is equivalent to one
year of service, but in no case shall it allow credit for a period of absence
without pay of more than a month’s duration . . . .” From its enactment in
1977, until its amendment in 1995, RSA 100-A:4, III-a provided:
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph III of this section, any
school district member who is absent without salary, due to a
disability for which he is compensated by a salary continuance
plan provided wholly or partially by the school district, shall be
allowed continued service credit in the retirement system until
3
such time as he returns to work or retires provided the member
continues to pay the regular member contributions required under
RSA 100-A:16 and further provided that the member or the school
district pays the required employer and state contributions as are
in effect from time to time or that both such parties pay said
contributions in any proportion mutually agreed upon. The
contributions so paid shall be remitted to the retirement system in
accordance with remittance procedures of the board of trustees. In
no case, however, shall the service credit, from the date on which
the member so absents himself to the date on which he makes one
of the above elections, exceed 5 years.
RSA 100-A:4, III-a (1990) (emphasis added). Effective July 1, 1995, the statute
was amended to provide:
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph III of this
section, any group I or group II member who is absent without
salary due to a disability for which the member is compensated by
a salary continuance plan which is funded wholly or partially by
the member’s employer shall continue to accrue creditable service
until such time as the member returns to work, dies, retires or is
no longer compensated by such salary continuance plan.
Amounts received under such salary continuance plan are
earnable compensation to the extent attributable to employer
funding and shall be subject to the regular member contributions
required under RSA 100-A:16 and the required employer and state
contributions, if applicable, as are in effect from time to time. All
such contributions shall be remitted to the retirement system in
accordance with remittance procedures of the board of trustees.
Any group I or group II member who is absent without salary due
to a disability for which the member is compensated by a salary
continuance plan which has not been funded in whole or in part by
the member’s employer shall not accrue any creditable service for
the period of such absence. Further, amounts received from such
salary continuance plan shall not be included as earnable
compensation for purposes of the retirement system.
RSA 100-A:4, III-a (2001) (emphasis added). Thus, prior to the 1995
amendment, only a school district member who was absent due to a disability,
for which he or she was compensated by an employer-provided salary
continuance plan, was allowed continued service credit in the retirement
system. Under the 1995 amendment, the benefit was made available to all
group I and group II NHRS members, and contributions on salary continuance
payments were made mandatory rather than optional.
4
Pursuant to the plain language of the statutory provisions, while RSA
100-A:5, II establishes that “creditable service” is calculated, as an accounting
measure, “upon service retirement,” a group II member is only entitled to
creditable service that accrued over the course of the member’s employment.
During the period of time in 1994 that the petitioner was out of work on short-
term disability, no creditable service accrued to him during those four months.
The petitioner argues that RSA 100-A:4, III-a is “a remedial piece of
legislation” and, as such, applies to his case “because the law was effective
upon [his] retirement and while his retirement application was pending.” In
other words, the petitioner contends that the statute as amended in 1995
applies retroactively to 1994.
As a general rule, statutes are to be applied prospectively.
Common sense dictates that this be so. Because every person is
presumed to know the law and, therefore, to organize his or her
conduct and affairs accordingly, notice or warning of a change in
the law should be given in advance of such change. Moreover,
there is a presumption of prospectivity when a statute affects
substantive rights. This presumption of prospectivity is reversed,
however, when the statute is remedial in nature or affects only
procedural rights. In that case, retrospective application is not
unjust.
Eldridge v. Eldridge, 136 N.H. 611, 613 (1993) (citations omitted). We have
previously held that the statutory entitlement of eligible public employees to
retirement benefits pursuant to RSA chapter 100-A is a substantive right.
Petition of Concord Teachers, 158 N.H. at 538-39. Therefore, we presume that
the legislature intended that RSA 100-A:4, III-a as amended in 1995 apply
prospectively.
As the hearings examiner correctly determined,
The change in the wording of the statute . . . shows no intent that
it be applied retrospectively. It creates a new, substantive right to
receive service credit for time out of work on an employer-
sponsored disability plan for 3 additional membership
classifications; group I employees and group II police and
firefighters. Absent a specific provision to the contrary, legislation
affecting a substantive right creates a presumption that the
provision is meant to be applied prospectively.
Accordingly, the hearings examiner concluded that because the petitioner’s
absence from work occurred before the board had statutory authority to grant
5
service credit to group II members on short-term disability, the granting of
service credit to him was erroneous. We affirm its conclusion.
The petitioner’s final argument is that the NHRS failed to provide him
with sufficient due process “when it resolved his appeal on a legal basis not
noticed for hearing.” According to the petitioner, because the issue he raised
before the board was whether the month of November 1994 should be credited
to his retirement pay, it was “inherently unfair” for the board to include the
three additional months it determined were credited in error. The petitioner’s
due process claim, however, is not supported by adequately developed legal
argument, nor does he cite either the State or Federal Constitution. “Judicial
review is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings without
developed legal argument, and neither passing reference to constitutional
claims nor off-hand invocations of constitutional rights without support by
legal argument or authority warrants extended consideration.” Appeal of
Omega Entm’t, 156 N.H. 282, 287 (2007).
Moreover, we note that upon becoming aware of the error in the
petitioner’s records, the board was authorized to correct it. Pursuant to RSA
100-A:27 (2001):
Should any change or error in the records result in any member or
beneficiary receiving from the system more or less than he would
have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the
board of trustees shall have the power to correct such error, and to
adjust as far as practicable the payments in such a manner that
the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such member or
beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid.
The petitioner makes no argument that this statute does not apply under these
circumstances.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6