THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-335
MANCHESTER WATER WORKS
v.
TOWN OF AUBURN
Argued: January 21, 2010
Opinion Issued: May 20, 2010
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Scott H.
Harris & a. on the brief, and Mr. Harris orally), for the petitioner.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Andover, Massachusetts (George R.
Moore and Stephanie E. Zywien on the brief, and Mr. Moore orally), for the
respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, Manchester Water Works (Water Works),
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) granting the motion to
dismiss its petition for a tax abatement filed by the respondent, the Town of
Auburn. The Water Works petitioned for an abatement pursuant to RSA 76:17
(2003) because its assessment did not contain a reduction for a conservation
easement placed on its property. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the trial court’s order. The Water Works, a
subdivision of the City of Manchester that provides drinking water for the city,
owns real property along Lake Massabesic and its watershed within the Town
of Auburn. Lake Massabesic is the primary source of Manchester’s drinking
water. Both parties agree that RSA 72:11 (2003) governs the taxation of the
flood control property in dispute here.
RSA 72:11 exempts from taxation land owned by a municipality for “the
purpose of a water supply or flood control,” but requires that the public entity
make annual payments in lieu of taxes to the city or town where the property
lies. RSA 72:11; see Manchester v. Auburn, 102 N.H. 325, 329 (1959) (stating
that RSA 72:11 “was plainly intended to take water supply property out of the
realm of taxation, and impose a charge in the nature of a charge for special
benefit, or a condition upon the grant of a power”). Specifically, RSA 72:11
states in pertinent part:
Property held by a city, town or district in another city or town for
the purpose of a water supply or flood control, if yielding no rent,
shall not be liable to taxation therein, but the city, town or district
so holding it shall annually pay to the city or town in which such
property lies an amount equal to that which such place would
receive for taxes upon the average of the assessed value of such
land, without buildings or other structures, for the 3 years last
preceding legal process to acquire the same, or other acquisition
thereof, the valuation for each year being reduced by all
abatements thereon . . . such payments shall be made on or before
December 1 in each year; provided, however, that after such
acquisition the valuation thus established shall be subject to
change, as to make such value proportional with the assessed
value of other property in the town which is subject to taxation, so
that such payment will not exceed its proportion of the public
charge in that year.
RSA 72:11. Accordingly, the Water Works must make payments based upon
the assessed value of the property minus any abatements. RSA 72:11; City of
Manchester v. Town of Auburn, 125 N.H. 147, 153 (1984) (Manchester II).
Auburn also must assess the value of the subject property in the same manner
that it assesses the “full and true” value of any other parcel of real estate.
Manchester II, 125 N.H. at 153 (noting that RSA 72:11 requires that “water
supply land be valued in accordance with the same principles as are used in
assessing the full and true value of any other parcel of property”). The Water
Works has the same right of appeal as any other taxpayer. See RSA 72:11.
In March 2007, the Water Works granted a conservation easement to the
Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests on a 460-acre parcel of its
2
property. The easement provides for a permanent transfer of development
rights to the Forest Society, subject to a right to terminate on thirty years’
notice. Concurrently, the Water Works entered into an option agreement in
favor of the Forest Society. This option agreement provides that the easement’s
purpose is “to provide long-term protection of such land against development,”
thereby protecting Manchester’s water supply. Auburn, however, contends the
purpose of the easement is to reduce the Water Works’ tax burden.
In November 2007, Auburn sent the Water Works a notice of payment in
lieu of taxes pursuant to RSA 72:11. Auburn arrived at the demanded
payment by using a rate of $13.71 per $1,000.00 of the assessed value of the
property as undeveloped lakefront property — the highest and best use of the
property. This is the same method Auburn uses for any tax appraisal. Auburn
did not account for the Water Works’ easement to the Forest Society in
determining the assessed value of the property.
In February 2008, the Water Works filed a timely abatement application
citing the conservation easement. Auburn’s board of selectman denied the
application, and the Water Works made its payment under protest.
Subsequently, the Water Works filed a petition for abatement in superior court,
arguing that the assessed valuation of the property exceeded its just and
proportionate valuation. In response, Auburn filed a motion to dismiss. The
trial court granted the motion, finding that the easement was an impermanent,
“self imposed” use restriction on real property “subject to termination or
revocation.” In other words, the easement did not comply with RSA chapters
79-A and 79-B, which govern the municipal taxation of conservation
easements. The trial court, therefore, ruled that “Auburn acted within proper
bounds in not considering the [e]asement in determining the value, for tax-
related purposes, of the [p]roperty, and in arriving at its calculation of the due
payment in lieu of taxes.”
In reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations contained in the pleadings are reasonably susceptible
of a construction that would permit recovery. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H.
72, 73 (2008). We assume the petitioner’s pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to it. Id. We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the applicable law,
and if the allegations constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was
improper to grant the motion to dismiss. Id.
The Water Works maintains that the trial court erred in finding the
conservation easement “a nullity for tax valuation purposes.” Specifically, the
Water Works contends that the easement is a valid conservation restriction,
and, therefore, the conservation easement should have been considered for tax
valuation purposes under RSA 72:11. The easement did not have to meet the
3
more restrictive definition of a “conservation restriction” under RSA 79-B:2
(2003) to be considered for tax purposes as the trial court found. Further, it
was not “the type of self-imposed restriction that is discounted in determining
taxable value of property.” (Bolding omitted.) Finally, the Water Works
disagrees with the trial court’s finding that “the legislature has evinced a
definite unwillingness to permit a water works entity . . . to at all avail itself of
the use of a ‘conservation restriction’ to reduce its payment in lieu of taxes.”
The Water Works’ arguments on appeal require us to construe various
statutes. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review
de novo. MacPherson v. Weiner, 158 N.H. 6, 9 (2008). When examining the
language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We interpret a statute to lead to a
reasonable result and review a particular provision, not in isolation, but
together with all associated sections. Id.
In assessing the “full and true” value of the property, Manchester II, 125
N.H. at 153, for purposes of RSA 72:11, the Water Works contends the trial
court should have considered the Forest Society easement. We agree that the
Forest Society easement appears to meet the statutory definition of a
conservation restriction under RSA 477:45, I (2001). The Forest Society
easement “prohibit[s] or require[s], a limitation upon . . . acts on or with
respect to, or uses of, a land or water area,” in order to maintain its “natural,
scenic, or open condition . . . or in any other use or condition consistent with
the protection of environmental quality.” RSA 477:45, I; see also RSA 477:46
(2001), :47 (Supp. 2009). Nevertheless, that the easement may comply with
RSA 477:45 does not mean that it must be considered in determining the
taxable value of the property. RSA 477:45 does not address how a municipal
conservation restriction should be assessed and valued. It defines a
conservation restriction for purposes of conveyance and enforcement — not for
purposes of taxation. As we have previously stated, “[t]itle is not the test of
taxability.” Piper v. Meredith, 83 N.H. 107, 109 (1927).
RSA chapter 79-B governs the municipal taxation of conservation
easements. The stated intent of RSA chapter 79-B is “to provide for a fair,
consistent and equitable method of municipal assessment of conservation
restriction land which provides a demonstrated public benefit, based upon the
conservation uses to which the land is perpetually limited,” as well as “to
further assist in the preservation of open space in this state in the public
interest by promoting the granting and acquisition of permanent conservation
restrictions on such open space land which provides a demonstrated public
benefit.” RSA 79-B:1 (2003).
4
To further these two purposes, RSA chapter 79-B defines a conservation
restriction more narrowly than does RSA 477:45. Compare RSA 79-B:2, IV
with RSA 477:45, I. To qualify for favorable tax treatment under chapter 79-B,
a conservation restriction must be “a permanent restriction of open space land
by deed granted in perpetuity, and further, as defined by RSA 477:45, I, . . . for
the purposes of natural resource conservation . . . .” RSA 79-B:2, IV. Here, the
Forest Society easement does not meet the definition of a conservation
restriction under RSA 79-B:2, IV. It is not a “permanent restriction” on land
“granted in perpetuity.” Id. The easement is not perpetual and can be
rescinded by the Water Works upon thirty years’ notice.
Further, the property is not “open space land” as contemplated by RSA
79-B:2, VII. Open space land is “any or all farm land, forest land, or
unproductive land” but “shall not include any property held by a city, town or
district in another city or town for the purpose of a water supply or flood
control, for which a payment in place of taxes is made in accordance with RSA
72:11.” RSA 79-A:2, IX (2003); RSA 79-B:2, VII (defining open space land by
reference to RSA 79-A:2). Here, the subject land was held specifically for the
purpose of a water supply or flood control. See RSA 79-A:2, IX; see also RSA
79-B:2, VII. Therefore, based upon the plain language of the relevant statutes,
the Forest Society easement is not a conservation restriction that qualifies for
current use favorable tax treatment.
The Water Works contends that even if the conservation easement did
not qualify for favorable current use tax treatment, it “must be considered” in
valuing the property’s fair market value. It affects the value of the property and
is “not the type of self-imposed restriction that is discounted in determining the
taxable value of property.” In support of this argument, the Water Works cites
Manchester II.
In Manchester II, as here, we examined whether Auburn had properly
determined the value of the Water Works’ lake front property for the purpose of
RSA 72:11 payments. Manchester II, 125 N.H. 147. There, Auburn argued
that activity restrictions imposed on Lake Massabesic, such as a swimming
prohibition, should not be considered for tax valuation purposes. Id. at 157.
Rather, the property should be assessed as lake front property with full use of
the lake — a twenty-five percent increase in value. Id. According to Auburn,
Lake Massabesic’s activity restrictions were “self-imposed” restrictions. Id.
These restrictions existed to ensure a clean water supply for the City of
Manchester. See id. at 150, 158. In Manchester II, we rejected Auburn’s
argument and held that “[t]he restrictions against activities on the lake,
whatever be their source, are not restrictions on the subject property itself.”
Id. at 158. They were restrictions on the use of the lake. Id. We reasoned that
“[e]ven if [the Water Works] were to sell its property, it would not cease to use
the lake as the primary source of potable water, and the would-be buyer would
5
take subject to said restrictions.” Id. Lake Massabesic had supplied
Manchester with water for over a hundred years. See id. at 150. Therefore,
Auburn had to consider these activity restrictions in determining “the full and
true value of the property.” Id. at 158.
By contrast, here, the Forest Society easement is a self-imposed
restriction on the use of the subject property itself. The document creating the
conservation easement prohibits “industrial or commercial activities [on the
property], except agriculture and forestry, including [limited] timber
harvesting,” and prevents the construction of any dwellings on the property,
among other restrictions. The fact that these restrictions are enforceable by
the Forest Society does not mean they are not “self-imposed.” We decline the
Water Works’ invitation to differentiate between self-imposed restrictions that
“attach to the property itself and encumber it in the hands of successors”
versus those that just place “limitations on value in the hands, or in the
control, of the property owner.” RSA chapter 79-B informs what type of tax
treatment conservation restrictions will receive. See RSA ch. 79-B (2003).
Indeed, as a self-imposed conservation restriction, the Forest Society easement
must comply with RSA chapter 79-B requirements to receive favorable tax
treatment. It would be against public policy to “allow property owners to
effectively control the valuation of their properties for taxation purposes by
careful imposition of limited restrictions in the deeds to their properties.”
Hoover v. State Bd. of Equalization, 579 S.W.2d 192, 196 (Tenn. Ct. App.
1978).
Finally, the Water Works argues that even if the easement is a self-
imposed restriction, it should be considered for tax valuation reasons because
the easement affects the value of the property. The Water Works cites
Waterville Estates Assoc. v. Town of Campton, 122 N.H. 506 (1982), and Locke
Lake Colony Assoc. v. Town of Barnstead, 126 N.H. 136 (1985), for this
proposition. In Waterville Estates and Locke Lake, we examined whether a
property association, which held title to common property within a real estate
development, was entitled to a tax abatement because the property “was so
encumbered with easements that it had no taxable value.” Locke Lake, 126
N.H. at 142; see also Waterville Estates, 122 N.H. at 508. In both cases, we
found that the common property, the servient property, was established for the
benefit of the homeowners. Locke Lake, 126 N.H. at 142; Waterville Estates,
122 N.H. at 509-10. Each homeowner’s deed included an “easement” entitling
the owner to use of the common property. See, e.g., Locke Lake, 126 N.H. at
142. These interests were easements intended to run with the land and were
not revocable at the will of the homeowner’s association, the owner of the
servient estate. See, e.g., id. Therefore, we held the common property, the
servient property, was subjected to so many easements that it had no taxable
value and, thus, the property association was entitled to a tax abatement. Id.;
Waterville Estates, 122 N.H. at 509-10. The value of these easements,
6
however, could be added to the value of the estate of the dominant owners.
Locke Lake, 126 N.H. at 141. We did not hold that an easement “must be
considered in assessing the taxable value of a parcel” as the Water Works
asserts. We also note that here the easement is distinct from the easements in
Waterville Estates and Locke Lake. The Forest Society easement is revocable
by the servient land owner, the Water Works, not the dominant owner, on
thirty years notice. It is not perpetual. See RSA 79-B:2, IV.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court properly granted Auburn’s
motion to dismiss the Water Works’ petition for an abatement of assessments.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
7