THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2009-097
THE LLK TRUST, THOMAS R. WALKER, TRUSTEE
v.
TOWN OF WOLFEBORO
Argued: November 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: February 11, 2010
Walker & Varney P.C., of Wolfeboro (Thomas R. Walker on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Preti, Flaherty, Beliveau & Pachios, PLLP, of Concord (Mark H. Puffer on
the brief and orally), for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, The LLK Trust, Thomas R. Walker, trustee,
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Fauver, J.) denying its request for an
abatement from property taxes assessed by the respondent, Town of Wolfeboro.
We affirm.
The record evidences the following facts. The petitioner owns property in
Wolfeboro consisting of a residence with an attached barn and ninety-three
acres of land, including 1,100 feet of frontage on Lake Wentworth.
Approximately ninety-one and one-half acres of the property, including nearly
the entire lake frontage, has been in current use since 1980. The house and
barn are located in the middle of the property on one and one-half acres that
are not in current use. Another acre, which is also not in current use,
comprises the road leading to the house site, and the road from the house site
to both the waterfront and the dock site.
In January 2006, when the petitioner purchased the property for
$4,600,000, its total assessed value was $362,151. The assessed value of the
one acre on which the house alone sits (the house site) was $104,500. In
August 2006, the Town increased the property’s total assessed value from
$362,151 to $3,342,151. The assessment increased because the Town
reclassified the house site from “shorefront residential” to “waterfront estate.”
Reclassifying the house site caused its assessment to increase from $104,500
to $2,979,500. The petitioner’s July 2006 tax bill, based upon the property’s
total assessed value of $362,151, was $1,987; its December 2006 bill, based
upon the property’s total assessed value of $3,342,151, was $37,651.
Because it is undisputed, we assume that the petitioner timely applied to
the Town for an abatement of the 2006 property tax due on the house site, and
timely appealed the Town’s denial to the superior court. See LSP Assoc. v.
Town of Gilford, 142 N.H. 369, 371 (1997). At trial, the Town conceded that it
should not have reclassified the house site. The Town argued that even if the
house site remained classified as “shorefront residential,” the Town had
undervalued it significantly. The Town contended that the proper valuation of
the house site for tax year 2006 should have been $1,214,351.
Based upon the testimony of the Town’s assessor, the trial court
concluded that the Town’s new valuation of the house site was consistent with
its fair market value, which the trial court found was $1,275,000 as of April 1,
2006. Accordingly, the trial court ruled that the petitioner had failed to prove
by a preponderance of the evidence that, using the new assessed value of
$1,214,351, the Town had taxed the house site disproportionately. This appeal
followed.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred by upholding the
Town’s decision to change the house site’s assessment in August 2006. The
petitioner claims that the Town lacked authority to do this. “Because the
power to tax arises solely by statute, the right to tax must be found within the
letter of the law and is not to be extended by implication.” Pheasant Lane
Realty Trust v. City of Nashua, 143 N.H. 140, 143 (1998) (quotation and
citations omitted). “As such, mistaken property tax valuations can be corrected
only through legislatively authorized remedies.” Id. Thus, resolving the
petitioner’s appeal requires us to construe the pertinent statutes.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Zorn v. Demetri, 158 N.H. 437, 438 (2009). In matters of statutory
2
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed
in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. We first look to the
language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language according
to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We construe all
parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall purpose and avoid an absurd
or unjust result. Id. Moreover, we do not consider words and phrases in
isolation, but rather within the context of the statute as a whole. Id. at 438-39.
This enables us to better discern the legislature’s intent and to interpret
statutory language in light of the policy or purpose sought to be advanced by
the statutory scheme. Id. at 439.
Pursuant to RSA 76:2 (2003), a tax year runs from April 1 to March 31.
Taxes are assessed based upon the value of property located in a town as of
April 1. See RSA 74:1 (Supp. 2009) (selectmen of each town must “take an
inventory of all estate liable to be taxed in such town as of April 1”); White v.
Lee, 124 N.H. 69, 76 (1983) (“Assessment of the tax is performed annually by
each city and town, based upon their property inventory as of April 1.”). The
Town must adjust assessments annually “so that all assessments are
reasonably proportional within that municipality.” RSA 75:8, I (Supp. 2009).
Additionally, “[a]t least as often as every fifth year, . . . the assessors and/or
selectmen shall value all real estate within a municipality so that the
assessments are valued in accordance with RSA 75:1.” RSA 75:8-a (2003).
The Town collects taxes semi-annually pursuant to RSA 76:15-a (2003),
which allows a town to collect taxes “assessed on April 1” in two installments,
the first due on July 1, and the second on December 1. Bills for the July 1
installment must be mailed by June 15. RSA 76:15-a, II. In order for the bills
to be prepared, “the lists of assessed property shall be committed by the
selectmen with a warrant under their hands and seal directed to the collector
of such town no later than May 15.” Id. The first installment may be based
upon “the prior year’s assessed valuation times 1/2 of the previous year’s tax
rate.” RSA 76:15-a, I. If, however, “it shall appear to the selectmen or
assessors that certain individual properties have physically changed in
valuation, they may use the current year’s appraisal times 1/2 the previous
year’s tax rate to compute the partial payment.” Id. Upon receipt of the July
payment, the tax collector must credit it “toward the amount of the taxes
eventually assessed against the property.” RSA 76:15-a, II. “A payment of the
remainder of the taxes assessed April 1, minus the payment due on July 1 of
that year, shall be due and payable December 1.” Id.
The trial court did not issue a specific finding as to whether the Town
erred when it revised its assessment of the house site in August 2006.
“Although the trial court did not expressly make this finding, we assume it
made all subsidiary findings necessary to support its decision.” Smith v.
3
Lillian V. Donahue Trust, 157 N.H. 502, 508 (2008). “We sustain the findings
and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in evidential support or
tainted by error of law.” Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. Town of Hudson, 145
N.H. 598, 600 (2000) (quotation omitted). The record supports a finding that
the Town did not violate the statutory scheme described above by revising the
assessment in August.
As allowed under RSA 76:15-a, the record shows that the Town based
the petitioner’s July 1, 2006 semi-annual tax bill upon the prior year’s
assessment of $362,151. The petitioner’s December 1, 2006 semi-annual tax
bill was based upon the property’s assessment as of April 1, 2006. As the
Town’s current assessor explained:
A. [T]he second tax bill [is] the actual tax bill of the year, which is
. . . after the State sets the tax rate and the second bill is your legal
bill of the year. . . .
. . . .
A. The first tax bill is only an appropriation for money for the
Town. . . . [W]hatever we do -- we’re looking at April 1st as the tax
date, so let’s say if you’re building a new house . . . [we look at]
[w]here were you as of April 1st? It may not be changed on the tax
card until September or . . . August . . . or some time after . . . that
first tax bill went out. But it still reflects what was happening . . .
on April 1st of . . . that year.
The record does not support the petitioner’s contention that the Town twice
assessed the value of the house site as of April 1, 2006. Contrary to the
petitioner’s assertions, the assessment reflected on the January and June 2006
tax cards is from the prior year; the assessment reflected on the September
2006 tax card was the property’s assessed value as of April 1, 2006. Although
the petitioner also contests the Town’s decision to reclassify the house site from
“shorefront residential” to “waterfront estate,” this argument is moot given the
Town’s concession that reclassifying the property was error.
To the extent that the petitioner contests the Town’s assessment of other
property that is not in current use, we observe that the trial court found that
the only assessment in dispute concerned the house site. The petitioner’s tax
abatement petition confirms that the petitioner’s appeal to the superior court
was limited to this assessment. As the petitioner has failed to argue that the
trial court’s finding in this regard was erroneous, we decline to address the
validity of any other assessment.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court erred when it concluded
that the value of the house site is enhanced by the fact that it is surrounded by
4
current use land. He contends that this court, in reviewing the trial court’s
order, should “disregard any enhancement factors regarding the valuation” of
the house site. However, the petitioner’s own experts testified that such
enhancement was proper. One of the petitioner’s experts testified:
Q. What’s the benefit that’s derived from a piece of property in
your opinion that is not in current use, but [is] surrounded by land
like this place?
A. Okay. It’s not substantial. I would say it’s about five
percent.
This expert also testified that in choosing sale properties to which to compare
the petitioner’s property, she “wanted to acknowledge that” because of the
current use land “the home site had privacy and control over that privacy.”
The petitioner’s other expert also testified that the fact that the house site was
surrounded by current use land “boost[ed]” the value of the house site by five
percent.
Moreover, the other experts testifying at trial agreed that the fact that the
house site is surrounded by current use land enhanced its value. The Town’s
previous assessor, Alice McKinnon, who had set the prior year’s assessment at
$104,500, testified that “the house lot would be worth more . . . with the
current use land around it.” She testified that if the house lot “were located
somewhere else and . . . wasn’t surrounded by land in current use, it would
have been valued at $40,000,” but that because it was surrounded by current
use land, she “enhanced that value by more than two . . . and a half times.”
Additionally, the Town’s expert testified that it would be proper to enhance the
value of the house site because it is surrounded by current use land, although
he did not testify that he used such an enhancement in his appraisal.
Given this factual record, we conclude that the petitioner has not
demonstrated that it preserved for our review the question of whether, as a
matter of law, it is proper to enhance the value of land that is not in current
use because it is surrounded by current use land. Not only did the petitioner
fail to object to testimony that enhancing the value of the house site was
proper, the petitioner was, in fact, the proponent of such testimony. Under
these circumstances, we conclude that the issue is not preserved for our
review, and we decline to address it. See State v. Pepin, 156 N.H. 269, 279-80
(2008).
Alternatively, the petitioner asserts that we should allow only privacy and
location to enhance the value of land surrounded by current use land and
should not allow “passive recreational uses” to enhance the value. As there is
no evidence in the record submitted on appeal that the appraisal by the Town’s
5
expert, upon which the trial court relied, enhanced the value of the house site
for this reason, we similarly decline to address this argument.
The petitioner next contends that the trial court erred by adopting the
opinion of the Town’s expert because his methodology was flawed. The
petitioner’s assertions in this regard concern the proper weight to be accorded
the testimony of the Town’s expert. However, we defer to the trial court’s
judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony, measuring the
credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given evidence.
Syncom Indus. v. Wood, 155 N.H. 73, 86 (2007). To the extent that the
petitioner argues that it met its burden of proving disproportionality solely by
showing that the methodology used by the Town’s expert was flawed, we
disagree. “[D]isproportionality, and not methodology, is the linchpin in
establishing entitlement to a petition for abatement.” Verizon New England v.
City of Rochester, 151 N.H. 263, 272 (2004); see Porter v. Town of Sanbornton,
150 N.H. 363, 369 (2003). “[W]hile it is possible that a flawed methodology
may lead to a disproportionate tax burden, the flawed methodology does not, in
and of itself, prove the disproportionate result.” Verizon New England, 151
N.H. at 272.
The petitioner next asserts that the trial court erred by accepting the
assessment offered by the Town’s expert and rejecting that offered by other
experts. When faced with conflicting testimony, a trier of fact is free to accept
or reject an expert’s testimony, in whole or in part. Tzimas v. Coiffures by
Michael, 135 N.H. 498, 501 (1992). Accordingly, we find no error in the trial
court’s decision to credit the opinion of one expert over the opinions of other
experts.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6