THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hooksett District Court
No. 2009-780
JEANMAX DARBOUZE
v.
NANCY CHAMPNEY
Submitted: May 13, 2010
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2010
J. Miller & Associates, PLLC, of Concord (Anthony Santoro on the brief),
for the plaintiff.
Backus, Meyer & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (B.J. Branch on the brief),
for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. In this landlord-tenant matter, the tenant, Nancy
Champney, appeals an eviction order of the Hooksett District Court (LaPointe,
J.) in favor of the landlord, Jeanmax Darbouze. The trial court found that:
(1) use of the words “Notice to Quit” rather than “Eviction Notice” was not
fatally defective to the landlord’s action; (2) use of “Mrs. Nancy” or “Nancy” on
the demand for rent and eviction notice, rather than the tenant’s full name, did
not warrant dismissal of the action; and (3) the landlord provided seven days’
notice as required by statute. We affirm.
The trial court’s order reflects the following facts. For several years,
Champney has rented 19 Townhouse Road in Allenstown. The monthly rent is
$1,100 and Champney deducts $100 per month in exchange for cleaning the
yard and making routine or simple repairs. In the summer of 2009, Champney
complained of water leaking from the kitchen ceiling. Darbouze attempted to
repair the ceiling, but was denied entry by Champney’s son, who complained
that Darbouze had not provided twenty-four hour prior notice. Champney did
not pay rent due on August 1, and on August 6, Darbouze served her with a
“Demand For Rent” and a “Notice To Quit.” The notices identified Champney
as “Mrs. Nancy” and “Nancy” and gave her until August 13 to vacate the
premises.
After Champney failed to vacate the premises, Darbouze filed a landlord-
tenant writ seeking her eviction. Champney moved to dismiss the action,
claiming that the notices were defective. The trial court denied the motion and
entered judgment in favor of Darbouze. This appeal followed.
Champney first argues that the eviction notice entitled “Notice To Quit” is
defective. In 2006, several statutes were amended to replace the term “Notice
To Quit” with the term “Eviction Notice.” Laws 2006, 192:3. Champney
contends that because of these legislative amendments, eviction proceedings
initiated by forms entitled “Notice To Quit” must be dismissed as a matter of
law.
“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo.” Lally v. Flieder, 159 N.H. 350, 351 (2009). “We are the final arbiter of
the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered
as a whole.” Id. “We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.” Id.
at 351-52. “When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is
not subject to modification.” Id. at 352. “We will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include.” Id.
RSA 540:2 governs the process for evicting a tenant from residential
property and requires a landlord to give to the tenant “a notice in writing to
quit the premises in accordance with RSA 540:3” and RSA 540:5 (relating to
service, which is not an issue here). RSA 540:2, II (2007) (emphasis added).
RSA 540:3 reads, in part:
II. For all residential tenancies, . . . 7 days’ notice shall be
sufficient if the reason for termination is as set forth in RSA 540:2,
II(a), (b), or (d) [rent arrearage, damage to the premises, or health
or safety reasons].
III. The eviction notice shall state with specificity the reason for the
eviction.
2
IV. If the eviction notice is based on nonpayment of rent, the notice
shall inform the tenant of his or her right, if any, to avoid the
eviction by payment of the arrearages and liquidated damages in
accordance with RSA 540:9.
V. For the purpose of interpreting or enforcing any lease or rental
agreement for residential tenants in effect on July 1, 2006, a notice
to quit shall be deemed an eviction notice under this section.
RSA 540:3 (2007).
The plain language of RSA 540:3 sets forth three requirements that a
landlord must include in any notice to evict a residential tenant for rent
arrearage. The landlord must provide notice of at least seven days, must state
with specificity the reason for the eviction, and, if the eviction is based on
nonpayment of rent, must inform the tenant of his or her right to avoid the
eviction by paying arrearages and liquidated damages. RSA 540:3 does not
require use of the term “Eviction Notice.”
In this case, the eviction notice stated that the reason for eviction was
neglect or refusal to pay rent in the amount of $2,350, it gave Champney seven
days “to quit and deliver . . . possession of the property” to the landlord, and it
informed Champney of her right to avoid eviction by paying all arrearages and
$15 in liquidated damages. Accordingly, the notice meets the three
requirements set forth in RSA 540:3.
Champney argues that RSA 540:3, V establishes that any notice entitled
“Notice To Quit” is defective as a matter of law. Champney reads the statute
too broadly. Rather than rendering the term “notice to quit” legally ineffective,
subsection V simply provides a rule of interpretation: In any residential lease
agreement in effect on July 1, 2006, the term “notice to quit” shall be
interpreted as “eviction notice.” The statute does not require use of the term
“eviction notice.” Thus, while the better practice would be the use of the term
“eviction notice,” we find no statutory prohibition against the use of the term
“notice to quit,” as long as the substance of the notice satisfies the three
enumerated requirements.
Champney next argues that because the “Demand For Rent” and “Notice
To Quit” used only her first name, the notices were defective as a matter of law,
and the action should have been dismissed. We disagree.
RSA 540:5, II (2007) requires the district court to provide standard forms
for a demand for rent and eviction notice. A landlord is not required to use
these forms, but a valid demand for rent or eviction notice must include the
same information that is requested on such forms. It is unclear from the
record whether Darbouze used an outdated Notice To Quit form from the
3
district court or a form which he created. Champney argues that because new
eviction notice forms provided by the district court request the tenant’s name,
the use of “Nancy” or “Mrs. Nancy” is legally insufficient.
Champney has attached to her appendix a copy of the forms now made
available by the district court. The first line of the Eviction Notice requests
“Tenant Name.” Nothing on the forms specifies that a landlord must provide
the tenant’s first and last name. Thus, the question before us is whether or
not this tenant received sufficient notice. In her brief, Champney
acknowledges service of the Demand For Rent and Notice To Quit. There is no
question that Champney received the notices and was aware that Darbouze
was beginning an eviction proceeding against her. The better practice is for a
landlord to state the full name of the tenant, when known, on any notices. But
where, as here, there is no dispute the tenant received the notices and was
aware they were directed to her, the lack of a last name is not a fatal defect
requiring dismissal of the action.
Finally, Champney contends that the Notice To Quit did not provide
seven “clean days” notice and, therefore, the notice was defective as a matter of
law, requiring dismissal of the action. Again, we disagree.
District Court Rule 1.1A provides that:
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these
rules, by order of court, or by applicable law, the day of the act,
event, or default after which the designated period of time begins to
run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed
shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or a legal
holiday . . . .
Dist. Ct. R. 1.1A.
In this case, the eviction notice was served on August 6, 2009, and for
purposes of computing time, this first day is not included. Seven days after
August 6, 2009, was Thursday, August 13. This last day of the period is
included, and because it was not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, this was
the date on which Champney was required to vacate the premises. Because
the notice specified that Champney had until August 13 to do so, the notice
complied with the requirements of RSA 540:3, II.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
4