THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Utilities Commission
No. 2009-274
APPEAL OF PENNICHUCK WATER WORKS, INC. & a.
(New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission)
Argued: January 21, 2010
Opinion Issued: March 25, 2010
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of North Conway (Robert Upton, II and Justin C.
Richardson on the brief and orally), and James M. McNamee, of Nashua, by
brief, for the petitioner.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Concord (Thomas J.
Donovan & a. on the brief, and Mr. Donovan orally), and Baker, Donelson,
Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz, P.C., of Chattanooga, Tennessee (Joe A.
Conner and Misty Smith Kelley on the brief, and Mr. Conner orally), for the
respondents.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C., of Concord (John T. Alexander and Daniel
J. Mullen on the brief), for intervenor Anheuser-Busch.
Barbara A. M. Maloney, PLLC, of Auburn (Richard J. Maloney on the
brief), for intervenor Business & Industry Association of New Hampshire.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Stephen J. Judge and
Pierre A. Chabot on the brief, and Mr. Judge orally), for intervenor Merrimack
Valley Regional Water District.
Boutin & Altieri, P.L.L.C., of Londonderry (Edmund J. Boutin on the
brief), for intervenor Town of Merrimack.
Mitchell Municipal Group, P.A., of Laconia (Laura A. Spector on the
memorandum of law), for intervenor Town of Pittsfield.
DALIANIS, J. Respondent Pennichuck Water Works (PWW) appeals an
order of the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC) approving the
petition filed by the petitioner, City of Nashua (City), in which the City sought
to acquire PWW and its affiliates, respondents Pennichuck East Utilities
(Pennichuck East) and Pittsfield Aqueduct, Inc. (Pittsfield Aqueduct)
(collectively, the Utilities). In approving the City’s petition against PWW, the
PUC found that the Utilities had failed to rebut the presumption under RSA
38:3 (2000) that acquiring PWW’s plant and property was in the public interest.
The Utilities now appeal this determination and challenge the imposition of
conditions to satisfy the public interest. The City has filed a cross-appeal,
contesting the PUC’s dismissal of its petition with respect to PWW’s affiliates,
as well as the PUC’s determination of the fair market value of PWW’s assets.
We affirm.
I. Background
Before setting forth the facts relevant to the instant appeal, we first
summarize the procedures contained in RSA chapter 38. See Pennichuck
Corp. v. City of Nashua, 152 N.H. 729, 731 (2005). RSA chapter 38 empowers
municipalities, with PUC approval and at a value set by the PUC, “to take by
eminent domain privately owned electric, gas and water utilities in order to
maintain and operate them as publicly owned facilities.” Id.; see RSA 38:2, I, II
(2000). A municipality may move forward with a plan to assume ownership of
a privately-owned utility “after 2/3 of the members of the governing body shall
have voted.” RSA 38:3. This vote must then be confirmed by a majority vote of
the municipality’s qualified voters at a regular election or special meeting called
2
for this purpose. Id.; Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at 731. A favorable
confirming vote creates a rebuttable presumption that the acquisition is in the
public interest. Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at 731.
Within thirty days of the confirming vote, the municipality must notify
the utility and inquire if it is willing to sell the identified plant and property
located within the municipality, as well as “that portion, if any, lying without
the municipality which the public interest may require, pursuant to RSA 38:11
as determined by the [PUC].” RSA 38:6 (2000); Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at
731. The utility is given sixty days to respond. RSA 38:7 (2000). When, as in
this case, the Utilities indicate their unwillingness to negotiate a sale, “the
municipality may proceed to acquire the plant as provided in RSA 38:10.” RSA
38:7. RSA 38:10 (2000), in turn, allows the municipality to take the property
by condemnation if, after notice and hearing, pursuant to RSA 38:9 (2000), the
PUC has determined that the taking is in the public interest. Pursuant to RSA
38:11 (2000), when determining whether the taking is in the public interest,
the PUC “may set conditions and issue orders to satisfy the public interest.”
The PUC also determines the amount of just compensation that the
municipality must pay for the assets in question. Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H.
at 731; see RSA 38:9, I, III, :10.
In November 2002, by a vote of fourteen to one, the City’s board of
aldermen decided to establish a municipal water works system and to acquire
all or part of the privately-owned water works system serving the City’s
residents. Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at 732. This resolution was approved
by the mayor in December 2002 and confirmed by City voters in January 2003.
Id. In February 2003, the City notified the Utilities of its intent to acquire them
to establish a municipal water works system. Id.
PWW is a privately-owned public utility that serves approximately 24,500
customers in the City and ten other municipalities in southern and central New
Hampshire, including: Amherst, Bedford, Derry, Epping, Hollis, Merrimack,
Milford, Newmarket, Plaistow and Salem. It is the largest investor-owned water
utility in the state. Pennichuck East provides water service to approximately
4,900 customers in twelve municipalities in southern and central New
Hampshire, including: Atkinson, Bow, Derry, Hooksett, Lee, Litchfield,
Londonderry, Pelham, Plaistow, Raymond, Sandown and Windham. When
Pittsfield Aqueduct received the notice from the City, it served customers in
Pittsfield; it has since expanded to serve customers in Barnstead, Conway and
Middleton. PWW, Pennichuck East and Pittsfield Aqueduct are separate
corporate entities; only PWW is engaged in the sale of water in the City.
The City and the Utilities entered into negotiations concerning the terms
of a possible sale of some or all of the Utilities’ assets. Pennichuck Corp., 152
N.H. at 732. On November 30, 2003, the City made a formal offer to purchase
3
the Utilities’ assets for $121 million. Id. The Utilities rejected this offer in
December 2003 and terminated negotiations in January 2004. Id.
The Utilities, thereafter, filed suit in superior court, seeking a declaratory
judgment to terminate or limit the City’s condemnation efforts. Id. The
superior court rendered its decision in August 2004, granting summary
judgment in favor of the City. We affirmed the trial court’s decision. Id. at
730-31.
Approximately one month after the Utilities filed their declaratory
judgment action, the City filed a condemnation petition with the PUC, asking it
to find that the condemnation of the Utilities’ assets was in the public interest
and to determine damages. Id. at 732. On January 31, 2005, the PUC
dismissed the City’s petition against Pennichuck East and Pittsfield Aqueduct,
ruling that the City could not condemn the property of these utilities because
they did not provide water service to City residents. The PUC ruled, however,
that the City could continue its condemnation proceeding against PWW. In so
ruling, the PUC emphasized that it had not yet determined whether
condemnation of any of PWW’s assets was in the public interest.
After the parties engaged in extensive discovery and motion practice, the
PUC heard the merits of the City’s petition over two days in January 2007 and
ten days in September 2007. On July 25, 2008, two of the PUC’s
commissioners, Thomas B. Getz and Graham J. Morrison, issued a lengthy
order: (1) finding that PWW had failed to rebut the presumption that the
taking of its property within the City’s borders was in the public interest; (2)
finding that the City had demonstrated that the taking of PWW’s property
outside of the City’s borders was in the public interest provided that the City
continues to operate the entire PWW system according to a unified rate
structure and provides all customers with the same quantity and quality of
water; (3) determining that the fair market value of the assets in question was
$203 million as of December 31, 2008; and (4) conditioning approval of the
City’s petition upon the City fulfilling nine conditions, including the creation of
a mitigation fund of $40 million to reimburse customers of PWW’s other
subsidiaries for the loss of the affiliation with PWW. A third PUC
commissioner, Clifton C. Below, concurred with respect to the other
commissioners’ public interest determinations and imposition of conditions,
but dissented with respect to their valuation of PWW’s assets. The third
commissioner calculated the fair market value of PWW’s assets as $151 million
plus the addition of $40 million for a mitigation fund for impacts to the
customers of PWW’s affiliates.
The Utilities and the City moved for rehearing. On March 13, 2009,
Commissioners Getz and Morrison denied these motions for rehearing.
Commissioner Below stated that he would have granted rehearing on the issue
4
of whether the PUC erred by using the price a hypothetical not-for-profit
municipal buyer would pay for PWW as a foundation for its valuation
determination.
In their appeal, the Utilities argue that: (1) the conditions imposed by
the PUC exceed its statutory authority because enforcing them requires it to
exercise jurisdiction over the City in violation of RSA 362:4 (2009); (2) by
imposing conditions, the PUC violated PWW’s procedural due process rights; (3)
the PUC failed to weigh the benefits and burdens of the proposed taking, as
required by the New Hampshire Constitution; (4) the PUC failed to set forth its
methodology; and (5) although the evidence supports the need for a mitigation
fund, it does not support a finding that $40 million would be sufficient to
generate the necessary revenue. In its cross-appeal, the City contends that the
PUC erroneously: (1) calculated the fair market value of PWW based upon a
flawed theory; (2) dismissed the City’s petition to acquire the assets of
Pennichuck East and Pittsfield Aqueduct; and (3) required a mitigation fund of
double the combined values and revenues of Pennichuck East and Pittsfield
Aqueduct.
In addition to the parties, five intervenors have filed appellate briefs:
Anheuser-Busch, Business & Industry Association of New Hampshire (BIA),
Merrimack Valley Regional Water District (Merrimack Valley), and the Towns of
Merrimack and Pittsfield. Briefly summarized, their positions are as follows:
Anheuser-Busch urges us to uphold the conditions imposed by the PUC upon
the City’s operation of PWW; BIA opposes the City’s petition to take PWW and
argues that we should reverse the PUC’s finding that this taking is in the
public interest; Merrimack Valley, the entity to which the City’s initial petition
indicated it would convey PWW, challenges the PUC’s valuation of PWW; the
Town of Merrimack opposes the City’s petition to take PWW and argues that
the PUC’s public interest finding is wrong; and, finally, the Town of Pittsfield
urges us to uphold the PUC’s establishment of the $40 million mitigation fund.
II. Standard of Review
A party seeking to set aside an order of the PUC has the burden of
demonstrating that the order is contrary to law or, by a clear preponderance of
the evidence, that the order is unjust or unreasonable. RSA 541:13 (2007); see
Appeal of Verizon New England, 153 N.H. 50, 56 (2005). Findings of fact by the
PUC are presumed prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13; see Appeal
of Verizon New England, 153 N.H. at 56. The appealing party may overcome
this presumption only by showing that there was no evidence from which the
PUC could conclude as it did. Legislative Utility Consumers’ Council v. Public
Utilities Comm’n, 118 N.H. 93, 99 (1978); see Appeal of Basani, 149 N.H. 259,
262 (2003). Further, because the PUC is not bound by the technical rules of
evidence, the admission of hearsay or technically irrelevant or immaterial
5
evidence is insufficient to render its order unjust, unreasonable, or unlawful.
Appeal of McKenney, 120 N.H. 77, 81 (1980); see RSA 541:17 (2007).
Additionally, in arriving at its conclusions, the PUC may rely not only
upon the evidence presented, but also upon its own expertise and that of its
staff. New England Tel. & Tel. Co. v. State, 113 N.H. 92, 101-02 (1973). It is
not compelled to accept the opinion evidence of any one witness or group of
witnesses. Id. at 102. “Whether it should rely upon the expert testimony
presented by staff witnesses in preference to that offered by the company is a
matter for its judgment based upon the evidence presented.” Id.
We deferentially review PUC orders such as the one at issue. See Appeal
of Verizon New England, 158 N.H. 693, 695 (2009). “When we are reviewing
agency orders which seek to balance competing economic interests, or which
anticipate such an administrative resolution, our responsibility is not to
supplant the PUC’s balance of interests with one more nearly to our liking.” Id.
(quotation, ellipsis and brackets omitted). “The statutory presumption, and the
corresponding obligation of judicial deference are the more acute when we
recognize that discretionary choices of policy necessarily affect such decisions,
and that the legislature has entrusted such policy to the informed judgment of
the [PUC] and not to the preference of reviewing courts.” Appeal of
Conservation Law Foundation, 127 N.H. 606, 616 (1986) (quotation omitted).
While we give the PUC’s policy choices considerable deference, we do not defer
to its statutory interpretation; we review the PUC’s statutory interpretation de
novo. See Appeal of Verizon New England, 158 N.H. at 695.
III. Analysis
A. Dismissal of Petition to Acquire PWW’s Affiliates
We first address whether the PUC erred by dismissing the City’s petition
to acquire the assets of Pennichuck East and Pittsfield Aqueduct (PWW’s
corporate affiliates servicing customers in towns and cities other than the City).
The Utilities assert that the City failed to preserve its argument because it did
not ask the PUC to reconsider its dismissal until after the final order on the
merits was issued. See RSA 541:3 (2007) (motions for rehearing must be filed
within thirty days of agency order). We assume, without deciding, that the
City’s motion for rehearing was sufficient to preserve its argument, and proceed
to analyze its merits.
Because “[i]t is fundamental that a legislative grant of power to condemn
for a public use, being derogatory of common right, may be exercised only
within the clear definition of the grant,” and this “definition is bounded by the
express words or the necessary implication of those words,” we begin by
examining the language of pertinent provisions of RSA chapter 38 governing
6
the power of a municipality to take property from a privately-owned public
utility. Interstate Bridge &c. v. Ham, 91 N.H. 179, 181 (1940).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Zorn v. Demetri, 158 N.H. 437, 438 (2009). We interpret statutes not
in isolation, but in the context of the overall statutory scheme. Appeal of
Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. 336, 340 (1996). Our analysis must start with
consideration of the plain meaning of the relevant statutes, construing them,
where reasonably possible, to effectuate their underlying policies. Nashua
School Dist. v. State, 140 N.H. 457, 458 (1995). Insofar as reasonably
possible, we will construe the various statutory provisions harmoniously. Id.
RSA 38:2, I, empowers a municipality to “take . . . or otherwise acquire
and maintain and operate . . . one or more suitable plants for the . . .
distribution of . . . water for municipal use, for the use of its inhabitants and
others, and for such other purposes as may be permitted . . . by the [PUC].”
RSA 38:3 enables a municipality to move forward to “establish such a plant”
after two-thirds “of the members of the governing body shall have voted . . .
that it is expedient to do so” and after this action is confirmed by a majority of
qualified voters. Under RSA 38:6, “[w]ithin 30 days after the confirming vote
. . . the governing body shall notify in writing any utility engaged, at the time of
the vote, in generating or distributing . . . water for sale in the municipality, of
the vote.” RSA 38:6 allows the municipality to “purchase all or such portion of
the utility’s plant and property located within such municipality that the
governing body determines to be necessary for the municipal utility service.”
Under RSA 38:6, the municipality “shall purchase that portion, if any, lying
without the municipality which the public interest may require, pursuant to
RSA 38:11 as determined by the [PUC].”
Giving these words their plain meaning, we agree with the PUC that
these statutes allow a municipality only to take by eminent domain a privately-
owned water utility that is “engaged, at the time of the vote, in generating or
distributing . . . water for sale in the municipality.” RSA 38:6. As it is
undisputed that, of the three utilities, only PWW was engaged in distributing
water for sale in the City, we agree with the PUC that the City may take only
PWW’s assets by eminent domain, and may not take the assets of Pennichuck
East and Pittsfield Aqueduct, the other separately incorporated entities that
indisputably have not been engaged in distributing water for sale in the City.
In arguing for a contrary result, the City focuses upon RSA 38:2, I, which
allows it to take a plant for the distribution of water “for municipal use, for the
use of its inhabitants and others, and for such other purposes” as the PUC
may permit. We do not interpret RSA 38:2, I, to allow a municipality to take a
utility that is not engaged at all in serving municipal residents. RSA 38:2, I,
7
authorizes the taking of a plant “for the use of [the municipality’s] inhabitants
and others.” Reading this language together with RSA 38:6, we conclude that
these statutes allow a municipality to take a utility that is engaged, at least in
part, in servicing a municipality’s own residents. Here, it is undisputed that
neither Pennichuck East nor Pittsfield Aqueduct has ever serviced City
residents. Accordingly, RSA 38:2, I, and RSA 38:6 do not allow the City to take
these utilities.
B. Public Interest Finding
We next address the PUC’s finding that the City’s taking of PWW’s assets
is in the public interest. RSA 38:3 creates a rebuttable presumption that a
municipality’s acquisition of a privately-owned utility is in the public interest.
See Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at 731. The PUC ruled, and the parties do not
dispute, that this presumption applies only to the City’s taking of PWW’s assets
located within the City. The PUC found that those opposing the City’s petition
failed to rebut the presumption. With respect to PWW assets located outside of
the City, the PUC ruled that the City had demonstrated that taking these
assets was in the public interest.
The Utilities first argue that the PUC erred when it found that they failed
to rebut the presumption that the City’s taking of PWW’s assets within the City
was in the public interest. In effect, they argue that because they presented
some evidence that the taking was not in the public interest, the presumption
should have disappeared, and the PUC should have determined, de novo, that
the taking was not in the public interest.
There are two theories of presumptions. Cunningham, Adm’x v.
Manchester Fire Dep’t, 129 N.H. 232, 235 (1987); see N.H. R. Ev. 301
Reporter’s Notes. The first theory, the Thayer theory, “holds that the only effect
of a presumption is to shift the burden of producing evidence with regard to the
presumed fact. If that evidence is produced by the adversary, the presumption
is spent and disappears.” Cunningham, 129 N.H. at 235 (quotation omitted);
see 2 G. Dix et al., McCormick on Evidence § 344, at 508 (Kenneth S. Broun
ed., 6th ed. 2006). The second theory, the Morgan theory, “holds that the
strong social policy reasons underlying some presumptions may persist despite
the introduction of some evidence tending to rebut the existence of the
presumed fact. In such situations, the presumption should act to shift the
burden of persuasion, as well as the burden of producing evidence.”
Cunningham, 129 N.H. at 236; see Dix et al., supra § 344, at 509, 517. “The
opponent of the presumption must then demonstrate the non-existence of the
presumed fact by at least a preponderance of the evidence, if not by a greater
standard.” Cunningham, 129 N.H. at 236. “A Morgan theory presumption
thus operates with a weight commensurate with the policy considerations that
the presumption embodies. In general, jurisdictions will adopt the Morgan
8
theory of the effect of a particular presumption when the legislature or
judiciary wishes to implement a significant policy objective.” Id.
Although the rules of evidence do not govern PUC proceedings, see RSA
541:17, we find this discussion of the different theories of presumption
instructive. Here, because RSA 38:3 reflects the legislature’s significant policy
objectives in favor of allowing municipalities to take over an existing water
distribution system, we conclude that the presumption contained in RSA 38:3
is governed by the Morgan theory. See Senate Comm. on Executive
Departments and Administration, Hr’g on HB 528 1-3 (April 21, 1997); State v.
City of Dover, 153 N.H. 181, 190 (2006) (recognizing that “[t]he purpose of RSA
chapter 38 is to empower municipalities to take by eminent domain privately
owned . . . utilities in order to maintain and operate them as publicly owned
facilities”). Accordingly, to rebut this presumption, those opposing the City’s
petition to acquire PWW had to demonstrate, by at least a preponderance of the
evidence, that the proposed taking was not in the public interest. See
Cunningham, 129 N.H. at 236. Based upon our review of the record, we
cannot say that the PUC’s determination that the opponents to the City’s
petition failed to meet this standard was unjust or unreasonable.
The Utilities next argue that the PUC failed to set forth its reasoning or
methodology. They imply that the PUC’s order, is, therefore, insufficient for
appellate review. See Appeal of Town of Newington, 149 N.H. 347, 352 (2003).
The PUC devoted no fewer than thirty-six pages of its 120-page order to the
public interest issue. The PUC exhaustively described all of the evidence
submitted by the parties on this issue and then carefully analyzed whether,
with respect to the taking of PWW assets located within the City, there was
sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption that the taking of such assets is in
the public interest, and whether, with respect to the taking of PWW assets
located outside of the City, the City established that the taking of these assets
is in the public interest. Because of the thoroughness with which the PUC
order discussed the public interest issue, we have no difficulty in discerning
the PUC’s findings or its underlying reasoning. Accordingly, we conclude that
the PUC’s order is more than sufficient for our review. See id.
The Utilities and the Town of Merrimack also assert that the PUC failed
to conduct the net public benefit analysis, which was constitutionally required.
Part I, Article 12 of the State Constitution limits exercise of the eminent
domain power to “public uses,” which has been interpreted to require a
showing of a public purpose for any taking and of a probable net benefit to the
public if a taking occurs for the intended purpose. Appeal of Cheney, 130 N.H.
589, 595 (1988). “Public purpose” and “probable net benefit to the public” are
related concepts. See Merrill v. City of Manchester, 127 N.H. 234, 236-37
(1985). As we have previously explained:
9
Whether a particular use is a public use is a question of law to be
resolved by the courts. In gauging the constitutionality of a
proposed condemnation, we must determine whether the
expenditures will be primarily of benefit to private persons or
private uses, which is forbidden, or whether they will serve public
purposes for the accomplishment of which public money may
properly be used.
In determining whether the purpose for which property is
being condemned is a public use, we must accordingly consider
the extent to which the proposed project will benefit the public.
The net benefit to the public will consist of the benefits of the
proposed project and the benefits of the eradication of any harmful
characteristics of the property in its present form, reduced by the
social costs of the loss of the property in its present form. If the
social costs exceed the probable benefits, then the project cannot
be said to be built for a public use. In such a case, the true
benefits of the project will accrue only to its private sponsors and
participants, and the use of the power of eminent domain will
violate the public use requirement of part I, article 12 of the State
Constitution.
Id. at 236-37 (citations and quotation omitted).
In this case, unlike many other eminent domain proceedings, the public
purpose of the taking is unassailable and undisputed. As the PUC noted, it is
a given “[t]hat the provision of public water supply is a public purpose of
constitutional sufficiency.” Cf. Public Service Co. v. Shannon, 105 N.H. 67, 69
(1963) (“It has long been established that supplying electricity is a public
purpose for which the power of condemnation may be delegated.”). As the PUC
further observed, “this is not a proceeding in which the underlying purpose of
the proposed taking is being challenged as insufficiently public (as distinct
from private) in nature to raise constitutional difficulties.”
The record in this case reveals that, contrary to the assertions of the
Utilities and the Town of Merrimack, the PUC considered and weighed all of the
evidence before it regarding whether the taking was in the public interest. For
instance, the Utilities contend that the PUC “never weighed evidence . . .
concerning Pennichuck’s positive record as a utility and its willingness to
expand into new areas.” (Quotations and brackets omitted.) The record shows,
however, that the PUC considered this evidence and found it unpersuasive.
The PUC stated that it did not agree with the Utilities that “because PWW, in
conjunction with its regulated affiliates . . . , is a successful regional utility the
public interest would not be served by allowing a municipality to acquire it.”
10
The Utilities likewise contend that the PUC “never weighed the damage to
the public interest of the state as a whole from losing access to the state’s
largest investor-owned regional water company, with the capital and
operational capability necessary to assist and take over troubled water systems
statewide.” The record shows, however, that the PUC considered this evidence
and rejected it as speculative. The PUC stated that while “[i]t is laudable that
[PWW] and its subsidiaries have been willing to expand into new areas when
that result was consistent with good public policy, . . . ultimately an investor-
owned utility cannot be expected to do so unless such a decision is in the best
interests of shareholders, who expect to maximize return on their investment
within certain risk parameters.” The PUC observed that while the evidence
suggested that PWW was more willing than the City “to acquire troubled water
systems,” this evidence was merely speculative.
Similarly, the Town of Merrimack argues that the PUC ignored evidence
that the City’s ownership of PWW “would interject a political element into the
operation of a water system not to the benefit of those communities that cannot
elect those politicians.” To the contrary, the PUC expressly considered this
assertion and rejected it, noting that “[i]t would be inappropriate for us to
adopt such a skeptical view of the ability of elected officials to make good
decisions.”
In short, the record shows that the PUC considered all of the evidence
before it and engaged in the proper analysis to determine whether the taking at
issue was in the public interest. We decline the invitation of the Utilities and
the Town of Merrimack to “supplant the PUC’s balance of interests with one
more nearly to our liking.” Appeal of Verizon New England, 158 N.H. at 695
(quotation and brackets omitted). In effect, the Utilities and the Town of
Merrimack contend that the PUC failed to accord proper weight to their
evidence that the City’s taking was not in the public interest. It is the PUC’s
duty to determine the proper weight to be given to evidence. See Appeal of
McKenney, 120 N.H. at 81. This court does not sit as a trier of fact when
reviewing PUC orders. Id.
C. Conditions
We next address whether the conditions the PUC imposed upon the
conveyance at issue were lawful. The PUC imposed nine conditions upon its
approval of the City’s taking of PWW, which required the City to: (1) provide
service to all customers within the current PWW territory, regardless of
location, with the same service at the same rates, terms and conditions; (2)
provide service to all PWW’s wholesale users in accordance with the rates,
terms and conditions of all existing wholesale contracts; (3) not bifurcate its
customer service functions and amend its contract with its contractor to
provide that this contractor handle all customer inquiries; (4) have technical
11
advisors on call twenty-four hours per day; (5) make technical water treatment
process information available electronically daily or more frequently, upon
request from any customer; (6) establish a technical advisory board to provide
recommendations concerning technical operations and policies related to the
water system; (7) establish a mitigation fund to account for the costs ultimately
incurred by PWW’s other utility subsidiaries arising out of the loss of their
affiliation with PWW; (8) submit for PUC approval its agreements with its
contractors incorporating these conditions; and (9) participate as an operator
in the underground utility damage prevention system known as “Digsafe” as
described in RSA 374:48-:56 (2009). Of these nine conditions, the City
proposed seven.
The Utilities first assert that the nine conditions exceeded the PUC’s
statutory authority because enforcing them will require it to exercise its
jurisdiction over the City after the conveyance occurs, which, they contend,
violates RSA chapter 362. We interpret the pertinent statutes in the context of
the overall statutory scheme. Appeal of Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. at 340.
We start with the plain meaning of the relevant statutes, construing them,
where reasonably possible, harmoniously to effectuate their underlying
policies. Nashua School Dist., 140 N.H. at 458.
The PUC has “general supervision of all public utilities and the plants
owned, operated or controlled by the same.” RSA 374:3 (2009). Generally, any
entity that owns or operates a water system or part thereof is deemed a “public
utility.” RSA 362:4, I (2009). A municipal corporation, however, that operates
solely within its corporate limits, is not a “public utility” subject to the PUC’s
jurisdiction. RSA 362:2, I (2009). A municipal corporation that provides water
services outside of its boundaries is also not a “public utility” for the purpose of
accounting, reporting or auditing functions. RSA 362:4, II (2009). A municipal
corporation that provides water service outside of its boundaries is not a
“public utility” for other purposes if: (1) it charges “new customers” outside
municipal boundaries “a rate no higher than 15 percent above that charged to
its municipal customers . . . and serves those customers a quantity and quality
of water or a level of water service equal to that served to customers within the
municipality”; or (2) it supplies bulk water to another municipality. RSA 362:4,
III-a(a) (2009).
Although municipal water companies that are already in operation are
generally not “public utilities” subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction, a municipality
that seeks to establish, expand, take or otherwise acquire, maintain and
operate a plant to distribute water is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction as set
forth in RSA chapter 38. See RSA 38:2; see also RSA 374:22 (2009) (requiring
any entity seeking to operate as a public utility in New Hampshire to first
obtain permission and approval from the PUC). RSA chapter 38 “sets forth in
12
great detail the procedures a municipal utility must follow before acquiring or
constructing ‘a plant.’” Appeal of Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. at 340.
Several provisions within RSA chapter 38 require the PUC to oversee
specific aspects of such an acquisition. For instance, RSA 38:6 requires the
PUC to determine the portion of the utility’s plant and property located outside
of the municipality that the public interest may require the municipality to
purchase. Additionally, RSA 38:9, III requires the PUC, upon petition, to “fix
the price to be paid for such plant and property” and to “determine the amount
of damages, if any, caused by the severance of the plant and property proposed
to be purchased from the other plant and property of the owner.” Further, RSA
38:11 allows the PUC to “set conditions and issue orders to satisfy the public
interest” when the PUC determines whether the purchase or taking is in the
public interest.
The Utilities argue, in effect, that notwithstanding the broad grant of
authority in RSA 38:11, the PUC may not enforce any conditions that would
require it to exercise jurisdiction over a municipality after municipal purchase
or taking of a public utility, unless, after the purchase or taking occurs, the
municipality will qualify as a regulated public utility under RSA chapter 362.
The plain language of RSA 38:11 does not support this construction. Nothing
in RSA 38:11 precludes the PUC from imposing conditions upon municipal
purchase or taking of a public utility unless the municipality will, after the
purchase or taking, qualify as a regulated public utility. Had the legislature
intended to limit the PUC’s authority in the way the Utilities suggest, it could
have so stated. We will not imply a limitation when the legislature has not
expressly created one.
The Utilities’ construction would also lead to an anomalous result.
Under the Utilities’ interpretation, the PUC would have the authority to impose
conditions upon a municipality’s taking or acquisition of a water distribution
system, but would lack any authority to enforce them unless, after the
acquisition or taking, the municipality happened to fall within the small group
of municipalities that qualify as “public utilities” under RSA chapter 362. In
this way, the Utilities’ construction of the statutes renders RSA 38:11 virtually
meaningless.
The Utilities’ argument is also contrary to our well-settled rule of
statutory construction “that in the case of conflicting statutory provisions, the
specific statute controls over the general statute.” Appeal of Plantier, 126 N.H.
500, 510 (1985) (quotation omitted). Here, to the extent that RSA chapter 362
conflicts with RSA chapter 38, RSA chapter 38 specifically governs municipal
establishment, expansion, or acquisition of electric, gas or water distribution
plants.
13
Our decision in Appeal of Ashland Electric Department, 141 N.H. at 340-
41, is instructive. In that case, the petitioner, Ashland Electric Department
(Ashland), was a municipal electric utility that provided electrical service to
most, but not all, of the town. Appeal of Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. at 337-
38. A rural electric cooperative provided service to the areas Ashland did not
service. Id. at 337-38. The town decided to expand Ashland’s service area and
voted to acquire the rural electric cooperative’s distribution plant. Id. at 338.
When the rural electric cooperative responded that it was unwilling to sell, the
town chose not to take the property by eminent domain, but instead decided to
build its own distribution plant to service the customers currently served by
the cooperative. Id. Ashland asked the PUC to declare that it could expand its
service area within town limits without prior PUC approval pursuant to RSA
chapter 38. Id. The PUC denied this request, and we affirmed the PUC’s
ruling. Id. at 337, 338.
Ashland argued that because it was a municipal utility that generally
was not subject to PUC jurisdiction, the PUC had no authority to regulate its
proposed expansion within its own borders. Id. at 339. We rejected this
assertion in part because it violated provisions within RSA chapter 38. Id. at
340. RSA chapter 38, we explained, governs whenever a municipality or
municipal utility seeks to acquire or construct a distribution plant within
territory served by a public utility. Id. Although as a municipal utility,
Ashland was not generally subject to PUC jurisdiction, it became subject to this
jurisdiction once it decided to build a distribution plant in territory served by a
public utility. See id.
Similarly, here, although the City would not normally be subject to PUC
jurisdiction if it operated its own water system, the City’s taking of a public
utility by eminent domain is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction. See RSA 38:2,
:3. As part of the oversight authority expressly granted to it by RSA chapter 38
generally and RSA 38:11 specifically, the PUC may condition its approval of the
acquisition upon the City’s fulfillment of certain prerequisites, even though,
after the acquisition, the City will not operate as a “public utility” under RSA
chapter 362. See RSA 38:11.
The Utilities also argue that the conditions imposed left the Utilities and
the public “with no recourse . . . if the PUC later determines that the $40
million fund has structural defects or will not yield sufficient annual revenues”
or if the PUC “is faced with the reality of significant, but necessary, cost
changes to contractor agreements . . . such that it has an impact on rates and
renders the taking no longer in the public interest.” The fact that the
conditions themselves do not describe the avenues of recourse that may be
available should the City violate the conditions or should compliance with them
require additional PUC action does not mean that no avenue of recourse exists.
14
Nothing in the language of the conditions abrogates any existing administrative
or legal remedy.
The Utilities next argue that the nine conditions are unconstitutional
because, by imposing them, the PUC deprived the Utilities of their federal and
state constitutional procedural due process rights. See U.S. CONST. amends.
V, XIV; N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. They contend that the PUC violated their
rights to procedural due process because the PUC: (1) “exceeded its quasi-
judicial obligation to serve as a neutral arbiter of the public interest . . . and to
adjudicate the proposal before it” and “[i]nstead, . . . performed as a super-
legislature”; and (2) deprived the Utilities “of [their] due process right to address
proposals that varied significantly from the one [the City] made in its petition
and its prefiled testimony.” We address each argument in turn. Although the
Utilities have raised these arguments under both the State and Federal
Constitutions, we first address them under the State Constitution, and cite
federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
We interpret the Utilities’ first argument to assert that the PUC violated
the Utilities’ due process rights because it did not act impartially. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15; U.S. CONST. amend. XIV. Due process requires a
hearing before a fair and impartial decision-maker. Appeal of Beyer, 122 N.H.
934, 939 (1982); see Petition of Betty Sprague, 132 N.H. 250, 266 (1989) (“An
impartial tribunal is an essential element of a fair hearing.”). Administrative
officials who serve in an adjudicatory capacity are presumed to be of
conscience and capable of reaching a just and fair result. Appeal of Dell, 140
N.H. 484, 492 (1995). The burden is upon the party alleging bias to present
sufficient evidence to rebut this presumption. Id. The fact that the PUC
imposed conditions, as RSA 38:11 expressly allows it to do, is not sufficient to
rebut the presumption that the PUC was a fair and impartial decision-maker.
See id. at 492-93; Petition of Betty Sprague, 132 N.H. at 266. Accordingly, we
reject the Utilities’ assertion that the PUC failed to be impartial when deciding
the City’s petition.
In their next argument, the Utilities essentially claim that the PUC
deprived them of an opportunity to be heard with respect to the conditions the
PUC imposed. “Where governmental action would affect a legally protected
interest, the due process clause of the New Hampshire Constitution guarantees
to the holder of the interest the right to be heard at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner.” Appeal of N.H. Fireworks, 151 N.H. 335, 338 (2004)
(quotation omitted).
This argument lacks merit. The record demonstrates that the concerns,
which prompted the PUC to impose the nine conditions, were well vetted
throughout the proceeding. For instance, one of the concerns, raised by PUC
staff, related to the allocation of customer service functions between City
15
employees and the City’s contractor. In light of this concern, the PUC imposed
a condition that precluded the City from bifurcating its customer service
functions and required it to amend its contract with its contractor to provide
that this contractor handle all customer inquiries. Another concern, also
raised by PUC staff, related to whether the City would commit to complying
with the Digsafe program. See RSA 374:48-:56. In response to the data
request from PUC staff, the City stated that it “will become a member of and
participate in the Dig Safe program for its water utility.” In light of this
concern, the PUC imposed a condition that required the City to participate in
the Digsafe program. Indeed, most of the nine conditions were specifically
proposed by the City to address PUC staff concerns. The record demonstrates
that the Utilities had ample opportunity to be heard about the concerns and
the proposed solutions to them. Under these circumstances, we conclude that,
in imposing the nine conditions, the PUC did not deprive the Utilities of their
constitutional right to an opportunity to be heard.
The Federal Constitution offers the Utilities no greater protection than
does the State Constitution with respect to the right to a neutral decision-
maker, see Appeal of Grimm, 141 N.H. 719, 720-22 (1997); Withrow v. Larkin,
421 U.S. 35, 46-47 (1975), and the right to an opportunity to be heard, see
Society for Protection of N.H. Forests v. Site Evaluation Comm., 115 N.H. 163,
168-69 (1975); Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 267 (1970). Accordingly, we
reach the same results under the Federal Constitution as we do under the
State Constitution.
D. Valuation
We next address whether the PUC erroneously valued PWW’s assets. In
this proceeding, the PUC was required to determine the amount of “just
compensation” or damages that the City would have to pay for PWW’s assets.
See Pennichuck Corp., 152 N.H. at 731; RSA 38:9, I, III, :10. The parties agree
that the standard for “just compensation” is fair market value. See Opinion of
the Justices, 131 N.H. 504, 510 (1989). Fair market value is “the price which
in all probability would have been arrived at by fair negotiations between an
owner willing to sell and a purchaser desiring to buy, taking into account all
considerations that fairly might be brought forward and reasonably be given
substantial weight in such bargaining.” Daly v. State, 150 N.H. 277, 279
(2003) (quotation omitted); cf. Public Service Co. v. New Hampton, 101 N.H.
142, 146 (1957) (property must be taxed at its “full and true value,” which is
“the price which the property will bring in a fair market, after reasonable efforts
have been made to find the purchaser who will give the highest price for it”
(quotations omitted)); Public Serv. Co. of N.H. v. Town of Seabrook, 126 N.H.
740, 742 (1985).
16
“[T]he search for fair market value is not an easy one, and is akin to a
snipe hunt carried on at midnight on a moonless landscape.” 590 Realty Co.
Ltd. v. City of Keene, 122 N.H. 284, 285 (1982) (quotation omitted).
“Determination of fair market value is an issue of fact . . . .” Society Hill at
Merrimack Condo. Assoc. v. Town of Merrimack, 139 N.H. 253, 255 (1994). We
have previously recognized “the extraordinary difficulties in placing a fair
market value on the property of a regulated utility.” Public Serv. Co. v. Town of
Ashland, 117 N.H. 635, 638 (1977); see Public Service Co., 101 N.H. at 146.
Because of this difficulty, “we give the trier of fact considerable deference in
this area.” Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co. v. Town of Hudson, 145 N.H. 598, 600
(2000).
The trier of fact may use any one or a combination of five appraisal
techniques in valuing public utility property: original cost less depreciation
(rate base or net book), comparable sales, cost of alternative facilities,
capitalized earnings, and reproduction cost less depreciation. Id. “Typically all
relevant factors must be considered, but a trier of fact need not allocate specific
weight to any one of the approaches listed.” Id. (quotation omitted). All of the
enumerated approaches are valid, but all also have weaknesses. Public Serv.
Co., 117 N.H. at 638. “[W]e have . . . never attempted to tie the fact finder’s
hands with a rigid fair market value formula in the absence of legislative
directive.” Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co., 145 N.H. at 602 (quotation and
brackets omitted). “Rather, judgment is the touchstone.” Id. at 600 (quotation
omitted).
Experts for both the City and the Utilities considered three approaches to
valuing PWW’s assets: the reproduction cost less depreciation approach,
comparable sales approach, and capitalized earnings approach. We briefly
describe each approach.
In the reproduction cost less depreciation approach, also known as the
cost approach, “a value . . . is derived for the fee simple interest in a property
by estimating the current cost to construct a reproduction of (or replacement
for) the existing structure, including an entrepreneurial incentive; deducting
depreciation from total cost; and adding the estimated land value.” Appraisal
Institute, The Appraisal of Real Estate 378 (13th ed. 2008). The sales
comparison approach derives value for the subject property “by comparing
similar properties that have recently been sold with the property being
appraised, identifying appropriate units of comparison, and making
adjustments to the sale prices (or unit prices, as appropriate) of the
comparable properties, based on relevant, market-derived elements of
comparison.” Id. at 297. In the capitalized earnings approach, otherwise
known as the income capitalization approach, “an appraiser analyzes a
property’s capacity to generate future benefits and capitalizes the income into
an indication of present value.” Id. at 445.
17
Although experts for the parties considered all three approaches in their
analyses, they weighted them differently. The City’s experts gave no weight to
the reproduction cost less depreciation approach; the Utilities’ experts gave no
weight to the comparable sales approach. The City’s experts gave the
comparable sales and capitalized earnings approaches equal weight; the
Utilities’ experts weighted the reproduction cost less depreciation approach
60% and the capitalized earnings approach 40%. Additionally, while the
experts for both sides included not-for-profit entities within their pool of
potential hypothetical buyers when using the capitalized earnings approach,
the City’s experts assumed that the presence of these entities would not affect
the market, while the Utilities’ experts assumed that they would.
Recognizing that each approach has weaknesses, see Public Serv. Co.,
117 N.H. at 638, and requires adjustments to “overcome items of value not
inherently included in it,” the PUC declined to treat one approach as
conclusive, and, instead, evaluated each approach and assigned weights to
them. Like the Utilities’ experts, the PUC gave no weight to the comparable
sales approach, ruling that this approach is of marginal usefulness given the
limited market for regulated utilities like PWW, and finding that the sales upon
which the City’s experts relied were not, in fact, comparable.
With respect to the reproduction cost less depreciation approach, the
PUC found that the use of this approach by the Utilities’ experts was more
credible than its use by the City’s experts. Thus, the PUC accepted the figures
used by the Utilities’ experts to value PWW’s land and certain intangible
property. Ultimately, under this approach, the PUC valued PWW’s assets to be
worth $210,349,285 as of December 31, 2008.
With respect to the capitalized earnings approach, which focuses upon
estimates for earnings and capitalization rates, the PUC observed that the
Utilities’ experts used a not-for-profit cash flow as the measure of earnings in
its discounted cash flow analysis. They began with PWW’s projected financial
statements and then made adjustments to them to account for certain not-for-
profit cost advantages, such as income tax savings, access to low-cost
municipal financing, property tax savings, and relief from regulatory expense.
By contrast, the City’s experts used PWW’s own regulated income stream and
regulated rate-of-return capitalization rate to compute value. Whereas the
Utilities’ experts assumed that a buyer would be a not-for-profit entity, the
City’s experts assumed that a buyer would be a privately-owned entity like
PWW. The PUC found the testimony of the Utilities’ experts persuasive on this
point. The PUC concluded “that so long as it is legally permissible for not-for-
profit buyers, that is more than one such buyer, to buy PWW, which is the case
here, their influence on valuation as part of the population of willing buyers
must be given full effect.”
18
The experts also disagreed about capitalization rates, with the Utilities’
experts recommending a 5% rate from which 2% is deducted for growth and
the City’s experts recommending a 7.2% rate from which 0% is deducted for
growth. The PUC found that the Utilities’ growth rate was inflated, and, thus
used the Utilities’ base rate and the City’s 0% growth rate.
To calculate the value of PWW’s assets under the capitalized earnings
approach, the PUC divided earnings of $8,540,012 by a capitalization rate of
5%, which yielded an income valuation of $170,800,230. From this, it
deducted $826,099 to account for the present value of negative net cash flows
for the years 2006 to 2009, and determined that the final value of PWW’s
assets was $169,974,131 as of December 31, 2005, and $192,053,771 as of
December 31, 2008. The PUC then weighted the reproduction cost less
depreciation approach at 60% and the capitalized earnings approach at 40%
and, with that weighting, calculated the overall fair market value of PWW’s
assets to be $203,031,079 as of December 31, 2008.
Both the City and Merrimack Valley (the entity to which the City may
eventually convey PWW) challenge the PUC’s valuation of PWW’s assets.
Specifically, both the City and Merrimack Valley contest how the PUC applied
the capitalized earnings approach, asserting that the PUC erred by assuming
that there could be more than one not-for-profit entity within the pool of
hypothetical buyers of PWW and that the presence of these entities required
using a not-for-profit cash flow to estimate earnings and a 5% capitalization
rate.
We first address the argument of the City and Merrimack Valley that the
PUC’s assumptions are unreasonable because there is no evidence from which
the PUC could have made them. See Legislative Utility Consumers’ Council,
118 N.H. at 99. This argument “is readily dismissed by the common principle
that conflicts in the evidence are to be resolved by the [trier of fact], who could
accept or reject such portions of the evidence presented as [it] found proper,
including that of the expert witnesses,” Crown Paper Co. v. City of Berlin, 142
N.H. 563, 570 (1997) (quotation and brackets omitted), and by the fact that the
PUC’s assumptions were based upon the testimony and reports of the Utilities’
experts. Southern N.H. Water Co. v. Town of Hudson, 139 N.H. 139, 141
(1994).
The City and Merrimack Valley mistakenly contend that the testimony
and reports of the Utilities’ experts do not constitute evidence from which the
PUC could have made its own assumptions because they were flawed. In
making these arguments, the City and Merrimack Valley seek to impose upon
PUC proceedings the evidentiary standards we have adopted for trial
proceedings. See RSA 516:29-a (2007); N.H. R. Ev. 702. These evidentiary
standards do not apply to PUC proceedings. See Appeal of McKenney, 120
19
N.H. at 80-81; RSA 541:17. Even if we were to agree that the testimony and
reports of the Utilities’ experts would have been inadmissible in a trial, their
admission in the PUC proceeding does not render its decision unjust,
unreasonable or unlawful. Appeal of McKenney, 120 N.H. at 81.
Further, the arguments of the City and Merrimack Valley ignore the
possibility that in making its assumptions, the PUC did not rely exclusively
upon the testimony and reports of the Utilities’ experts, but also relied upon its
own experience and expertise. See New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 113 N.H. at
101-02. When deciding cases such as this one, the PUC must bring to its
decision-making an expertise and knowledge of the industries it regulates. See
Appeal of Public Serv. Co. of N.H., 122 N.H. 1062, 1075 (1982).
The City and Merrimack Valley essentially argue that the PUC erred by
finding the Utilities’ experts more credible with respect to the capitalized
earnings approach than the City’s experts. Once testimony is admitted, it is
the PUC’s duty to resolve issues of fact and conflicts of opinion. Appeal of
McKenney, 120 N.H. at 81. The PUC is not compelled to accept the opinion
evidence of any one witness or group of witnesses, including expert witnesses.
See id. As the trier of fact, the PUC could accept or reject such portions of the
evidence as it found proper, including that of expert witnesses. See Tennessee
Gas Pipeline Co., 145 N.H. at 602. The PUC was not required to believe even
uncontroverted evidence. See Brent v. Paquette, 132 N.H. 415, 418 (1989).
Further, there was support in the record for the PUC’s credibility
determination. The PUC could have reasonably determined that the approach
advocated by the City’s experts was contrary to New Hampshire law. The City’s
experts assumed that the eventual purchaser of PWW would be a for-profit
entity. We have previously held, however, that it is error not to consider a
potential unregulated municipal buyer when valuing a water utility. See
Southern N.H. Water Co., 139 N.H. at 142. Failing to consider an unregulated
purchaser in the capitalized earning approach “overestimates the effect of PUC
regulation on fair market value.” Id. at 143. Even if such a purchase is
unlikely, we have held that it must be considered. Id. at 142. “The
unlikelihood of sale is, after all, the reason why valuation of public utilities is
so extraordinarily difficult and why this court has typically given the trier of
fact considerable deference in this area.” Id. Moreover, by using PWW’s cash
flow, the City’s experts valued PWW essentially at its rate base or net book
value. We have recognized, however, that “it is possible that a prospective
purchaser would pay more than net book cost.” Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co.,
145 N.H. at 602; see Public Service Co., 101 N.H. at 151.
Additionally, there was evidence in the record from which the PUC could
have found (although it did not do so) that the City’s experts were biased. As
the PUC noted, there was evidence that the City’s experts were specifically
20
hired “to advocate that acquiring PWW’s assets was in the public interest.”
There was evidence as well that the City’s experts stood to benefit financially if
the City’s condemnation of PWW succeeded. Further, there was evidence that
the City’s experts promised the City, before they were engaged, that they would
produce a valuation within a specific range, which would allow the City to
finance the purchase without raising rates, and that the valuation they
produced was close to this range. We conclude, therefore, that the PUC was
not compelled on the record before it to find the City’s experts more credible
than the Utilities’ experts with regard to their use of the capitalized earnings
approach to valuation. See Brent, 132 N.H. at 418.
Having concluded that there is evidence to support the PUC’s
assumptions, we next address the arguments of the City and Merrimack Valley
that these assumptions were legally invalid. The City and Merrimack Valley
contend that the assumption that there could be more than one not-for-profit
entity within the pool of potential buyers of PWW violates RSA chapter 38. We
disagree that RSA chapter 38 precludes more than one municipality, town or
regional water district from competing to purchase a public utility. Nothing in
RSA chapter 38 requires that only one municipality, town or regional water
district bid upon such a purchase at a time.
The City and Merrimack Valley next argue that by adopting the
assumptions of the Utilities’ experts, the value the PUC gave to PWW’s assets
under the capitalized earnings approach was not fair market value, but was,
instead, the investment value of PWW to the City. In this argument, the City
and Merrimack Valley again fault the PUC for assuming that the likely
purchaser of PWW would be a not-for-profit entity, thus requiring the use of an
enhanced cash flow and a 5% capitalization rate. As previously discussed, this
assumption has support in the record and is not legally erroneous. Because
we conclude that this assumption was supported by the evidence and is not
legally erroneous, we disagree that the eventual value that the PUC gave to
PWW’s assets was not fair market value. Having found that the PUC’s
valuation has support in the record and that it is not erroneous as a matter of
law, we uphold it.
E. Mitigation Fund
Finally, we address whether the PUC erred by requiring a mitigation fund
of $40 million to compensate the customers of PWW’s affiliates. Acting
pursuant to RSA 38:9, III, which obliges the PUC to “determine the amount of
damages, if any, caused by the severance of the plant and property proposed to
be purchased from the other plant and property of the owner,” the PUC
required the City to create a fund to mitigate the harm to Pennichuck East and
Pittsfield Aqueduct customers from losing the synergies associated with PWW’s
assets. The PUC accepted the testimony of the Utilities’ expert that
21
Pennichuck East and Pittsfield Aqueduct, combined, would need $3.4 million
in additional annual revenue if the City takes PWW. The PUC also accepted
the Utilities’ expert’s testimony that an initial fund investment of $40 million
would be required to generate annual earnings of $3.4 million. The expert
testified that a fund of this size would insulate the customers of Pennichuck
East and Pittsfield Aqueduct from the rate increases related to the City’s taking
of PWW.
The Utilities contend that a $40 million fund will not generate $3.4
million annually. For its part, the City asserts that requiring it to establish a
fund of this magnitude is unreasonable. Because the parties have failed to
show that there is no evidence from which the PUC could have found as it did,
see Legislative Utility Consumers’ Council, 118 N.H. at 99, and in light of the
deference we owe the PUC in such proceedings, see Appeal of Verizon New
England, 158 N.H. at 695, we decline to overturn its findings with respect to
the $40 million mitigation fund.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
22