THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-850
FIRST BERKSHIRE BUSINESS TRUST & a.
v.
COMMISSIONER, NEW HAMPSHIRE
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE ADMINISTRATION & a.
Argued: October 14, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 24, 2010
Rath, Young & Pignatelli, P.C., of Concord (Kenneth C. Bartholomew and
Christopher J. Sullivan on the brief, and Mr. Bartholomew orally), for the
petitioners.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Glenn A. Perlow, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the New Hampshire Department of
Revenue Administration.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, First Berkshire Business Trust (First
Trust), First Berkshire Properties, LLC (First LLC) and Second Berkshire
Properties, LLC (Second LLC), appeal an order of the Superior Court (O’Neill, J.)
that partially affirmed and partially reversed a decision of the New Hampshire
Department of Revenue Administration (DRA). We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. The petitioners are three separate
business organizations. First LLC and Second LLC are both wholly-owned
subsidiaries of First Trust. This appeal arises out of two transactions involving
real property located at 200 John E. Devine Road in Manchester. At issue is
DRA’s imposition of real estate transfer taxes, interest and penalties in
connection with these transactions. See RSA 78-B:1, :7-a (2003); RSA 21-J:28
(2000), :33 (Supp. 2009).
The first transaction occurred in April 2003, when First Trust obtained
refinancing for the property and others through Wells Fargo Bank as a means
of avoiding bankruptcy. As a condition of refinancing, Wells Fargo required
First Trust to create a single purpose entity, subsequently known as First LLC.
Wells Fargo required that: (1) title to the subject property be in First LLC’s
name; (2) a deed be executed listing First LLC as the property’s legal owner;
and (3) First LLC be listed as the borrower of the funds from Wells Fargo. First
LLC entered into a mortgage with Wells Fargo on the property. On April 11,
2003, a deed from First Trust to First LLC was recorded, stating that the
property was deeded from First Trust to First LLC for ten dollars and “other
good and valuable consideration” to be paid by First LLC.
The second transaction occurred in the summer of 2003, when the
property was refinanced again through another bank. First Trust sought
refinancing to obtain better repayment terms. First Trust formed Second LLC
because it anticipated that it would need another single purpose entity for the
second refinancing. The other bank approved this. On June 23, 2003, a deed
from First LLC to Second LLC was executed; it was recorded on July 9, 2003.
The deed states that the property was deeded from First LLC to Second LLC “in
consideration of the sum of Ten Dollars . . . and other good and valuable
consideration” to be paid by Second LLC.
In October 2004, DRA issued notices of assessment, including additional
taxes, penalties and interest against First Trust in the amount of $102,271.84
and against First LLC and Second LLC in the amount of $100,556.16.
Thereafter, the petitioners petitioned DRA to re-determine the taxes, penalties
and interest owed. Following hearings, DRA issued a final order upholding its
original assessment.
The petitioners appealed to the superior court, where DRA stipulated
that the total amount of taxes, penalties and interest owed through March 31,
2009, was $316,920.00. The parties filed cross-motions for summary
judgment. In ruling on these motions, the trial court upheld DRA’s
determination that the transfers (from First Trust to First LLC and then from
First LLC to Second LLC) were subject to the real estate transfer tax. See RSA
78-B:1. The trial court further upheld DRA’s decision to tax the transfers
based upon the fair market value of the subject property. See RSA 78-B:9
2
(2003). The trial court ruled, however, that DRA erred by imposing penalties
on the petitioners for their failure to pay the real estate transfer taxes when
due. See RSA 21-J:33. This appeal followed.
We review the trial court’s rulings on summary judgment by considering
the affidavits and other evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party. See S. N.H. Med. Ctr. v. Hayes, 159 N.H. 711, 715 (2010). If this review
does not reveal any genuine issues of material fact, i.e., facts that would affect
the outcome of the litigation, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as
a matter of law, we will affirm. Id. We review the trial court’s application of law
to fact de novo. Id.
Resolving the issues on appeal requires statutory interpretation. In
matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s
intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.
LaChance v. U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Co., 156 N.H. 88, 93 (2007). We review
the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Estate of Gordon-Couture v.
Brown, 152 N.H. 265, 266 (2005).
When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. LaChance, 156 N.H. at 93. We read
words or phrases not in isolation, but in the context of the entire statute and
the entire statutory scheme. Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 509
(2004); Appeal of Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. 336, 340 (1996). When the
language of a statute is plain and unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for
further indications of legislative intent. Franklin, 151 N.H. at 509. We review
legislative history to aid our analysis when the statutory language is
ambiguous or subject to more than one reasonable interpretation. Id. at 510.
We construe an ambiguous tax statute against the taxing authority rather than
the taxpayer. Pheasant Lane Realty Trust v. City of Nashua, 143 N.H. 140, 143
(1998). However, we do not strictly construe statutes that impose taxes, but
instead examine their language in the light of their purposes and objectives.
Appeal of Town of Pelham, 143 N.H. 536, 538 (1999).
The petitioners first argue that the transfers are not subject to the real
estate transfer tax because the transfers did not constitute “bargained-for
exchanges” within the meaning of RSA chapter 78-B. See RSA 78-B:1-a, II, IV
(2003), V (Supp. 2009). We disagree.
RSA 78-B:1, I(a) provides, in pertinent part: “A tax is imposed upon the
sale, granting and transfer of real estate and any interest therein including
transfers by operation of law.” Under RSA 78-B:1, I(a), “[e]ach sale, grant and
transfer of real estate, and each sale, grant and transfer of an interest in real
estate shall be presumed taxable unless it is specifically exempt from taxation
3
under RSA 78-B:2.” The petitioners do not argue that the transactions at issue
are specifically exempt from taxation pursuant to RSA 78-B:2 (2003).
RSA 78-B:1-a, V defines a sale, grant and transfer as “every contractual
transfer of real estate, or any interest in real estate from a person or entity to
another person or entity, whether or not either person or entity is controlled
directly or indirectly by the other person or entity.” A contractual transfer is “a
bargained-for exchange of all transfers of real estate or an interest therein.”
RSA 78-B:1-a, II. By contrast, a noncontractual transfer is “a transfer which
satisfies the 3 elements of a gift transfer: (a) [d]onative intent; (b) [a]ctual
delivery; and (c) [i]mmediate relinquishment of control.” RSA 78-B:1-a, III
(2003).
RSA chapter 78-B does not define “bargained-for exchange.” In Petition
of Lorden, 134 N.H. 594, 600 (1991), in the context of interpreting an earlier
version of RSA chapter 78-B, we explained that a bargained-for exchange is an
element of “consideration.” RSA 78-B:1-a, IV defines “consideration” as “the
amount of money, or other property and services, or property or services valued
in money which is given in exchange for real estate, and measured at a time
immediately after the transfer of the real estate.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, the
term “bargained-for exchange” as used in RSA 78-B:1-a, II is the exchange of
“money, or other property and services, or property or services valued in
money” for an interest in real estate. RSA 78-B:1-a, IV.
The petitioners contend that the transactions are not “bargained-for
exchanges” because the parties to the transactions did not bargain at arm’s
length and the purchasing entities (First LLC and Second LLC) did not pay
adequate value for the sales. To support these assertions, they mistakenly rely
upon Petition of Lorden, which concerned whether the distribution of
unencumbered corporate assets to stockholders upon the corporation’s
dissolution and liquidation was subject to the real estate transfer tax. Petition
of Lorden, 134 N.H. at 595. We held that the distribution was not subject to
the tax because even if a “transfer” took place, the stockholders gave no
consideration in exchange for it. Id. at 599. They did not pay for the transfer
of real estate in money or provide anything else in exchange for it. Id. at 599-
600. Here, by contrast, money, or other property and services, were exchanged
when First LLC purchased the property from First Trust and when Second LLC
purchased it from First LLC. Moreover, following Petition of Lorden, the
legislature specifically amended the definition of “consideration” to include “the
surrender of shareholder or beneficial interest holder rights in liquidation of a
corporation.” Laws 1992, 203:1. Thus, on this issue, Petition of Lorden is no
longer good law.
Contrary to the petitioners’ assertions, bargaining at arm’s length is not
required for a transaction to constitute a “bargained-for exchange.” RSA 78-
4
B:1-a, II gives as examples of “bargained-for exchange[s]” numerous transfers
that do not involve bargaining at arm’s length, such as: (1) a transfer from a
shareholder to a corporation in which he holds an interest, see RSA 78-B:1-a,
II(a); (2) a transfer from a partner to the partnership in which he holds an
interest, see RSA 78-B:1-a, II(b); (3) a transfer from a corporation to its
shareholders, see RSA 78-B:1-a, II(e); or (4) a transfer from a partnership to its
partners, see RSA 78-B:1-a, II(f). Additionally, RSA 78-B:1-a, V specifies that a
sale, grant or transfer “means every contractual transfer of real estate, or any
interest in real estate from a person or entity to another person or entity,
whether or not either person or entity is controlled directly or indirectly by the
other person or entity in the transfer.” (Emphases added.)
Nor is payment of adequate value required for a transfer to constitute a
“bargained-for exchange.” RSA 78-B:9, III specifically gives DRA the “power,
barring specific proof to the contrary, to determine the actual price or
consideration by the fair market value of the real estate.” Thus, if adequate
value is not exchanged, RSA 78-B:9, III authorizes DRA to “determine the
actual price or consideration by the fair market value of the real estate.”
Additionally, RSA 78-B:1-a, IV requires DRA to consider the fair market value
of the property to be the consideration exchanged in certain statutorily
enumerated circumstances, such as when “the property exchanged includes
. . . the forgiveness of an obligation owed to the transferee, or the assumption
of an obligation by the transferee.”
Here, the transactions at issue constituted “bargained-for exchanges”
because they involved the exchange of “money, or other property and services,
or property or services valued in money” for an interest in the subject property.
RSA 78-B:1-a, II, IV. In the first transaction, First LLC became the owner of
the subject property in exchange for giving First Trust ten dollars; Second LLC
became the owner of the property in exchange for giving First LLC ten dollars.
In both transactions, money was exchanged for an interest in the subject
property. Accordingly, both transactions constitute “bargained-for exchanges”
within the meaning of the statute.
While the petitioners argue that the trial court erred to the extent that it
found that the transactions constituted “bargained-for exchanges” because
First LLC assumed First Trust’s mortgage and Second LLC assumed First LLC’s
mortgage, we need not decide this issue. Even if the petitioners are correct
that the old mortgages were not assumed and that new mortgages were
obtained, we conclude that the transactions were “bargained-for exchanges” for
the reasons set forth above.
The petitioners next assert that the trial court erred by allowing DRA to
impose the real estate transfer tax based upon the subject property’s fair
market value. They argue that DRA may impose the real estate transfer tax
5
based upon fair market value only under the circumstances set forth in RSA
78-B:1-a, IV, or when there is no evidence of the actual price paid for the
property, see RSA 78-B:9, III. Here, they contend, because none of the
circumstances set forth in RSA 78-B:1-a, IV exist and because there is
evidence of the actual price paid for the property (ten dollars), DRA had no
authority to base the real estate transfer tax upon the property’s fair market
value.
We assume, without deciding, that the circumstances set forth in RSA
78-B:1-a, IV are not present here. Accordingly, we confine our analysis to RSA
78-B:9, which grants DRA the “power to audit all real estate transfers” in the
state to “verify[ ] and determin[e] the existence of a sale, granting or transfer
of real estate,” and to “verify[ ] and determin[e] the amount of the price or
consideration paid” for the transfer. RSA 78-B:9, I. RSA 78-B:9, II specifically
requires DRA to “look to the substance of the transaction or series of
transactions to determine if a sale, grant or transfer of real estate has
occurred.” Under RSA 78-B:9, III, “[i]f there is occasion to determine if the
stated price or consideration is the actually paid or required to be paid price or
consideration,” DRA has “the power, barring specific proof to the contrary, to
determine the actual price or consideration by the fair market value of the real
estate.”
We agree with the trial court that DRA reasonably relied upon RSA 78-
B:9, III to determine that the actual consideration for the exchanges at issue
was the property’s fair market value. The stated price for each exchange was
ten dollars “and other good and valuable consideration.” The vague reference
to “other good and valuable consideration” gave DRA occasion to conduct an
audit under RSA 78-B:9 to determine if the stated ten dollar purchase price
was the “actually paid or required to be paid price or consideration.” RSA 78-
B:9, III. In so doing, DRA reasonably could have determined that the tangible
benefits afforded First Trust in the first transaction and First LLC in the second
transaction far exceeded the ten dollar purchase price and that the property’s
fair market value more accurately reflected the actual consideration given for
the exchanges. Therefore, contrary to the petitioners’ assertions, DRA’s use of
the property’s fair market value as a basis for the real estate transfer taxes
imposed did not violate RSA 78-B:9.
Finally, the petitioners contend that to allow DRA to impose the real
estate transfer tax upon the transactions at issue violates Part I, Article 12 and
Part II, Articles 5 and 6 of the New Hampshire Constitution. They assert that
to impose the real estate transfer tax when special purpose entities are used in
refinancing and to decline to impose this tax when they are not used violates
the constitutional command that taxation be just, uniform, equal and
proportional. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 12, pt. II, arts. 5 and 6.
6
Three provisions of the New Hampshire Constitution work in conjunction
to ensure the fairness of any scheme of taxation enacted by our legislature.
Smith v. N.H. Dep’t of Revenue Admin., 141 N.H. 681, 685 (1997). First, Part I,
Article 12 establishes that “[e]very member of the community has a right to be
protected by it, in the enjoyment of his life, liberty, and property; he is therefore
bound to contribute his share in the expense of such protection.” This article
requires that a given class of taxable property be taxed at a uniform rate and
that “taxes must be not merely proportional, but in due proportion, so that
each individual’s just share, and no more, shall fall upon him.” Id. at 685-86
(quotation and brackets omitted). This provision literally imposes a
requirement of proportionality of a taxpayer’s portion of the public expense,
“according to the amount of his taxable estate” and requires that similarly
situated taxpayers be treated the same. Id. at 686 (quotation omitted).
Second, Part II, Article 5 authorizes the General Court “to impose and
levy proportional and reasonable assessments, rates and taxes, upon all the
inhabitants of, and residents within, the . . . state.” This section requires “that
all taxes be proportionate and reasonable, equal in valuation and uniform in
rate, and just.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Third, Part II, Article 6 grants the legislature broad power to declare
property to be taxable or non-taxable based upon a classification of the
property’s kind or use, but not based upon a classification of the property’s
owner. Id. These three constitutional provisions require that taxation be just,
uniform, equal, and proportional. Id. A tax must be in proportion to the actual
value of the property subject to tax, and it must operate in a reasonable
manner. Id. at 687.
We hold that it does not violate these constitutional commands to impose
the real estate transfer tax when an entity has transferred property to a single
purpose entity in order to obtain refinancing for that property. The real estate
transfer tax applies whenever there is a contractual transfer of real estate or an
interest in real estate. See RSA 78-B:1, :1-a, V. The real estate transfer tax
applies uniformly to all similarly situated taxpayers, that is, all taxpayers
involved in a contractual transfer of real estate. The fact that the tax does not
apply when a contractual transfer of real estate has not occurred, such as
when an entity refinances a property without transferring the property to
another entity, does not render the tax unconstitutional.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7