THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-797
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL EULIANO
Argued: November 10, 2010
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Michael Euliano, appeals his conviction on
one count of second degree assault, see RSA 631:2 (2007) (amended 2010), one
count of conduct after an accident, see RSA 264:25 (2004), and two counts of
reckless conduct, see RSA 631:3 (2007). On appeal, he argues that the
Superior Court (Barry, J.) erroneously: (1) commented on the evidence in the
presence of the jury; and (2) denied his motion to dismiss the reckless conduct
indictments. We affirm.
The jury could have found or the record supports the following. In the
early morning hours of November 12, 2007, the defendant drove his car onto
the sidewalk of Cross Street in Nashua and struck and injured Juan Pech. He
also hit Miguel Bisono and Jose Baez. The defendant did not stop. Later that
morning, a number of officers went to the defendant’s home and told him to go
to the Nashua Police Station. He complied and was arrested. The defendant
was interviewed by Detective Steve Sweeney and Detective Jonathan Lehto.
During the interview, he admitted to accidentally hitting someone earlier that
morning but denied that he swerved onto the sidewalk to do so.
The defendant was indicted for second degree assault, conduct after an
accident and reckless conduct. At trial, Officer Sean Mabry of the Nashua
Police Department testified that shortly after midnight on November 12, 2007,
he was dispatched to the area of Cross Street for “a report of a large
disturbance with approximately 15 people.” He testified that after he parked
and exited his cruiser, he heard “[s]omeone in the crowd yell[] -- you know --
that car just ran over my friend.” Officer Mabry stated that the car drove
within two feet of him and, as it did so, he observed the defendant driving and
“shouted stop, police, several times,” but the defendant did not stop.
Pech, Baez and Bisono also testified at trial. Pech testified that he was
walking on the sidewalk when he noticed the defendant’s vehicle speeding
towards him and his friends and then “g[et] on the sidewalk,” but that he did
not remember anything after that. Baez testified that he was on the sidewalk
with Pech when Pech was hit by a car driven by the defendant. He testified
that he felt the mirror of the car touch him. Bisono testified that he too was on
the sidewalk with Pech when he observed a car go “on top of” the sidewalk and
hit Pech. He stated that the car also made contact with him. According to
Pech and Bisono, the defendant did not stop at the scene of the accident.
Detective Sweeney testified about his interview with the defendant and during
his testimony, the State played the videotape of the defendant’s interview.
The defendant asserted self-defense. He testified that he was driving up
Cross Street when a van pulled up to his right and his friend jumped out and
told him to stop. The defendant explained that at this point he turned around
because he “noticed in [his] rearview mirror that about 30 kids were running
up the street with bats and machetes.” He stated that he saw someone hit his
friend’s shoulder with a machete and he “took off . . . down Cross Street.” He
stated that “the road was full of people.” He explained that he “[s]werved
around them as much as [he] could,” but that he “[e]nded up driving on the
sidewalk” and hitting Pech. The defendant admitted that after he hit Pech, he
kept driving. He further stated that he did not “tr[y] to hit anybody.”
The State cross-examined the defendant concerning inconsistencies
between his trial testimony and the information he gave to the police in his
2
videotaped statement. He agreed with the prosecutor’s statement that his
“story” was “considerably different from the one [he] gave the police on the
morning of the incident.” He indicated that he “crossed over the lane and onto
the sidewalk and hit [Pech] on the sidewalk.” Additionally, he conceded that he
could have left the area by taking an alternate route but that instead he turned
around and drove towards the crowd.
At the close of the evidence, the defendant moved to dismiss the two
reckless conduct indictments, arguing that they are insufficient to charge
felony reckless conduct because they fail to allege that the instrument used by
the defendant in committing the crime constituted a deadly weapon. The court
denied the motion. The jury found the defendant guilty of all charges and this
appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court made improper comments
during the course of his trial in violation of his rights to due process and to an
impartial judge under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments to the Federal
Constitution and Part I, Articles 15 and 35 of the State Constitution. The
defendant concedes that he did not object to the trial court’s comments.
Nonetheless, he contends that we should review the trial court’s conduct under
the plain error rule.
The plain error rule allows us to exercise our discretion to correct errors
not raised before the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A; State v. Russell, 159
N.H. 475, 489 (2009). For us to find plain error: “(1) there must be error; (2)
the error must be plain; and (3) the error must affect substantial rights.” State
v. Panarello, 157 N.H. 204, 207 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted).
Generally, to satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected
substantial rights, the defendant must demonstrate that the error was
prejudicial, i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding. State v. Lopez,
156 N.H. 416, 425 (2007). If all three of these conditions are met, we may then
exercise our discretion to correct a forfeited error only if the error meets a
fourth criterion: the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings. See Panarello, 157 N.H. at 207. The rule is
used sparingly, however, and is limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. See id.
The defendant argues that, on three separate occasions, the trial court
“expressed a judicial opinion on the evidence, on [his] guilt, and on his
credibility.” The defendant maintains that this conduct prejudiced him,
thereby denying him a fair trial. The first comment occurred during the State’s
direct examination of Detective Dennis Lee of the Nashua Police Department
concerning his involvement in the investigation:
3
Q. And while you were there, did you locate any type of a crime
scene?
A. We did.
Q. And where was that located?
A. Just north of the intersection of Canal Street and Cross Street.
[Defense counsel]: Objection, Your Honor, foundation for this?
. . . .
[Defense counsel]: There’s no foundation.
THE COURT: For what?
[Defense counsel]: For any crime scene. What crime? We haven’t
heard about any crime from this witness.
THE COURT: Well, you know, the people weren’t out there saying
the rosary from what I can get so far . . . .
The second comment occurred shortly thereafter during the State’s direct
examination of the same witness:
Q. And with this map of Nashua, could you just indicate where the
general vicinity it was of the crime scene that you found?
A. Approximately it was in the area of --
[Defense counsel]: Objection, Your Honor. Your Honor, the State
hasn’t established that any crime occurred. It said in the opening
-- and I stipulate now -- that [the victim] was hit by [the
defendant]. But that’s not a crime -- it was an occurrence of self-
defense. It was an act. So I object to the Prosecutor continuing to
refer to it as a crime scene. It was an accident scene.
THE COURT: Hit and run is a crime . . . . At least it was when I
got admitted to the bar in 1968. And it still is as far as I know.
And there’s been evidence so far of a hit and run taking place. And
I’ll allow it. Objection overruled.
The final comment followed the State’s introduction of the videotaped
interview of the defendant. After the videotape concluded, the court stated:
4
“Well, I don’t think that’s going to win any Academy Awards. We’re going to
recess at this point and we’ll resume at ten o’clock tomorrow.”
While we do not condone the trial court’s conduct, after reviewing the
record in this case, we are not persuaded that the challenged comments give
rise to plain error affecting the defendant’s substantial rights. The comments
do not express a judicial opinion on the defendant’s guilt or credibility as
suggested by the defendant. Indeed, the first two comments did not occur
during testimony about the defendant. The first comment was made following
testimony describing “a large disturbance” involving “multiple people fighting --
acting disorderly” and “bordering” on a riot. As such, the jury could easily
have understood the comment to be referring to the “large disturbance.” It
cannot reasonably be construed to imply, as the defendant alleges, that the
trial court believed the defendant to be “a bad person who had committed a
crime.” Cf. Young v. Clogston, 127 N.H. 340, 344 (1985) (finding that the trial
court’s dialogue with a witness “could have colored the jury’s decision as to the
reasonableness of the plaintiff’s conduct and was improper”).
The second comment was made during Detective Lee’s testimony about
his investigation of a hit and run. Prior testimony by Officer Mabry also
indicated that a hit and run had occurred. Thus, the trial court’s statement
reflected the evidence offered by the officers in their testimony regarding the
investigation of a hit and run. While a single direct response to the objection
would have been preferable, a trial judge is not prohibited from summarizing
the evidence, so long as he does not “manifest[ ] bias in the presentation of
evidence.” People v. Harris, 118 P.3d 545, 571 (Cal. 2005) (no judicial bias
against the defendant where the court commented on the evidence outside the
presence of the jury, interrupted defense counsel during cross-examination of
several witnesses and questioned the defendant during his testimony), cert.
denied, 547 U.S. 1065 (2006).
The third comment followed the State’s introduction of the videotaped
interview of the defendant. To the extent the comment could be construed as a
statement regarding the individuals on the videotape, there is no indication
that the comment solely referred to the defendant. The interview involved not
only the defendant but also Detective Sweeney and Detective Lehto. At most,
the comment suggests that the video did not exhibit the type of material worthy
of an Academy Award. It was not a specific comment on the defendant’s guilt
or credibility. Cf. State v. Houston, 139 S.W.3d 223, 229 (Mo. Ct. App. 2004)
(defendant was prejudiced when the trial court essentially told defendant that
his defense was “‘immaterial and irrelevant,’ and consistently interject[ed] on
behalf of the State, all in the presence of the jury”); State v. Chappell, 987 P.2d
1114, 1118 (Kan. Ct. App. 1999) (trial court’s comment that child victim was
capable of telling the truth and had answered questions truthfully during voir
dire substantially prejudiced the defendant’s right to a fair trial).
5
Moreover, in view of the entire trial record, we find that the defendant
has failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s comments affected the outcome
of the proceeding. The defendant admitted that he drove onto the sidewalk and
hit Pech with his car. Pech, Bisono and Baez confirmed that a car was driven
onto the sidewalk and struck Pech. Bisono and Baez testified that the car
made contact with them. Pech and Baez both identified the defendant as the
driver. While the defendant testified that he swerved onto the sidewalk to avoid
hitting the crowd, he conceded that he could have left the area by an alternate
route but chose not to do so.
In addition, the defendant admitted to leaving the scene after the
accident and other witnesses corroborated that the defendant did not stop after
he hit Pech. Further, in the videotape of his interview with the detectives, the
defendant made statements that were inconsistent with his testimony at trial.
Indeed, he agreed with the prosecutor’s statement that his “story” at trial was
“considerably different from the one [he] gave the police on the morning of the
incident.”
Finally, the trial judge instructed the jury at the close of evidence: “If
you believe that I have expressed or suggested an opinion as to the facts in my
rulings, you should ignore that belief. It is up to you alone to decide the facts
in this case.” The defendant argues that this instruction “was insufficient to
cure the prejudice.” We disagree. Jurors are presumed to follow the court’s
instructions. See State v. Cosme, 157 N.H. 40, 46 (2008). Accordingly, we
conclude that the defendant has not carried his burden to show that the trial
court’s conduct amounted to plain error that affected the outcome of the
proceeding. See Lopez, 156 N.H. at 425.
Nevertheless, the facts of this case warrant a note of caution. A judge
must be mindful of comments from the bench, as the judge’s influence on the
jury is necessarily great. See Young, 127 N.H. at 344. We caution trial judges
to refrain from making ostensibly witty or sarcastic remarks, which could in
any way be interpreted as going to the weight of testimony, see id., or the
defendant’s guilt or innocence. See State v. Rosencrans, 128 N.H. 399, 401
(1986).
To the extent that the defendant argues that the trial judge was not
impartial under Part I, Article 35 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the
Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution, and, thus, should have
been disqualified from the proceedings, see State v. Belyea, 160 N.H. 298, 303
(2010), he has not adequately developed this argument for appellate review.
Accordingly, we decline to address it. See id. at 307.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to dismiss the reckless conduct indictments. He maintains that the
6
indictments fail to allege a material element of the crime of felony reckless
conduct, namely, the deadly weapon element, and, thus, they are insufficient
under Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and
Sixth Amendments to the United States Constitution. We note that the
defendant failed to raise a state constitutional claim in the trial court; we,
therefore, confine our constitutional analysis to the requirements of the Federal
Constitution. See State v. LaMarche, 157 N.H. 337, 340 (2008).
We will assume, without deciding, that requirements under the Federal
Constitution pertaining to indictments apply. But see Williams v. Haviland,
467 F.3d 527, 532 (6th Cir. 2006) (noting that the Supreme Court has
repeatedly asserted “that the Grand Jury Clause of the Fifth Amendment does
not apply to the states”). Under the Federal Constitution, “an indictment is
sufficient if it, first, contains the elements of the offense charged and fairly
informs a defendant of the charge against which he must defend, and, second,
enables him to plead an acquittal or conviction in bar of future prosecutions for
the same offense.” Hamling v. United States, 418 U.S. 87, 117 (1974);
LaMarche, 157 N.H. at 341. “It is generally sufficient that an indictment set
forth the offense in the words of the statute itself, as long as those words of
themselves fully, directly, and expressly, without any uncertainty or ambiguity,
set forth all the elements necessary to constitute the offence intended to be
punished.” Hamling, 418 U.S. at 117 (quotation omitted).
In this case, the reckless conduct indictments under which the
defendant was charged reference RSA 631:3, II and are identical, except for the
victims’ names. The indictments state, in relevant part, that the defendant:
did commit the crime of Reckless Conduct, in that [the defendant],
did recklessly engage in conduct which placed another in danger of
serious bodily [sic] while operating a motor vehicle on Cross Street
by driving his vehicle onto the sidewalk, striking [the victim]
thereby placing [the victim] in danger of serious bodily injury.
(Bolding omitted.)
RSA 631:3 provides that a person commits the crime of reckless conduct
“if he recklessly engages in conduct which places or may place another in
danger of serious bodily injury.” RSA 631:3, I. The crime “is a class B felony if
the person uses a deadly weapon as defined in RSA 625:11, V. All other
reckless conduct is a misdemeanor.” RSA 631:3, II. Section II elevates the
offense of reckless conduct from a misdemeanor to a felony by requiring the
State to charge and prove that the defendant used a “deadly weapon as defined
in RSA 625:11, V.” Id. A “[d]eadly weapon” is “any firearm, knife or other
substance or thing which, in the manner it is used, intended to be used, or
7
threatened to be used, is known to be capable of producing death or serious
bodily injury.” RSA 625:11, V (2007).
In this case, the language of the reckless conduct indictments tracks the
wording of section I of the statute. See RSA 631:3, I. Thus, the indictments
alleged misdemeanor reckless conduct with sufficient definiteness to withstand
a motion to dismiss. Hamling, 418 U.S. at 117; State v. Champagne, 119 N.H.
118, 119-22 (1979) (finding that the trial court did not err by not dismissing
arson indictment that failed to include the aggravating factors of felony-level
arson because it sufficiently alleged misdemeanor arson). Therefore, we
conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s motion to
dismiss the indictments.
We next turn to whether the indictments sufficiently allege felony-level
reckless conduct. We need not address this question, however, because even
assuming that the indictments do not allege all the elements of felony-level
reckless conduct, we conclude that any error was harmless. See United States
v. Mojica-Baez, 229 F.3d 292, 311 (1st Cir. 2000) (harmless error review
applies “to the failure to include an element in an indictment that otherwise
provided the defendants with fair notice of the charges against them”), cert.
denied, 532 U.S. 1065 (2001); United States v. Dentler, 492 F.3d 306, 310 (5th
Cir. 2007) (applying harmless error review to failure to include an element in
an indictment); State v. Fichera, 160 N.H. 660, 662-63 (2010) (applying
harmless error review to an Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000),
violation concerning an omission from an indictment). Under federal law, “we
consider only whether, on the basis of the evidence that would have been
available to the grand jury, any rational grand jury presented with a proper
indictment would have charged that the defendant committed the offense[s] in
question.” Dentler, 492 F.3d at 311 (quotation and brackets omitted); see
Fichera, 160 N.H. at 663. “In conducting that examination, we may consider
the [trial] jury’s unanimous findings – which are considered to be, at a
minimum, persuasive evidence of how a grand jury would find.” Dentler, 492
F.3d at 311 (quotation and brackets omitted).
Here, the grand jury returned indictments for reckless conduct that
reference the felony-level offense, RSA 631:3, II, and each is marked as a class
B felony. The indictments allege that the defendant used his car, and no other
object, to strike Baez and Bisono “thereby placing [them] in danger of serious
bodily injury.” (Bolding omitted.) At trial, the defendant did not dispute that
he struck Baez and Bisono with his car. Furthermore, Baez and Bisono
testified that they were standing with Pech when he was hit, and the defendant
admitted that he hit Pech, in the prosecutor’s words, “hard.” Based upon these
circumstances, we find that any rational grand jury presented with proper
indictments would have charged the defendant with felony-level reckless
conduct. Since the defendant does not argue that the indictments failed to
8
provide him with sufficient notice of the felony-level offenses, we will not
consider whether the defendant was prejudiced by any error in the language of
the indictments. See Fichera, 160 N.H. at 663.
Finally, to the extent the defendant argues that the jury’s verdict was
incomplete as to felony-level reckless conduct because “[t]he court did not
instruct the jury that the State must prove the ‘deadly weapon’ element, and
did not instruct on the RSA 625:11, V definition of that element,” we decline to
address this argument. We generally do not consider issues raised on appeal
that were not presented in the trial court. See Panarello, 157 N.H. at 207. A
review of the record does not reflect, and the defendant has not pointed to, any
evidence that this argument was raised before the trial court. It is the burden
of the appealing party to provide this court with a record sufficient to decide
the issues raised on appeal and to demonstrate that the appellant raised those
issues before the trial court. State v. Thiel, 160 N.H. 462, 464 (2010). As the
defendant has failed to meet his burden, we will not address this argument.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9