THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-599
AMER KHATER & a.
v.
SEAN SULLIVAN & a.
Submitted: March 24, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 3, 2010
Amer Khater and Habiba Mhaidar, by brief, pro se.
Ransmeier & Spellman, PC, of Concord (Daniel J. Mullen on the
memorandum of law), for the defendants.
HICKS, J. The plaintiffs, Amer Khater and Habiba Mhaidar, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (Barry, J.) dismissing their claim for monetary relief
for alleged violations of their equal protection rights under the New Hampshire
Constitution. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the trial court’s order. In the summer of
2008, the plaintiffs applied for two retail vehicle permits to display and sell
vehicles at two separate locations in Hudson. Defendant Town of Hudson
(town) denied these permits. The town avers that it did so because the
plaintiffs failed to obtain site plan approval. The plaintiffs, however, allege that
the true reason was unlawful race discrimination in violation of the Equal
Protection Clause of the New Hampshire Constitution, see N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 12, and filed suit against the town and two of its officials, Sean Sullivan
and Shawn Jasper. As evidence of this discrimination, the plaintiffs alleged
that other Hudson residents received permits to display and sell vehicles
without having to receive site plan approval.
The defendants moved to dismiss because the plaintiffs failed to exhaust
their administrative remedies by appealing the denial of their permit to the
zoning board of adjustment. The trial court ruled that the plaintiffs did not
have to exhaust their administrative remedies because “the board of
adjustment, although particularly suited to review the permit denials, is not
equipped to handle a charge of race discrimination” and cannot award the
monetary damages the plaintiffs seek. The trial court, however, dismissed the
plaintiffs’ action on different grounds. Citing Rockhouse Mt. Property Owners
Assoc. v. Town of Conway, 127 N.H. 593 (1986), the trial court ruled that
courts disfavor the creation of a common law tort remedy for a constitutional
violation, particularly where a statutory remedy exists.
In reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss, we consider
whether the allegations contained in the pleadings are reasonably susceptible
of a construction that would permit recovery. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H.
72, 73 (2008). We assume the plaintiffs’ pleadings to be true and construe all
reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to them. Id. We then engage
in a threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the applicable
law, and, if the allegations constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that
it was improper to grant the motion to dismiss. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiffs first argue that they exhausted their
administrative remedies. We need not address this argument because the trial
court ruled that the plaintiffs did not have a cause of action pursuant to the
doctrine outlined in Rockhouse, not because of any alleged failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.
The plaintiffs next appear to argue that they still have a viable cause of
action against the two individual defendants because the trial court addressed
their claims only as to the town, and not as to the two individual defendants.
We disagree. The trial court addressed the plaintiffs’ arguments as to both the
town and the individual defendants.
We now turn to the primary issue on appeal. In Rockhouse, we
examined whether a violation of state constitutional guarantees of equal
protection or due process can serve as the basis for a direct action for money
damages. Rockhouse, 127 N.H. at 597. There, a group of vacation home
owners sued the Town of Conway and the town selectmen for refusing to lay
out and maintain roads in a development. Id. at 595. They claimed that they
were being discriminated against because of their “seasonal residence” in
2
violation of their rights to equal protection and due process under the State
Constitution. Id. at 596.
In Rockhouse, we recognized that while the “denial of equal protection
demands some vindication in the law,” id. at 598; see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art.
12, it need not take the form of “a damages remedy modeled on tort law.”
Rockhouse, 127 N.H. at 598. While we have the authority to create such a
remedy at common law, we will avoid such an exceptional exercise where an
established statutory, common law, or administrative remedy is adequate. Id.
at 598-99; see Marquay v. Eno, 139 N.H. 708, 722 (1995); see also Bush v.
Lucas, 462 U.S. 367 (1983). Where no established remedy exists or that
remedy is meaningless, however, we “will not hesitate to exercise our authority
to create an appropriate remedy.” Marquay, 139 N.H. at 722.
In Rockhouse, we found that an adequate statutory remedy was
available. The landowners had a statutory right to seek de novo review of the
town selectmen’s decision to not construct and maintain roads to their homes.
Rockhouse, 127 N.H. at 598. This statutory right existed whether or not the
selectmen’s refusal was due to “mere error or an [unconstitutional] intent to
discriminate.” Id. We held this remedy was adequate even though it would
“not provide any additional recompense when the denial has resulted from
unconstitutional conduct rather than mere error.” Id. at 599. Our concern
was that the creation of a supplemental constitutional cause of action “would
inevitably lead to the conversion of every road dispute into a constitutional tort
action.” Id. We noted that “[i]n the charged atmosphere of local politics, few
are suspected of benignly motivated error.” Id.
Similarly, existing statutory law provides the plaintiffs with an adequate
remedy for the harms alleged here. The plaintiffs could have challenged the
denial of the requested permits by appealing to the zoning board of adjustment.
If they received an unfavorable result, they could then have appealed the
permit denial to the superior court. This statutory remedy may not be as
“complete” as an additional constitutional tort would provide, but we,
nevertheless, hold it to be adequate. Further, this case poses the same policy
concerns as in Rockhouse. We believe that the “likely multiplication of
litigation resulting from a local squabble would be too high a price to pay for
such a supplemental cause of action.” Id. Therefore, we decline to recognize a
new constitutional tort.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in granting the
defendants’ motion to dismiss.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
3