THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2009-824
JOHN DOE
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF SAFETY
Argued: April 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2010
Marcia A. B. Thunberg, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (David M. Hilts, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, New Hampshire Department of Safety
(DOS), appeals an order of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) granting petitioner
John Doe’s motion for summary judgment upon his petition for a declaratory
judgment and denying DOS’s cross motion for summary judgment. The trial
court held that Doe is not required to register for life as a sex offender. We
reverse.
The record supports the following relevant facts. Doe, a New Hampshire
resident, pleaded guilty to gross sexual assault in Maine in August 1991. See
Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, § 253(2)(D). In July 1993, he received notice that,
because of his Maine conviction, he was required to register as a sex offender
in New Hampshire for ten years. See RSA 632-A:11-:19 (Supp. 1993) (repealed
1996). He registered each subsequent year as required.
In 1996, the legislature amended the applicable statutory scheme. See
Laws 1996, ch. 293. Under the new scheme, the period of time that a New
Hampshire resident convicted in another jurisdiction of a sexual offense is
required to register depends upon DOS’s determination as to which New
Hampshire statute is “reasonably equivalent” to the other jurisdiction’s statute.
See RSA ch. 651-B (Supp. 2009). For example, if DOS determined that the
out-of-state statute under which the offender was convicted was reasonably
equivalent to aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2 (Supp.
2009), the offender would be required to register for life. See RSA 651-B:1, X(a)
(Supp. 2009); RSA 651-B:6, I. If, however, it determined that the out-of-state
statute was reasonably equivalent to misdemeanor sexual assault, see RSA
632-A:4 (Supp. 2009), the offender would be required to register for ten years.
See RSA 651-B:1, VIII(a) (Supp. 2009); RSA 651-B:6, II.
In 2003, Doe received notice from his local police department stating,
“after reviewing your out of state conviction it has been determined that you
must register annually for life,” and that aggravated felonious sexual assault
was his reasonably equivalent New Hampshire offense. He continued to receive
registration forms indicating, however, that he was required to register for ten
years, so he sought clarification. In July 2007, Doe received confirmation from
DOS that he was required to register for life. DOS indicated that it had
reviewed the underlying facts of his conviction in making its determination.
Doe sought review by DOS, which held a hearing and confirmed that he
was required to register for life. Specifically, the report of the hearings
examiner stated that “[t]his determination was made based on the elements of
the[ ] offenses, and the fact [that Doe] admitted to penetrating his victim when
interviewed by the police” when he pleaded guilty in Maine in 1991. Doe then
filed a petition for declaratory judgment in the trial court, which reversed
DOS’s ruling and concluded that he was required to register for only ten years.
The trial court ruled that DOS erred when it “used a transcript of a police
interview . . . in which [Doe] admitted that he had digitally penetrated the
victim” in determining that aggravated felonious sexual assault was the
reasonably equivalent offense. This appeal followed.
In reviewing a trial court’s summary judgment ruling, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence and all inferences properly drawn therefrom in the
light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Werne v. Executive Women’s Golf
Assoc., 158 N.H. 373, 375 (2009). If our review of the evidence fails to reveal
any genuine issue of material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, we will affirm the trial court’s decision. Id. We review the
trial court’s application of law to the facts de novo. Id.
2
DOS first argues that the trial court’s finding that it relied upon the
police interview transcript in making its equivalency determination is
unsupported by the record. We disagree. While Doe’s first notice in 2003 from
his local police department did not specify how the determination was made,
the later notice from DOS specified that DOS “reviewed the police reports . . .
including a transcript of [Doe’s] audiotaped interview” in which he “admitted to
digitally penetrating the victim’s vagina.” DOS concedes in its brief that it
“relied on the interview transcript” in making its determination. The report of
the hearings examiner stated that DOS’s determination “was made based on
the elements of the[ ] offenses, and the fact [that Doe] admitted to penetrating
his victim when interviewed by the police.” While the parties may dispute the
details regarding the point at which DOS made the relevant determination and
the information it had available at the time, we cannot say that the trial court
erred in concluding that there were no genuine issues of material fact with
respect to whether DOS relied upon Doe’s admission in the interview.
Alternatively, DOS argues that even if it did rely upon the interview, any
such reliance is permissible because other provisions within RSA chapter 651-
B may require the department to look beyond the elements of an offense to
determine which statutes are equivalent. We disagree. New Hampshire
Administrative Rules, Saf-C 5502.01(c) provides that DOS “shall determine
whether a law of another jurisdiction is reasonably equivalent” to a particular
New Hampshire law “by making a comparison of the elements of the New
Hampshire statute to the elements of the other jurisdiction’s statute.” It
further specifies that, in order to be deemed reasonably equivalent, “[t]he text
of the elements of the law of the other jurisdiction shall be analogous but not
necessarily exactly the same as the elements of the [New Hampshire]
statute[ ].” N.H. Admin. Rules, Saf-C 5502.01(c).
We review the interpretation of administrative rules de novo. Appeal of
Murdock, 156 N.H. 732, 735 (2008). “In construing rules, as in construing
statutes, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used.” Id. (quotation omitted). We look at the rule as a whole, and not
in segments. Id. “While deference is accorded to an agency’s interpretation of
its regulations, that deference is not total. We still must examine the agency’s
interpretation to determine if it is consistent with the language of the
regulation and with the purpose which the regulation is intended to serve.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Under Saf-C 5502.01(c), DOS is limited to “making a comparison of the
elements of the New Hampshire statute to the elements of the other
jurisdiction’s statute.” “[W]e will not permit an agency to add or delete
requirements . . . through the mere expedient of interpreting a rule that is clear
and unambiguous on its face.” Milette v. N.H. Retirement System, 141 N.H.
342, 346-47 (1996) (quotation and citation omitted). Here, the rule
3
unambiguously provides that DOS must compare the elements of the two
statutes. DOS cannot add requirements to its equivalency determination by
considering evidence such as the recorded police interview.
Finally, DOS argues that, even without consideration of the interview,
the Maine statute under which Doe was convicted is still reasonably equivalent
to aggravated felonious sexual assault. When Doe was convicted, the Maine
statute provided that “[a] person is guilty of gross sexual assault if that person
engages in a sexual act with another person and . . . [t]he other person is
unconscious or otherwise physically incapable of resisting and has not
consented to the sexual act.” Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, § 253(2)(D). Thus,
the elements under the Maine statute required (1) a sexual act with another
person, (2) while the person is physically incapable of resisting, and (3) lack of
consent. Under New Hampshire law, a person is guilty of aggravated felonious
sexual assault if he “engages in sexual penetration with another person” under
a variety of circumstances, including when “the victim is physically helpless to
resist.” RSA 632-A:2, I(b).
Comparing the two statutes, aggravated felonious sexual assault requires
the element of sexual penetration, in contrast to gross sexual assault, which
does not. DOS contends, however, that the elements are still “analogous” and
therefore “reasonably equivalent” because New Hampshire’s definition of
“sexual penetration” is substantially similar to Maine’s definition of “sexual
act.” We agree.
“Sexual penetration” means, among other things, cunnilingus, fellatio or
“[a]ny intrusion, however slight, of any part of the actor’s body, including
emissions, of any object manipulated by the actor into genital or anal openings
of the victim’s body.” RSA 632-A:1, V (Supp. 2009).
“Sexual act” means
(1) Any act between 2 persons involving direct physical contact
between the genitals of one and the mouth or anus of the other, or
direct physical contact between the genitals of one and the genitals
of the other; [or]
. . .
(3) Any act involving direct physical contact between the
genitals or anus of one and an instrument or device manipulated
by another person when that act is done for the purpose of
arousing or gratifying sexual desire or for the purpose of causing
bodily injury or offensive contact.
4
Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A, § 251(C). The definition further provides that “[a]
sexual act may be proved without allegation or proof of penetration,” but
nowhere does the statute define the term “penetration.” Id. The comment
states that “[t]he definition of ‘sexual act’ . . . [ha]s broader coverage than the
[prior] law requiring some penetration, and serves to permit a conviction upon
contact in the case of sodomy, fellatio, and cunnilingus.” Me. Rev. Stat. Ann.
tit. 17-A, § 251(C) cmt.
As noted above, New Hampshire’s statutory definition of sexual
penetration includes fellatio and cunnilingus, supporting the inference that the
definitions are analogous. In addition, it is well-settled that the element of
sexual penetration can be met in New Hampshire without proof of actual
penetration. See, e.g., State v. Mason, 150 N.H. 53, 57 (2003) (“The act of
cunnilingus does not require actual penetration.”); State v. Melcher, 140 N.H.
823, 824, 826 (1996) (“Whatever its commonly accepted meaning, . . . fellatio is
‘sexual penetration’ for purposes of the statute, whether or not it involves
actual penetration . . . .”). Thus, although the elements are not exactly the
same, they are analogous, and, accordingly, the trial court erred in concluding
that the statutes were not reasonably equivalent.
Doe argues that our analysis in State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706, 708-10
(2003), requires a different result in this case. In Hull, the defendant was
convicted of driving under the influence of liquor (DUI), third offense. Hull, 149
N.H. at 707. One of his three offenses was a Massachusetts conviction for
operating under the influence of intoxicating liquor (OUI). Id. He appealed the
trial court’s denial of his motion to exclude evidence of his Massachusetts
conviction, arguing that it was not reasonably equivalent to the New Hampshire
DUI offense. Id. at 708. In holding that OUI and DUI were, in fact, reasonably
equivalent offenses, we noted that, for sentencing purposes, “[n]either the
legislature nor this court has defined what constitutes a reasonably equivalent
offense.” Id. at 709 (quotation omitted). We found persuasive, however, that
DOS had defined the term under its administrative rules in the context of sex
offender registration. Id. at 709-10. We further concluded that Saf-C
5502.01(c) was consistent with tests applied in other jurisdictions to determine
whether offenses are reasonably equivalent for the purposes of sentencing. Id.
at 709. In elaborating upon the tests applied in other jurisdictions, we stated:
[O]ne common factor is whether the evidence required to sustain a
conviction for the out-of-state jurisdiction’s offense would
necessarily sustain a conviction under the home state’s statute. If
the answer to this question is “yes,” the offense is an “equivalent
offense” for sentencing enhancement purposes. If the answer to
this question is “no,” the offenses are not “equivalent.”
Id. at 710 (citations omitted).
5
As the State aptly points out, however, Hull involved a question of
statutory interpretation of RSA 265:82-b, II (2004) (repealed 2006), which
imposed an enhanced sentence for subsequent DUI convictions, including
those that were “reasonably equivalent offenses in an out-of-state jurisdiction.”
Id. at 707, 708-09 (quotation and emphasis omitted). The issue before us in
Hull required us neither to construe nor apply Saf-C 5502.01(c). Our holding
in that case pertained to equivalency under RSA 265:82-b, II, a sentencing
provision. Unlike sentencing, sex offender registration has the administrative
purpose of providing a means for law enforcement agencies in this State to
share information regarding the whereabouts and levels of dangerousness of
convicted sex offenders. Horner v. Governor, 157 N.H. 400, 403 (2008). While
considering whether the evidence required to sustain the out-of-state
jurisdiction’s conviction would necessarily sustain a conviction under RSA 632-
A:2, I(b) may be relevant in the context of sentencing for subsequent offenses, it
is not relevant to the purpose of sex offender registration. Accordingly, we
decline to extend our reasoning in Hull to the context of sex offender
registration.
Reversed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6