THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2009-126
PIKE INDUSTRIES, INC. & a.
v.
BRIAN WOODWARD & a.
Argued: January 13, 2010
Opinion Issued: May 7, 2010
Shaheen & Gordon, P.A., of Concord (Karyn P. Forbes and Arpiar G.
Saunders, Jr. on the brief, and Ms. Forbes orally), for appellees, Pike
Industries, Inc. and Redimix Companies, Inc.
Casassa and Ryan, of Hampton (John J. Ryan on the brief and orally), for
the appellants.
Wyskiel, Boc, Tillinghast & Bolduc, P.A., of Dover (Christopher A. Wyskiel
on the brief and orally), for the Town of Madbury.
DUGGAN, J. The appellants, Brian Woodward and other abutters of Pike
Industries, Inc.’s (Pike) asphalt plant, appeal a ruling of the Superior Court
(Tucker, J.) reversing the decision of the Town of Madbury Zoning Board of
Adjustment (ZBA) that Pike had discontinued its nonconforming use of its
plant. We affirm in part and reverse in part.
The following facts are drawn from the administrative record. Beginning
prior to 1960, Pike has continuously operated an asphalt production plant in
Madbury. In the mid-1960s, the town promulgated an ordinance that zoned
the area surrounding the plant for residential and agricultural use, making the
plant a pre-existing nonconforming use. After that, Pike continued to operate
the plant on a seasonal basis from mid-spring through November or December.
During the winter months, Pike performed equipment maintenance, paid
electric bills generated by the plant, and submitted bids for future work for the
plant.
After producing a “batch” of asphalt on October 17, 2005, Pike
suspended its seasonal operations, as was customary. Between October 2005
and November 2006, Pike made electrical and operational repairs to the plant,
engaged in emissions training for plant staff, bought safety equipment for the
plant, worked on mix plans exclusively for the plant, and submitted mandatory
site plan reports to the State. Overall, Pike spent $24,596.32 in maintenance
and repair costs during this thirteen-month period. In addition, Pike
continued to advertise asphalt production at the Madbury plant on its website,
included the Madbury plant in its price list, and submitted bids to
municipalities for projects involving asphalt to be produced at the Madbury
plant. Although Pike was prepared to begin asphalt production at any time, it
did not produce any asphalt at the Madbury plant between October 2005 and
August 2007. Pike had other facilities that were more suitable for the bids it
received during that time period.
In April 2007, Redimix Companies, Inc. (Redimix), Pike’s sister entity,
filed a site plan application with the Madbury Planning Board proposing to
replace the asphalt plant with a concrete batch facility. In May 2007, the
planning board held a hearing on the site plan application, at which it was
revealed that the asphalt plant had not produced any asphalt for two years. In
June 2007, the abutters submitted a letter to the planning board arguing that
the nonconforming use had been discontinued under the relevant town
ordinance. The Madbury Zoning Ordinance (ordinance) provides, in pertinent
part, that “[w]henever a non-conforming use has been discontinued for more
than one year for any reason, such non-conforming use shall not thereafter be
re-established, and the future use of the property shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this Ordinance.” Madbury Zoning Ordinance art. XIII,
§ 1(b). The planning board voted unanimously that there was “no
discontinuance of use concerning the Redi-Mix application.” The abutters
appealed to the ZBA.
The ZBA determined that Pike had produced no asphalt during 2006, but
had incurred considerable costs due to repair, training, personnel, and other
2
maintenance functions. After considering the “townspeople’s point of view,” the
“spirit of the ordinance,” and other potential uses for the site, the ZBA
determined that the production of asphalt constituted the nonconforming use.
Therefore, because Pike had not produced asphalt for more than one year, the
ZBA ruled that Pike was ineligible to recommence asphalt production under the
town’s ordinance. In its discussions, the ZBA was uncertain whether it had to
determine whether Pike intended to abandon its nonconforming use.
Ultimately, relying upon McKenzie v. Town of Eaton Zoning Board of
Adjustment, 154 N.H. 773 (2007), the ZBA concluded that Pike’s intent was
irrelevant and it had to decide only whether Pike had discontinued its
nonconforming use for one year.
Pike appealed to the superior court, which reversed and remanded the
ZBA’s decision. The court concluded that the ZBA relied upon improper
considerations in interpreting the ordinance. It also found that the ZBA erred
in defining “use” narrowly as the mere production of asphalt, thereby finding
the nonconforming use discontinued. Finally, the trial court ruled that,
pursuant to Lawlor v. Town of Salem, 116 N.H. 61 (1976), the ZBA should have
considered whether Pike intended to abandon its pre-existing nonconforming
use. This appeal followed.
The abutters argue that the superior court erred in finding that: (1) the
ZBA should not have considered the “spirit of the ordinance” in interpreting the
town’s ordinance; (2) the ZBA applied the incorrect definition of the term “use”
in determining whether Pike had discontinued its pre-existing nonconforming
use; and (3) the ZBA should have considered whether Pike intended to abandon
the nonconforming use. We address each argument in turn.
Our review of zoning cases is limited. Harrington v. Town of Warner, 152
N.H. 74, 77 (2005). “The factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie
lawful and reasonable, and will not be set aside by the trial court absent errors
of law, unless the court is persuaded, based upon a balance of probabilities, on
the evidence before it, that the ZBA’s decision is unreasonable.” Id. “The party
seeking to set aside the ZBA’s decision bears the burden of proof on appeal to
the trial court.” Id. “We will uphold the superior court’s decision on appeal
unless it is not supported by the evidence or is legally erroneous.” Id.
The interpretation of a zoning ordinance is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Fox v. Town of Greenland, 151 N.H. 600, 605 (2004). Because
the traditional rules of statutory construction govern our review, we construe
the words and phrases of an ordinance according to the common and approved
usage of the language. Id. When the language of an ordinance is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond the ordinance itself for further
indications of legislative intent. Id.
3
We first address the abutters’ argument that the superior court erred in
finding that the ZBA should not have considered “the spirit of the ordinance” in
determining whether the asphalt plant use had been discontinued. The
abutters argue that the ZBA properly considered the “spirit of the ordinance”
because we have held that statutory provisions are to be construed “in a
manner that is consistent with the spirit and objectives of the legislation as a
whole.” City of Manchester Sch. Dist. v. City of Manchester, 150 N.H. 664, 669
(2004). We have also held, however, that we will “not look beyond the language
of a statute to determine legislative intent if the language is clear and
unambiguous.” Petition of Goffstown Educ. Support Staff, 150 N.H. 795, 799
(2004).
We agree with the superior court that the ZBA erred in beginning its
analysis of the ordinance by considering factors other than the plain language
of the ordinance itself. In reaching their decision, members of the ZBA noted
that the “spirit of the zoning is to restrict rather than increase nonconforming
uses and to eliminate them” and “the spirit of the ordinance” is “a great factor
to consider.” The language of the ordinance, however, is plain and
unambiguous that if “a non-conforming use has been discontinued for more
than one year for any reason, such non-conforming use shall not thereafter be
re-established.” Madbury Zoning Ordinance art. XIII, § 1(b). Therefore, the
only issue before the ZBA was whether Pike had discontinued its use.
Next, we consider the abutters’ argument that the trial court erred in
determining the ZBA applied the incorrect definition of the term “use” in
analyzing whether Pike had discontinued its pre-existing nonconforming use.
The ZBA found that “use” meant that Pike had to actually produce asphalt at
the Madbury plant. Pike, however, argues that it used the asphalt plant by
maintaining, repairing, and upgrading the asphalt plant, advertising and
soliciting bids, submitting emissions testing results to the State, purchasing
and providing safety training and equipment for the plant, and performing mix
designs at the site. The trial court agreed, finding that “the ZBA erred . . . in
selecting one aspect of a commercial endeavor and then determining that, since
it did not occur, the nonconforming use was discontinued.”
As set forth above, we construe the words and phrases of an ordinance
according to the common and approved usage of the language. Fox, 151 N.H.
at 605. The ordinance defines a “[n]onconforming building, structure or use”
as “[a] building, structure, or use of land legally existing at the time of
enactment of this ordinance and which does not conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is situated.” Madbury Zoning Ordinance art. III. We
agree with the trial court that the ZBA should have considered “other aspects
of Pike’s business operations,” not just whether it produced asphalt during the
period of time in question.
4
As part of its business, Pike produces asphalt when customers order it.
Pike, therefore, must engage in other activities, such as maintaining and
repairing equipment within the plant and advertising and soliciting bids, to be
prepared to produce asphalt when orders arrive. We agree with the trial court’s
analogy of the asphalt plant to a store. A store owner must set up a store
front, stock the store with merchandise, maintain a staff, pay utilities, and
advertise its services. Even with all of these preparations, however, the store
owner cannot guarantee that customers will purchase merchandise. Like the
store owner, Pike maintained the asphalt plant in a state of readiness to
produce asphalt, but had no customers with orders suitable for that plant.
Therefore, although Pike did not produce asphalt in 2006, it continued to use
the asphalt plant.
Finally, we consider the abutters’ argument that the trial court erred in
finding that the ZBA should have considered whether Pike intended to abandon
its nonconforming use. In Lawlor, we held that the right to a nonconforming
use could be lost by abandoning it. Lawlor, 116 N.H. at 62. In McKenzie, we
distinguished Lawlor, and noted that other jurisdictions “have concluded that a
consideration of intent to abandon is not necessary when an ordinance defines
abandonment without a consideration of intent.” McKenzie, 154 N.H. at 777.
We further held that an ordinance that by its own terms does not require
subjective intent to abandon a nonconforming use is constitutional. Id. at 778-
79.
Under the terms of the ordinance, the ZBA correctly decided it did not
need to consider Pike’s intent to abandon the nonconforming use. The
ordinance at issue in McKenzie provided that “a nonconforming use that is
sufficiently destroyed and is not rebuilt within a year ‘shall constitute
discontinuance and abandonment.’” Id. at 776. Thus, the ordinance defined
what constituted abandonment. Similarly, the ordinance here provides that
when “a non-conforming use has been discontinued for more than one year for
any reason, such non-conforming use shall not thereafter be re-established.”
Madbury Zoning Ordinance art. XIII, § 1(b). The ordinance, by its own terms,
defines what constitutes the discontinuance of the nonconforming use. The
phrase “for any reason” negates the requirement that the ZBA must consider
Pike’s subjective intent in deciding whether Pike discontinued its
nonconforming use. The facts of this case fall within the analysis set forth in
McKenzie, and the ZBA did not need to consider Pike’s subjective intent.
Therefore, we reverse the superior court’s order requiring the ZBA to determine
on remand whether Pike intended to abandon the pre-existing nonconforming
use. In all other respects, we affirm.
Reversed in part; affirmed in part.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5