THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2009-023
THE HILL-GRANT LIVING TRUST
v.
KEARSARGE LIGHTING PRECINCT
Argued: September 24, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 16, 2009
Cooper Cargill Chant, P.A., of North Conway (Randall F. Cooper on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Boynton, Waldron, Doleac, Woodman & Scott, P.A., of Portsmouth
(William G. Scott and Leslie M. Leonard on the brief, and Mr. Scott orally), for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Hill-Grant Living Trust, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Houran, J.) granting summary judgment to the defendant,
Kearsarge Lighting Precinct, and denying its cross-motion for summary
judgment, on the ground that the plaintiff’s regulatory taking claim is
premature. We affirm.
The trial court’s order recited the following facts. Kearsarge Lighting
Precinct is a village district that has the authority to promulgate zoning
regulations. It enacted a zoning ordinance that prohibits the building of any
structure more than 900 feet above sea level. The plaintiff owns a thirty-acre
parcel in Bartlett. The property lies within the district and almost all of it lies
more than 900 feet above sea level.
The plaintiff sought a building permit to build a house at an elevation
above the 900-foot limit. Following denial of the application by the precinct’s
commissioners, the plaintiff appealed to the precinct’s zoning board of
adjustment (ZBA) requesting a variance. The ZBA denied the request and the
plaintiff did not appeal that decision.
Instead, the plaintiff commenced the instant action alleging inverse
condemnation by regulatory taking. The plaintiff sought just compensation
under the State Constitution and damages under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (2006) on
the ground that a failure to pay compensation would violate the Federal
Constitution’s Fifth Amendment.
In granting the precinct’s motion for summary judgment, the trial court
employed the federal finality doctrine espoused in Williamson Planning
Comm’n v. Hamilton Bank, 473 U.S. 172 (1985), agreeing with the parties that
this court, “when presented with the opportunity to do so, . . . [would] apply
the Williamson finality doctrine to state regulatory takings claims.” Applying
the Williamson standard, the court concluded that “this litigation is
premature.”
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in ruling that the
denial of its variance application “was not a final, definitive position” of the
ZBA. It also contends that the trial court erred in failing to grant its cross-
motion for summary judgment because “the adoption and application of the
[900-foot restriction] to the plaintiff’s property was a categorical taking,
depriving the Plaintiff of all economically beneficial use of those property rights
by prohibiting any development on the subject property.”
Before addressing the plaintiff’s arguments, we first consider the
precinct’s contention that the plaintiff’s taking claim is now moot because the
precinct rescinded the zoning ordinance article at issue on March 26, 2009,
and, therefore, the 900–foot restriction is no longer applicable to the plaintiff’s
property. The precinct asserts that the plaintiff “needs to submit a new
application for consideration,” failing which, its “claim for damages is rendered
moot.” In addition to briefing the mootness argument, the precinct filed a
motion to dismiss, which we deferred ruling upon until after oral argument.
The plaintiff disputes that its claim is moot, arguing that rescission of
the ordinance merely limits its claim to one for a temporary taking. It also
2
asserts that “[a]t a minimum, [it] should be entitled to [its] fees and costs in
bringing this appeal.”
We agree with the plaintiff that rescission of a challenged ordinance will
not moot an otherwise valid regulatory taking claim. As the United States
Supreme Court stated in First Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles County, 482
U.S. 304, 319 (1987), “[i]nvalidation of the ordinance . . . though converting the
taking into a ‘temporary’ one, is not a sufficient remedy to meet the demands of
the Just Compensation Clause.” Thus, “where the government’s activities have
already worked a taking of all use of property, no subsequent action by the
government can relieve it of the duty to provide compensation for the period
during which the taking was effective.” First Lutheran Church, 482 U.S. at
321; see Smith v. Town of Wolfeboro, 136 N.H. 337, 345 (1992) (citing First
Lutheran Church for support in a state constitutional takings analysis).
Accordingly, we deny the precinct’s motion to dismiss.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, “we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” McGrath v. SNH Dev.,
158 N.H. 540, 542 (2009). “We will affirm if the evidence reveals no genuine
issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de
novo.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted). Where the plaintiff has raised both
state and federal constitutional claims, we address the plaintiff’s state
constitutional claim first, see State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite
federal opinions for guidance only, see id. at 232-33.
We recognize that “arbitrary or unreasonable restrictions which
substantially deprive the owner of the economically viable use of his land in
order to benefit the public in some way constitute a taking within the meaning
of our New Hampshire Constitution requiring the payment of just
compensation.” Burrows v. City of Keene, 121 N.H. 590, 598 (1981) (quotation
omitted). While “[t]he owner need not be deprived of all valuable use of his
property,” a taking occurs “[i]f the denial of use is substantial and is especially
onerous.” Id. “There can be no set test to determine when regulation goes too
far and becomes a taking. Each case must be determined under its own
circumstances.” Id.
As the United States Supreme Court reasoned in MacDonald, Sommer &
Frates v. Yolo County, 477 U.S. 340, 348 (1986):
It follows from the nature of a regulatory takings claim that an
essential prerequisite to its assertion is a final and authoritative
determination of the type and intensity of development legally
permitted on the subject property. A court cannot determine
3
whether a regulation has gone “too far” unless it knows how far the
regulation goes.
Accordingly, the Court held in Williamson, 473 U.S. at 186, that “a claim that
the application of government regulations effects a taking of a property interest
is not ripe until the government entity charged with implementing the
regulations has reached a final decision regarding the application of the
regulations to the property at issue.”
The trial court predicted that when presented with an appropriate case,
we would adopt the reasoning of Williamson for purposes of a regulatory taking
claim under our State Constitution. In Blue Jay Realty Trust v. City of
Franklin, 132 N.H. 502, 505-06 (1989), we relied upon Williamson in affirming
the dismissal of federal takings and due process claims. We left open, however,
the question whether a Williamson requirement should be imposed upon a
plaintiff raising a State taking claim, stating that “we will need a more
developed record than this case now presents, as well as a reason to believe
that the issue need be reached, before considering it.” Blue Jay Realty Trust,
132 N.H. at 506. The case now before us squarely presents the issue on an
adequate record, and we now hold that a State taking claim must meet the
ripeness requirement of presenting “a final decision [of the applicable
governmental entity] regarding the application of the regulations to the
property at issue.” Williamson, 473 U.S. at 186.
The plaintiff argues that its claim is ripe, citing Palazzolo v. Rhode Island,
533 U.S. 606 (2001), for the following proposition:
While a landowner must give a land-use authority an opportunity
to exercise its discretion, once it becomes clear that the agency
lacks the discretion to permit any development, or the permissible
uses of the property are known to a reasonable degree of certainty,
a takings claim is likely to have ripened.
Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 620. The plaintiff asserts two reasons why it would have
been futile to submit another application for the ZBA’s discretionary review.
First, it asserts that it submitted a plan that “clearly showed that the proposed
building site was the lowest point on the property that would support both
vehicular access and state septic.” Second, it argues that the ZBA could not
legally accept and consider a new variance application because “[t]here has
been no change of circumstances affecting the merits of the application.” See
Fisher v. City of Dover, 120 N.H. 187, 190 (1980). We address each contention
in turn.
The plaintiff’s first contention is based upon a plan it submitted that
contained the following notation:
4
THIS LOT IS REACHED BY A DEEDED RIGHT OF WAY. THIS
ROW DOES NOT GIVE ACCESS TO THE LOWER (SOUTHEAST)
PORTION OF THE LOT WHICH IS ALSO INACCESSIBLE DUE TO
THE RAVINE SHOWN BY THE STEEP CONTOUR LINES[.]
THE PLAN SHOWS THE FIRST AVAILABLE HOUSE SITE ON THE
30 ACRE PARCEL THAT IS ACCESSIBLE BY THE DEEDED RIGHT
OF WAY AND WILL MEET THE STANDARDS OF THE NEW
HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES.
While we consider, on appeal from a grant of summary judgment, “all
inferences properly drawn from [the evidence] . . . in the light most favorable to
the non-moving party,” McGrath, 158 N.H. at 542, the plaintiff attempts to
read more into this plan than can be reasonably inferred from it. We cannot
conclude from the description of the proposed site as the “FIRST” accessible
site meeting septic requirements that it is the only such site; in fact, the use of
the term “FIRST” implies that there are or may be others. Nor does the plan
show that the proposed building site is “the lowest point on the property”
(emphasis added) that would be both accessible and support a septic system.
The plan’s notation states only that a portion of the lot which is cut off by a
ravine is also inaccessible from the right-of-way. The plan shows an area
between the right-of-way and the ravine that is lower in elevation than the
proposed homesite, and gives no indication that the area is not accessible from
the right-of-way. Thus, we cannot draw a reasonable inference from the plan
that there is no lower site on the property that would be accessible from the
right-of-way and support a septic system; any such conclusion would be mere
speculation.
We also note that the record contains the affidavit of one of the trustees
of the plaintiff who avers that he is “familiar with the land, and the house site
selected by the engineers was the . . . lowest site in elevation accessible from
the right-of-way giving access to the property.” We find this affidavit
insufficient to create a triable issue of fact on the question of the futility of
submitting a new variance application because it does not meet the
requirement of “set[ting] forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine
issue for trial.” RSA 491:8-a, IV (1997).
To defeat a motion for summary judgment, “[t]he opposing party’s
affidavit must contain more than general allegations or denials. It must set
forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial.” Gamble v. University of
New Hampshire, 136 N.H. 9, 16-17 (1992). The affiant’s assertion of
inaccessibility is merely a conclusory allegation; under the circumstances of
this case, it is tantamount to assertion of the opinion, unsupported by any
factual basis, such as, for instance, steepness of grade or physical obstruction,
that it is physically impossible to construct a road or driveway to a lower site
5
on the property between the right-of-way and the ravine. As such, the affidavit
is insufficient to defeat summary judgment. Cf. N.E. Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of
Franklin, 141 N.H. 449, 454 (1996) (affidavit, even of expert, that failed to set
forth specific facts was insufficient to support conclusory assertions and
conclusory assertions did not satisfy burden in opposing a summary judgment
motion).
The plaintiff next argues that Fisher precludes the ZBA from considering
a new variance application. In Fisher, we stated that “[w]hen a material change
of circumstances affecting the merits of the application has not occurred or the
application is not for a use that materially differs in nature and degree from its
predecessor, the board of adjustment may not lawfully reach the merits of the
petition.” Fisher, 120 N.H. at 190. We further stated that “[t]he determination
of whether changed circumstances exist is a question of fact which necessitates
a consideration of the circumstances which existed at the time of the prior
denial. Resolution of this issue must be made, in the first instance, by the
board of adjustment.” Id. at 190-91 (quotation and citation omitted).
The precinct argues that it has presented evidence showing that the ZBA
“was willing to consider other, less ambitious plans for the [plaintiff’s] property”
and that a new proposal “with a materially different building structure and
location” would likely meet the Fisher standard for consideration of a
subsequent application. Specifically, the minutes of the January 15, 2008 ZBA
meeting record the following:
[ZBA member Rob] Clark stated the plan submitted with the
applicant’s application shows they want to construct at the 1200-
foot [sic] mark. [Kearsarge Lighting Precinct Commissioner Peter]
Needham stated the Board should consider allowing the applicant
to construct at a lower elevation.
. . . Thomas McDonough, Kearsarge Lighting Precinct
Commissioner, asked if the Board could grant an elevation
limitation of where they can build on that lot. [Precinct Counsel
Peter] Hastings answered in the negative and stated that the
applicant is challenging the 900-foot elevation period. Mr.
McDonough stated he wouldn’t want to see the variance granted,
but if the applicant came back with a specific location, he could
see granting a variance on that specific location.
. . . .
. . . [ZBA member John] McDougall stated currently the
applicant is asking to build anywhere on the lot, but if the
6
applicant resubmits with a certain elevation, the Board may grant
a Variance.
This case is therefore factually more analogous to Morgenstern v. Town
of Rye, 147 N.H. 558 (2002), in which we noted that the minutes of prior ZBA
hearings “d[id] not suggest that the ZBA would never grant a variance to
construct a house on the plaintiff’s lot. Indeed, in its pleadings submitted to
the superior court, the town essentially invited the plaintiff to file a new
variance application . . . .” Morgenstern, 147 N.H. at 566. We distinguished
the situation presented in Morgenstern from that in Fisher on the ground that
“the plaintiff did not merely resubmit substantially the same application for a
variance, but, at the town’s invitation, submitted a new proposal in an effort to
meet the town’s concerns,” id., and concluded that the trial court erred in
ruling that there was no material change between the previous and subsequent
applications, id. at 564.
On the basis of Morgenstern, we conclude that Fisher does not preclude
consideration of a subsequent variance application explicitly or implicitly
invited by the ZBA and modified to address its concerns. See id. at 564, 566.
The determination of whether a subsequent application is “for a use that
materially differs in nature and degree from its predecessor,” Fisher, 120 N.H.
at 190, like the determination of whether changed circumstances exist, “must
be made, in the first instance, by the board of adjustment.” Fisher, 120 N.H. at
191. Thus, it is logical to presume that if the ZBA invites submission of a
subsequent application modified to meet its concerns, it would find an
application so modified to be materially different from its predecessor, thus
satisfying Fisher.
The plaintiff argues that this case differs from Morgenstern because here
“there was no real discussion” regarding the ZBA’s concerns. The plaintiff
contends that “[i]t would be one thing if there had been specific complaints
about the proposal vis-a-vis its specific location and its impact on abutters, or
the view, or the drainage or whatever,” but asserts that “in this case, there was
nothing at issue other than the fact that the application was contrary to a
prohibition to construct above 900 feet.”
We disagree. As the ZBA minutes quoted above indicate, the ZBA’s
concern was not that the proposed building site was above 900 feet in
elevation, but that it was at or nearly at the highest elevation on the property.
The minutes indicate that the ZBA would consider a different site at a lower
elevation than the first proposal, yet still above 900 feet.
The plaintiff, nevertheless, argues that even if a new variance application
were considered, its approval would be precluded by the application of
collateral estoppel to the ZBA’s prior findings. Specifically, the plaintiff asserts:
7
The ZBA voted unanimously that the construction of the home on
the property above 900 feet would cause a diminution of property
value to the abutting property. The ZBA also voted unanimously
that construction of a home above 900 feet would [be] contrary to
the spirit and intent of the ordinance, would be contrary to the
public interest, and that substantial justice would not be done by
the granting of the variance.
(Citations omitted.) See, e.g., Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155
N.H. 102, 105 (2007) (outlining requirements an applicant for a variance must
satisfy); cf. Laws 2009, 307:6 (repealing and reenacting RSA 674:33, I(b)
relating to conditions under which a zoning board of adjustment is empowered
to grant a variance).
We disagree with the plaintiff’s characterization of the ZBA’s findings.
Each of the findings referred to related to the consequences of granting “this
variance,” not of generally building above the 900-foot elevation. Cf. Malachy
Glen Assocs., 155 N.H. at 107 (noting that “the mere fact that the project
[violates a provision of the zoning ordinance], which is the reason for the
variance request, cannot be used by the ZBA to deny the variance”). For
instance, the ZBA unanimously denied the proposed finding “that the use
contemplated by the petitioner as a result of obtaining this variance would not
be contrary to the spirit and intent of the ordinance.” (Bolding omitted;
emphasis added.) The other proposed findings similarly referred specifically to
“this variance.”
Moreover, after the denial of a building permit, the plaintiff filed an
appeal from administrative decision along with the request for variance with
the ZBA, attaching the building permit application and its attachments. Those
attachments include a plot plan showing the proposed house location at an
elevation roughly between 1028 and 1036 feet. We conclude that in context,
“this variance” refers to a variance to permit construction of the specific
building proposed in the specific location proposed. Cf. L&G Associates v. Bd.
of Appeals, 673 A.2d 1146, 1148 (Conn. App. Ct. 1996) (“A use outside that
requested in the variance application and illustrated in the site plan would
require a further variance. . . . To hold otherwise would transform a variance
into a change of zone.”). Thus, consideration of a variance application to build
at a different location on the property would not be precluded by collateral
estoppel.
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the submission of a new
variance application would not have been futile. We do not intend to imply,
however, that the ZBA may oppressively require a landowner to submit
multiple successive applications. As the Supreme Court noted in Palazzolo:
“Government authorities, of course, may not burden property by imposition of
8
repetitive or unfair land-use procedures in order to avoid a final decision.”
Palazzolo, 533 U.S. at 621.
Because the ZBA “has [not] reached a final decision regarding the
application of the regulations to the property at issue,” Williamson, 473 U.S. at
186, the plaintiff’s state taking claim is not ripe and we affirm the decision of
the trial court. As Williamson also bars the plaintiff’s federal claims, we reach
the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
The plaintiff also challenges the trial court’s denial of its cross-motion for
summary judgment, in which it argued, on the basis of Lingle v. Chevron
U.S.A., Inc., 544 U.S. 528 (2005), and Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal
Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992), that imposition of the 900-foot restriction upon
its property constitutes a categorical taking, “depriving the Plaintiff of all
economically beneficial use of th[e] property . . . by prohibiting any
development [thereon].” We need not reach this argument because we hold
that the plaintiff’s per se taking claim is not ripe.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
9