THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-180
IN THE MATTER OF PAMELA TABER-MCCARTHY AND RICKY C. MCCARTHY
Argued: February 18, 2010
Opinion Issued: April 9, 2010
Mosca Law Office, of Manchester (Edward C. Mosca on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Walker & Buchholz, P.A., of Manchester (Kevin E. Buchholz on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Ricky C. McCarthy, appeals an order
recommended by a Marital Master (Green, M.) and approved by the Superior
Court (Abramson, J.) that adopted the qualified domestic relations order
(QDRO) proposed by the petitioner, Pamela Taber-McCarthy. We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. The parties married in 1998. On
January 16, 2006, the petitioner filed for divorce. Their final divorce decree,
entered in April 2007, provided, in pertinent part:
C. Retirement. The parties agreed on the amount of the
retirement and the effective date all parties utilized for figuring the
same. If it turns out that as of 1/16/06 the figure[ ] presented
relative to Respondent’s retirement plan of $105,070.65 is not
accurate, the amount to be transferred can be adjusted either up
or down reflecting the accurate figure.
The Petitioner agreed that her counsel will prepare the
QDRO needed to transfer funds from the Respondent to the
Petitioner. The counsel for the Petitioner shall have the right to
contact the Respondent’s employer . . . and obtain the appropriate
information, valuation and forms that are necessary to effectuate
an appropriate QDRO. The Respondent shall execute all
documents necessary to allow Petitioner’s counsel to have access
to this information. . . . If the Court finds that there is any delay in
signing authorizations to obtain information, a motion for
contempt and appropriate sanctions will be entertained by the
court.
The parties’ divorce decree became effective July 13, 2007. In August
2007, the parties stipulated to a QDRO. The stipulated QDRO gave the date of
marriage as September 26, 1998; the date of filing of the divorce petition as
January 16, 2006; and the date of the divorce as July 13, 2007. The stipulated
QDRO assigned to the petitioner “an amount equal to 50% of the [respondent’s]
‘vested benefit’ under [his employer’s 401(k) plan] which was earned during the
period of the marriage only from September 26, 1998 to January 16, 2006.”
“This amount,” the stipulated QDRO provided, “is calculated to be $77,430.
One half of this amount is $38,715. This amount shall be reduced by . . .
$4,735.04 . . . . [Accordingly,] [t]he net amount due [the petitioner] is
$33,979.96.”
The stipulated QDRO further provided: “In the event the Plan
Administrator determines that this order is not a [QDRO] . . . , both parties
shall cooperate with the Plan Administrator to make the changes necessary for
it to become a qualified order. This includes signing all documents which may
be necessary for the parties to obtain an amended order that meets the
requirements for a [QDRO] . . . .”
The stipulated QDRO was never entered as a court order, however,
because the administrator of the respondent’s retirement plan expressed
concerns about it, which the parties were unable to resolve. Specifically, the
plan administrator noted that the stipulated QDRO was “unclear [as] to
whether or not gains (losses) should be applied from January 16, 2006 until
the date of distribution or transfer or if the $33,979.96 is a lump sum
payment.” The parties attempted to negotiate an addendum to the stipulated
QDRO that would address this concern, but were unable to agree.
2
In December 2008, following numerous hearings on the issue, the court
adopted the petitioner’s proposed QDRO, which provided, in pertinent part,
that the net amount due her ($33,979.96) “shall be a lump sum amount
payable without any gains or losses thereon.”
On appeal, the respondent argues that the QDRO the court ultimately
adopted caused him to suffer the “loss of approximately $12,000 . . . out of his
portion of the funds in order to pay the petitioner the original amount agreed
to, which in effect awarded [her] more than what the parties’ agreement called
for [her] to receive.” He contends that the QDRO, therefore, effected an
unequal division of property and that the trial court could not have reasonably
found any special circumstances to warrant such a division. He further
contends that the division of property, as effected by the QDRO, is inequitable,
particularly given the petitioner’s delay in getting the stipulated QDRO
approved. He argues that given the delay caused by the petitioner, the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion by failing to award her the original
amount agreed to less the losses incurred in the interim. He also asserts that
the trial court improperly applied the Hodgins formula. See Hodgins v.
Hodgins, 126 N.H. 711, 716 (1985), superseded by statute on other grounds by
RSA 458:16-a, I (2004). Finally, he argues that the trial court erred when it
failed to grant his motion to compel. We address each of his arguments in
turn.
We first address whether the QDRO the court ultimately ordered
awarded the petitioner more than the parties’ agreement called for her to
receive. A stipulated agreement is contractual in nature and, therefore, is
governed by contract rules. Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs., 155
N.H. 368, 373 (2007). The interpretation of a contract is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Id. When interpreting a written agreement, we give
the language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the
circumstances and the context in which the agreement was negotiated, and
reading the document as a whole. Id. Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will
be determined from the plain meaning of the language used in the contract. Id.
“The language of a contract is ambiguous if the parties to the contract
could reasonably disagree as to the meaning of that language.” N.A.P.P. Realty
Trust v. CC Enterprises, 147 N.H. 137, 139 (2001) (quotation and brackets
omitted). “If the agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be determined,
under an objective standard, what the parties, as reasonable people, mutually
understood the ambiguous language to mean.” Behrens v. S.P. Constr. Co.,
153 N.H. 498, 503 (2006). In applying the objective standard, a court should
examine the contract as a whole, the circumstances surrounding execution
and the object intended by the agreement, while keeping in mind the goal of
giving effect to the intention of the parties. N.A.P.P. Realty Trust, 147 N.H. at
141.
3
According to the parties’ final divorce decree, “[t]he parties agreed on the
amount of the retirement and the effective date” for valuing the parties’
retirement benefits. The parties agreed that the valuation date was January
16, 2006. As of that date, the respondent’s retirement plan was valued at
$105,070.65, however, the parties’ decree stated that “[i]f it turns out that . . .
[this figure] . . . is not accurate, the amount to be transferred can be adjusted
either up or down reflecting the accurate figure.”
Thereafter, the parties entered into a stipulated QDRO. Consistent with
the parties’ agreement, as reflected in their divorce decree, the stipulated
QDRO valued the parties’ retirement benefits as of January 16, 2006. The
stipulated QDRO stated that “[t]he net amount due [the petitioner] is
$33,979.96” based upon the values of the parties’ retirement benefits as of the
agreed-upon valuation date.
The plain meaning of the stipulated QDRO was that the petitioner was to
receive a net amount equal to $33,979.96. As the respondent concedes:
“Nothing in the QDRO called for the application of any gains and losses on [the
petitioner’s] distribution from the date of calculation to the date of segregation
or distribution.” The QDRO is not ambiguous in this respect, however. See
Dow Associates, Inc. v. Gulf Oil Corp., 114 N.H. 381, 383 (1974). It is simply
silent on this issue. See id.
We first articulated this principle in Dow, which concerned the
interpretation of a lease. In that case, a dispute between the parties arose
regarding whether the tenant or landlord was responsible for the cost of sewer
rental. Id. at 382-83. The parties’ lease, “while detailed in many respects, did
not state which party was responsible for payment of water, sewer, and
electricity bills.” Id. at 383 (quotation omitted). We held that because the
agreement was silent upon this issue, the trial court properly ruled that the
tenant’s refusal to pay the sewer rental did not breach the lease. Id. The trial
court could not “supply the deficiency by writing into the lease a provision for
the payment of sewer rental, when the parties did not.” Id. The agreement was
not ambiguous with regard to who was responsible for paying the sewer rental;
it was silent. Id.
Although Dow arose in a different context, we find its reasoning to be
applicable here. In this case, while the parties’ stipulation regarding the QDRO
was detailed in many respects, “[w]hether by accident or design,” the parties
failed to state in their agreement that the amount the petitioner was to receive
under the QDRO included gains and/or losses. Id. The stipulated QDRO was
“not ambiguous in this respect; it [was] simply silent.” Id. Thus, the trial court
did not err by applying the plain language of the stipulation awarding the
petitioner $33,979.96. See id. Contrary to the respondent’s assertions, the
4
trial court’s order awarded the petitioner precisely what the parties’ agreement
called for her to receive.
We next turn to the respondent’s assertions that the trial court’s order
impermissibly effected an unequal division of property. The respondent argues
that in the nearly three years since the divorce became final, changes in the
stock market have effectively made the $33,979.96 a larger portion of his
retirement. Thus, he claims that what was fair and equitable in 2007 is no
longer so and that “to reach an equitable result,” the trial court should have
awarded the petitioner less than the amount stipulated in the QDRO.
“A property settlement in a divorce decree is a final distribution of a sum
of money or a specific portion of the spouses’ property and is not subject to
judicial modification on account of changed circumstances.” In the Matter of
Birmingham & Birmingham, 154 N.H. 51, 57 (2006) (quotation omitted). “Such
a property distribution will not be modified unless the complaining party shows
that the distribution is invalid due to fraud, undue influence, deceit,
misrepresentation, or mutual mistake.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
The respondent has neither argued nor demonstrated that modification of the
parties’ property settlement was required for any of the foregoing reasons. See
id. Accordingly, he has failed to demonstrate that modification of the parties’
property settlement was necessary. See id. The respondent’s reliance upon
changed circumstances, such as the decline of the stock market, is insufficient
to warrant modifications to the original property division. See id.
We next address whether, as the respondent claims, the trial court
misapplied the Hodgins formula. In Hodgins, we established a formula for
equitably apportioning retirement benefits when the actual and contingent
values are unascertainable. See In the Matter of Watterworth & Watterworth,
149 N.H. at 452. The Hodgins formula calculates a percentage to be paid to an
employee’s former spouse by dividing the number of months the employee was
employed during the marriage and before divorce commenced by the total
number of credits the employee will have earned toward the retirement benefit
as of the date benefits commence and awarding half of this amount to each
spouse. Id.; see Hodgins, 126 N.H. at 716. The Hodgins formula is designed to
help trial courts avoid the problem of valuation when it is impossible to
determine the value of the retirement benefit at the time of divorce. In the
Matter of Watterworth & Watterworth, 149 N.H. at 452. The formula does not
apply when the value of the retirement benefit is ascertainable. See id.
Although the trial court’s order referred to the Hodgins formula, the
record demonstrates that, in fact, the court did not apply this formula to divide
the respondent’s retirement account. Nor was it required to do so. See id. The
respondent’s retirement benefit, a 401(k) account, was a defined contribution
plan. As such, it had an ascertainable value. See id. Therefore, the trial court
5
did not, and had no need to, resort to the Hodgins formula to ascertain the
actual value of the respondent’s retirement benefit as of the valuation date.
See id.
Finally, we address whether the trial court erred when it failed to grant
the respondent’s motion to compel. The respondent’s motion sought to compel
the petitioner to sign a form allowing him access to information about her
retirement accounts. He argues that the trial court should have granted his
motion because the court allowed the petitioner to seek information pertaining
to the gains/losses to his retirement benefit. Since the petitioner never
actually obtained the information she sought, and since the parties never
disputed the amount of the petitioner’s own retirement benefit, we hold that
the trial court committed no reversible error by failing to grant his motion.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6