THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-228
ALFRED HUARD
v.
TOWN OF PELHAM & a.
Argued: November 4, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 31, 2009
Sakellarios & Associates, LLC, of Manchester (Jean-Claude Sakellarios
on the brief), and Walsh & Associates, of Manchester (Robert M. Walsh on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Donahue, Tucker & Ciandella, PLLC, of Exeter (John L. McGowan and
John J. Ratigan on the brief, and Mr. McGowan orally), for the respondents.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Alfred Huard, appeals three orders of the
Superior Court (Groff, J., Nicolosi, J., and Barry, J.) in favor of the
respondents, Town of Pelham, Roland Soucy, acting code enforcement officer,
and Jeffrey Gowan, town planning officer. The first order denied his motion to
enforce settlement. The second and third orders granted the town’s motions
for summary judgment. We affirm.
The following facts are not in dispute. Huard owned and operated an
automobile transmission repair business. In 2004, he purchased property at 3
Windham Road, located in a residential zone. He used the property for both
residential and business purposes, believing that he could do so pursuant to a
use variance granted to prior owners of the property in 1985. The 1985 use
variance permitted repair of “carburetors, fuel pumps alternators, etc.” In
August 2006, Huard received a letter from the town’s code compliance officer
stating that “operation of an automobile transmission repair business in a
residential zone is not allowed,” and that pursuant to article XIII, section 307-
88(D) of the town’s zoning ordinance, the 1985 use variance had expired due to
non-use for one year or longer. See Pelham, N.H., Rev. Ordinances art. XIII, §
307-88(D) (2006) (repealed 2007) (“[V]ariances not used for one (1) year or
longer shall expire by operation of law at the end of said one year period.”).
Huard did not appeal the code compliance officer’s decision that the use
variance had expired. He did, however, apply for a new use variance in
September 2006, which was denied. He did not file a motion for rehearing with
the town’s zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) upon its denial of his request for a
new variance. Instead, in May 2007, he filed a petition for injunctive relief and
declaratory judgment in the superior court.
In March 2007, two months before Huard filed his petition, the town
voted to repeal article XIII, section 307-88(D). In light of that change, town
counsel drafted a stipulation to stay the superior court action pending further
proceedings at the local level. Both parties signed the agreement, and the trial
court approved it on October 30, 2007. The stipulation states, in relevant part:
1. [Huard] shall be allowed to resume use of the premises for the
transmission repair business, pending a final order or other
resolution of the Petition.
2. The matter shall be stayed to allow the town’s administrative
official to make an administrative decision on the issue whether
the original variance can be reasonably construed as permitting
the proposed transmission repair use, or such other articulation of
this issue as the administrator shall make. The administrative
decision shall be made in light of the fact that the provision of the
Pelham zoning ordinance that provides for the extinguishment of
variances on grounds of discontinued use for a period of over one
year has been repealed.
3. This administrative decision shall be made within 7 business days
of the Court’s approval of this stipulation, and shall be published
by providing abutters . . . with notice of the decision by certified
mail, and by posting copies in two public places. The notice shall
2
state that an appeal may be taken within 30 days of the decision to
the ZBA, and not thereafter.
4. That the provisions of this Stipulation are without prejudice to the
rights of the parties to assert such claims or defenses that they
may have.
In accordance with the stipulation, the town’s administrative official
issued his decision, stating that the 1985 use variance “remains in force today
and reasonably encompasses transmission repairs . . . as proposed by Huard.”
Subsequently, abutters appealed to the ZBA. The ZBA agreed that Huard’s
transmission repair business was within the scope of the 1985 variance.
However, it also ruled, contrary to the administrative decision, that the 1985
variance had expired due to non-use for longer than one year as a result of a
foreclosure on the property in 1989. The ZBA reasoned that, although use
variances no longer expire due to non-use occurring after 2007, the use
variance at issue here expired many years earlier under the old zoning
ordinance, and thus could not be revived simply because the ordinance had
changed.
Huard filed a motion to enforce settlement, which was denied. The town
filed two motions for summary judgment on the claims Huard raised in his May
2007 petition. In the first, the town argued, among other things, that the trial
court lacked jurisdiction over two of Huard’s claims because he failed to
exhaust his administrative remedies. In the second, the town argued that the
ZBA’s decision that Huard’s variance had expired was not an unconstitutional
taking. The trial court granted both motions.
Huard first argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to
enforce settlement. He does not argue that the ZBA erred as a matter of law in
finding that his variance was still subject to the repealed one-year expiration
provision. He argues only that the ZBA’s conclusion that the repealed
ordinance applied to him violated the terms of the stipulation. We limit our
analysis, accordingly, to whether the action by the ZBA violated the terms of
the stipulation.
Huard essentially argues that the stipulation limited the scope of the
local proceeding to one issue: whether his transmission repair business “was
within the scope of the 1985 variance,” and, therefore, that the ZBA’s
conclusion that his variance had expired contravenes the terms of the parties’
agreement. The town maintains that “[a]ll events that followed from the
Stipulation . . . were legally permissible and contemplated under the
Stipulation.” In denying Huard’s motion, the trial court did not specifically rule
upon the meaning of the stipulation. It ruled only that: “It is clear to the
Court that the parties did not have a mutual understanding of the terms of the
3
agreement. There was no meeting of the minds.” We apply the law relevant to
our review of stipulations, and we reach the same result as the trial court,
albeit on different grounds. See In re Trailer and Plumbing Supplies, 133 N.H.
432, 438 (1990) (noting that when a trial court reaches the correct result, but
on mistaken grounds, this court will sustain the decision if there are valid
alternative grounds to support it).
A stipulated agreement is contractual in nature and, therefore, is
governed by contract rules. Public Serv. Co. of N.H. v. Town of Seabrook, 133
N.H. 365, 370 (1990). The interpretation of a contract is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Czumak v. N.H. Div. of Developmental Servs., 155
N.H. 368, 373 (2007). When interpreting a written agreement, we give the
language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering the
circumstances and the context in which the agreement was negotiated, and
reading the document as a whole. Id. Absent ambiguity, the parties’ intent will
be determined from the plain meaning of the language used in the agreement.
Id.
Huard’s assertion that the stipulation limited the scope of the local
proceedings to the single issue of whether his transmission repair business
“was within the scope of the 1985 variance” is contrary to its plain meaning.
The stipulation states: “The matter shall be stayed to allow the town’s
administrative official to make an administrative decision on the issue whether
the original variance can be reasonably construed as permitting the proposed
transmission repair use, or such other articulation of this issue as the
administrator shall make.” The stipulation further states that abutters would
be given notice, that appeals could be taken to the ZBA and that parties could
assert such claims and defenses as they might have. The plain meaning of the
stipulation does not establish an intent to abrogate the general powers of the
ZBA to review an administrative decision. See Pelham, N.H., Rev. Ordinances
art. XIII, § 307-83(A) (2006) (providing that the ZBA has “[t]he power to hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any . . . decision . . .
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Chapter”).
By the same token, it does not place any limitation upon what a ZBA appeal
proceeding would address or what the outcome of that proceeding would be.
Thus, the trial court did not err in denying Huard’s motion.
Next, Huard argues that the trial court erred in granting the town’s
motion for summary judgment by concluding that it lacked jurisdiction to hear
his petition for injunctive relief and declaratory judgment because he failed to
exhaust his administrative remedies. He concedes that he did not exhaust his
administrative remedies, but argues that he is not required to do so “if it is
obvious that it is a waste of time and will more likely than not result in the
denial of his requests.” He argues that he was entitled to proceed directly to
the superior court to resolve the purely legal question of “whether the ZBA can
4
reactivate a repealed zoning ordinance to achieve the result it seeks.” We
disagree.
Although the town’s motion requests summary judgment, we construe it
as a motion to dismiss for failure to exhaust administrative remedies. The
general rule is that administrative remedies must first be exhausted before a
party brings a matter to the courts. See Prop. Portfolio Group v. Town of Derry,
154 N.H. 610, 616 (2006). The rule “is particularly applicable when . . .
substantial questions of fact exist concerning a city zoning ordinance, matters
that belong in the first instance to the designated local officials.” V.S.H. Realty,
Inc. v. City of Rochester, 118 N.H. 778, 782 (1978). “[T]his sound rule is based
on the reasonable policies of encouraging the exercise of administrative
expertise, preserving agency autonomy, and promoting judicial efficiency.” Id.
However, “it is proper to permit the use of the declaratory judgment procedure
to challenge the validity of a zoning ordinance . . . where the question is one
peculiarly suited to judicial rather than administrative treatment and no other
adequate remedy is available.” Prop. Portfolio Group, 154 N.H. at 616-17
(quotation and ellipses omitted). Under these circumstances, a petitioner is not
required to exhaust his administrative remedies. Id.
Whether the one-year expiration provision applied to Huard’s variance
and whether his transmission repair business fell within the scope of the
variance were both issues involving applications of the town’s zoning ordinance
to the facts of his case. These were not questions “peculiarly suited to judicial
rather than administrative treatment.” Prop. Portfolio Group, 154 N.H. at 616-
17 (quotation omitted). To the contrary, they are precisely the types of issues
that involve “fact[s] . . . concerning a . . . zoning ordinance, matters that belong
in the first instance to the designated local officials.” V.S.H. Realty, Inc., 118
N.H. at 782. The ZBA, as the local authority, is better suited to make findings
of fact with respect to the characteristics of Huard’s property, the current use
of other property in the area of 3 Windham Road, and the impact of the original
use variance, all matters, in the first instance, of local concern. As for whether
the one-year expiration provision applied to the use variance, resolution of this
issue involved issues of fact with respect to the property’s prior ownership and
previous use, also matters not “peculiarly suited to judicial rather than
administrative treatment.” Prop. Portfolio Group, 154 N.H. at 616-17
(quotation omitted).
Finally, Huard argues that the trial court erred in granting the town’s
motion for summary judgment, concluding that the town’s actions were not an
unconstitutional taking of his property. We note that he does not argue that
article XIII, section 307-88(D) of the zoning ordinance is facially
unconstitutional. He argues only that the town’s application of the ordinance
to his variance was an unconstitutional taking because he can no longer
conduct his transmission repair business. Specifically, he contends that there
5
were genuine issues of material fact and that we must, accordingly, remand the
issue to the trial court.
“In reviewing the trial court’s initial grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
from them, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Bel Air
Assocs. v. N.H. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs., 158 N.H. 104, 107 (2008)
(quotation omitted). “If there is no genuine issue of material fact, and if the
moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the grant of summary
judgment is proper.” Id. (quotation omitted). An issue of fact is material if it
affects the outcome of the litigation under the applicable substantive law. N.E.
Tel. & Tel. Co. v. City of Franklin, 141 N.H. 449, 452 (1996). We review the
trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Bel Air Assocs., 158
N.H. at 107.
We first address Huard’s claim under the State Constitution, and cite
federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231, 233
(1983). Under Part I, Article 12 of the New Hampshire Constitution, “[n]o part
of a man’s property shall be taken from him, or applied to public uses, without
his consent.” A governmental regulation can be a taking, even if the land is not
physically taken, if it is an arbitrary or unreasonable restriction which
substantially deprives the owner of the economically viable use of his land.
Burrows v. City of Keene, 121 N.H. 590, 597-98 (1981); Smith v. Town of
Wolfeboro, 136 N.H. 337, 346 (1992). “Limitations on use create a taking if
they are so restrictive as to be economically impracticable, resulting in a
substantial reduction in the value of the property and preventing the private
owner from enjoying worthwhile rights or benefits in the property.” Pennichuck
Corp. v. City of Nashua, 152 N.H. 729, 733-34 (2005).
In Huard’s objection to the town’s motion for summary judgment and his
accompanying affidavit, he failed to set forth any facts that would affect the
outcome of the litigation under the applicable substantive law. Huard asserted
that the garage where he repaired transmissions is “unattractive.” He further
asserted that the inability to repair transmissions adversely affects the value of
the property, but he did not present any evidence indicating to what degree.
Without any supporting evidence, he contended that his property “cannot be
used for anything,” but also conceded that “the house i[s] all right to live in.”
He further acknowledged that the owner from whom he bought the property
operated a business other than transmission repair without objection from the
town, indicating that a different type of business use is permissible on his
property. In addition, his affidavit alleged that abutters were interested in
purchasing his land, a fact which supports its economic viability. See Claridge
v. N.H. Wetlands Bd., 125 N.H. 745, 748 (1984) (noting that trial court’s
findings that land could be sold to abutters supported its conclusion that the
property continued to have economic value).
6
These assertions fail to support a claim that the ZBA’s application of the
zoning ordinance substantially denied him the economically viable use of his
land. Although Huard may not be permitted to use the property precisely as he
wishes, he has not demonstrated that a genuine issue of material fact exists as
to whether the value of his property has been substantially destroyed. See
Funtown v. Town of Conway, 127 N.H. 312, 318 (1982).
Neither the procedural posture nor the facts of this case are like those at
issue in City of Keene v. Burrows, 121 N.H. 590 (1981). Burrows considered
the question of whether Keene’s designation of the plaintiffs’ property as part of
a conservation district constituted a taking requiring compensation under the
State Constitution. Burrows, 121 N.H. at 594, 601. In that case, the plaintiffs
purchased 124 acres of woodland for the purpose of subdividing it into lots. Id.
at 594. The city, seeking to preserve its open spaces, offered to buy the land
from the plaintiffs, but at a cost far below their purchase price and its assessed
value for tax purposes. Id. The parties could not agree to a sale price, and the
plaintiffs went forward with their development plans. Id. at 595.
Subsequently, the city amended its zoning ordinance to include 109 of the
plaintiffs’ 124 acres in a conservation zone in which development was
prohibited. Id.
We held that the city’s action constituted a taking under Part I, Article 12
of the New Hampshire Constitution. Id. at 601. We stated that the right to
just compensation for a taking of property necessarily limits the police power
and that the government cannot, through regulation, indirectly effect a taking
without paying compensation. Id. at 596-97. We concluded that “[f]rom the
outset, it was plain that the city wished that the plaintiffs’ land be devoted to
open space,” and, instead of paying for this result, obtained it by “prohibit[ing]
all normal private development.” Id. at 600 (quotation omitted).
The expiration of a use variance is not equivalent to the prohibition of all
normal private development. The record indicates that although transmission
repairs are not permitted on Huard’s property, other types of business may be
permissible. Even if this is not the case, however, Huard purchased his
property for both residential and business purposes, and he acknowledges that
his ability to live in the house is unaffected by whether or not the property has
a use variance. Further, the record is devoid of evidence regarding appraisals
of the property or estimates of how the inability to repair transmissions on it
affects its value.
The Federal Constitution offers Huard no greater protection than does
the State Constitution under these circumstances. See Lucas v. South
Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1019 (1992). Therefore, we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution as we do under the State
Constitution.
7
To the extent that Huard argues that the conduct of the ZBA violated his
right to due process, this argument was not raised in the notice of appeal.
Accordingly, we will not address it. Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H. 616, 623
(2008).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8