THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2009-234
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRYAN T. FARR
Argued: March 31, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 19, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Bryan T. Farr, appeals his
convictions, following a bench trial in Superior Court (Arnold, J.), for one felony
count of delivering or providing any visual representation of a child engaging in
sexual activity, see RSA 649-A:3, I(a) (2007) (amended 2008), and one felony
count of possessing or controlling any visual representation of a child engaging
in sexual activity, see RSA 649-A:3, I(e) (2007) (amended 2008). We remand.
The defendant was indicted on one count of possessing and one count of
delivering child pornography. The indictment for possessing child pornography
alleged that the defendant knowingly “possessed and/or had under his control
a visual representation, in the form of a computer image/picture (file name: 2
cute little boys having fun), of a child engaged in the sexual act of
masturbation with another male.” The indictment for delivering child
pornography alleged that the defendant knowingly “delivered and/or provided,
over the Internet via real-time chat (video conferencing), a visual
representation, in the form of a computer image/picture (file name: 2 cute
little boys having fun), of a child engaged in the sexual act of masturbation
with another child.”
Before trial, the defendant moved to dismiss these charges on the ground
that to prosecute him for both violated his right to be shielded from multiple
punishments for the same offense under the Double Jeopardy Clauses of the
State and Federal Constitutions. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 16; U.S. CONST.
amends. V, XIV. The State objected, and the trial court held a hearing at which
it heard evidence that on July 13, 2006, the defendant had an online
conversation with Detective James McLaughlin of the Keene Police Department.
The defendant was in his home in Swanzey, while the detective was in Keene.
During the conversation, the defendant used his webcam to film a video clip as
it was playing on his computer. The video clip was entitled “2 cute little boys
having fun.” The defendant transmitted the video clip to the detective via the
Internet, and the video clip was then displayed on the detective’s computer
screen. When the image appeared on the detective’s computer screen, he
clicked the “Print Screen” button, which captured a picture of the image on his
screen, and then saved the picture to a Microsoft Word document. The
detective testified that it was not possible to save the entire video clip as it was
playing in real time on his computer.
The next day, the Keene Police Department executed a search warrant at
the defendant’s Swanzey residence and, among other items, seized a computer
containing a compact disc labeled “Porn.” Upon review of the disc, the police
discovered numerous pornographic images and videos, including the video clip
entitled “2 cute little boys having fun.” This was the same video clip that the
defendant had previously transmitted to the detective.
The trial court found that the indictment for delivering child pornography
was based upon the defendant’s delivery to the detective of the video clip via
his webcam and the Internet. The trial court found that the indictment for
possessing child pornography was based upon the defendant’s possession of
the video clip contained on his compact disc.
The trial court ruled that it did not violate double jeopardy to punish the
defendant for both offenses because the two charges required different evidence
and occurred on different dates: “For the delivery indictment, the State would
be required to present evidence of the defendant sending the picture via his
webcam to [the] [d]etective . . . on July 13, 2005. Such evidence would
necessarily include [the] [d]etective[’s] . . . saved portion of the video clip.” By
2
contrast, the trial court noted, “[f]or the possession indictment, the State would
be required to introduce the compact disc containing the video clip, which was
discovered on July 14, 2005.” The trial court ruled that because “the facts
supporting the possession indictment would not sustain the delivery
indictment” and vice versa, punishing the defendant for committing both
offenses did not violate his rights against double jeopardy under the State and
Federal Constitutions. The court, therefore, denied the defendant’s motion to
dismiss, and the case proceeded to a bench trial.
For the purposes of the bench trial and this appeal, the defendant
stipulated that he possessed or had under his control a visual representation of
a male engaged in the sexual act of masturbation with another male and that
he delivered and/or provided this same representation over the Internet. The
defendant also stipulated that he believed that the males depicted in the visual
representation were younger than sixteen years of age. Accordingly, the only
issue for trial was whether the males depicted in the video clip actually were
younger than sixteen years of age. See RSA 649-A:2, I (2007) (amended 2008).
To meet its burden of proof on this issue, the State offered a copy of the video
as well as the testimony of an expert. The trial court ruled that the expert’s
testimony was inadmissible and declined to consider it. Relying upon its own
review of the video, however, the court found that it depicted at least one child
under the age of sixteen, and, thus, that the State had met its burden of proof.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred by
denying his motion to dismiss. This argument presents a question of
constitutional law, which we review de novo. State v. Flood, 159 N.H. 353, 355
(2009). We first address the defendant’s claim under the State Constitution,
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), citing opinions from federal and state
jurisdictions for guidance only, id. at 233.
Part I, Article 16 of the State Constitution provides, in pertinent part,
that “[n]o subject shall be liable to be tried, after an acquittal, for the same
crime or offense.” This provision protects a defendant’s right in three ways:
(1) it protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after acquittal;
(2) it protects against a second prosecution for the same offense after
conviction; and (3) it protects against multiple punishments for the same
offense. See Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Johanson), 156 N.H. 148, 156
(2007). The defendant asserts a violation of the third category of protections.
Under the New Hampshire Constitution, “[t]wo offenses will be
considered the same for double jeopardy purposes unless each requires proof
of an element that the other does not.” State v. McGurk, 157 N.H. 765, 773
(2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). We focus upon whether proof of the
elements of the crimes as charged will in actuality require a difference in
evidence. State v. Ford, 144 N.H. 57, 65 (1999). “In making this inquiry, we
review and compare the statutory elements of the charged offenses in light of
3
the actual allegations contained in the indictments.” State v. Liakos, 142 N.H.
726, 730 (1998) (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that the possession and delivery charges are the
same for double jeopardy purposes because the possession offense as charged
is a lesser included offense of the delivery offense as charged and both offenses
derive from the same criminal act. See State v. McKean, 147 N.H. 198, 200
(2001); see also Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 168 (1977). To convict the
defendant of the possessing child pornography charge, the State had to prove,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that he possessed or had under his control any
visual representation of a child engaging in sexual activity. See RSA 649-A:3,
I(e). As charged in the indictment, the State had to prove specifically that he
knowingly possessed and/or had under his control “a visual representation, in
the form of a computer image/picture (file name: 2 cute little boys having
fun).” Thus, the elements of the offense as charged were: (1) knowingly;
(2) possessing or controlling; (3) a specific visual representation, in the form of
a computer image/picture, of a child engaging in sexual activity.
To convict the defendant of the delivering child pornography charge, the
State had to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he delivered or provided
any visual representation of a child engaging in sexual activity. See RSA 649-
A:3, I(a). As charged in the indictment, the State specifically had to prove that
the defendant knowingly delivered and/or provided the visual representation
“over the Internet via real-time chat (video conferencing)” and that the visual
representation was “in the form of a computer image/picture (file name: 2 cute
little boys having fun).” The elements of this offense as charged were thus:
(1) knowingly; (2) delivering or providing; (3) over the Internet via real time chat
(video conferencing); (4) a specific visual representation, in the form of a
computer image/picture, of a child engaging in sexual activity.
The only difference between the two charges is that one required proof
that the defendant possessed or controlled the specific visual representation at
issue and the other required proof that he delivered or provided it over the
Internet via real time chat (video conferencing). The possessing pornography
charge is a lesser included offense of the delivering pornography charge if, as
the defendant contends, delivering pornography necessarily encompasses
possessing or controlling it. In other words, if, as the defendant argues, proof
that he delivered the video clip necessarily constitutes proof that he possessed
or controlled it, the possession charge is a lesser included offense of the
delivery charge. See State v. Constant, 135 N.H. 254, 256-57 (1992).
We agree with the defendant that the possession charge in this case was
a lesser included offense of the delivery charge. Here, the defendant was
charged with “delivering” the same video clip that he “possessed” and/or
“controlled.” Moreover, for purposes of both trial and appeal, the defendant
stipulated, among other things, that he delivered and/or provided the very
4
same visual representation that he possessed and/or had under his control.
Thus, in this case, according to the indictments and stipulated evidence, proof
that the defendant delivered or provided the video clip necessarily also
established that he possessed or had under his control the same video clip.
See Mason v. State, 532 N.E.2d 1169, 1172 (Ind.) (“Possession of a narcotic
drug is an inherently included lesser offense of dealing a narcotic drug,
inasmuch as it is impossible to commit the greater offense without committing
the lesser offense.”), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1049 (1989); State v. Bertsch, 707
N.W.2d 660, 664-66 (Minn. 2006) (possession of pornographic work involving
minor was lesser included offense of disseminating same work); State v.
Kamaka, 277 S.W.3d 807, 815 (Mo. Ct. App. 2009) (possessing child
pornography is lesser included offense of disseminating it because under facts
presented, it was impossible to disseminate child pornography without first
possessing it); cf. People v. Flaar, 852 N.E.2d 338, 341-42 (Ill. App. Ct. 2006)
(transferring image via e-mail attachment and retaining copy of image on hard
drive for more than month are separate and distinct acts of possession; thus,
prosecuting defendant for both acts does not violate double jeopardy), appeal
denied, 861 N.E.2d 658 (Ill. 2006).
We need not decide whether possession and/or control of child
pornography under RSA 649-A:3, I(e) is always a lesser included offense of
delivering child pornography under RSA 649-A:3, I(a). Cf. Ford, 144 N.H. at 66
(theft is a lesser included offense of robbery). Rather, we hold only that the
possession charge at issue is a lesser included offense of the delivery charge at
issue in light of the manner in which the State charged the offenses and the
stipulated evidence. See Constant, 135 N.H. at 256-57.
This does not conclude our double jeopardy analysis, however, for it
violates double jeopardy to punish a defendant for both a lesser included and
greater offense only if both derive from the same criminal act. Ford, 144 N.H.
at 66. A criminal act “consists of the sum of discrete actions that together
constitute an offense.” Id.
The defendant argues that, in this case, he is charged with committing a
single criminal act, delivering a video clip that he possessed and controlled.
He further asserts that possession is a continuing offense in that his original
possession on the day he delivered the video clip and his continued possession
the next day were not separate volitional acts. Therefore, he reasons, the
possession and delivery offenses derive from the same criminal act.
Although this is an issue of first impression in New Hampshire, “other
jurisdictions have held that uninterrupted possession of the same contraband
over a period of time is but one offense constituting a continuing course of
conduct, precluding convictions of multiple offenses for possession of the same
contraband on different dates.” Fulcher v. Com., 149 S.W.3d 363, 376 (Ky.
2004). United States v. Jones, 533 F.2d 1387 (6th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 431
5
U.S. 964 (1977), is “[t]he most often cited case on [this] issue.” Id. In Jones,
the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled that it violated
double jeopardy for the defendant to be punished for possessing a firearm on
one date in 1970 and for possessing the same firearm three years later. Jones,
533 F.2d at 1389-92. The Sixth Circuit held that “[p]ossession is a course of
conduct, not an act,” and that “by prohibiting possession Congress intended to
punish as one offense all of the acts of dominion which demonstrate a
continued possessory interest in a firearm.” Id. at 1391. The Sixth Circuit
reasoned that were the rule otherwise, the defendant could have been charged
“with possession on more than 1100 separate days” and could have been
imprisoned for the rest of his life. Id.
Several jurisdictions have similarly held that uninterrupted possession of
a single item constitutes one continuous offense. See United States v. Rivera,
77 F.3d 1348, 1351 (11th Cir.) (“Where there is no proof that possession of the
same weapon is interrupted, the Government may not arbitrarily carve
possession into separate offenses.”), cert. denied, 517 U.S. 1250 (1996); United
States v. Horodner, 993 F.2d 191, 193 (9th Cir. 1993) (uninterrupted
possession of firearm constitutes single offense); United States v. Kimberlin,
781 F.2d 1247, 1254 (7th Cir. 1985) (five-day period of unlawfully possessing
department of defense patch was one continuous offense; thus, multiple
punishments violated double jeopardy), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 938 (1986);
Fulcher, 149 S.W.3d at 377 (under Kentucky statute, continuing course of
conduct may be carved into separate offenses only if it has been interrupted by
legal process; because appellant’s arrest was legal process, possession of
aluminum foil “boat” before and after arrest constitute separate offenses);
Johnson v. Morgenthau, 505 N.E.2d 240, 242-43 (N.Y. 1987) (uninterrupted
possession of weapon over six days is continuous offense supporting one
prosecution for criminal possession); State v. Zele, 716 A.2d 833, 837 (Vt.
1998) (possession of marijuana is continuing offense); 1 W. LaFave,
Substantive Criminal Law § 6.1(e) at 430 n.46 (2d ed. 2003).
When a controlled substance is involved, courts “have determined that
separate convictions for possession of the same controlled substance will not
violate the Double Jeopardy Clause if the possessions are sufficiently
differentiated by time, location, or intended purpose.” Rashad v. Burt, 108
F.3d 677, 681 (6th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1075 (1998), holding
limited by United States v. Forman, 180 F.3d 766, 769-70 (6th Cir. 1999); see
United States v. Johnson, 977 F.2d 1360, 1374 (10th Cir. 1992) (separate
punishments warranted for defendant’s possession of one narcotic supply for
sale and another supply for personal use), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 1070 (1993);
Com. v. Rabb, 725 N.E.2d 1036, 1043-44 (Mass. 2000) (no double jeopardy
violation to punish defendant for possessing cocaine in his home, which he
actively sold to buyers, and possessing cocaine in his motel room, which he
intended for future sales; possessions differentiated by location and purpose);
cf. Bertsch, 707 N.W.2d at 664 (inquiry into whether two offenses are separate
6
criminal acts is analogous to inquiry into whether multiple offenses constitute
single behavioral incident under Minnesota statute; factors to examine include
time, place and whether segment of conduct was motivated by effort to obtain
single criminal objective). These factors are “meant to be disjunctive, with no
one determinative factor.” Rabb, 725 N.E.2d at 1043.
We applied a similar formulation in Ford, 144 N.H. at 67, when
determining whether the defendant’s robbery of a store clerk and theft of
jewelry from the store derived from the same criminal act. Although the
offenses occurred during a single event, we concluded that the robbery of the
clerk and theft from the store constituted two distinct acts because each
involved different property and were separated in time and space. Ford, 144
N.H. at 67.
Keeping in mind that “[t]he Double Jeopardy Clause is not such a fragile
guarantee that prosecutors can avoid its limitations by the simple expedient of
dividing a single crime into a series of temporal or spatial units,” Brown, 432
U.S. at 169, we, nonetheless, adopt the Rashad formulation for the purposes of
this appeal and hold that possessing a single visual representation of child
pornography, here the video clip of the two males, may be considered separate
possessions only if the evidence indicates that the possessions are separated in
space or time or that they were intended for different purposes or transactions.
See State v. Quick, 206 P.3d 985, 992 (N.M. 2009) (Maes, J., specially
concurring). Close proximity in space and time “is indicative of unitary
conduct.” Id. Likewise, lack of evidence indicating that the defendant had a
separate intent or purpose with regard to his possessions of the single visual
representation is not necessarily fatal to the determination that the
possessions were separate, “but, in the absence of other factors, is strongly
corroborative of unitary conduct.” Id.
Here, the defendant’s possession of the video clip was uninterrupted,
and, thus, his possession was a continuing offense. There is nothing to
differentiate the defendant’s possession of the video clip on his compact disc
when he transmitted the video clip to the detective and when the police seized
the compact disc the next day. According to the indictments as charged and to
the stipulated evidence, the same compact disc forms the basis of both the
delivery and possession charges. Moreover, there is no evidence that the
defendant had a different intent with regard to his possession of the compact
disc on the day he delivered the video clip to the detective and on the following
day when the disc was found in his computer. Further, there is no evidence
that the compact disc changed locations; at all times relevant to the
indictments as charged and the stipulated evidence, the compact disc was in
the defendant’s home.
Accordingly, because we conclude that, in this case, proof that the
defendant delivered and/or provided the video clip to the detective constituted
7
proof that he possessed and/or controlled it, and because we also conclude
that, in this case, the defendant’s possession of the video clip was a continuing
offense, it violated the State Double Jeopardy Clause to subject the defendant
to multiple punishments for delivering and possessing the same video clip.
Having concluded that the defendant’s state constitutional rights were violated,
we need not decide whether his federal constitutional rights were also violated.
See State v. Pepin, 155 N.H. 364, 368 (2007).
The defendant next asserts that the evidence was insufficient to support
the trial court’s finding that the video clip depicted a child under the age of
sixteen. To convict the defendant of the child pornography charges, the State
had to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the images at issue depicted an
actual person younger than sixteen years of age. See RSA 649-A:2, I; Clark,
158 N.H. at 15. Because the defendant does not argue otherwise, we assume,
without deciding, that to prove that the images depicted an actual person
younger than sixteen years of age, the State had only to produce the images
themselves. See Clark, 158 N.H. at 18 (holding that State need not produce
evidence beyond images themselves to prove that pornography depicts real
rather than virtual child).
To prevail upon his sufficiency of the evidence argument, the defendant
must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the video clip depicted an actual
child under the age of sixteen. See State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 424 (2003).
Having viewed the video clip, we conclude that a rational trier of fact, viewing
all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the
clip depicted a child younger than sixteen. Accordingly, we hold that the
evidence was sufficient to support the trial court’s finding on this issue.
In sum, we hold that it violated the Double Jeopardy Clause of the State
Constitution for the defendant to have received punishments for both delivering
and possessing the video clip at issue but that the evidence was sufficient to
support the trial court’s finding that the video clip depicted a child under the
age of sixteen. We remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8