THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Safety Bureau of Hearings
No. 2009-119
PETITION OF JAMES M. MOONEY
(New Hampshire Department of Safety Bureau of Hearings)
Submitted: April 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: August 19, 2010
James M. Mooney, pro se, by brief.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Rosemary Wiant, assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, James M. Mooney, appeals the
determination by the respondent, the New Hampshire Department of Safety,
that he must complete further treatment in an Impaired Driver Intervention
Program (IDIP) before his driver’s license can be restored. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the record. In 1994, Mooney was arrested
for, but not convicted of, driving while intoxicated. In 2004, Mooney was
convicted of driving while intoxicated. As a result, the division of motor
vehicles suspended his license and Mooney attended an IDIP. At its
conclusion, Daniel Burnford, a licensed alcohol and drug counselor, evaluated
Mooney in an exit interview. See N.H. Admin. Rules, He-A 707.12. Burnford
recommended that Mooney complete additional treatment because he met “the
criteria for a positive diagnosis for alcohol dependency or abuse.” Burnford
based his recommendation upon Mooney’s 1994 arrest and 2004 conviction for
driving while intoxicated, and his answers to the Prevention Research
Institute’s risk assessment, which indicated that he had the highest risk of
re-offending. Based upon this recommendation, the division of motor vehicles
notified Mooney that his license remained suspended. Mooney successfully
sought a hearing before the department of safety to contest the finding that
further treatment was necessary. See RSA 265-A:18, VII(c) (Supp. 2009); N.H.
Admin. Rules, He-A 707.12(g)(2), 707.16.
At the hearing, Mooney argued that the IDIP could not “use an arrest
which did not result in a conviction for purposes of imposing a penalty or
punishment.” He contended that “[t]he administrative rule the program is
using to [require him to complete additional treatment] is unconstitutional,
arbitrary and capricious and . . . violates his constitutional rights” because the
rule has no statutory authority permitting “penalties to be imposed for an
arrest not resulting in a conviction.” Mooney argued that only a sentencing
court may impose further treatment and counseling.
The hearings examiner affirmed the decision of the division of motor
vehicles, concluding that “the administrative rule is valid,” and that RSA 265-
A:42, II permitted the IDIP to require Mooney to complete additional treatment.
The hearings examiner determined that Burnford properly used the 1994
arrest in determining that Mooney needed additional treatment, and that such
treatment “is not a penalty.” The report included the following language:
Appeal rights (RSA 263:76): Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, may appeal to the superior
court in the county wherein he/she resides within 30 days from the date
of this order. Pursuant to Saf-C 203.26, this appeal does not postpone
or delay the suspension resulting from the action by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
Mooney moved for a rehearing before the department of safety. The
department of safety responded in a letter dated January 15, 2009, which
stated, in relevant part:
[T]he appeal process is correctly stated in [the hearings examiner’s]
report in this matter. There is no provision in the applicable rules or
statutes for a motion for rehearing. Accordingly, no action is taken with
respect to your motion, and [the hearings examiner’s] decision remains
in full force and effect.
Subsequently, Mooney filed this petition for a writ of certiorari.
The State argues that we should dismiss Mooney’s appeal without
considering its merits because he failed to appeal the hearings examiner’s
2
decision to the superior court pursuant to RSA 263:76 (2004). Mooney
contends that his petition is properly before us pursuant to RSA chapter 541.
RSA 21-P:13 (2000) establishes a bureau of hearings within the department of
safety, and RSA chapter 541 governs appeals from such hearings “[u]nless
otherwise provided by law.”
To determine which statutory provisions apply to Mooney’s petition, we
must construe RSA 263:76 and RSA 21-P:13. In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed
in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Appeal of Pennichuck Water
Works, 160 N.H. 18, 27 (2010). We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in
the context of the overall statutory scheme. Id. Our analysis must start with
consideration of the plain meaning of the relevant statutes, construing them,
where reasonably possible, to effectuate their underlying policies. Id. Insofar
as reasonably possible, we will construe the various statutory provisions
harmoniously. Id. Courts can neither ignore the plain language of the
legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not see fit to include.
Appeal of Astro Spectacular, 138 N.H. 298, 300 (1994).
RSA 263:76 provides that “[a]ny person whose license has been
suspended or revoked . . . may petition, within 30 days thereafter, the superior
court in the county where such person resides.” Upon review, the superior
court determines “whether the decision of the [director of the division of motor
vehicles] is unreasonable or unlawful,” and “[a]ll findings of the director upon
all questions of fact properly before him shall be deemed prima facie lawful and
reasonable.” The court may only set aside the decision of the director of the
division of motor vehicles: (1) because of errors of law; or (2) if “the court is
satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is
unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 263:76.
The plain words of RSA 263:76 indicate that it governs appeals stemming
from decisions made by the division of motor vehicles to suspend or revoke a
license. However, Mooney’s central claim is that it was improper for Burnford
to rely upon his 1994 arrest to determine that he required further treatment,
and improper for the department of safety to uphold Burnford’s determination.
See RSA 265-A:18, VII(c) (providing for hearing before commissioner of
department of safety or his designee, not before director of division of motor
vehicles). As demonstrated by his motion for rehearing and by his petition to
this court, he challenges the decision of the hearings examiner upholding
Burnford’s recommendation that he requires further treatment, not any
decision of the director to suspend his license. Accordingly, Mooney could not
appeal this decision to the superior court pursuant to RSA 263:76.
Because there is no other law providing for an appeal from the hearings
examiner’s decision, Mooney’s appeal is properly before us pursuant to RSA
3
21-P:13 and RSA chapter 541. See RSA 21-P:13 (providing that “[u]nless
otherwise provided by law, all rehearings and appeals shall be held in
accordance with RSA 541”). RSA 541:3 provides that “[w]ithin 30 days after
any order or decision . . . any party to the action or proceeding . . . may apply
for a rehearing in respect to any matter determined in the action or proceeding,
or covered or included in the order.” Next, “[u]pon the filing of such motion for
rehearing,” the hearings examiner must “grant or deny the [motion], or
suspend the order or decision complained of pending further consideration.”
RSA 541:5. “Within thirty days after the application for a rehearing is denied,
or, if the application is granted, then within thirty days after the decision on
such rehearing, the applicant may appeal by petition to the supreme court.”
RSA 541:6. Thus, while Mooney styles his petition as a petition for writ of
certiorari, we will treat it as an appeal pursuant to RSA 541:6. We turn to the
merits of his petition.
Findings of fact made by a hearings examiner are prima facie lawful and
reasonable. Appeal of Jean-Guy’s Used Cars & Parts, 159 N.H. 38, 39 (2009).
We will not set aside the hearings examiner’s decision except for errors of law,
unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before it,
that such order is unjust or unreasonable. Id.; RSA 541:13 (2007). The
appealing party must prove that the decision was clearly unreasonable or
unlawful. Appeal of Jean-Guy’s Used Cars & Parts, 159 N.H. at 39; see RSA
541:13.
Although Mooney makes several arguments, the crux of his petition is a
challenge to Rule 707.12(c)(3), which requires the counselor “conducting the
exit evaluation and assessment interview [to] issue a positive finding, thus”
requiring the client to complete further treatment, “if . . . [t]he client has 2 or
more alcohol or drug-related motor vehicle arrests or convictions.” N.H.
Admin. R., He-A 707.12(c)(3). The counselor may also, “after conferring with
the program director,” decline to impose further counseling where the client
has two or more alcohol motor vehicle arrests or convictions “but in the
judgment of both the [counselor] and the program director a positive finding is
clinically contraindicated.” N.H. Admin. R., He-A 707.12(d). Mooney argues
that Rule 707.12(c)(3) imposes a penalty for an arrest, and that the penalty is
not specifically authorized by statute. Mooney also argues that the rule
unlawfully modifies statutory law.
The State argues that alcohol or drug-related motor vehicle arrests may
be used to consider whether further treatment is required, consistent with the
purpose of RSA chapter 265-A, which is to protect the public and treat alcohol
problems. The State contends that Rule 707.12 is valid because it furthers
these purposes and does no more than fill in statutory gaps.
4
Although “‘[r]ules adopted by State . . . agencies may not add to, detract
from, or in any way modify statutory law,’” the legislature may delegate the
authority to administrative agencies to “‘fill in details to effectuate the purpose
of the statute.’” Portsmouth Country Club v. Town of Greenland, 152 N.H.
617, 621 (2005) (quoting Opinion of the Justices, 121 N.H. 552, 557 (1981)).
“[T]he legislature must declare a general policy and prescribe standards for
administrative action.” Opinion of the Justices, 121 N.H. at 557. Agency
regulations that contradict the terms of a governing statute exceed the agency’s
authority. Appeal of Gallant, 125 N.H. 832, 834 (1984). Rules and regulations
promulgated by administrative agencies pursuant to a valid delegation of
authority have the force and effect of law. State v. Elementis Chem., 152 N.H.
794, 803 (2005).
The legislature delegated authority to the New Hampshire Department of
Health and Human Services to promulgate rules governing the IDIP. See RSA
265-A:39, IV(a), (e) (requiring commissioner of department of health and
human services to adopt rules regarding “[p]rocedures and forms to be followed
in order for drivers who have completed [the IDIP] to regain their licenses or
driving privileges” and “[a]ny other matter related to the proper administration
of this section and the protection of the public”). We have recognized that the
legislature “has specifically granted the IDIP the authority to determine
whether . . . an individual is in need of further counseling.” State v.
Parmenter, 149 N.H. 40, 46 (2002) (construing predecessor to RSA chapter
265-A).
We have stated “that the purpose of the DWI statutes is to prevent the
operation of cars by persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor.” State
v. Goding, 126 N.H. 50, 52 (1985) (quotation omitted) (construing predecessor
to RSA chapter 265-A). The “declared policy of the legislature” is that
“intoxicated drivers are a severe threat to the health and safety of the citizens
of New Hampshire and visitors from out-of-state who use our highways.” Id.
(quotation omitted). Rule 707.12(c)(3) effectuates this purpose. As noted
above, Rule 707.12(c)(3) requires the counselor “conducting the exit evaluation
and assessment interview [to] issue a positive finding, thus overcoming the
presumption of successful completion” if “[t]he client has 2 or more alcohol or
drug-related motor vehicle arrests or convictions.” We cannot conclude that
Rule 707.12 “add[s] to, detract[s] from, or in any way modif[ies] statutory law.”
Portsmouth Country Club, 152 N.H. at 621 (quotation omitted). Rather, this
rule “fill[s] in [the] details to effectuate the purpose of the statute,” which is to
protect the public. Id.; see Goding, 126 N.H. at 52. Accordingly, we hold that
Rule 707.12(c)(3) was promulgated pursuant to a valid delegation of authority
and therefore has the force and effect of a law. See Portsmouth Country Club,
152 N.H. at 621.
5
Rule 707.12(c)(3) is also consistent with RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(3) (amended
2010), which requires Mooney “to furnish proof of successful completion of an
[IDIP] prior to the restoration of the . . . driver’s license or privilege to drive.”
See also RSA 265-A:42, I (“The director of the Division of Motor Vehicles shall
not restore the license or driving privilege of any person whose license or
privilege has been revoked or suspended pursuant to RSA 265-A:2, I . . . until
such person has furnished proof of successful completion of an [IDIP].”); RSA
265:82-b, I(a)(3) (2004) (repealed). RSA 265-A:18, VII(c) defines “[s]uccessful
completion” of [an] [IDIP] as “meeting further counseling requirements, if any,
arising out of the final evaluation given to the offender at the [IDIP].” See also
Parmenter, 149 N.H. at 46 (“If, at the completion of the IDIP, it is recommended
that the individual receive additional counseling, the person must complete the
counseling in order to have his or her license restored.”) (construing
predecessor to RSA chapter 265-A).
We have carefully considered Mooney’s remaining arguments and
conclude that they are without merit and do not warrant further discussion.
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6