THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-753
ROBERT P. GRIMARD
v.
ROCKINGHAM COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
Argued: September 8, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 27, 2010
McKittrick Law Offices, of North Hampton (J. Joseph McKittrick on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Elizabeth A. Bailey
on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Robert P. Grimard, appeals a decision of
the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) affirming an order of the New Hampshire
Department of Labor (DOL) denying his wage claim and request for attorney’s
fees. We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. The petitioner is employed by the
respondent, Rockingham County Department of Corrections, as a salaried
exempt employee. His annual salary is $48,000, which he receives on a
bi-weekly basis. The petitioner received his paycheck, in full, at all times
relevant to this appeal.
Under the respondent’s leave policy, all employees accrue “earned time.”
The policy in existence at the time the petitioner filed his wage claim states, in
pertinent part:
EARNED TIME. Part-time and full-time employees accrue
Earned Time. Earned Time is an alternative approach to the
traditional manner of earning paid time off for vacation, personal
days and sick leave. Instead of dividing benefits into a specific
number of days for each category, Earned Time puts these days
together into a single benefit. Earned Time days can be used for a
variety of purposes, including a payment in cash based on the
formulae set forth below at the time of voluntary termination.
Bereavement Leave, Holidays and Jury Duty are provided as
separate benefits.
Earned time may be used any time after it has been earned, in units of one-
quarter hour or more. The petitioner accrues eighteen hours of earned time
each month. Under the earned time policy, when the petitioner leaves his
office during his regularly scheduled hours, his accrued earned time credit is
deducted accordingly. For example, if the petitioner leaves the office for a
doctor’s appointment and is absent for two hours, his earned time is reduced
by two hours.
The petitioner filed a wage claim with the DOL alleging that because he is
a salaried employee, he “should have no loss of earned time regardless of the
hours [he] work[s] in any one week based on RSA 275:43-b.” See RSA 275:43-
b, I (2010). The hearing officer denied the petitioner’s claim, finding that
because he was paid his salary, in full, for every pay period he was employed
and was notified in writing as to how his earned time would be deducted, the
petitioner was not owed any wages. The petitioner appealed the DOL decision
to the superior court, which upheld the DOL decision and denied the
petitioner’s request for attorney’s fees. This appeal followed.
“Any party aggrieved by [a DOL wage claim] decision may appeal to the
superior court . . . by petition, setting forth that the decision is erroneous, in
whole or in part, and specifying the grounds upon which the decision is
claimed to be in error.” RSA 275:51, V (2010). “The scope of review by the
superior court shall be limited to questions of law.” Id. “After hearing and
upon consideration of the record, the [superior] court may affirm, vacate or
modify in whole or in part the decision of the commissioner, or may remand the
matter to the commissioner for further findings.” Id. We, in turn, review de
2
novo the trial court’s decisions on questions of law. See Demers Agency v.
Widney, 155 N.H. 658, 660 (2007).
To resolve this appeal, we must determine whether the respondent
violated RSA 275:43-b, I, by deducting from the petitioner’s earned time in
accordance with its published policies. We are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. Appeal of Parkland Med. Ctr., 158 N.H. 67, 72 (2008). We first examine
the language of the statute, and, where possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Id. When the statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent, and we will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We also interpret
the statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation.
Liam Hooksett, LLC v. Boynton, 157 N.H. 625, 628 (2008).
The petitioner’s wage claim was brought under RSA 275:43-b, I, which
provides, in pertinent part: “A salaried employee shall receive full salary for
any pay period in which such employee performs any work without regard to
the number of days or hours worked,” except under certain specifically
enumerated circumstances.
RSA chapter 275 does not define the term “salary.” It does, however,
define a “salaried employee” as
any employee who under an employment agreement or as a matter
of policy or practice, regularly receives each pay period a
predetermined or fixed amount of money constituting
compensation, based on a predetermined amount of wages to be
paid as determined by a . . . bi-weekly rate, . . . and which amount
is not subject to reduction because of variations in the quality or
quantity of the work performed and regardless of the hours or days
worked except as otherwise provided in RSA 275:43-b.
RSA 275:42, VI (2010) (emphasis added). Under the plain language of the
pertinent statutes, a salaried employee is entitled to receive a fixed amount of
money to be paid at a specific time; i.e., a paycheck. It is this fixed amount of
money that constitutes the employee’s “salary” and cannot be reduced except
as provided in RSA 275:43-b.
The exceptions to the full salary requirement in RSA 275:43-b, I, support
a finding that the legislature intended “salary” to be limited to money received.
For instance, under RSA 275:43-b, I(e), an employer is not required to pay a
salaried employee’s full salary when,
3
[t]he salaried employee voluntarily, without coercion or pressure,
requests time off without pay for any portion of a pay period, after
the employee has exhausted any leave time pursuant to a written
bona fide leave plan, practice or policy and such leave time
requested by the employee is granted by the employer.
Thus, salary is intended to be separate and distinct from an employee’s leave
time and although an employer may not reduce a salaried employee’s salary, it
may reduce the employee’s leave time in a manner consistent with the
employer’s plan or policy.
At the DOL hearing, the petitioner testified that he was “[p]aid the same
amount in money” each week, and the respondent presented evidence that the
petitioner was always paid his full paycheck. Even though the petitioner’s
earned time may have been reduced, he nonetheless received his full salary.
Thus, there was no violation of RSA 275:43-b, I, and the trial court properly
denied the petitioner’s wage claim.
The petitioner’s appeal is premised upon his argument that by deducting
from his earned time, the respondent impermissibly reduced his compensation.
We recognize that the term “wages” is defined as “compensation,” RSA 275:42,
III (2010), and that we have previously held that compensation includes
employee benefits. See Gilman v. County of Cheshire, 126 N.H. 445, 448-49
(1985). However, the petitioner’s claim does not concern the definition of
“wages”; rather, it concerns the meaning of the word “salary” as used in RSA
275:43-b, I. Because “salary” is statutorily limited to the money received in
each pay period, a deduction of accrued earned time is not a reduction in
salary.
The trial court also properly denied the petitioner’s request for attorney’s
fees. “[W]hen the court has found a wage claim meritorious, it should exercise
its statutory discretion by awarding reasonable counsel fees.” Demers Agency,
155 N.H. at 664. Because the trial court did not find the wage claim to be
meritorious, it did not err by denying the request for attorney’s fees.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4