THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-232
WESLEY BECKLES & a.
v.
JENNIFER E. MADDEN, M.D. & a.
Argued: November 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: April 9, 2010
Lubin & Meyer, P.C., of Boston, Massachusetts (Suzanne C.M.
McDonough on the brief, and Benjamin R. Novotny orally), for the plaintiffs.
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, PLLC, of Manchester (Todd Hathaway on the
brief and orally), for defendants Jennifer E. Madden, M.D., Eugene A. Lesser,
D.O., Foundation Medical Partners, and Foundation Neurology.
Rath, Young and Pignatelli, PC, of Nashua (Kenneth C. Bartholomew on
the brief and orally), for defendant Nagbhushan S. Rao, M.D.
BRODERICK, C.J. The plaintiffs, Wesley and Maggie Beckles, appeal a
decision of the Superior Court (Barry, J.) granting summary judgment on their
medical malpractice claims in favor of the defendants, Jennifer E. Madden,
M.D., Eugene A. Lesser, D.O., Foundation Medical Partners, Foundation
Neurology, and Nagbhushan S. Rao, M.D. We reverse and remand.
I
We recite the undisputed facts provided in the record and in the trial
court’s order. Plaintiff Wesley Beckles sustained a neck injury at work. In
March 2003, Barbara O’Dea, M.D., not a named party to this lawsuit,
examined Mr. Beckles and noted symptoms that were not necessarily
consistent with his work injury. In particular, the medical records indicate
that he suffered tightness and tingling in different parts of his body,
numbness, a general feeling of muscle weakness, weakness to the left side of
his body, shock-like sensations, and difficulties with balance, gait and memory
recall. Her notes state that: “Gait is abnormal today with some questionable
weakness on the left side, at times with a mild limp, and at one point [he]
appeared to fall a bit against the wall to get back into upright posture. He had
a similar difficulty with attempting to squat, started to fall backwards a bit,
and I had to help support the patient with this.” She also documented that he
had “poor recollection of sequence of events or dates.” Dr. O’Dea’s
recommendations included evaluating whether Mr. Beckles had “metabolic
difficulty such as [vitamin] B12 deficiency causing pernicious anemia with
secondary neurological symptoms to this.” She referred him to a neurologist
and his primary care physician for further diagnosis and treatment.
On March 25, Mr. Beckles again met with Dr. O’Dea for a follow-up
appointment, and her progress notes indicate that he had recently missed two
scheduled appointments with a neurologist because he could not find “the right
location.” She also noted his “continued difficulties with the balance and sense
of wasting in his lower extremities,” and documented a recent episode in which
he lost his balance and fell at work. The doctor’s notes reflect that “[t]he
patient still ha[d] difficulty with gait,” continued to have “balance difficulties, at
times [came] close to touching the wall while trying to walk,” displayed “a
marked difficulty with attempting to do even a partial squat,” and “appear[ed]
to have some swaying tendency.”
The following day, Mr. Beckles was examined by Dr. Rao, a neurologist.
Dr. Rao was on temporary assignment at Foundation Neurology, and
neurologist Dr. Lesser co-signed Dr. Rao’s notes. Dr. Rao’s notes document
that Mr. Beckles continued to experience difficulty with his gait and balance.
In his description of Mr. Beckles’ condition, he noted: “He walks almost as if
he is spastic and has ataxia. On Romberg testing he almost fell to the left.
With his feet together he has some difficulty balancing himself.” When opining
on Mr. Beckles’ ability to work, Dr. Rao noted that “he should not be lifting
heavy things and should not be doing complicated maneuvers [and he] requires
close supervision to prevent any falls.” After noting several possible causes,
2
Dr. Rao ordered various testing including a blood test to check his “[vitamin]
B12 and folate levels.”
Two days later, on March 28, Mr. Beckles was examined by his primary
care physician, Dr. Madden. Dr. Madden documented Mr. Beckles’ problems
with numbness, coordination and gait, and concluded that his symptoms were
“associated with probable depression.” The doctor also noted that “I went
through his entire history of this event and examined him and he never
mentioned to me that he had been seen by Dr. Rao of neurology (Dr. Lesser’s
partner), just this week.” Dr. Madden prescribed medication, planned to wait
for “neurology to complete their workup,” and ordered a complete blood count.
The following weekend, on April 6, Mr. Beckles fell at home and fractured
a bone in his right leg. The circumstances surrounding the fall are unclear. A
medical progress note dated April 10 stated: “At home, . . . he became
unsteady and twisted his right ankle after a fall on 04/06/03.” Another
medical note documented: “He also tells me that . . . he fell fracturing his right
foot. He could not tell me the details.” However, one medical note stated: “In
retrospect, the patient probably had a rather severe B12 deficiency
contributing to gait disturbance which subsequently led to his fall in April.”
Dr. Rao examined Mr. Beckles at the end of April for a neurology follow-up, and
his notes reported: “I would like him to have physical therapy especially for
gait training as he had difficulty walking and was ataxic (causing his fall
resulting in a fracture). I hope the gait training will improve his ability to
walk.”
Subsequently, on June 7, Mr. Beckles was admitted to the emergency
department at Southern New Hampshire Medical Center where it was
discovered that blood clots had developed in one of his legs and traveled to his
lungs. He received thrombolytic therapy in order to dissolve the blood clots,
which ultimately caused him to suffer a brain hemorrhage. He also was
diagnosed and treated for vitamin B-12 deficiency, for which he will receive
injections over the course of his lifetime. Due to the brain hemorrhage, Mr.
Beckles suffered permanent brain damage, causing numerous disabilities. He
will require 24-hour care for the rest of his life. He is in his mid-60s with a
normal life expectancy and resides in a nursing home.
The plaintiffs filed suit against the defendants, alleging that they were
negligent in the medical care they provided to Mr. Beckles. Specifically, they
allege that the defendants failed to diagnose Mr. Beckles’ apparent vitamin B-
12 deficiency that was causing gait and balance problems, and also failed to
timely initiate precautionary measures to prevent him from falling. According
to the plaintiffs, Mr. Beckles’ fall and broken ankle were a direct result of the
defendants’ negligence, and this injury ultimately led to his brain hemorrhage
and other injuries.
3
The plaintiffs’ expert disclosure identified Dr. Barry Singer, a
hematologist from Pennsylvania, and Dr. Kenneth Fischer, a neurologist from
Florida. Dr. Fischer was deposed on February 15, 2008, and Dr. Singer was
deposed about two months later. Subsequently, the defendants moved for
summary judgment, contending that the plaintiffs’ medical experts were
unable to provide sufficient testimony to establish the necessary causal
connection between their alleged negligent care and Mr. Beckles’ fall. Over the
plaintiffs’ objection, the trial court granted the motion. The plaintiffs’ motion
for reconsideration was denied. This appeal followed.
II
A moving party is entitled to summary judgment “if the pleadings,
depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with
the affidavits filed, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact
and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” RSA
491:8-a, III (1997). “[T]he adverse party may not rest upon mere allegations or
denials of his pleadings, but his response, by affidavits or by reference to
depositions, answers to interrogatories, or admissions, must set forth specific
facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.” RSA 491:8-a, IV (1997).
We review the trial court’s grant of summary judgment by considering the
affidavits and other evidence, and the inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Smith v. HCA Health Servs.
of N.H., 159 N.H. 158, 160 (2009). “If this review does not reveal any genuine
issues of material fact, i.e., facts that would affect the outcome of the litigation,
and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will
affirm.” Id. We review the trial court’s application of law to the facts de novo.
Id.
The trial court concluded that the opinions of the plaintiffs’ two medical
experts were insufficient to warrant a reasonable juror’s conclusion that the
defendants’ alleged negligence caused Mr. Beckles to fall. It outlined the
plaintiffs’ burden in demonstrating causation as follows:
Mr. Beckles must prove that the defendants’ failure to diagnose the
B-12 deficiency and provide physical therapy or an assistive
device, such as a cane, was a substantial factor in bringing about
his fall. This means that he must demonstrate that, had the
defendants properly treated Mr. Beckles, he would have received
an assistive device or physical therapy prior to his fall on April 6
and that the assistive device and/or the physical therapy would
have prevented his fall.
The trial court concluded that the plaintiffs’ medical experts could not testify
with a sufficient level of probability that Mr. Beckles would have received
4
physical therapy or an assistive device prior to his fall, or that even if he had
received therapy and an assistive device, the fall would have been avoided. The
trial court ruled that the medical experts gave conclusory statements or bald
conclusions regarding causation which are insufficient to demonstrate that any
negligence on the part of the defendants caused Mr. Beckles’ fall.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in granting
summary judgment because the record reveals a genuine issue of material fact
on causation. They contend that the medical experts opined with reasonable
medical certainty that had the defendants immediately provided preventative
care to Mr. Beckles, it is more likely than not that he would not have fallen.
According to the plaintiffs, the various factual assumptions underlying the
expert medical opinions on causation relate to the weight and credibility to be
afforded to the opinions and constitute matters that are within the province of
the fact-finder, not the trial court.
Defendants Dr. Madden, Dr. Lesser, Foundation Medical Partners and
Foundation Neurology advance three arguments in support of the trial court’s
order. First, they contend that the plaintiffs’ expert testimony was insufficient
to establish causation. Second, they argue that it failed to meet the threshold
requirement of reliability under RSA 516:29-a. Third, they contend that even if
it had sufficient factual foundation and was reliable, the expert testimony failed
to establish causation as a matter of law. Dr. Rao, the remaining defendant,
contends that the expert testimony was insufficient to establish causation
because it was speculative, did not satisfy the necessary standard of
reasonable probability, and lacked any factual foundation.
III
A negligence action based upon a claim of medical malpractice is
governed by RSA chapter 507-E (1997 & Supp. 2009). RSA 507-E:2 provides
in part:
I. In any action for medical injury, the plaintiff shall have
the burden of proving by affirmative evidence which must include
expert testimony of a competent witness or witnesses:
(a) The standard of reasonable professional practice in the
medical care provider’s profession or specialty thereof, if any, at
the time the medical care in question was rendered; and
(b) That the medical care provider failed to act in accordance
with such standard; and
5
(c) That as a proximate result thereof, the injured person
suffered injuries which would not otherwise have occurred.
Thus, the plaintiffs must produce sufficient evidence that a doctor’s negligence
proximately caused the patient’s injury. See Bronson v. The Hitchcock Clinic,
140 N.H. 798, 801 (1996). Here, the defendants’ summary judgment motion
exclusively focused upon the causal connection between their alleged
negligence and Mr. Beckles’ fall. Thus, our review is likewise limited.
The concept of proximate cause includes both the cause-in-fact and the
legal cause for the injury. Id. Conduct is cause-in-fact if the injury, in this
case the fall, would not have occurred without that conduct. Id. The evidence
to support this causal link must be “sufficient to warrant a reasonable juror’s
conclusion that the causal link between the negligence and the injury probably
existed.” Id.; see also Goudreault v. Kleeman, 158 N.H. 236, 246 (2009); RSA
507-E:2, I(c). This standard is satisfied if the evidence shows “with reasonable
probability, not mathematical certainty, that but for the defendant’s negligence,
the harm would not have occurred.” Bronson, 140 N.H. at 802-03. “[L]egal
cause requires a plaintiff to establish that the negligent conduct was a
substantial factor in bringing about the harm.” Estate of Joshua T. v. State,
150 N.H. 405, 408 (2003). “Although the negligent conduct need not be the
sole cause of the injury, to establish proximate cause a plaintiff must prove
that the defendant’s conduct caused or contributed to cause the harm.” Id.
In medical malpractice cases, expert testimony is required to establish
proximate cause. See id. This requirement “serves to preclude the jury from
engaging in idle speculation.” Id. (quotation omitted). “A medical expert’s
competent opinion that the defendant’s negligence ‘probably caused’ the harm
establishes the quantum of expert testimony necessary.” Goudreault, 158 N.H.
at 246. Medical experts need not use specific words or phrases that mirror the
statutory standard in order to furnish sufficient evidence to support causation.
See Bronson, 140 N.H. at 804. Ultimately, resolution of the question of
proximate cause is generally for the trier of fact. Estate of Joshua T., 150 N.H.
at 408.
The dispute before us centers upon a somewhat narrow time frame,
starting with the doctor’s appointments on March 26 and March 28 and
concluding at the time of Mr. Beckles’ fall on April 6. It is our task to review
whether the summary judgment record, including the expert testimony, viewed
in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs as the non-moving parties, as well
as all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom, see Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co., 159
N.H. 232, 234 (2009), would be sufficient to warrant a reasonable juror’s
conclusion that the causal link between the defendants’ alleged negligence and
Mr. Beckles’ fall probably existed, see Bronson, 140 N.H. at 801.
6
As an initial matter, we note that defendants Dr. Madden, Dr. Lesser,
Foundation Medical Partners and Foundation Neurology contest whether an
opinion letter authored by one plaintiff expert, Dr. Fischer, should be
considered part of the summary judgment record, arguing that “[r]eliance on
the unsworn disclosure is inappropriate.” See Machenton v. Auto Leasing
Corp., 135 N.H. 298, 301-02 (1992) (deposition sufficient to satisfy affidavit
requirement under RSA 491:8-a, II). We decline to consider this argument,
however, because the defendants acknowledged at oral argument that the
expert’s letter was part of the summary judgment record before the trial court
and they did not move to strike it or otherwise seek to have it excluded.
Indeed, defense counsel had the same opinion letter marked as an exhibit
during Dr. Fischer’s deposition. Accordingly, we consider the expert’s opinion
letter part of the summary judgment record.
We also reject defendant Rao’s argument that we should apply a clearly
erroneous or unsustainable exercise of discretion standard in reviewing the
trial court’s summary judgment ruling regarding the sufficiency of the expert
medical testimony. Rather, our task is to review de novo the summary
judgment record in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs to determine
whether genuine issues of material fact exist and whether the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See Smith, 159 N.H. at 160. In
conducting this review, we are mindful that the question of proximate
causation is generally a matter for the trier of fact, see Estate of Joshua T., 150
N.H. at 408, and that experts are permitted to opine on hypothetical
circumstances that are supported by evidence and resemble the case at bar,
see Canney v. Travelers Insurance Co., 110 N.H. 304, 305 (1970).
We turn now to review the summary judgment record before us. The
plaintiffs’ experts, either collectively or individually, provided testimony on the
following points. They opined that acting in accord with the proper medical
standard of care, the defendants should have followed up on the blood testing
ordered by Dr. Rao to ascertain Mr. Beckles’ vitamin B-12 level and discovered
the deficiency, then counseled him and his wife on safety issues related to his
unstable gait and balance difficulties and ordered physical therapy. They
testified that Mr. Beckles would have engaged in a minimum of one physical
therapy session before his fall at which he would have received instruction and
training on how to safely walk and safely navigate, including standing up,
sitting, and lying down. According to the plaintiffs’ experts, Mr. Beckles should
have received an assistive device of some type, such as a cane or walker, from
either the defendant doctors or a physical therapist. Additionally, they opined
that given Mr. Beckles’ confused mental status and his history of missing
doctor appointments and problems with memory, proper medical care would
have required that Mrs. Beckles be included in the management of her
husband’s care to guard against falls, and to supervise him on matters
involving his physical instability.
7
With respect to physical therapy training, Dr. Fischer testified that he
has seen physical therapy sessions with patients many times. He described a
typical training session as including “safety first,” in which the therapist
evaluates the patient’s gait and potential problems for safety, and gives the
patient a proper assistive device “right at the first visit.” He also testified that
the training includes instructing the patient on how to use the device, as well
as how to stand up, sit, and lie down. Dr. Singer testified that at the first
session, a physical therapist would have given Mr. Beckles whatever was
necessary to provide for his safety, stating: “I mean, if the man couldn’t walk
they probably would have told him to stay in bed, if he couldn’t get around
successfully.”
Although the time frame between the alleged negligence and Mr. Beckles’
fall was relatively short, Dr. Singer’s deposition testimony suggests he believed
that the situation was urgent and should have prompted immediate attention
from the doctors. Moreover, both experts opined that proper precautionary
care was warranted, even without detecting the vitamin B-12 deficiency, given
Mr. Beckles’ history of gait and balance problems. Finally, they opined, either
directly or inferentially, that proper precautionary measures more likely than
not would have prevented Mr. Beckles from falling, and, as a direct result of
the defendants’ failure to implement proper precautionary measures to protect
Mr. Beckles, including providing him with an assistive device and training him
how to use it properly in different situations, he fell and fractured his ankle.
Defendant Rao argues that the plaintiffs’ expert opinions were
insufficient to establish causation because they opined, without any factual
foundation, that Mrs. Beckles’ involvement would have prevented her
husband’s fall and that Mr. Beckles lacked mental capacity to handle his own
medical affairs. In her affidavit, however, Mrs. Beckles averred that, “Had any
of the Doctors recommended gait training or physical therapy to help, I would
have ensured that he received it immediately.” Further, the medical records
raise a genuine factual dispute regarding his mental confusion. Dr. O’Dea
remarked that he had “poor recollection of sequence of events or dates,” and he
had recently missed two neurology appointments because he could not find the
location of the doctor’s office. Dr. Madden’s notes document that Mr. Beckles
failed to tell Dr. Madden that Mr. Beckles had just undergone a neurology
exam with Dr. Rao earlier that week.
Dr. Rao also argues that the plaintiffs’ expert testimony was particularly
speculative on whether his purported negligence proximately caused Mr.
Beckles’ fall. He contends that the results of the blood tests he ordered on
March 26 were returned mistakenly to the wrong doctor, and “[c]ommon sense
dictates that Dr. Rao would not [have] follow[ed] up . . . and notice[d] they were
missing for at least several days,” leaving insufficient time for him to take
measures to provide physical therapy and prevent the fall. The defendant,
8
however, fails to account for the expert testimony opining that: (1) the
situation was urgent and required immediate attention; and (2) immediate
precautionary care was required even absent detecting the vitamin B-12
deficiency.
The trial court concluded that the experts’ opinions were insufficient to
demonstrate causation because they collectively or individually speculated
about: (1) how long it would take to have blood drawn for a vitamin B-12 test;
(2) whether physical therapy would have occurred prior to the fall; (3) whether
Mr. Beckles would have been available for any physical therapy or blood
drawing appointments; (4) whether Mr. Beckles would have received a cane or
another assistive device from the doctors or from the physical therapist; and (5)
whether proper precautionary instruction and an assistive device would have
prevented the fall. However, the deposition testimony and Dr. Fischer’s opinion
letter viewed as a whole reveal that the experts opined that had the defendants
rendered proper medical care, the normal and expected time line and
procedure would likely have resulted in (1) securing blood test results by the
end of the week that Mr. Beckles was seen by the doctors, or early the following
week, (2) communicating the diagnosis and safety counseling to Mr. Beckles
and his wife almost immediately upon securing the test results, and (3)
beginning physical therapy training before Mr. Beckles fell. Moreover, they
opined that even without the vitamin B-12 deficiency, the same precautionary
measures were required given Mr. Beckles’ physical and mental symptoms.
Both of the plaintiffs’ experts acknowledged that timely preventative care
depended, in part, upon Mr. Beckles’ cooperation in meeting with the
physicians, in engaging in physical therapy, and in complying with safety
instructions. They also acknowledged that timely preventative care partly
depended upon timely blood testing, follow-up appointments, and appropriate
scheduling of physical therapy. Whether or not these underlying events were
more likely than not to have occurred given the particular individuals involved
and the circumstances of the case are issues of fact for the jury to resolve. Cf.
id. (facts assumed in hypothetical scenario opined upon by an expert must be
supported by the evidence and resemble the case before the jury). The
defendants correctly assert that the plaintiffs must demonstrate each
necessary step in the causal connection between the defendants’ alleged
negligence and Mr. Beckles’ fall in order to recover on their negligence claims.
In this case, however, several factual issues relevant to causation can be
established through lay testimony rather than expert testimony, such as the
likelihood that Mr. Beckles would have complied with physical therapy training
and that Mrs. Beckles would have supervised her husband.
The trial court noted that “there is no concrete evidence regarding the
factual circumstances surrounding Mr. Beckles’s fall,” and defendant Rao
argues that a causal link cannot be established because “there is so little
9
information as to how the fall actually occurred and the reasons for his falling.”
However, viewing the record in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, a
genuine issue of material fact exists regarding the circumstances surrounding
the fall and their relationship to the purported negligence in this case. For
example, one medical progress note states: “At home, he states he became
unsteady and twisted his right ankle after a fall on 04/06/03.” Yet, another
medical note authored by Dr. Rao documents that: “He also tells me that . . .
he fell fracturing his right foot. He could not tell me the details.” Dr. Singer’s
deposition testimony suggests that he fell while trying to get out of bed, and
defense counsel stated that Mrs. Beckles had “testified [during deposition] that
he fell that week when he was trying to get out of bed.” Two medical notes
appear to directly attribute Mr. Beckles’ fall to his unstable walking gait.
Specifically, Dr. Rao’s April 22 notes state that: “I would like him to have
physical therapy especially for gait training as he had difficulty walking and
was ataxic (causing his fall resulting in a fracture). I hope the gait training will
improve his ability to walk.” Additionally, a transfer summary note states that
“[i]n retrospect, the patient probably had a rather severe B12 deficiency
contributing to gait disturbance which subsequently led to his fall in April.”
We conclude that the circumstances surrounding the fall as relevant to the
proximate cause element involve issues of fact that are properly left to the jury
to resolve.
The trial court also was troubled by some of the indecisive phraseology
used by the experts at different times during their depositions. On several
occasions when faced with different scenarios offered by defense counsel, the
experts qualified their answers, stating that they would be “speculating.” At
one point, Dr. Singer testified that he “can’t say one way or the other” whether
gait training “would probably have prevented this fall in this particular case.”
(Emphases added.) Further, at times when pressed on the likely occurrence of
certain foundational facts, (e.g., whether the physical therapy training would
have occurred in a timely manner), the doctors responded indecisively.
However, the experts also gave definitive answers. For example, when
Dr. Fischer was asked the basis for stating that Mr. Beckles would have
received physical therapy, gait training and an assistive device before his fall,
he answered, “It doesn’t take five days. It may take a day or so to get physical
therapy evaluation, but not five days.” Moreover, summary judgment should
not be applied to foreclose the plaintiffs from submitting evidence on the
factual assumptions underlying the experts’ opinions, such as whether Mr.
Beckles would have promptly attended a follow-up appointment given his
apparently poor memory. The existence of the ultimate facts upon which the
experts’ opinions rest should be left to the jury in this case.
In addition, when the deposition testimony is read in the light most
favorable to the plaintiffs, it appears that the plaintiffs’ experts did not vacillate
10
as to what they ultimately opined likely happened in this case. For example,
Dr. Singer stated:
My opinion is that diagnosing the Vitamin B-12 deficiency would
have allowed better precautionary care of the patient such as the
fall would have been prevented. . . . [P]reventative as far as
preventing the fall in my opinion could have been instituted.
Dr. Fischer stated: “But the diagnosis being made by Dr. Rao correctly and
timely, and doing the other aspect of that, of providing the physical therapy,
gait training and counseling, more likely than not would have prevented the
fall.” When asked whether proper physical therapy training would have
prevented Mr. Beckles from falling, Dr. Fischer stated:
I can’t say with certainty, but I think with the medical probability.
Again, looking at Dr. Rao’s report on [April] 22nd, he fell because
he was clumsy. He was unsupervised. He didn’t have an assistive
device. That all would have been prevented had he had therapy,
had some training and had an assistive device. So the answer is
more likely than not [the fall] would have been prevented.
Moreover, in his opinion letter, Dr. Fischer clearly attributed Mr. Beckles’
fall to the defendants’ alleged substandard medical care.
We disagree with the characterization by the trial court and the
defendants that the expert opinions consist of bald conclusions and conclusory
statements. Rather, the plaintiffs’ experts explained the normal and expected
time line and the procedures for providing proper precautionary measures to
ensure Mr. Beckles’ safety, and opined that had these procedures been
followed, Mr. Beckles probably would not have fallen. Compare Randall v.
Benton, 147 N.H. 786, 790 (2002) (while expert testified that the suicide was a
foreseeable event and that defendant’s deviations caused or substantially
contributed to the suicide, the plaintiff offered no specific lay or expert
testimony to demonstrate that if the defendant had taken the additional steps
recommended by the plaintiff’s expert, the deceased would not have otherwise
committed suicide), with Hodgdon v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 147 N.H. 286, 290-91
(2001) (causation sufficiently shown by expert testimony that medical records
show that “chances are” at least 50 percent of plaintiff’s optic nerve was still
functioning while at the emergency room, and that plaintiff ultimately suffered
injury that she otherwise would not have suffered had physician properly
diagnosed and immediately treated her condition).
We conclude that the summary judgment record, including the expert
testimony and opinion letter, as well as all reasonable inferences drawn
therefrom, when viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiffs, would be
11
sufficient for a reasonable juror to conclude that from the time Mr. Beckles was
seen by the defendants on March 26 and on March 28, there was a reasonable
probability that had the defendants provided proper precautionary care, Mr.
Beckles would not have fallen on April 6. Cf. St. Pierre v. Elgert, 145 N.H. 620,
624 (2000) (expert testimony sufficient to withstand motion for directed verdict
where he testified that there was a “reasonable medical probability” that the
plaintiff’s infection in her uterus was “instigated and started by” the
defendant’s medical failure). The particular factual uncertainties underlying
the experts’ testimony did not render their opinions insufficient such that
causation could be resolved as a matter of law in this case. Accordingly, we
reverse the trial court’s ruling granting summary judgment to the defendants
on the issue of causation.
IV
Defendants Dr. Lesser, Dr. Madden, Foundation Medical Partners and
Foundation Neurology argue that the expert medical opinions in this case were
not reliable and were merely “speculation dressed-up as expert analysis,”
lacking any “scientific or other methodology.” Relying upon RSA 516:29-a, they
argue that the trial court properly discounted such evidence because the
experts’ testimony would not be admissible at trial. The trial court, however,
did not address the reliability of the expert testimony under RSA 516:29-a
(2007), see Goudreault, 158 N.H. at 246-47, and, therefore, that issue is not
properly before us.
Finally, according to defendants Dr. Lesser, Dr. Madden, Foundation
Medical Partners and Foundation Neurology, the trial court concluded that the
facts of this case do not establish causation as a matter of law even if the
plaintiffs’ expert testimony is sufficient and reliable. They argue that the chain
of events starting from the defendants’ alleged failure to diagnose the vitamin
B-12 deficiency leading to Mr. Beckles’ brain hemorrhage involve “far too many
speculative leaps of faith” and “[t]he individual risk of each [precipitating event
leading to the final result] is incredibly small” such that the risk of each event
happening in a single case “is just too unforeseeable to amount to legal
causation under New Hampshire law.” Because the defendants/ misconstrue
the trial court’s ruling, we decline to reach the merits of their argument.
The trial court, after concluding that “Dr. Singer’s testimony is
insufficient to demonstrate causation,” ruled that: “Additionally, the Court
notes that, even after considering the testimonies of both doctors, there are
insufficient facts to demonstrate a causal link between any negligence of the
defendants and Mr. Beckles’s fall.” (Emphases added.) The trial court’s ruling
simply summarizes its conclusion regarding the expert testimony of both Dr.
Singer and Dr. Fischer in relation to Mr. Beckles’ fall. It did not render a ruling
that, even if the expert testimony was sufficient as to causation of the fall, it
12
was insufficient to establish causation of all the alleged injuries, including the
brain hemorrhage and resulting disabilities.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
13