THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-075
BRENTWOOD VOLUNTEER FIREMAN'S ASSOCIATION
v.
DANIEL E. MUSSO, SR.
Submitted: November 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 4, 2009
Craig N. Salomon, of North Hampton, by brief, for the petitioner.
Michael E. Chubrich, of Portsmouth, by brief, for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The respondent, Daniel E. Musso, Sr., appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) granting the petition to quiet title and for
temporary and permanent injunctions filed by the petitioner, Brentwood
Volunteer Fireman’s Association. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Since 1992, the respondent has
operated a motor vehicle repair business on a parcel of land in Brentwood,
approximately one acre in size, which he eventually purchased in 1995. The
deed to him described the parcel as
lying on the Easterly side of [Crawley Falls Road] . . . and bounded
. . . Westerly by said road and Easterly by land of G. Russell Rowe,
the same being the mill yard and mill privilege situated on the
Exeter River at Crawley’s Falls, so-called, being the middle dam or
privilege at said Falls, together with all the mills and machinery
situated thereon, and also the mill dam and the right of the
flowage connected therewith, and all land connected with said
privilege on both sides of said River.
Also since 1992, the respondent has, with the petitioner’s permission, used
land located across Crawley Falls Road for additional customer parking and
storage. This land is the subject of the instant litigation.
The disputed parcel is located within a larger parcel owned by the
petitioner. A deed to the disputed parcel describes it as a triangular tract of
land “on the westerly side of . . . Crawley Falls Road[ ] and on the southerly
side of the Exeter River,” bounded “Easterly by [Crawley Falls Road],
Southwesterly by land of the heirs of Joseph Sandborn and Northerly by said
Exeter River together with the Mill Privileges and all right in the dam across the
river.”
The petitioner brought the present petition to defend against the
respondent’s claim that he owned the disputed parcel and to enjoin him from
using it to store firewood, various pieces of equipment and registered and
unregistered motor vehicles. The respondent argued that because his deed
included a mill privilege, he owned the disputed property. The trial court
rejected this claim, ruling that any mill privilege the respondent may have
possessed was lost by adverse possession or abandonment.
On appeal, the respondent contends that this ruling was error. He also
argues that the trial court erred when it found, based upon a certain exhibit,
that the petitioner owned the disputed property. We address these arguments
in turn. We do not address the respondent’s assertion that the trial court’s
decision deprived him of his property without due process in violation of Part I,
Article 15 of the State Constitution because he has failed to brief this argument
sufficiently and demonstrate that he preserved it for our review. See Appeal of
Omega Entm’t, 156 N.H. 282, 287 (2007); Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
In an action to quiet title, the burden is on each party to prove good title
as against all other parties whose rights may be affected by the court’s decree.
Hersh v. Plonski, 156 N.H. 511, 514 (2007). A trial court may not render
judgment quieting title to disputed property in the absence of parties with a
duly recorded interest in the property, unless those parties claimed no interest
and the petition so alleged. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s determination
unless it is erroneous as a matter of law or unsupported by the evidence. Id.
2
The respondent first argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that
any mill privilege he may have had was lost by abandonment or adverse
possession. He contends that “[m]ill rights and mill privileges can be lost or
extinguished only by adverse possession or by adverse use that makes it
impossible to exercise [those] . . . rights or . . . privileges,” and that the
petitioner’s “desultory occasional use of the Disputed Area” and its
construction of “two ‘little sheds’” was insufficient to constitute the requisite
adverse use.
The term “mill privilege” means “the land and water used with the mill,
and on which it and its appendages stand.” Moore v. Fletcher, 16 Me. 63, 65
(1839). When a mill privilege is conveyed without any exact bounds set forth in
the deed, “such deeds have been held to convey so much land as was
necessary, and customarily used with the mill.” Maddox v. Goddard, 15 Me.
218, 224 (1839). We need not address whether the mill privilege granted to the
respondent included the right to the disputed property because, as the trial
court aptly found, any mill privilege he could have possessed was abandoned
long ago.
Contrary to the respondent’s assertions, a mill privilege may be lost
through abandonment. See J. Angell, A Treatise on the Law of Watercourses
§§ 496-99, at 571-72 (5th ed. 1854). Abandonment may be found when the
owner of a mill site expressly declares that he no longer intends “to keep up the
mill, accompanied with correspondent acts, such as removing the dam and
mill, and giving notice of such intention to those whose lands he has flowed,
and to whom he has paid damages.” Id. § 497, at 572. Nonuse of the site “for
an unreasonable length of time,” will also result in loss of a mill privilege. Id.
§ 498, at 572. “[T]he entire and continued disuse of such mill site for twenty
years, is strong prima facie evidence of a non-user for an unreasonable length
of time; and unless rebutted by clear and satisfactory proof, it is conclusive.”
Id. The trial court found that no mill activity has taken place on the
respondent’s property since at least 1934. In light of this finding, which the
respondent does not dispute on appeal, we hold that the trial court did not err
when it found that the respondent’s mill privilege was abandoned.
The respondent next asserts that the trial court erred when it found that
the petitioner had record title to the disputed property based upon an affidavit
from Stuart S. Wilson, Jr. and attached 2007 quitclaim deeds to the petitioner
from the shareholders of Delaware Holding Co., Inc., a corporation that
previously owned the disputed parcel and dissolved in 1988. The respondent
contends that the deeds failed to satisfy the petitioner’s burden to prove that it
had good title to the property. See Hersh, 156 N.H. at 514.
The respondent argues that the petitioner “made no effort to prove the
applicable provision of New York law, which controls the question of who owns
3
the assets of a defunct and dissolved New York corporation.” He contends that
to prove this, the petitioner was required to submit expert testimony “regarding
the law controlling New York corporations.” Absent such proof, he argues, the
petitioner failed to establish that it had good title to the disputed property. We
disagree. The respondent does not cite, and we are not aware of, any case to
support the proposition that expert witness testimony is required in a bench
trial to educate the court about the applicable law. Moreover, it is well
established that “[a]fter dissolution, the property of [a] corporation passes to
[its] shareholders, subject to the payment of corporate debts.” 16A W. Fletcher,
Fletcher Cyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations § 8224, at 437 (2003).
New York law is in accord. See N.Y. Business Corporation Law § 1005
(McKinney 2003).
The respondent next argues that, because Delaware Holding Company,
Inc. was a foreign corporation, it could not dissolve and its assets could not
pass to its shareholders unless it first registered with the New Hampshire
Secretary of State pursuant to RSA 293-A:15.03 (1999). RSA 293-A:15.03 sets
forth the procedure by which a foreign corporation may apply for a certificate of
authority to transact business in New Hampshire. The respondent has not
cited any authority, and we are not aware of any, to support his assertion that
dissolution, in and of itself, constitutes “transacting business” in New
Hampshire for the purposes of RSA chapter 293-A. We, therefore, reject his
contention that the failure of Delaware Holding Company, Inc. to register in
New Hampshire precluded the company from dissolving and from passing its
assets to its shareholders in accordance with New York law. The respondent’s
remaining arguments are without merit and do not warrant further discussion.
See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4