THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2009-280
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GEORGE REID
Argued: January 6, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lothstein Law Office, PLLC, of Concord (Theodore Lothstein on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, George Reid, appeals his conviction by a
jury on two counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:2
(Supp. 2003), and two counts of felonious sexual assault, see RSA 632-A:3
(Supp. 2003). He argues that the Trial Court (Brown, J.) erred when it allowed
the State to admit a videotape of the victim’s interview with police and when it
denied his motion for a mistrial. We affirm.
The record reflects the following facts. In 2003, the defendant was living
with the victim’s grandmother. The victim, E.B., visited her grandmother and
the defendant numerous times a week at their home, where they had a
swimming pool and a hot tub. On at least one occasion, the defendant and
E.B. were in the hot tub alone and the defendant did not have clothes on; the
defendant told E.B. to come to him, pulled her bathing suit bottom down to her
knees, and placed his penis between her buttocks. Occasionally, the victim
also slept in the same bed with her grandmother and the defendant. On at
least one occasion, the defendant pulled down E.B.’s pajama pants and put his
penis between her buttocks. E.B. also told investigators that the defendant
penetrated her vagina with his penis and his finger. On May 6, 2004, E.B. gave
a videotaped interview with an investigator, Nancy Harris-Burovac, and
described the incidents involving the defendant.
During the trial, which took place in January 2009, the State attempted
to introduce the victim’s videotaped statement as a recorded recollection. The
victim testified that she remembered giving the videotaped interview and that
at the time of the interview her memory was better than it was at trial. She
testified that she had viewed the videotape and did not remember some of the
events that she described on the videotape. E.B. specifically testified that she
did not remember any of the sexual assaults involving vaginal penetration, but
that when she was interviewed she tried to tell the truth about “what happened
with George.” When defense counsel questioned the victim about some of the
specific allegations, she was unable to testify to a memory of whether the
assaults had occurred.
The trial court ruled that, with regard to the vaginal penetration charges,
the victim had first-hand knowledge of the events, that she presently lacked
sufficient memory of the event to testify fully and accurately, that the recorded
statement was made at or near the time of the event when the witness had
declared an accurate memory of the statement, and that the recorded
statement accurately reflected the witness’s knowledge. The State was then
permitted to play an edited portion of the videotaped interview relating to the
vaginal penetration charges.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that the trial court erred in
allowing the State to introduce the victim’s videotaped interview with an
investigator under the recorded recollection exception to the hearsay rule. “We
review the trial court’s decisions on the admissibility of evidence under an
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.” State v. Beede, 156 N.H. 102,
105 (2007). “Therefore, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s
rulings were clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.”
Id.
“‘Hearsay’ is a statement, other than one made by the declarant while
testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the
matter asserted.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(c). Hearsay is inadmissible unless it falls
2
within one of the specifically enumerated exceptions provided in the rules of
evidence. See N.H. R. Ev. 802. To be admissible under the “recorded
recollection” exception, a recorded statement must meet the following
requirements:
(1) the witness once had firsthand knowledge about the event; (2)
the witness now lacks sufficient memory of the event to testify fully
and accurately; (3) the recorded statement was made at or near the
time of the event when the witness had a clear and accurate
memory of it; and (4) the recorded statement accurately reflects the
witness’s knowledge.
State v. Locke, 139 N.H. 741, 743 (1995); see N.H. R. Ev. 803(5).
The defendant contends that the State did not satisfy the third and
fourth prongs of the foundation for a recorded recollection. We disagree. The
third prong requires that the recorded statement be made at or near the time of
the event when the witness had a clear and accurate memory of it. The victim
disclosed the incidents to her mother on April 22, 2004, and gave her taped
interview on May 6, 2004. In Locke, we found that the trial court properly
exercised its discretion in finding that the third prong was satisfied when a
videotape of the victim’s statement was made “within a few weeks of the
disclosure of the incidents.” Locke, 139 N.H. at 743-44. Here, the videotaped
statement was made fourteen days after the disclosure of the incidents. At
trial, the victim testified that when she made the videotaped statement she had
a clear memory of the events. We find that the trial court was well within its
discretion to find that the third prong of the recorded recollection exception
was met.
The fourth prong requires that the recorded statement accurately reflect
the witness’s knowledge. The defendant argues that because the victim
equivocated as to whether the incidents described in the videotaped interview
actually took place, the State did not show that the statement accurately
reflects the victim’s knowledge.
Rule 803(5) does not specify any particular method of establishing
the knowledge of the declarant nor the accuracy of the statement.
It is not a sine qua non of admissibility that the witness actually
vouch for the accuracy of the written memorandum. Admissibility
is, instead, to be determined on a case-by-case basis upon a
consideration . . . of factors indicating trustworthiness, or the lack
thereof.
United States v. Porter, 986 F.2d 1014, 1017 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 510 U.S.
933 (1993). While the general rule is that the witness must confirm the
3
accuracy of the recorded statement, “unless the witness has expressly
repudiated it on the stand the trial judge may consider all of the circumstances
in finding the requisite confirmation, including the demeanor of the witness in
court . . . as well as the conditions under which the out-of-court statement was
made.” Pickett v. United States, 822 A.2d 404, 406 (D.C. 2003).
Here, the victim never repudiated the accuracy of the taped portion of the
statement that was played for the jury. At trial, she could not remember the
events described in the video at all and was unable to provide any information
to either the State or defense counsel as to the accuracy of the recorded
statements. The trial court was in the best position to determine the
admissibility of the recording based upon a consideration of the factors
indicating the trustworthiness of the statement. The trial court had the
opportunity to observe testimony from the victim witness on multiple occasions
regarding her memory of the events discussed in the video. The trial court also
viewed the video in advance of showing it to the jury and considered the
demeanor of the victim while making the statements. In ruling on the
admissibility of the video, the trial court found that “[t]he recorded statement
was made at or near the time of the event, when the witness had declared an
accurate memory of it and of the recorded statement . . . . The recorded
statement accurately reflects the witness’ knowledge.” “[T]o the extent the
finding reflects the court’s firsthand observations of the witness’s demeanor, it
is deserving of considerable deference.” Locke, 139 N.H. at 743.
Additionally, the record supports a finding that the videotaped statement
accurately reflected the victim’s knowledge of the abuse at the time she made
the statement. As previously mentioned, the interview occurred two weeks
following the disclosure of the incidents. At trial, the victim testified that she
remembered meeting with “Nancy” for the interview to “talk to her about what
happened, what George had done.” She testified that her memory at the time
of the interview was better than it was at present. She testified that she had
tried to forget the incidents in the intervening years “so it [didn’t] worry [her],”
but that when she spoke to the investigator on the videotape, she tried to tell
her everything that happened with the defendant. Finally, the victim testified
that when she spoke with the investigator, she was telling her the truth about
the incidents that occurred with the defendant. Given this testimony, we find
that the trial court properly exercised its discretion in finding that the fourth
prong of the recorded recollection exception was met.
The defendant also argues that the admission of the videotaped interview
violated his right to confrontation under the Sixth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution. The defendant contends that because E.B. claimed to have no
memory of the charged events, she was not available for cross-examination.
We have previously held that the admission of a witness’s prior statement does
not violate the federal right to confrontation if the witness is present for cross-
4
examination, even if the witness has no recollection of the events. State v.
Legere, 157 N.H. 746, 755-56 (2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1623 (2009). The
defendant urges us overrule our decision in Legere and hold that a witness who
cannot remember the events described in a prior statement is not available to
defend or explain that statement as required by the right of confrontation. We
find no reason to overrule our decision in Legere, and, because it controls this
case, we find that the defendant’s right to confrontation was not violated.
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in not granting a
mistrial after the State introduced evidence of the defendant’s silence in
violation of the Fifth Amendment and Part I, Article 15 of the State
Constitution. The defendant also contends that the manner in which the
evidence was elicited constituted prosecutorial overreaching requiring a
mistrial.
During the direct examination of Officer Patrick Emerson, the prosecutor
asked him whether during his investigation he spoke to persons who may have
had relevant information. Officer Emerson responded, “I did. I subsequently
ended up interviewing Benjamin [B.], who is [E.B.’s] grandfather, his wife Alice.
I interviewed Sally Ann [B.], and I also attempted to interview Lynn [B.] and Mr.
Reid.” A few questions later the prosecutor asked, “You indicated that you
wanted to, or tried to talk to Mr. Reid; is that correct?” and Emerson
responded, “It’s correct.” The defendant objected and a bench conference
ensued.
At the bench, defense counsel argued that the previous question and
answer constituted an improper comment on the defendant’s right to remain
silent in violation of Doyle v. Ohio, 426 U.S. 610, 618-19 (1976). The
prosecutor explained that he asked the question because he did not want
defense counsel to claim during closing argument that the State had conducted
an inadequate investigation. The trial court ruled that it would “rather not
have [the State] go there,” and insisted that defense counsel was “not going to
talk about shoddy work.” Defense counsel indicated that he would likely move
for a mistrial “in light of a prior ruling from [the trial court] barring this
question to this very witness in this very subject matter.” The trial court
allowed the examination of Emerson to continue and heard the defendant’s
motion during the afternoon recess.
During the motion hearing, defense counsel argued that not only was the
line of questioning a violation of the defendant’s constitutional right to remain
silent, which required a mistrial, but because the prosecutor had been on
notice that such a line of questioning was inadmissible, the question itself
constituted prosecutorial misconduct requiring dismissal with prejudice.
Before the prosecutor responded to the motion, the trial court noted that it
5
“[did] not find any prosecutorial [mis]conduct [had] occurred in front of [the
trial court] on the examination of [Officer Emerson].”
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion for a mistrial, finding that
“a mere reference by a witness to a defendant’s silence . . . does not necessarily
require a mistrial.” The court ruled that “a curative instruction is appropriate
and will cure any problem we’ll have.” Defense counsel elected not to have the
court read the curative instruction because “it [would] draw undue attention to
a Constitutional infirmity.”
We first address the defendant’s claims under the State Constitution,
and cite federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 232-33
(1983). “Mistrial is the proper remedy only if the evidence or comment
complained of was not merely improper, but also so prejudicial that it
constitutes an irreparable injustice that cannot be cured by jury instructions.”
State v. Neeper, 160 N.H. 11, 15 (2010) (quotation omitted). “Because the trial
court is in the best position to gauge the prejudicial nature of the testimony
being challenged, the court’s ruling on a motion for mistrial will not be
overturned absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Gibson,
153 N.H. 454, 459-60 (2006). A defendant’s pre-arrest silence may be used to
impeach his credibility, but the use of pre-arrest silence in the State’s case-in-
chief is unconstitutional. State v. Remick, 149 N.H. 745, 747 (2003). “A mere
reference by a witness to a defendant’s silence, without more, however, does
not necessarily require a mistrial.” State v. Spaulding, 147 N.H. 583, 587
(2002).
We first review whether the reference to the defendant’s silence could be
cured with a jury instruction. “An instruction to disregard the reference to
silence is generally sufficient in the absence of prosecutorial misconduct or
comment that cannot be cured by a cautionary jury instruction.” Id. at 547.
Here, the line of questioning referring to the officer’s attempts to interview the
defendant was cut off immediately after the witness confirmed an attempt to
interview the defendant. The trial court found that the question had been
stopped “before it got out of the barn.” The question here, whether the officer
attempted to interview the defendant, standing by itself, is not a sufficiently
clear reference to the defendant’s invocation of his right to remain silent so as
to substantially prejudice him to the level requiring a mistrial. The trial court
properly exercised its discretion in finding that reference to the defendant’s
silence could be cured with a cautionary instruction. The trial court offered to
give a cautionary instruction, but defense counsel rejected the offer. “This may
well have been a sensible decision, but it was a decision that does not now
entitle the defendant to the drastic and wholly unnecessary alternative of
declaring a mistrial.” State v. Cote, 126 N.H. 514, 531 (1985).
6
We next address the defendant’s assertion that the prosecutor’s question
to Officer Emerson constituted prosecutorial misconduct. “A prosecutor’s
impermissible comment may require a new trial either because the misconduct
so poisoned the well that the trial’s outcome was likely affected or the breach
was so egregious that reversal becomes a desirable sanction to forestall future
prosecutorial trespasses.” State v. Turgeon, 137 N.H. 544, 546-47 (1993)
(quotations omitted). The defendant points out that the first trial in this case
resulted in a mistrial and asserts that because in the prior trial, the trial court
ruled that the prosecutor’s line of questioning regarding Officer Emerson’s
attempt to interview the defendant was impermissible, any similar attempt in
the second trial was prosecutorial misconduct. During the defendant’s motion
for a mistrial, the transcript of the questioning from the first trial was read into
the record:
Question: “And in all, do you have any idea of how many
interviews you might have conducted in the course of this case?”
Answer: “I interviewed Sally Ann [B.], the aunt to the victim, I
interviewed Alison and Benjamin [B.], the biological father of E.B.,
and her step-grandmother, and I believe that’s it.”
Question: “Okay. Would it be your preference to interview
someone who was an alleged suspect in an investigation like this?”
Answer: “Absolutely.[”]
Question: [“]Did you make any efforts to sit down [with] Mr. Reid
and talk to him?”
Answer: “Later in the investigation, I made attempts to contact
him.”
At that point in the first trial, defense counsel objected and the prosecutor
explained to the trial court where the line of questioning was headed. The trial
court ruled that it “[didn’t] want to go down that road,” and sustained the
objection.
During the first trial, the inquiry into Officer Emerson’s attempts to
interview the defendant was initiated by the prosecutor, who then asked follow-
up questions regarding the interview attempts. However, in this case, the
officer made reference to his attempt to interview the defendant without being
asked by the prosecutor, and the prosecutor later asked him to confirm his
statement in an attempt to diffuse any claim of inadequate police work. This
line of questioning ceased immediately upon defense counsel’s objection and
was not explored again for the rest of the trial. We cannot say that the
7
prosecutor’s question “so poisoned the well that the trial’s outcome was likely
affected or [that] the breach was so egregious that reversal [is] a desirable
sanction to forestall future prosecutorial trespasses.” Turgeon, 137 N.H. at
546-47 (quotations omitted). The trial court was well within its discretion to
find that there was no prosecutorial misconduct committed by the State.
Because the State Constitution is at least as protective as the Federal
Constitution under these circumstances, see State v. Anderson, 141 N.H. 168,
169 (1996), we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8