THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2009-357
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL FICHERA
Argued: April 22, 2010
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. Following a jury trial, the defendant, Daniel Fichera, was
convicted of second degree assault. On appeal, he contends that the Trial
Court (Brown, J.) erred in imposing an enhanced sentence pursuant to RSA
651:2, II-g (2007). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The defendant separated from
the victim, his wife, in 2003. Several months later, the victim agreed to meet
the defendant to discuss obtaining a variance to a parcel of property that they
owned jointly, which they accessed through a neighbor’s driveway. When the
victim arrived at the defendant’s home, she agreed to drive with him in his
recreational vehicle (RV) to the parcel; she thought that she and the defendant
were going to meet with the neighbor at the neighbor’s house. When they
arrived at the neighbor’s house, the house was dark. The defendant stated
that the neighbor would be along soon and that they should wait at the parcel;
he suggested they have a picnic while waiting. As time passed and the
neighbor did not arrive, the defendant became more agitated. He asked the
victim to write on a piece of paper that she was an adulterous woman. He then
retrieved a shotgun from the RV. When the victim attempted to leave, the
defendant grabbed her and pushed her into the RV. When she again tried to
leave, he blocked her. Subsequently, he pulled a pair of handcuffs and duct
tape from a bag and attempted unsuccessfully to handcuff the victim. After
some time, as the sun was setting, the victim told him she had to leave. He
told her, “Woman, I love you so much . . . but you’re gonna die.” He then shot
her in the chest. As she attempted to escape, he caught her and, using the
rifle as a club, beat her on the back of her head and the back of her shoulders.
When the defendant ran back to the RV, the victim was able to escape to a
neighbor’s house.
The defendant was subsequently indicted on charges of attempted
murder, first degree assault, and kidnapping. The attempted murder
indictment alleged that he “did shoot [the victim] in the chest with a shotgun.”
The first degree assault indictment alleged that he caused bodily injury to the
victim by “strik[ing her] in the head with the butt end of a shotgun.”
Near the end of trial, the court and counsel discussed jury instructions,
including lesser included offense instructions. The defendant argued, inter
alia, that as to the attempted murder charge, the evidence was insufficient to
support an instruction on first degree assault as a lesser included offense, but
was sufficient to support an instruction on second degree assault. The court
instructed the jury on second degree assault as a lesser included offense of
attempted murder. The defendant was convicted of second degree assault.
The trial court, after finding “that the jury could only have found the defendant
guilty of the lesser included second-degree assault if they also found that he
used a firearm,” imposed an enhanced sentence pursuant to RSA 651:2, II-g.
On appeal, the defendant argues that, in order to seek an enhanced
sentence, the State was required either to indict him for second degree assault
with a firearm or to sufficiently charge the firearm enhancement in the
attempted murder indictment. Citing Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466
(2000), he contends that because no indictment alleged the firearm
enhancement, the trial court had no authority to impose the enhanced
sentence. In addition, he cites the trial court’s failure to instruct the jury that
in order to convict him of second degree assault, it had to find that he used a
firearm. The defendant contends that, absent a specific finding by the jury
2
that he used a firearm, the enhancement statute is not applicable. We note
that the defendant does not cite a provision of the State Constitution; we
therefore confine our constitutional analysis to the requirements of the Federal
Constitution. See State v. Lamarche, 157 N.H. 337, 340 (2008).
RSA 651:2, II-g provides:
If a person is convicted of a felony, an element of which is the
possession, use or attempted use of a deadly weapon, and the
deadly weapon is a firearm, such person may be sentenced to a
maximum term of 20 years’ imprisonment in lieu of any other
sentence prescribed for the crime. The person shall be given a
minimum mandatory sentence of not less than 3 years’
imprisonment for the first offense and a minimum mandatory
sentence of not less than 6 years’ imprisonment if such person has
been previously convicted of any state or federal offense for which
the maximum penalty provided was imprisonment in excess of one
year, and an element of which was the possession, use or
attempted use of a firearm. Neither the whole nor any part of the
minimum sentence imposed under this paragraph shall be
suspended or reduced.
We begin with the defendant’s argument that Apprendi requires the State
to have charged this sentencing enhancement factor in an indictment. We will
assume both that Apprendi sets forth requirements for indictments in state
prosecutions, compare State v. Ouellette, 145 N.H. 489, 491 (2000) (construing
Apprendi as applying to state indictment), with Williams v. Haviland, 467 F.3d
527, 531-32 (6th Cir. 2006) (noting explicit admonition in Apprendi that it was
not addressing issue of requirements for indictments in state prosecutions),
and that the indictments failed to adequately allege use of a firearm. We agree
with the State, however, that this error is subject to harmless error review
under the Federal Constitution. See Washington v. Recuenco, 548 U.S. 212,
218-22 (2006). An Apprendi violation concerning an omission from an
indictment may constitute harmless error where the evidence is overwhelming
that the grand jury would have found the fact at issue. See United States v.
Confredo, 528 F.3d 143, 156 (2d Cir. 2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1654
(2009).
Here, the grand jury returned an indictment for attempted murder that
alleged that the defendant shot the victim in the chest with a shotgun. It
returned a second indictment for first degree assault alleging that the
defendant caused bodily injury by means of a deadly weapon by striking the
victim in the head with the butt end of a shotgun. At trial, the defendant did
not dispute that the victim was shot in the chest, and there was no evidence of
the use of any deadly weapon other than a shotgun. Furthermore, the State
3
presented uncontroverted testimony from Marc Dupre, a criminalist at the
department of safety laboratory, that the shotgun was a firearm. We conclude
that these circumstances establish, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the grand
jury would have found the shotgun to be a deadly weapon and a firearm.
Because an omission in the indictment means that the defendant had no
notice from the indictment of the omitted allegations, a harmless error analysis
may also require consideration of whether the defendant was prejudiced
thereby. See United States v. Salazar-Lopez, 506 F.3d 748, 754 n.6 (9th Cir.
2007), cert. denied, 128 S. Ct. 2523 (2008). In this case, however, the issue of
an enhanced sentence under RSA 651:2, II-g did not arise until the defendant
requested that the trial court instruct the jury on reckless second degree
assault as a lesser included offense of attempted murder. The jury was
instructed, without objection, that an element of second degree assault was
that the defendant caused bodily injury to the victim by means of a deadly
weapon, and the jury was instructed as to the definition of “deadly weapon.”
See RSA 625:11, V (2007). The reckless second degree assault statute itself
provides that if the deadly weapon is a firearm, the defendant shall be
sentenced in accordance with RSA 651:2, II-g. RSA 631:2, I(b). Based upon
the record before us, we conclude that any lack of notice arising from the
wording of the indictments was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant also argues that absent a specific finding by the jury that
he used a firearm, the enhancement statute is not applicable. He contends
that the trial court’s failure to give a firearm instruction is the equivalent of
failure to instruct on an element of the offense. Even assuming that the trial
court so erred, we note that under the Federal Constitution, such an error is
subject to harmless error analysis. See Washington v. Recuenco, 548 U.S. at
218-22; Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 9-15 (1999). Here, the jury was
instructed that to find second degree assault it must find that the defendant
caused bodily injury to the victim by means of a deadly weapon. The defendant
did not dispute that the victim was shot in the chest; there was no evidence of
the use of any deadly weapon other than a shotgun; and there was
uncontroverted testimony that the shotgun was a firearm. As the trial court
aptly found, the jury could only have found the defendant guilty of the lesser
included second-degree assault charge if they also found he used a firearm.
We conclude that any error arising out of the failure of the trial judge to
instruct the jury regarding use of a firearm was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
We reiterate that the defendant did not cite a provision of the State
Constitution. We therefore do not decide whether the alleged failures to charge
the firearm enhancement in an indictment and to instruct the jury regarding
use of a firearm constituted errors under the State Constitution or, if they did,
4
whether such errors would be subject to a harmless error analysis. See
Lamarche, 157 N.H. at 340.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
5