THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Tax and Land Appeals
No. 2009-491
APPEAL OF CITY OF CONCORD
(New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals)
Argued: June 10, 2010
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2011
Rath, Young & Pignatelli, P.C., of Concord (Christopher J. Sullivan and
Jason M. Tanguay on the brief, and Mr. Sullivan orally), for Home Care
Association of New Hampshire.
Gardner Fulton & Waugh, P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (Adele M. Fulton on the
brief and orally), for the City of Concord.
HICKS, J. The City of Concord (City) appeals orders of the board of tax
and land appeals (BTLA) ruling that the taxpayer, Home Care Association of
New Hampshire (HCA), is entitled to a charitable tax exemption under RSA
72:23 (Supp. 2010) and denying the City’s motion to have an attorney sit as a
board member. We vacate and remand.
The following facts were found by the BTLA or appear in the record. HCA
is a voluntary corporation organized under RSA chapter 292 and is a tax
exempt organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. See
26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) (2006). According to its articles of association, HCA’s
objectives are:
1. To promote not-for-profit home health care and related
services.
2. To promote programs and services directed toward the
prevention of illness, the encouragement of good health practices
and the overall protection of the public’s health.
3. To work with other groups, associations, agencies and
individuals toward coordination, increased effectiveness and
availability of human services for all residents of the State of New
Hampshire.
HCA describes itself in its mission statement as “a membership
organization.” Its bylaws provide for three categories of membership:
(1) provider membership, which is open to New Hampshire licensed “providers
of home health, homemaker, hospice, or other home care services exclusive of
home medical equipment providers”; (2) affiliate membership, which is open to
“home medical equipment providers; case management providers;
organizations providing products and/or services to home care providers; non-
licensed providers of home care products and/or services and other
organizations doing business with home care providers or interested in [HCA’s]
mission . . . , such as insurers, intermediaries and other trade and
membership associations”; and (3) individual membership, which is open to
any person, not associated with an agency eligible under another membership
category, “who subscribes to the stated purpose and objectives of” HCA and
pays the prescribed membership dues. The BTLA found that “[a]pproximately
one-quarter of the members of HCA are for-profit agencies.”
HCA’s mission statement states that HCA is an “organization which
enhances the ability of agencies providing home health care to deliver quality
services to New Hampshire residents.” The statement further provides that
HCA performs its “mission through education, networking, research,
leadership, and public policy advocacy.” The BTLA found that HCA “provides
home health care related education and training programs, which are open to
the general public, that are intended to further [HCA’s] stated objectives.” The
BTLA also found that HCA maintains a website through which users, including
the general public, can obtain “information about home care and its role in
health care delivery, . . . search for home care providers, and . . . learn about
education programs designed to further [HCA’s] objectives.” The website lists
only home care providers that are members of HCA. In addition, HCA
maintains a toll free telephone number for inquiries from the general public
about home health care.
HCA has a wholly-owned subsidiary, Granite State Home Health
Association (GSHHA), that lobbies the state legislature on behalf of HCA’s
members. The BTLA found that “[t]he governance, staffing and activities of
2
HCA and GSHHA, as well as their use of . . . [office space], are interdependent
and inextricably intertwined.”
HCA owns a building at 8 Green Street in Concord, which it uses as its
only office. It shares that office space with GSHHA. It leases the second floor,
or approximately half of the space, to a third party not eligible for a tax
exemption. From 1984 to 2005, HCA was given a property tax exemption for
the half of the property that it uses.
In 2006, however, the City denied HCA’s request for tax exemption. HCA
unsuccessfully sought an abatement from the Concord Board of Assessors, and
then appealed to the BTLA. See RSA 72:34-a (Supp. 2010). The BTLA
concluded that HCA “met its burden to prove it satisfies the requirements for
and is entitled to receive a charitable tax exemption for that portion of the
Property it occupies pursuant to RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l.”
During the course of the appeal before the BTLA, the City filed a motion
requesting that an attorney sit as a board member. The City believed that the
only attorney member of the BTLA “ha[d] been recusing himself . . . based on
his residency in Concord.” The City offered that if residency were the sole
reason for the attorney’s recusal, it would waive that cause. Otherwise, the
City requested that the BTLA appoint another attorney as a temporary member
to sit on cases involving the City. The BTLA denied the motion, noting that the
attorney member was involved as a plaintiff in litigation against the City. The
City unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration of the BTLA’s decisions, and
then brought this appeal.
On appeal, the City “has the burden of showing that the . . . decision is
clearly unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of the [BTLA] upon all
questions of fact shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable.”
Appeal of Kiwanis Club of Hudson, 140 N.H. 92, 93 (1995) (quotation and
ellipsis omitted); RSA 541:13 (2007); see RSA 71-B:12 (2003) (providing BTLA
decisions may be appealed in accordance with RSA chapter 541). We will not
set aside or vacate a BTLA decision “except for errors of law, unless [we are]
satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before [us], that such order
is unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 541:13. “The interpretation of a statute is to
be decided ultimately by this court. Therefore, if we find that the board
misapprehended or misapplied the law, its order will be set aside.” Appeal of
Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. 455, 458 (2005).
The City first challenges the BTLA’s conclusion that HCA satisfies the
requirements for a charitable tax exemption. We begin by reviewing those
requirements. RSA 72:23, V provides that the following property is exempt
from taxation:
3
The buildings, lands and personal property of charitable
organizations and societies organized, incorporated, or legally
doing business in this state, owned, used and occupied by them
directly for the purposes for which they are established, provided
that none of the income or profits thereof is used for any other
purpose than the purpose for which they are established.
RSA 72:23, V. The term “‘charitable’ as used to describe a corporation, society
or other organization within the scope of” RSA 72:23 is defined to mean:
a corporation, society or organization established and administered
for the purpose of performing, and obligated, by its charter or
otherwise, to perform some service of public good or welfare
advancing the spiritual, physical, intellectual, social or economic
well-being of the general public or a substantial and indefinite
segment of the general public that includes residents of the state of
New Hampshire, with no pecuniary profit or benefit to its officers
or members, or any restrictions which confine its benefits or
services to such officers or members, or those of any related
organization. The fact that an organization’s activities are not
conducted for profit shall not in itself be sufficient to render the
organization “charitable” for purposes of this chapter . . . .
RSA 72:23-l (2003).
In ElderTrust of Florida, Inc. v. Town of Epsom, 154 N.H. 693 (2007), we
set forth four factors that an organization seeking a charitable tax exemption
under RSA 72:23, V and RSA 72:23-l must satisfy; namely, whether:
(1) the institution or organization was established and is
administered for a charitable purpose; (2) an obligation exists to
perform the organization’s stated purpose to the public rather than
simply to members of the organization; (3) the land, in addition to
being owned by the organization, is occupied by it and used
directly for the stated charitable purposes; and (4) any of the
organization’s income or profits are used for any purpose other
than the purpose for which the organization was established.
Under the fourth factor, the organization’s officers or members
may not derive any pecuniary profit or benefit.
ElderTrust, 154 N.H. at 697-98.
The City contends that in finding the first factor satisfied, the BTLA erred
“when it decided that HCA has charitable goals but ignored how those goals are
administered.” The City argues that the evidence fails to support a finding that
HCA operates in a manner that bestows a public benefit. For example, the City
4
challenges the BTLA’s specific finding of fact that “[t]he general public benefits
through the education and training of home health care providers who are
responsible for serving those who use or who may use home care services.”
Citing program materials contained in the record, the City argues:
The average individual in the general public providing care to a
family member would not have any reason to take a seminar
entitled “ICD-9 CM Coding: Update and Review” for “diagnosis
coding” which is “a key element in determining accurate payments
and driving outcome improvement”; “HCS-D Certification
Examination”; “Introducing Financial Thinking to Clinical Minds”;
“PPS Billing Bootcamp” which is a “step by step process to ensure
an agency is properly reimbursed”; or “Marketing Home Care, HME
and Hospice Services”. These topics were obviously designed to
directly assist and benefit only agencies in the business of home
health care and not the needs of the general public.
(Citation and ellipsis omitted.)
As framed, the City’s argument is closely related to its challenge to the
BTLA’s finding on the second factor, that “an obligation exists to perform the
organization’s stated purpose to the public rather than simply to members of
the organization.” ElderTrust, 154 N.H. at 697-98. The City contends that
“[t]he [BTLA’s] errors in failing to examine the administration of HCA’s objects
are seen more readily in light of this second factor.” We accordingly address
the City’s arguments on both factors together, as the arguments are
interrelated and ultimately urge a single conclusion; namely, that “HCA is, in
fact, a trade association” with its primary focus on advancing “the common
interests of its members,” rather than the interests of the general public.
“The purpose of the obligation requirement is to prevent organizations,
even if they operate for charitable purposes, from obtaining the benefits of a tax
exemption without providing some service of public good.” Eldertrust, 154
N.H. at 699. The City argues that “[t]he obligation to provide services directly
to the general public has always been the touchstone of being ‘charitable.’” We
disagree. In Town of Peterborough v. MacDowell Colony, 157 N.H. 1 (2008), we
stated that the “obligatory service requirement relates not to whom the service
is provided but to whether the organization is required to provide the service at
all.” MacDowell, 157 N.H. at 8. Thus, direct service to the public is not
required for a charitable tax exemption. As MacDowell demonstrates, an
organization can indirectly provide a benefit to the public (there, the promotion
of art) by means of a service (there, the artist-in-residence program) that is
provided to certain individuals (there, the Colony fellows). See MacDowell, 157
N.H. at 6. The obligation to provide the service by which the public benefits
indirectly satisfies the requirement that the organization must be obligated to
5
“perform [its] stated purpose to the public” and “provid[e] some service of
public good.” Eldertrust, 154 N.H. at 697, 699.
Nevertheless, the City’s contention that HCA primarily benefits its
members and “[a]ny benefit to the public is incidental to that primary purpose”
must be examined. We noted in Society of Cincinnati v. Exeter, 92 N.H. 348
(1943), that “[a] group of persons selecting their membership and combining in
self-interest for their own betterment lacks the altruistic spirit inherent in a
legal charity.” Society of Cincinnati, 92 N.H. at 356; see Nature Conservancy v.
Nelson, 107 N.H. 316, 319 (1966) (stating taxpayer “cannot be considered a
charitable organization if its purposes are confined mostly to benefiting its own
members”).
Here, the BTLA found that “the general public is the beneficiary of
[HCA’s] activities” and concluded that “[t]he fact that [HCA] provides this
benefit to the public primarily through its members is not a disqualifying
feature of [its] practice but rather a pragmatic approach to accomplishing its
mission.” The BTLA relied heavily on MacDowell, stating:
The board sees [HCA’s] situation as analogous to the questions
raised by the Town of Peterborough and answered by the court in
MacDowell where the town, in that case, argued the resident
artists benefited from their stay at the colony rather than the
general public. As the court found in MacDowell, the board finds
the ultimate beneficiary of [HCA’s] activities is the general public.
Working with and through its members, [HCA] is able, in an
efficient manner, to provide home health care services to the
general public.
The City contends that “[t]he indirect public benefits that HCA argued it
gave . . . [are] too attenuated, speculative and incidental to qualify for the
charitable tax exemption.” The City cites Nature Conservancy, 107 N.H. at
320, in which we noted that to qualify for a charitable tax exemption, the
“property must be occupied and used by [the organization] for its public
charitable purposes” and that “[t]his occupation and use cannot be slight,
negligible or insignificant.” We reached similar conclusions in other cases. For
instance, in The Housing Partnership v. Town of Rollinsford, 141 N.H. 239
(1996), we determined that an “indefinite and prospective benefit,” in the form
of rent stability, “is not the direct use and occupation of the property that RSA
72:23, V requires in order for a charitable organization to receive a tax
exemption.” Housing Partnership, 141 N.H. at 244. In Appeal of Town of
Wolfeboro, we concluded that “a theoretical future use of the charitable
services available,” namely, financial assistance to those residents of the
taxpayer’s elderly housing complex who “might develop the need for [such]
assistance, should they enter nursing care,” was insufficient to show “use and
6
occupation [of the property] directly for the charitable purposes of the
organization.” Appeal of Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. at 461.
Although these cases dealt with the requirement that the property be
“occupied . . . and used directly for the stated charitable purposes,” Eldertrust,
154 N.H. at 698, we believe they more broadly express the principle that a tax
exemption is not warranted when the asserted compliance with any of the
requirements therefor is no more than “slight, negligible or insignificant,”
Nature Conservancy, 107 N.H. at 320, “indefinite and prospective,” Housing
Partnership, 141 N.H. at 244, or “theoretical,” Appeal of Town of Wolfeboro,
152 N.H. at 461. To apply this principle in terms of the organization’s
charitable purpose or the provision of benefits to the public as opposed to its
members, we find instructive the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court’s
statement in Massachusetts Medical Society v. Assessors of Boston, 164
N.E.2d 325 (Mass. 1960):
Whether an institution is in its character literary,
benevolent, charitable or scientific will depend upon the declared
purposes and the actual work performed. An institution will be
classed as charitable if the dominant purpose of its work is for the
public good and the work done for its members is but the means
adopted for this purpose. But if the dominant purpose of its work
is to benefit its members or a limited class of persons it will not be
so classed, even though the public will derive an incidental benefit
from such work.
Massachusetts Medical Soc., 164 N.E.2d at 328 (citations omitted); cf. Society
of Cincinnati, 92 N.H. at 356 (“If there may be additions in broadening the
definition of a charitable institution that it is one dispensing public charity as
its sole or primary engagement, the Society does not qualify.”).
Accordingly, we conclude that for an institution or organization to meet
the requirement that it was “established and is administered for a charitable
purpose,” ElderTrust, 154 N.H. at 697, that charitable mission must be its
dominant or primary purpose; if the dominant or primary “purpose of its work
is to benefit its members or a limited class of persons,” the organization will not
meet this requirement “even though the public will derive an incidental benefit
from such work.” Massachusetts Medical Soc., 164 N.E.2d at 328. As with the
obligation requirement, to determine whether an organization meets the
“established and . . . administered” requirement, ElderTrust, 154 N.H. at 697,
we “look to both its charter or organizational statements and its actions taken
pursuant to those statements.” E. Coast Conf. of the Evangelical Covenant
Church of America v. Town of Swanzey, 146 N.H. 658, 662 (2001); see
Massachusetts Medical Soc., 164 N.E.2d at 328 (“Whether an institution is in
its character literary, benevolent, charitable or scientific will depend upon the
declared purposes and the actual work performed.”). Thus, notwithstanding
7
that an organization’s stated purpose is to primarily benefit the public, if the
organization is actually administered so that any public benefit is “slight,
negligible or insignificant,” Nature Conservancy, 107 N.H. at 320, when
compared to the benefit derived by the organization’s members, the
organization is not entitled to a charitable tax exemption. We note that the
principles we enunciate herein are entirely consistent with MacDowell, in
which we agreed with the trial court’s conclusion that MacDowell’s artist-in-
residence program did, in fact, “primarily benefit[] society as a whole.”
MacDowell, 157 N.H. at 6 (quotation omitted; emphasis added).
Here the BTLA denied the City’s proposed factual finding that “HCA’s
corporate purpose is to promote the common interests of its members who are
involved in the home health care industry.” The BTLA acknowledged that
HCA’s activities “benefit [its] members directly,” but found that the general
public is “the ultimate beneficiary of [HCA’s] activities.” Specifically, the BTLA
found that HCA’s services benefit the general public: (1) “through the education
and training of home health care providers who are responsible for serving
those who use or who may use home care services”; (2) “from the promotion of
programs and services directed toward the prevention of illness, the
encouragement of good health practices and the overall protection of the
public’s health”; and (3) “from increased effectiveness and availability of human
services.” We accept these finding as prima facie lawful. See Appeal of Kiwanis
Club, 140 N.H. at 93; RSA 541:13. The BTLA did not determine, however,
whether these benefits are merely incidental to a dominant or primary purpose
(as opposed to the sole purpose as intimated in the rejected finding of fact) of
benefiting HCA’s members, or whether these benefits to the public are slight,
negligible or insignificant when compared to the benefit derived by HCA’s
members. Nor did it determine, more specifically, whether HCA is, in fact, in
the manner in which it is operated, more akin to a trade or professional
association. See Massachusetts Medical Soc., 164 N.E.2d at 328. Accordingly,
we vacate the BTLA’s decision and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
The City next argues that the BTLA erred in failing to find that GSHAA is
not a charitable organization, having disposed of the City’s request for that
finding by neither granting nor denying it. The City argued before the BTLA
that “HCA and GSHHA are, for all intents and purposes, one and the same
organization for purposes of analyzing the use of the real estate.” The BTLA
noted, however, that it could find no support in New Hampshire law for “the
City’s premise that GSHHA’s lobbying efforts overshadowed or negatively
impacted” HCA’s mission and thereby disqualified HCA for a tax exemption.
The City changes tack somewhat on appeal, asserting that “GSHHA is in
fact a separate corporation,” and arguing that it was erroneous for the BTLA “to
ignore its use and occupancy of the real estate.” We agree that GSHHA’s use
and occupancy of the property is relevant to determining the extent, if any, to
8
which HCA is entitled to a tax exemption for the property. If GSHHA uses the
property for non-exempt purposes, “[a] division of value between the two uses
should be made if such exist.” Alton Bay Camp Meeting Asso. v. Alton, 109
N.H. 44, 50 (1968).
We need not determine whether, as HCA contends, the City failed to
develop before the BTLA its argument based upon RSA 72:23, V-a. That
statute is not necessary to the City’s argument, as it deals with the converse
proposition: that real estate owned but not occupied by an organization
eligible for an RSA 72:23 tax exemption may still be exempt if the occupying
organization is also eligible for the exemption. See RSA 72:23, V-a. Here, the
issue is use of the property by an organization (GSHHA) that the City claims is
not eligible for a charitable tax exemption. The BTLA had before it evidence of
GSHHA’s activities and use of the property. Accordingly, on remand, the BTLA
should examine whether any allocation of exempt and non-exempt use must be
made in accordance with Alton Bay Camp Meeting Asso., 109 N.H. at 50.
Finally, the City challenges the BTLA’s denial of its motion to have an
attorney sit as a board member. The City states:
[T]he City does not challenge the Board’s decision as to [the
attorney member’s] recusal so long as he is personally involved in
litigation against the City. However, as the recusal has continued
for many years (even to date), the City and its taxpayers have been
— and will continue to be — denied the opportunity to have all
skills and resources available for appeals that were intended by the
legislature.
HCA argues that the City has not shown that the BTLA’s order was
clearly unreasonable or unlawful, particularly where the City does not
challenge the recusal in this case but “[i]nstead . . . appears to focus on
perceived continued or future unfairness.” We agree, and decline to address
the City’s broader challenge because the issue as raised is not ripe for review.
In part, “ripeness relates to the degree to which the defined issues in a
case are based on actual facts and are capable of being adjudicated on an
adequately developed record.” Appeal of State Employees’ Assoc., 142 N.H.
874, 878 (1998) (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). As HCA notes, even
if the City’s allegations of a recusal policy that has continued for many years
and will continue are true, such facts are simply not in the record before this
court. Accordingly, we decline to address the City’s claim.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9