THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Newport Family Division
No. 2009-829
IN THE MATTER OF TAMMY RUPA AND ALAN RUPA
Argued: September 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: December 22, 2010
Barbara L. Parker, of Newport, on the brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Shanelaris & Schirch, PLLC, of Nashua (Jane M. Schirch on the brief and
orally), for the intervenors.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Tammy Rupa, appeals an order issued by
the Newport Family Division (Cardello, J.) granting the intervenors, Afons and
Lucy Rupa (grandparents), visitation and unsupervised telephone contact with
her minor child. The petitioner also appeals the trial court’s order requiring
her to provide transportation related to the grandparents’ visitation. We vacate
and remand for application of the legal standard for determining an award of
grandparent visitation set forth in this opinion.
The trial court found, or the record reflects, the following facts. Tammy
and Alan Rupa are the parents of a child born in January 1995. They were
divorced on September 14, 2000. The trial court awarded the parties joint legal
custody of the child, while granting Ms. Rupa sole physical custody. Mr. Rupa
was awarded visitation with the child on alternate weekends, and although the
grandparents were not awarded visitation in the decree, in the years following
the divorce Mr. Rupa exercised his visitation at their home in Massachusetts.
The child has been diagnosed with pervasive developmental disorder – not
otherwise specified, a condition on the autism spectrum, as well as generalized
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder and attention deficit disorder.
In November 2008, the petitioner wrote a letter to the grandparents, advising
them that the child was not transitioning well from her weekend visitations and
that the petitioner intended to end the child’s visits to their home.
The petitioner also filed a petition in the superior court to modify the
terms of the divorce decree, in which she requested that Mr. Rupa’s and the
grandparents’ visitation with the child be suspended. The petitioner asserted
that appropriate limits for the child were not being set during her visits, that
the transitions to and from the grandparents’ home resulted in violent
outbursts from her, and that Mr. Rupa and the grandparents were unable or
unwilling to follow recommended protocol in their visitation. Initially, both Mr.
Rupa and the grandparents, who sought to intervene, opposed the petition to
modify. At some point, however, Mr. Rupa ceased to participate in the
proceedings, and he is not a party to this appeal.
In March 2009, the trial court issued a temporary order on the
modification petition, granting the grandparents’ request to intervene but
altering the visitation schedule to one overnight weekend visit at their home per
month, with a second weekend visit per month to occur in Newport, where the
petitioner and the child reside. After the child engaged in several violent
outbursts at home and at school in April 2009, resulting in her hospitalization
and suspension from school, the petitioner filed a petition to modify the
temporary order resulting in a May 2009 order further reducing the
grandparents’ visitation and temporarily eliminating all overnight visits.
Following a final hearing, the trial court issued a permanent modified
parenting plan in September 2009 that awarded Ms. Rupa sole residential
responsibility and sole decision-making authority for the child. With respect to
the grandparents’ request for visitation, the trial court found, among other
things, that: (1) the grandparents had enjoyed significant contact with the child
over the course of her life; (2) between 2000 and 2008 she regularly spent two
weekends per month with her grandparents; (3) when not visiting with her
grandparents she maintained consistent telephone contact with them; and (4)
the grandparents regularly provided travel for the child to and from her visits.
As for the petitioner’s concerns that transitioning to and from the
grandparents’ home was having a negative effect on the child’s behavior, the
trial court found “insufficient evidence [that her] outbursts and behavioral
problems correlate to, and follow, visits with the [grandparents].” The trial
court further stated:
Andy Engart, [the child’s] therapist, stated that overnight visits or
weekend visits with the [grandparents], which occur in a less
structured, less restrictive environment that is more focused on
2
[the child] having fun, “is a good thing.” The Court has considered
the criteria set forth in RSA 461-A:13, and finds that continued
visitation with the [grandparents], which [the child] has enjoyed
regularly throughout most of her life, is in her best interest,
despite the issues associated with transition.
Based upon these findings, the trial court ruled that the grandparents
were entitled to visitation one weekend each month. The court ordered that the
parties meet in Milford to begin the visitation, and that the grandparents be
responsible for returning the child to the petitioner’s home at the end of the
visitation. The court also ruled that the grandparents were entitled to
unsupervised weekly mail, email and telephone contact with the child. This
appeal ensued.
The petitioner first argues that her fundamental right to parent,
guaranteed under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the
United States Constitution and under Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire
Constitution, was violated when the trial court substituted its judgment for
hers regarding the grandparents’ visitation with the child. Specifically, she
argues that because there is a presumption that fit parents act in their child’s
best interests, see Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 68 (2000), the application of
the grandparent visitation statute, RSA 461-A:13 (Supp. 2009), must be limited
to those cases in which a finding has been made that a parent is unfit.
Because no such finding was made in this case, the petitioner argues that the
decision to allow the grandparents’ visitation over her objection violated her
constitutional rights. The petitioner makes the same arguments with respect
to the order for telephonic visitation and the order requiring her to transport
the child to Milford for the grandparents’ visitation.
“This court has consistently held that we will not consider issues raised
on appeal that were not presented in the lower court.” LaMontagne Builders v.
Brooks, 154 N.H. 252, 258 (2006) (quotation omitted). But see Sup. Ct. R. 16-
A (plain error rule). “We require issues to be raised at the earliest possible
time, because trial forums should have a full opportunity to come to sound
conclusions and to correct errors in the first instance.” Tiberghein v. B.R.
Jones Roofing Co., 151 N.H. 391, 393 (2004) (quotation omitted). As the
appealing party, the petitioner bears the burden of demonstrating that she
raised her issues before the trial forum. Id. In this instance, appellate counsel
for the petitioner conceded at oral argument that her constitutional claims had
not been raised at the trial level. Accordingly, we will not address them.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court erred in its application of
RSA 461-A:13 by failing to accord her parental judgments any deference when
considering the best interests of her child. While we do not decide the
petitioner’s constitutional arguments because they have not been preserved,
there is a constitutional overlay to her statutory issues. In construing RSA
3
461-A:13, we must be mindful of our case law addressing when grandparent
visitation is constitutionally permissible. See In the Matter of Dufton &
Shepard, 158 N.H. 784 (2009) (defining “grandmother” for purposes of standing
under RSA 461-A:13); In the Matter of R.A. & J.M., 153 N.H. 82 (2005)
(plurality opinion) (considering the constitutionality of the predecessor statute
to RSA 461-A:13). Moreover, we are guided by the United States Supreme
Court opinion in Troxel, regarding the fundamental right to parent. Thus, it is
against this backdrop that we interpret the language of RSA 461-A:13.
“[W]e are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the words of
the statute considered as a whole.” In the Matter of Watterworth &
Watterworth, 149 N.H. 442, 445 (2003). “We presume that the legislature
intended to confine a statute’s scope within constitutional limits.” R.A., 153
N.H. at 95. “Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
enacting them and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme.” Appeal of Manchester Transit Auth., 146 N.H. 454, 458
(2001). “It is within our purview to establish the constitutional grounds within
which a statute may be applied.” R.A., 153 N.H. at 104.
RSA 461-A:13, II sets forth criteria that the trial court must consider in
determining an award of grandparent visitation with a minor child in the
absence of a nuclear family. The statute provides, in relevant part:
The court shall consider the following criteria in making an
order relative to a grandparent’s visitation rights to the minor
child:
(a) Whether such visitation would be in the best interest of
the child.
(b) Whether such visitation would interfere with any
parent-child relationship or with a parent’s authority over the
child.
(c) The nature of the relationship between the grandparent
and the minor child, including but not limited to, the frequency
of contact, and whether the child has lived with the
grandparent and length of such residence, and when there is
no reasonable cause to believe that the child’s physical and
emotional health would be endangered by such visitation or
lack of it.
(d) The nature of the relationship between the grandparent
and the parent of the minor child, including friction between
the grandparent and the parent, and the effect such friction
would have on the child.
(e) The circumstances which resulted in the absence of a
nuclear family, whether divorce, death, relinquishment or
termination of parental rights, or other cause.
4
(f) The recommendation regarding visitation made by any
guardian ad litem appointed for the child pursuant to RSA
461-A:16.
(g) Any preference or wishes expressed by the child.
(h) Any such other factors as the court may find
appropriate or relevant to the petition for visitation.
RSA 461-A:13, II.
The authority of the trial court to grant grandparent visitation is derived
from RSA 461-A:6, the statute relating to parental rights and responsibilities.
The overarching standard for determining parental rights and responsibilities is
set forth in section I, which provides, “In determining parental rights and
responsibilities, the court shall be guided by the best interests of the
child . . . .” RSA 461-A:6, I (Supp. 2009). In keeping with this standard,
section V provides, in relevant part: “If the court determines that it is in the
best interest of the child[ ], it shall in its decree [of parental rights and
responsibilities] grant reasonable visitation privileges to a party who is a . . .
grandparent[ ] of the child[ ] pursuant to RSA 461-A:13.” RSA 461-A:6, V.
Thus, the legislature has made clear that the best interests of the child are
paramount when the court considers an award of grandparent visitation.
In R.A., a grandmother sought joint custody of her grandchild under RSA
458:17, VI (2004), the predecessor to RSA 461-A:6, V, which authorized the
trial court to award grandparent visitation, rights or responsibilities.
Concluding that RSA 458:17, VI was unconstitutional on its face, the trial
court awarded the child’s father primary physical custody and the child’s
mother visitation at the grandmother’s home under the grandmother’s
supervision. In considering the constitutionality of RSA 458:17, VI, we
addressed the best interests of the child standard and the weight that must be
given to parental determinations of a child’s best interests. Chief Justice
Broderick, writing the plurality opinion, stated:
[W]hen the legislature recently recodified RSA 458:17, VI as RSA
461-A:6, V, it added various factors that courts must consider in
determining the best interest of the child. . . . Consistent with the
decision[] in . . . Troxel, I now hold that, in determining the best
interest of the child, . . . it is not only relevant, but also necessary
that a court give special consideration to the wishes of the child’s
parents.
R.A., 153 N.H. at 98 (construing the language of RSA 458:17, VI relative to
child custody).
In Troxel, the U.S. Supreme Court considered a Washington State statute
that allowed third parties to petition for visitation rights with a minor child.
5
Troxel, 530 U.S. 57. In holding that the statute unconstitutionally infringed
upon the fundamental right to parent, guaranteed under the Due Process
Clause of the Federal Constitution, the Supreme Court stated:
Once the visitation petition has been filed in court and the matter
is placed before a judge, a parent’s decision that visitation would
not be in the child’s best interest is accorded no deference. [The
statute] contains no requirement that a court accord the parent’s
decision any presumption of validity or any weight whatsoever.
Instead, the Washington statute places the best-interest
determination solely in the hands of the judge. Should the judge
disagree with the parent’s estimation of the child’s best interests,
the judge’s view necessarily prevails. Thus, in practical effect, in
the State of Washington a court can disregard and overturn any
decision by a fit custodial parent concerning visitation whenever a
third party affected by the decision files a visitation petition, based
solely on the judge’s determination of the child’s best interests.
The Washington Supreme Court had the opportunity to give [the
statute] a narrower reading, but it declined to do so.
Id. at 67.
In keeping with Troxel and our own case law concerning the fundamental
rights of parents, we conclude that RSA 461-A:13 requires a narrow
construction to comport with state and federal constitutional requirements.
See R.A., 153 N.H. at 99; In the Matter of Jeffrey G. & Janette P., 153 N.H.
200, 203 (2006) (“[T]he right of biological and adoptive parents to raise and
care for their children is a fundamental liberty interest protected by Part I,
Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution.”); Roberts v. Ward, 126 N.H. 388,
391 (1985) (concluding that parental rights “have been found to operate against
the State, against third parties and against the child” (citation omitted)). State
and federal courts have long recognized that “there is a constitutional
dimension to the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children.”
Troxel, 530 U.S. at 65; see also R.A., 153 N.H. at 93 (“[W]e and the Supreme
Court have a long history of recognizing parents’ fundamental rights to the care
and custody of their children.”); In re Noah W., 148 N.H. 632, 639 (2002) (“RSA
chapter 170-C was enacted to provide for the involuntary termination of the
parent-child relationship by a judicial process, which will safeguard the rights
and interests of all parties.”). Moreover, it is a well-established presumption
that fit parents act in their child’s best interests. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 68; In
the Matter of Nelson & Horsley, 149 N.H. 546, 547 (2003). It is for these
reasons that natural and adoptive parents’ rights over their children “are not
easily set aside.” R.A., 153 N.H. at 90. Thus, while there are instances where
parental rights must yield to the State’s parens patriae power in order to
ensure the welfare of the child, a parent’s determination of what is in the
child’s best interests must be given special consideration by the trial court.
6
Troxel, 530 U.S. at 69 (“The problem here is not that the [trial court]
intervened, but that when it did so, it gave no special weight at all to [the
mother’s] determination of her daughter’s best interests.”); cf. In the Matter of
Berg & Berg, 152 N.H. 658, 661 (2005) (“Parental rights are not absolute, but
are subordinate to the State’s parens patriae power, and must yield to the
welfare of the child.”).
The plain language of RSA 461-A:13 instructs that in determining an
award of grandparent visitation the trial court must consider various factors,
the first two of which are: “(a) Whether such visitation would be in the best
interest of the child,” and “(b) Whether such visitation would interfere with any
parent-child relationship or with a parent’s authority over the child.” RSA 461-
A:13, II(a), (b). Because both Troxel and our own case law have consistently
emphasized the significance of the parent-child relationship and the
fundamental rights of parents, we hold that in applying RSA 461-A:13 the trial
court must weigh the first two statutory factors more heavily than the
remaining listed factors, according due deference to a fit parent’s judgment as
to the best interests of the child as part of the court’s determination of the
child’s best interests. Further, in order to assist in any appellate review, we
exercise our supervisory authority over the trial courts and instruct those
courts to make express findings of fact with respect to all of the enumerated
factors that it considers. See Fisher v. Minichiello, 155 N.H. 188, 193 (2007)
(exercising supervisory authority and providing instructions to trial courts in
their issuance of civil stalking orders).
We will not overturn a trial court’s determination regarding an award of
visitation except where there has been an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
In the Matter of Kosek & Kosek, 151 N.H. 722, 724 (2005). Here, although the
trial court concluded that it was in the child’s best interest to continue
overnight visitation with the grandparents, it is not evident from the record
that the trial court accorded due deference to the petitioner’s determination of
the best interests of her child or that it weighed more heavily the first two
factors relating to the protected parent-child relationship. Thus, it is not clear
that the trial court applied RSA 461-A:13 in a way that comports with the
constitutional requirements of due process. We therefore vacate the trial
court’s order and remand for application of RSA 461-A:13 in light of our
holdings herein.
The petitioner also argues that the trial court lacked statutory authority
to order: (1) unsupervised telephonic communication between the grandparents
and the child up to three times per week; and (2) transportation, at her
expense, in order to facilitate the grandparents’ visitation. We address these
arguments in the event that the trial court, on remand, awards grandparent
visitation.
7
“[I]n matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature's intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole.” State v. Pessetto, 160 N.H. ____, ____ (decided Oct. 19, 2010). “We
interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result and review a particular
provision, not in isolation, but together with all associated sections.” In re
Thermo-Fisher Scientific, 160 N.H. ____, ____ (decided Sept. 17, 2010).
As noted above, RSA 461-A:6 provides the trial court with authority to
determine parental rights and responsibilities and expressly states that in
doing so “the court shall be guided by the best interests of the child.” The
statute further provides:
If the court determines that it is in the best interest of the children,
it shall in its decree grant reasonable visitation privileges to a party
who is a stepparent of the children or to the grandparents of the
children pursuant to RSA 461-A:13.
RSA 461-A:6, V. Thus, references to parental rights and responsibilities within
RSA chapter 461-A plainly encompass any potential award of grandparent
visitation.
While RSA 461-A:6 establishes the authority and procedure by which to
determine parental rights and responsibilities, including grandparent
visitation, RSA 461-A:4 provides for the development of a written plan
describing those rights and responsibilities. See RSA 461-A:1, V (“‘Parenting
plan’ means a written plan describing each parent’s rights and
responsibilities.”); RSA 461-A:4 (“Parenting Plans; Contents.”). RSA 461-A:4, I,
provides that “[i]n developing a plan under this section, the court shall consider
only the best interests of the child as provided in RSA 461-A:6 and the safety of
the parties.” Thus, if grandparent visitation is awarded under RSA 461-A:6,
then the provisions of RSA 461-A:4 necessarily apply to any such visitation.
RSA 461-A:4, II states that “[a] parenting plan may include provisions
relative to . . . [i]nformation sharing and access, including telephone and
electronic access . . . [and] [t]ransportation and exchange of the child.”
Therefore, contrary to the petitioner’s argument, we conclude that there is
statutory authority for the trial court to award the grandparents telephonic
access to the child and to order the sharing of transportation responsibilities.
Vacated and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8