THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2009-527
ROBERT P. HULL & a.
v.
GRAFTON COUNTY & a.
Argued: March 24, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 19, 2010
William L. O’Brien, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the petitioners.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (Elizabeth A. Bailey
and Karyl Roberts Martin on the brief, and Ms. Bailey orally), for the
respondents.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Robert P. Hull and John J. Babiarz,
appeal from an order of the Superior Court (Bornstein, J.) denying, in part,
their motion for summary judgment, denying their request for equitable relief
and attorney’s fees, and granting the cross-motion for summary judgment of
the respondents, Grafton County, its Commissioners and Treasurer, and the
Chair and Clerk of the Grafton County Convention (Convention). We affirm.
I
The following facts were either found by the trial court or are supported
by the record. On May 21, 2008, eighteen of the twenty-six members of the
Convention met in Concord to vote on the salaries for Grafton County’s elected
officials. The meeting had been noticed in the State of New Hampshire House
Record on May 16; no other public notice had been given. At the meeting, the
Convention adopted, by a vote of fifteen to three, a resolution to increase by 2.3
percent the salaries of the County Attorney, High Sheriff, Register of Deeds,
and Treasurer for the 2009 fiscal year. The Convention also voted
unanimously that the County Commissioners’ salaries should remain at the
2008 fiscal year level.
On June 24, 2008, Hull requested documents related to the May 21
meeting, which the County’s counsel provided on June 30. Shortly thereafter,
the petitioners, through counsel, informed the respondents’ counsel that the
notice for the May 21 meeting was deficient because it failed to comply with the
requirements of RSA 91-A:2, II and RSA 24:9-d. Subsequently, the Convention
met again on July 21 and voted to ratify the actions taken at the May 21
meeting. The approved salaries took effect in January 2009; the aggregate
salary increase for the 2009 fiscal year resulting from the 2.3 percent increase
for the County Attorney, High Sheriff, Register of Deeds, and Treasurer was
$4,288.78.
In October 2008, the petitioners filed suit, alleging that the Convention
failed to follow the notice requirements of RSA chapter 91-A and RSA 24:9-d for
its May 21 meeting, thus rendering the Convention’s vote “legally ineffective.”
Further, they alleged that the Convention could not ratify its actions at the May
meeting on July 21, as the deadline established to set the salaries under RSA
23:7 had expired. The petitioners sought a declaration that the Convention
had violated the cited statutory provisions, and requested that the respondents
be enjoined from raising, appropriating, or spending monies for the new salary
levels. Further, the petitioners requested that the respondents be enjoined
from further violations of the statutory provisions, that a monitor be appointed
to review their compliance and provide periodic reports to the court, and that
the petitioners be awarded attorney’s fees.
In November, the trial court conducted a hearing on the petitioners’
request for a preliminary injunction to enjoin the payment of any salaries, and
not just payment of the approved raises, to the County’s elected officials. It
denied the petitioners’ request, ruling that “[e]ven if the petitioners’ claims are
valid, the relief requested is inequitable because it would cause injury to the
public far greater than any suffered as the result of improper notice of the May
21 [m]eeting.”
2
Subsequent to the parties filing cross-motions for summary judgment,
the trial court granted the petitioners’ motion solely to the extent of ruling that
the May 21 meeting was not properly noticed and was conducted in violation of
RSA chapter 91-A and RSA 24:9-d. The trial court denied the petitioners’
motion with respect to all other issues, and granted the respondents’ cross-
motion. Attorney’s fees were not awarded to either the petitioners or the
respondents. In response to the petitioners’ motion for reconsideration, the
trial court denied their request to enjoin future violations by the respondents of
the statutory notice provisions and to appoint a monitor to ensure such
compliance, as the court found “no basis for granting such relief in the
circumstances presented.” This appeal followed.
The petitioners contend that the trial court erred in: (1) concluding that
the Convention had the authority on July 21, 2008, to ratify its May 21, 2008
vote on the salaries for the elected county officials, when the deadline
established by RSA 23:7 to set those salaries had expired prior to the July 21
meeting; (2) granting the respondents’ cross-motion for summary judgment in
the absence of evidence that all potential candidates for the county offices
knew of the May 21 meeting or that salaries were to be set at that meeting; (3)
failing to grant the petitioners the equitable relief sought, including a
mandatory injunction and the appointment of a monitor; and (4) failing to
award the petitioners attorney’s fees. We address each argument in turn.
II
The petitioners first contend that the trial court erred in denying, for the
most part, their motion for summary judgment. In reviewing the trial court’s
summary judgment rulings, we consider the evidence in the light most
favorable to each party in its capacity as the non-moving party and, if no
genuine issue of material fact exists, we determine whether the moving party is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Coco v. Jaskunas, 159 N.H. 515, 518
(2009). Here, our decision turns on the interpretation of RSA 23:7. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Id.
RSA 23:7 (2000) reads, in pertinent part:
Every county convention shall have the power to establish
salaries, benefits and other compensation paid to elected county
officers including the county attorney, sheriff, register of deeds,
treasurer, and county commissioners. . . . Said compensation shall
be established biennially by the county convention prior to the
filing date required under RSA 655:14 for the elected offices listed
in this section . . . .
3
RSA 655:14 (2008) reads, in pertinent part:
The name of any person shall not be printed upon the ballot of any
party for a primary unless he . . . meets all the other qualifications
at the time of filing, and he shall file with the appropriate official
between the first Wednesday in June and the Friday of the
following week a declaration of candidacy . . . .
We need not set forth here the text of either RSA 91-A:2, II or RSA 24:9-d, as it
is undisputed that the May 21 meeting did not comply with the notice
requirements of those statutes. It is also undisputed that the July 21 meeting
did comply with those same notice requirements, and that the time period
delineated in RSA 655:14 ended on Friday, June 13.
The petitioners argue that it was error for the trial court to conclude that
the Convention had the authority on July 21, 2008, to ratify its earlier vote on
the salaries for the elected county officials, because the deadline established by
RSA 23:7 to set those salaries had expired prior to the July 21 meeting. They
contend that, based upon the plain meaning of RSA 23:7, “the July 21, 2008
vote — whether considered as a ratification or a new original action — must be
considered a nullity.”
We first address the petitioners’ threshold argument that the May 21 vote
“was ineffective because it was defectively noticed.” In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiter of legislative intent as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. In re Juvenile 2005-212, 154 N.H.
763, 765 (2007). We will not consider what the legislature might have said, or
add words that it did not see fit to include. Id. at 766.
While RSA 23:7 mandates that compensation for certain elected county
officers be established prior to the filing date required under RSA 655:14 (here,
June 13, 2008), the statute is silent with regard to the consequences if its
mandate is fulfilled by way of a meeting that did not comply with notice
requirements provided by other statutes. Nothing in the plain language of RSA
23:7, however, provides that defective notice automatically rendered the May
21 vote a nullity, as argued by the petitioners. Indeed, we reiterate that in this
case, the Convention did, at the May 21 meeting and pursuant to RSA 23:7,
establish county compensation by vote well in advance of the June 13 deadline.
The May 21 meeting did not comply with the notice requirements of RSA
91-A:2, II or RSA 24:9-d. Although RSA 91-A:2, II (Supp. 2009) is silent with
regard to the consequences for a violation of its provisions regarding notice,
RSA 91-A:8, II (2001) provides that the superior court may invalidate an action
of a public body taken at a meeting held in violation of the provisions of RSA
chapter 91-A “if the circumstances justify such invalidation.” We note that the
4
petitioners have not, with regard to this issue, argued that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion by not invalidating the Convention vote.
See Lambert v. Belknap County Convention, 157 N.H. 375, 381 (2008) (under
RSA 91-A:8, II, decision whether to invalidate action is within discretion of the
trial court). Consequently, the petitioners have not preserved this issue for
appellate review. See State v. Kincaid, 158 N.H. 90, 95 (2008) (arguments not
briefed are deemed waived).
RSA 24:9-d (Supp. 2009) is also silent with regard to the consequences
for a violation of its provisions regarding