THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-801
DANIEN BROUSSEAU
v.
SUPERINTENDENT, HILLSBOROUGH COUNTY HOUSE OF CORRECTIONS
Argued: May 13, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 16, 2010
Richard Guerriero, public defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally,
for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Danien Brousseau, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. On February 9, 2009, the
petitioner was arrested and charged with two felony counts of receiving stolen
property, see RSA 637:7, :11 (2007), and five misdemeanor charges:
possession of burglary tools, see RSA 635:1, V (2007); unauthorized use of a
propelled vehicle, see RSA 634:3 (2007); conduct after an accident, see RSA
264:25 (2004); resisting arrest or detention, see RSA 642:2 (Supp. 2009); and
disobeying a police officer, see RSA 265:4 (2004). A bench trial for the
misdemeanor charges was scheduled in Manchester District Court for April 27,
2009. On that day, the parties negotiated a plea agreement pursuant to which
the State agreed to nol pros the possession of burglary tools charge, and the
petitioner agreed to plead nolo contendere to three misdemeanors (resisting
arrest, conduct after an accident, and disobeying an officer) and to a violation
(operating without a license). As part of his plea, in addition to other
punishments, the petitioner agreed to pay a $500 fine. After reviewing an
acknowledgement and waiver of rights form with counsel, the petitioner signed
it and appeared in district court for sentencing.
As the district court was reviewing the terms of the plea agreement, the
following exchange occurred:
THE COURT: All right, for the record, there are a
plethora of charges in front of the Court. . . . [W]ith regard to
[ ] disobeying a police officer, [the plea agreement is for] 12 months
in the House of Corrections, ten months suspended for two years
and the condition of good behavior [and a] $500 fine. How would
that be paid?
MS. MELONE: Your Honor, [the petitioner is] going to be
requesting time to pay it, because he’s been incarcerated.
THE COURT: Well, I’m disinclined to accept a negotiated
plea on that basis. . . . [P]eople have to be able to perform on their
plea, if they wish to have that. So if what you’re telling me is that
you want to try this case, I guess . . . we’ll try it.
MS. MELONE: Your Honor, may I have a moment with
my client?
THE COURT: Yes.
MS. MELONE: Your Honor, my client -- while we
maintain that he’s entitled to time to pay, he’s opting to serve the
fine off to permit the Court -- at its discretion -- to go forward with
the plea today.
THE COURT: All right.
. . . .
THE COURT: Sir, is that the agreement?
THE [PETITIONER]: Yes, sir.
2
The district court then engaged the petitioner in a plea colloquy, see Boykin v.
Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 242-44 (1969); State v. Lopez, 156 N.H. 193, 200
(2007), accepted the plea, and imposed the agreed-upon terms.
Shortly thereafter, the petitioner brought a habeas corpus petition in
superior court, arguing that the district court violated his state and federal
constitutional rights to equal protection when it “refused” his plea because he
could not pay his entire fine at once. The superior court heard argument on
May 5, 2009, and, on the same day, ordered the petitioner to be released from
the house of corrections pending the issuance of its ruling.
On July 2, 2009, the superior court ruled that although the district
court’s action had violated the petitioner’s equal protection rights, the
petitioner waived his right to challenge the district court’s rejection of his
original plea by entering a new plea. As the superior court stated: “Because
the petitioner pled nolo contendere despite the equal protection violation and
does not argue that his plea was not knowing, intelligent, or voluntary, he has
waived his right to challenge that violation now.”
On appeal, the petitioner raises two questions: (1) whether the district
court violated his constitutional rights “when it rejected a plea agreement on
the grounds that [he] was unable to pay the fine immediately, without
considering [his] financial inability to pay”; and (2) whether the petitioner
“waive[d] his right to contest this constitutional violation when he entered into
a renegotiated plea agreement.” Because we conclude that the petitioner’s new
plea constituted a waiver of his right to challenge the district court’s rejection
of his original plea, we need not decide whether, by rejecting his original plea,
the district court violated the petitioner’s constitutional rights.
A guilty plea, voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently made,
unconditionally waives all “independent claims relating to the deprivation of
constitutional rights that occurred prior to [its] entry.” Tollett v. Henderson,
411 U.S. 258, 267 (1973). “[B]oth the parties and the trial court have assumed
that a plea of nolo contendere is functionally equivalent to a plea of guilty, with
which [Tollett] was concerned. We will proceed on the same assumption, but
without warranting its soundness.” Richard v. MacAskill, 129 N.H. 405, 407
(1987).
The Tollett court “reasoned that a guilty plea represents a break in the
chain of events which has preceded it in the criminal process, and reflects a
defendant’s decision to leave behind claims of constitutional error in an effort
to expeditiously resolve the criminal proceedings against him.” United States v.
Gaffney, 469 F.3d 211, 215 (1st Cir. 2006) (quotation and citation omitted); see
Tollett, 411 U.S. at 267. Having entered a plea, a defendant may only “attack
[its] voluntary and intelligent character.” Tollett, 411 U.S. at 267.
3
New Hampshire follows this general rule. See State v. Parkhurst, 121
N.H. 821, 822 (1981). We have held, for instance, that, by entering a guilty
plea, a defendant waives the right to appeal a trial court’s ruling upon his
motion to suppress. Id. The First Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled that a
guilty plea waives an appeal based upon: (1) claims of insufficient evidence of
an interstate commerce nexus; (2) a discovery violation claim; (3) a claim based
upon a so-called “jurisdictional” element of a criminal statute; (4) a Speedy
Trial Act claim; (5) a constitutional challenge to a criminal statute; (6)
suppression claims based upon the Fourth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution; (7) a statute of limitations claim; and (8) a challenge to the
voluntariness of a confession. Gaffney, 469 F.3d at 215 n.2 (citing cases).
However, “[a] guilty plea does not foreclose a petitioner from challenging
any constitutional defect in the sentence that arises subsequent to the plea.”
Molinas v. Commissioner of Correction, 652 A.2d 481, 487 (Conn. 1994). For
example, in State v. Moran, 158 N.H. 318, 320-21 (2009), we rejected the
State’s assertion that the defendant had waived his ability to challenge his
suspended sentence by previously negotiating a plea. We explained: “In New
Hampshire, consent of the defendant cannot make an otherwise illegal
sentence legal, regardless of whether that consent was given knowingly,
intelligently, and voluntarily.” Moran, 158 N.H. at 320 (quotation and brackets
omitted); see State v. Burgess, 141 N.H. 51, 54 (1996). But cf. State v.
Dansereau, 157 N.H. 596, 603 (2008) (declining to adopt general rule “that,
when a sentence is illegal, a guilty plea is involuntary because the defendant
has not been informed of the direct consequences of his plea, and, thus, the
plea must be vacated”).
In this case, the petitioner is not challenging the legality of his sentence,
but instead claims that, before the district court accepted his new plea, it acted
unconstitutionally by rejecting his original plea. Consistent with our general
rule that a plea waives all claims relating to the deprivation of constitutional
rights occurring before its entry, we hold that by entering a new plea, the
petitioner waived any claim that the district court violated his constitutional
rights by rejecting his original plea.
In his brief, the petitioner urges that we expand our existing case law
regarding illegal sentences and hold that “a defendant who enters [into] a plea
agreement does not waive his right to challenge unconstitutional actions of the
judge in sentencing.” (Emphasis added.) He cites no authority for this
proposition and does not develop an argument as to why our case law should
be so expanded. We, therefore, decline his invitation. To the extent that the
petitioner intimated at oral argument that he was, in fact, challenging the
legality of his sentence, he did not brief this argument, and, therefore, it is
deemed waived. See State v. Kelly, 159 N.H. 390, 394 (2009). This argument
is also beyond the scope of the petitioner’s questions in his notice of appeal.
See Guyotte v. O’Neill, 157 N.H. 616, 623 (2008).
4
While conceding that his plea was voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently
made, the petitioner argues that it cannot be a waiver because he did not
expressly waive his right to challenge the district court’s rejection of his original
plea on equal protection grounds. For support, he relies upon Molinas, 652
A.2d at 486-87. Molinas, however, is factually distinguishable from this case.
In Molinas, the petitioner accepted a plea offer in 1989, pleading guilty to
a narcotics charge in exchange for a promise of a “sentence recommendation by
the state of twelve years imprisonment.” Molinas, 652 A.2d at 483 n.4. He was
then sentenced to a twelve-year term to be suspended after seven years, five
years of probation, and a $20,000 fine. Id. at 483. In 1993, the petitioner was
paroled, but was not released because he had not paid the fine. Id. He filed a
petition for a writ of habeas corpus, which was granted and upheld on appeal.
Id. at 483-84. The appellate court concluded that because the defendant was
not informed when he entered into the plea agreement seven years earlier that
his failure to pay the fine could result in continued incarceration, his plea was
not knowing, voluntary or intelligent. Id. at 486-88. The appellate court
acknowledged that while a plea constitutes a waiver of constitutional claims
occurring before its entry, it cannot constitute a waiver of subsequent
constitutional defects. Id. at 487.
Here, by contrast, the petitioner admits that his plea was voluntarily,
knowingly and intelligently made. In his brief, he concedes that he “knew what
he was doing when he entered into the no contest plea” and that he
“voluntarily ple[d] no contest knowing that he would satisfy the fine through
time spent in jail rather than through time payments.” Further, at oral
argument, the petitioner conceded that he did not challenge the voluntary,
knowing or intelligent character of his plea. Indeed, the record shows that the
petitioner volunteered to be incarcerated to “serve the fine off.” As his counsel
informed the court, “[W]hile we maintain that he’s entitled to time to pay, he’s
opting to serve the fine off to permit the Court -- at its discretion -- to go
forward with the plea today.” (Emphasis added.)
To the extent that the petitioner seeks now to argue that his plea was not
voluntarily, knowingly or intelligently made, he has not demonstrated that he
made this claim to the superior court, and it is not preserved for our review.
The trial court specifically observed that the petitioner “does not argue that his
plea was not knowing, intelligent, or voluntary.”
Moreover, whereas in Molinas, the petitioner’s constitutional claim did
not arise until after he entered his plea, in this case, the petitioner’s claim
arose before he entered his new plea. The Molinas plea agreement “itself did
not alert the petitioner to the right at issue because its alleged impact on his
continued incarceration did not become apparent until several years later,
when his parole became effective.” Id. Here, any constitutional claim arising
5
from the district court’s rejection of the petitioner’s original plea occurred
before he entered his new plea.
While we do not need to reach the issue in this case, we are troubled by
the petitioner’s assertions that district courts commonly reject plea agreements
requiring payment of a fine when a defendant is financially unable to do so. In
the exercise of our supervisory authority, we strongly urge the district courts to
follow District Court Rule 2.7 when faced with a defendant who “indicates an
inability to pay” a court-ordered fine “forthwith.” Pursuant to that rule, the
defendant “shall be required to complete an affidavit of resources, under oath,”
before leaving the courthouse and, if the court finds that he is indigent, the
court has the discretion to defer payment, order periodic payments thereof, or
allow the defendant to perform community service in lieu of payment. See Dist.
Ct. R. 2.7. Additionally, it is well within the district court’s discretion to accept
the plea, but defer imposition of sentence for a brief period of time to provide
the defendant a reasonable opportunity to raise funds sufficient to pay the fine.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6