THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-085
JOANNE RADZIEWICZ & a.
v.
TOWN OF HUDSON
Submitted: September 24, 2009
Opinion Issued: October 20, 2009
Joanne Radziewicz and Peter Radziewicz, by brief, pro se.
Hage Hodes, P.A., of Manchester (David E. LeFevre on the memorandum
of law), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioners, Joanne and Peter Radziewicz, appeal an
order of the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) dismissing, for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction, their appeal from a ruling of the zoning board of adjustment (ZBA)
in favor of the respondent, Town of Hudson. See RSA 677:4 (2008). We affirm.
The record supports the following relevant facts. The petitioners own
property in Hudson. They contest the ZBA’s grant of a use variance to the
owners of an abutting property permitting it to be used as a multi-family
dwelling. On November 8, 2007, the ZBA denied the petitioners’ motion for a
rehearing. See RSA 677:2 (2008). Thirty-two days later, on December 10,
2007, the petitioners appealed to the superior court. See RSA 677:4. The town
moved to dismiss, arguing that the appeal was untimely and that the court,
accordingly, lacked subject matter jurisdiction. See id. (allowing for appeal of a
ZBA decision to the superior court “within 30 days after the date upon which
the [ZBA] voted to deny the motion for rehearing”). The petitioners objected,
arguing that because the thirtieth day had fallen on a Saturday, Superior
Court Rule 12(1) permitted them to file the appeal on the following Monday.
The superior court initially denied the town’s motion to dismiss.
On September 29, 2008, the parties attended a hearing on the merits of
the petition. The town orally renewed its motion to dismiss for lack of subject
matter jurisdiction due to untimely filing. The superior court granted the
motion, reasoning that decisions of this court that had been issued since its
initial order denying the motion dictated that “failure to comply with a
statutory timeframe deprive[d] . . . [it] of appellate jurisdiction.” This appeal
followed.
The petitioners first argue that the trial court erred by reversing its
earlier denial of the town’s motion to dismiss. Specifically, they claim that
superior court rules barred the trial court from reconsidering the issue because
the town did not file a motion for reconsideration or request a hearing when the
initial order denying the motion was issued.
The trial court has the power to reconsider an issue until final judgment
or decree. Goudreault v. Kleeman, 158 N.H. 236, 249 (2009). In addition, “the
issue of subject matter jurisdiction may be raised at any time in the
proceedings because jurisdiction cannot be conferred where it does not already
exist.” Route 12 Books & Video v. Town of Troy, 149 N.H. 569, 575 (2003).
“The superior court has no discretion when dealing with statutory time
requirements that confer jurisdiction.” Id. Accordingly, the town was not
required to file a motion for reconsideration or to request a hearing, and the
trial court did not err in revisiting its earlier ruling.
Next, the petitioners argue that they timely filed their appeal to the
superior court because the thirtieth day from the ZBA’s denial of their motion
for rehearing fell on a Saturday, and that, accordingly, Rule 12(1) extended the
deadline to the following Monday. The petitioners concede that RSA 677:4
mandates that appeals be filed within thirty days in order to establish
jurisdiction in the superior court, and that they failed to comply with this
deadline. Nonetheless, they argue that the provisions of Rule 12(1) control.
Rule 12(1) provides:
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these
rules, by order of court, or by applicable law, . . . [t]he last day of
the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday,
2
Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event the period shall extend
until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or a
legal holiday . . . .
The trial court ruled that notwithstanding Rule 12(1), the plain language of
RSA 677:4 does not allow for filing an appeal beyond thirty days when the
thirtieth day falls on a Saturday. We agree.
The interpretation and application of RSA 677:4 is a question of law,
which we review de novo. See Upton v. Town of Hopkinton, 157 N.H. 115, 118
(2008). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Id. When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. at 118-19. We interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.
Id. at 119.
In construing other sections of RSA chapter 677 containing similar
provisions, we have held that parties must comply with the required statutory
timelines to establish jurisdiction in the superior court. For example, we have
held that “strict compliance with the thirty-day filing deadline of RSA 677:15, I,
is required to vest the trial court with jurisdiction.” Atwater v. Town of
Plainfield, 156 N.H. 265, 267 (2007). We have also held that under RSA 677:3,
I (2008), “compliance with the deadline is a necessary prerequisite to
establishing jurisdiction and failure to timely move for rehearing divests the
superior court of subject matter jurisdiction.” Cardinal Dev. Corp. v. Town of
Winchester Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 157 N.H. 710, 712 (2008). The same
rule applies here. RSA 677:4 vests jurisdiction in the superior court for
appeals of ZBA decisions only if a petition is filed “within 30 days after the date
upon which the [ZBA] voted to deny the motion for rehearing.”
We addressed a similar issue in Dermody v. Town of Gilford, 137 N.H.
294 (1993). In that case, the petitioners filed an appeal in the superior court
thirty-one days after a decision of the Gilford Planning Board. The applicable
statute, however, required that they file their petition “within 30 days after the
filing of the decision.” Dermody, 137 N.H. at 295 (quotation and emphasis
omitted). The petitioners argued that the superior court had the discretion to
allow their petition because their noncompliance with the deadline resulted
from “accident, mistake or misfortune,” the standard by which the superior
court could, at that time, waive the strict application of its rules. Id. at 296-97;
see Super. Ct. R. Preface (amended 1999). We disagreed, holding that
[s]tatutory time requirements relative to the vesting of
jurisdiction . . . must be distinguished from the superior court’s
3
own procedural rules. While the superior court has the discretion
to apply its concept of accident, mistake or misfortune in some
other contexts, the court cannot use this concept to establish
jurisdiction in the superior court in the first instance.
Dermody, 137 N.H. at 296-97 (citation omitted).
The same reasoning applies to this case, and we agree with the trial
court’s conclusion that the plain meaning of the statute, and not Rule 12(1),
governs the petitioners’ appeal. Compliance with the thirty-day filing deadline
was a necessary prerequisite to establishing jurisdiction in the superior court.
Because the petitioners’ appeal was not filed within thirty days, the superior
court never had jurisdiction, and could not rely upon Rule 12(1) to establish
jurisdiction that did not exist in the first instance.
The petitioners next argue that their petition was timely filed based upon
H I K Corporation v. Manchester, 103 N.H. 378, 381 (1961). In that case, the
deadline at issue fell on a Sunday, and we held that a motion filed the next
business day was timely. H I K Corporation, 103 N.H. at 381. Our reasoning,
however, was based upon the common law “recognized principle that when the
terminal day of a time limit falls upon Sunday that day is to be excluded from
the computation.” Id. This recognized principle arose from statutes in
existence at that time “prohibiting the performance of work and labor and the
transaction of business on Sunday,” and because Sunday was “generally
recognized as a dies non juridicus,” a day on which no judicial act or
proceeding could be carried out. 86 C.J.S. Time § 14(2), at 880 (1954). We
know of no comparable recognized principle in the common law with regard to
Saturday deadlines, and the petitioners point to none.
Finally, the petitioners argue that “[e]ntertaining the Town of Hudson’s
last-minute, oral Motion To Dismiss deprived the Petitioners of due process of
law and fundamental fairness pursuant to the New Hampshire and United
States Constitutions.” They cite no particular provisions of either constitution
and do not develop this argument further. We have repeatedly stated that
judicial review is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings
without developed legal argument, and neither passing reference to
constitutional claims nor off-hand invocations of constitutional rights without
support by legal argument or authority warrants extended consideration. Guy
v. Town of Temple, 157 N.H. 642, 658 (2008). We therefore decline to address
this argument further.
We note that after the petitioners’ appeal was filed in the trial court, RSA
21:35, II (Supp. 2008) (amended 2008) was amended to specifically permit
statutory filing deadlines which fall on a Saturday to automatically extend to
the next business day. See Laws 2008, 11:1. The petitioners contend that this
4
amendment “is a clear indication that [the legislature] would support the
Petitioners’ plea for application of Superior Court Rule 12(1)” to the
circumstances of their case. We disagree. As stated above, superior court
procedural rules cannot establish subject matter jurisdiction for an appeal
from a ZBA decision where it is already lacking. Moreover, in deciding the case
before us, we are bound by the statute in effect at the time of the petitioners’
filing deadline.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5