THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2009-425
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BRUCE HALL
Argued: May 4, 2010
Opinion Issued: July 23, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (James C. Vara, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
Cohen & Winters, PLLC, of Concord (Andrew S. Winters on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Bruce Hall, appeals the Superior Court’s
(Conboy, J.) denial of his motion to vacate his sentence based upon ineffective
assistance of counsel. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. On November 18, 2004, the
defendant was indicted on five counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault
against his six-year-old granddaughter. See RSA 632-A:2 (2007). Counsel met
with the defendant to discuss his case, specifically whether he should plead
guilty or go to trial. The defendant repeatedly asserted that he was unwilling to
go to trial because he did not want his granddaughter to have to testify. Trial
counsel explained the defendant’s other options, including a negotiated plea, a
capped plea, and a non-negotiated plea. She drew a diagram outlining the
merits and consequences of each option, which the defendant took home. The
defendant’s primary concern was reducing the minimum sentence that he
would be required to serve, asserting that he could not spend more than three
to four years in prison.
Counsel attempted to negotiate a plea agreement with the State. The
State’s best offer was a capped plea with a recommendation of a seven and a
half to twenty year sentence on each of the five counts with all sentences to run
concurrently. Counsel explained the offer to the defendant, noting that while it
was possible to argue for a shorter/lesser sentence with a capped plea
agreement, based upon her twenty-two years of experience as a criminal
defense attorney, the presiding judge would likely impose the prosecutor’s
recommended sentence. Counsel further explained that the presiding judge
would also likely require the defendant to waive sentence review under the
capped plea agreement, leaving the defendant with no recourse if he were
displeased with the sentence imposed. The defendant was unwilling to accept
the capped plea agreement because he feared that he would not live long
enough to complete the sentence. He was nearly sixty years old and in poor
health. Trial counsel advised him that a sentence of less than seven and a half
years was unlikely.
Alternatively, counsel informed the defendant that he could plead
without any agreement and argue for a lesser sentence to the trial judge and
later to the sentence review board. Counsel also advised the defendant of the
risks involved with a non-negotiated plea, including the judge’s right to impose
a sentence in excess of the prosecutor’s recommendation and the defendant’s
inability to withdraw the plea regardless of the sentence imposed. Counsel
discussed the defendant’s desire to pursue a non-negotiated plea with the
prosecutor, who agreed not to increase his recommended sentence. The
defendant entered a non-negotiated guilty plea to all charges.
At the sentencing hearing, counsel argued for a sentence of three to ten
years based upon several mitigating factors: the defendant had no previous
criminal record, had taken full responsibility for his actions, was nearly sixty
years old and in poor health, suffered from mental health issues, and had fully
complied with pre-trial services and counseling. In addition, the victim’s
mother had written a letter to the court asking for a “small” sentence and a
pre-sentence investigation report filed by the probation and parole office
recommended a five year minimum sentence. Ultimately, the court accepted
the prosecutor’s recommendation and sentenced the defendant to seven and a
half to twenty years in the state prison on each of the five counts to run
concurrently.
2
Soon after the sentencing hearing, trial counsel met with the defendant
and reminded him of his right to seek sentence review. Counsel cautioned the
defendant that the sentence review board could increase his sentence.
Subsequently, she discussed with him the relative merits and risks of pursuing
sentence review. She advised that he had a legitimate argument for a sentence
reduction. In addition to the mitigating factors noted above, counsel discussed
a specific case with similar facts and circumstances in which the review board
had reduced a defendant’s sentence of ten to twenty years to three and a half
to ten years. Counsel left the decision whether to seek sentence review to the
defendant. He chose to pursue it.
The sentence review board, however, found that the defendant’s sentence
was “grossly disproportionate to sentences imposed under similar
circumstances.” The board modified one of his concurrent seven and a half to
twenty year sentences to run consecutive to the others, effectively doubling his
sentence.
Subsequently, through new counsel, the defendant moved to vacate his
sentence, contending that he was denied effective assistance of counsel. He
argued that trial counsel should have persuaded him to accept the capped plea
agreement and to forego sentence review. The trial court denied the motion,
finding, in part, that trial counsel’s representation was reasonable under the
circumstances.
The defendant asserts that his counsel was ineffective under the State
and Federal Constitutions. Both Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and
the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution “guarantee
a criminal defendant reasonably competent assistance of counsel.” State v.
Sharkey, 155 N.H. 638, 640 (2007); see Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S.
668, 686 (1984). We first address the claims under the State Constitution,
citing federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33
(1983).
To prevail on his claim, the defendant must demonstrate, “first, that
counsel’s representation was constitutionally deficient and, second, that
counsel’s deficient performance actually prejudiced the outcome of the case.”
State v. McGurk, 157 N.H. 765, 769 (2008) (quotation omitted); see Strickland,
466 U.S. at 687.
To satisfy the first prong of the test, the performance prong, the
defendant “must show that counsel’s representation fell below an objective
standard of reasonableness.” State v. Whittaker, 158 N.H. 762, 768 (2009)
(quotation omitted); see Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U.S. 510, 521 (2003) (stating
that the proper measure of attorney performance remains simply
reasonableness under prevailing professional norms). We judge the
3
reasonableness of counsel’s conduct based upon the facts and circumstances
of that particular case, viewed from the time of that conduct. Strickland, 466
U.S. at 690. As we have previously stated:
Judicial scrutiny of counsel’s performance must be highly
deferential. A fair assessment of attorney performance requires
that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of
hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s
challenged conduct, and to evaluate the conduct from counsel’s
perspective at the time. Because of the difficulties inherent in
making the evaluation, a court must indulge a strong presumption
that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable
professional assistance; that is, the defendant must overcome the
presumption that, under the circumstances, the challenged action
might be considered sound trial strategy.
Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 769 (quotations and citations omitted). In other words,
the defendant must show that no competent lawyer, under the same
circumstances, would have allowed him to enter a non-negotiated guilty plea or
pursue sentence review to its conclusion without first actively trying to
persuade him to take another course of action. Id.
Both the performance and prejudice prongs of the ineffectiveness inquiry
are mixed questions of law and fact. Id. at 768. Therefore, we will not disturb
the trial court’s factual findings unless they are not supported by the evidence
or are erroneous as a matter of law, and we review the ultimate determination
of whether each prong is met de novo. Id.
In the plea agreement context, “[p]rior to trial an accused is entitled to
rely upon his counsel to make an independent examination of the facts,
circumstances, pleadings and laws involved and then to offer his informed
opinion as to what plea should be entered.” Von Moltke v. Gillies, 332 U.S.
708, 721 (1948). Counsel must not only communicate the terms of the plea
offer to his client, but also the relative merits of the offer as compared to the
client’s chances for success at trial. State v. Bristol, 618 A.2d 1290, 1292 (Vt.
1992). However, reasonable professional conduct does not, under all
circumstances, require an attorney to provide an explicit opinion as to whether
a client should accept a plea offer. Purdy v. United States, 208 F.3d 41, 45-46
(2d Cir. 2000).
The defendant first asserts that counsel’s failure to actively persuade him
to accept the capped plea offered by the prosecutor was unreasonable. The
State counters that “the defendant’s decision to enter a non-negotiated plea
was a tactical decision based on sound advice,” and that counsel was effective.
We agree.
4
Counsel discussed the defendant’s options with him, providing a diagram
to assure that he understood the risks and consequences of each. The
defendant had refused to go to trial while insisting that he did not want to
serve more than three years in prison. There may have been little chance of a
sentence less than the prosecutor’s recommendation of seven and a half to
twenty years, but there were several legitimate mitigating factors to form the
basis of an argument for a lesser sentence. Because trial counsel secured a
promise from the prosecutor that he would not increase his sentencing
recommendation for the non-negotiated plea, there was little risk that the
defendant’s sentence would be greater than with the capped plea arrangement.
The non-negotiated plea preserved the defendant’s right to review by the
sentence review board, whereas, had he entered a capped plea, the sentencing
judge would likely have required him to waive his right to review.
It is the duty of trial counsel to protect the defendant’s interest in
sentence review when possible. See Super. Ct. Sentence Rev. Div. R.1.
Counsel fulfilled her duty to protect the defendant’s right to sentence review
with little risk to the defendant with the non-negotiated plea.
The defendant cites Dasher v. Attorney General, Florida, 574 F.3d 1310
(11th Cir. 2009), and Ebron v. Commissioner of Correction, 992 A.2d 1200
(Conn. App. 2010), in support of his contention that trial counsel should have
actively tried to convince him to accept the capped plea arrangement. Given
the starkly disparate facts in Dasher and Ebron, we find neither persuasive. In
Dasher, counsel provided the defendant with advice deemed by the court to be
a “piece of foolishness” based upon the circumstances. Dasher, 574 F.3d at
1317-18. In Ebron, counsel “mismanaged” the defendant’s case and advised
the defendant that the state’s offer was “high” even though he had no defenses
to the primary charges and faced a potential sentence more than triple the
state’s plea offer. Ebron, 992 A.2d at 1207-09. In both cases, the court found
that there was ineffective assistance of counsel. Dasher, 574 F.3d at 1318;
Ebron, 992 A.2d at 1209. Implicit in their holdings is a finding that there was
only one reasonable course of action based upon the circumstances of each
case and, therefore, failure to advise the client to pursue that course
constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. Dasher, 574 F.3d at 1317; Ebron
992 A.2d at 1209. By contrast, here, trial counsel had a reasonable basis to
advise the defendant that entering a non-negotiated plea was a viable option.
Counsel also adequately informed the defendant of the risks of entering a non-
negotiated guilty plea. The advice was reasonable and hardly a baseless “piece
of foolishness.” Dasher, 574 F.3d at 1317.
The defendant cites Boria v. Keane for the proposition that counsel must
advise the defendant on what plea should be entered. Boria v. Keane, 99 F.3d
492 (2d Cir.), clarified on other grounds on rehearing, 90 F.3d 36 (2d Cir.
1996), cert. denied, 521 U.S. 1118 (1997). In Boria, trial counsel conveyed the
5
state’s one- to three-year plea offer to the defendant, but failed to advise the
defendant of its merits, instead allowing the defendant to go to trial while
knowing that trial would be “suicidal.” Boria, 99 F.3d at 495. The defendant
rejected the plea offer and was sentenced to twenty years to life in prison. Id.
at 494-95. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals found that the defendant
received ineffective assistance, reasoning that effective assistance of counsel
includes counsel’s informed opinion regarding how the defendant should plead.
Id. at 497. Four years later, however, the Second Circuit clarified Boria,
recognizing that reasonable professional conduct does not under all
circumstances require an attorney to provide an explicit opinion as to whether
a client should take a plea. Purdy, 208 F.3d at 46. The court rejected the
assertion that Boria created a per se rule that counsel must advise a client to
plead guilty or not. Id. (stating that “[p]er se rules like the one [the defendant]
advocates ― and mistakenly reads into Boria ― are not well calibrated to gauge
the ineffective assistance of counsel”).
Trial counsel’s advice throughout the instant case reflected a reasonable
exercise of strategic discretion. Accordingly, we need not address the prejudice
prong of the ineffective assistance test. See State v. Kepple, 155 N.H. 267, 270
(2007).
The defendant next argues that counsel was ineffective for failing to
strongly advise him not to pursue sentence review. Although the decision to
pursue sentence review turned out be a poor choice for the defendant, we
ignore the distorting effects of hindsight and evaluate the reasonableness of
counsel’s conduct at the time, indulging a strong presumption that counsel’s
conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable professional assistance.
Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 769. Counsel believed that the defendant had a
legitimate argument to advance to the sentence review board in support of a
reduced sentence. This included a letter asking for leniency from the victim’s
mother, a pre-sentence investigation report that recommended a lighter
sentence, and several mitigating factors including the defendant’s age, poor
health, and mental illness. In addition, counsel previously had a similar case
in which the sentence review board reduced a defendant’s sentence. All of
these factors add up to a reasonable basis for the advice given.
Furthermore, trial counsel was under no obligation to aggressively
pursue a particular strategy with the defendant. See Bristol, 618 A.2d at 1292
(holding that effective assistance of counsel did not require counsel to
aggressively pursue a rejected plea agreement as long as the defendant knew of
the agreement and was adequately informed of its terms). Trial counsel
informed the defendant of the risks and benefits related to sentence review and
urged him to weigh the potential benefits against the level of risk that he was
willing to accept. Ultimately, it was the defendant who decided to pursue
6
sentence review because he was focused primarily upon reducing his minimum
sentence.
Because we hold that trial counsel’s advice in regard to the decision to
pursue sentence review was reasonable under the circumstances, we need not
address the prejudice prong of the ineffective assistance test. See Kepple, 155
N.H. at 270.
Because the standard for determining whether a defendant has received
ineffective assistance of counsel is the same under both the State and Federal
Constitutions, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we
do under the State Constitution. Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
7