THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-698
ALEX BUILDERS & SONS, INC.
v.
MICHAEL DANLEY & a.
Argued: March 24, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 19, 2010
Hoefle, Phoenix, Gormley & Roberts, P.A., of Portsmouth (Lawrence B.
Gormley on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Coughlin, Rainboth, Murphy & Lown, P.A., of Portsmouth (Kenneth D.
Murphy on the brief and orally), for the defendants.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, Alex Builders & Sons, Inc., appeals an order of
the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) discharging its mechanic’s lien against property
of the defendants, Michael and Ann Marie Danley. We reverse and remand.
The record supports the following facts. On March 26, 2009, the plaintiff
sued the defendants under theories of breach of contract, quantum meruit and
unjust enrichment, alleging that it had supplied materials and performed
services in constructing a home at 26 Odiorne Point, Portsmouth. The writ
further alleged that despite their promise to pay for those materials and
services, the plaintiffs had failed to pay an outstanding balance of $45,391.75.
Also on March 26, 2009, the plaintiff petitioned the superior court for an ex
parte attachment, “in accordance with RSA 447 and 511-A:8,” on property of
the defendants described as: “Any and all Real estate located at, but not
limited, to 26 Odiorne Point Road, Portsmouth NH 03801, aka Tucker’s Cove,
Tax Map 224, Lot 10-002.” The pleading was entitled: “PETITION FOR EX
PARTE MECHANICS LIEN.” (Bolding and underlining omitted.)
The plaintiff’s attorney also completed a writ of attachment and trustee
process, sometimes referred to as the “blue form,” which commanded the
sheriff to attach the goods or estate of the defendants up to the value of
$50,000. The return of service on the writ of attachment indicates that the
person making the attachment had attached the defendants’ lands and
tenements in Rockingham County “to the exten[t] ordered on the reverse side of
this writ” by leaving a copy of the writ and return at the registry of deeds.
The defendants objected to the ex parte attachment, arguing, in part,
that the writ of attachment was defective because it failed to specify its purpose
to perfect a mechanic’s lien and failed to accurately describe the property to be
attached. The plaintiff moved to supplement the record, alleging that its “writ,
totaling the five pages on record at the Registry of Deeds, includes the Petition,
which repeatedly, in the heading, in Paragraph ‘B’ and on the second page of
the Petition, asserts the appropriate notice language.”
After hearing and review of the writ of attachment “and other pertinent
papers,” the court ruled that the writ was defective and that the mechanic’s
lien had not been properly perfected. By interlocutory appeal pursuant to
Supreme Court Rule 8, the trial court transferred the following questions of
law:
I. Did the trial court err in ordering dissolution of the mechanic’s
lien as a result of its finding of a defective writ and
noncompliance with the statutory requirement?
II. Did the trial court err in failing to distinguish the authority
cited by [the plaintiff] in Manchester Federal Sav. and Loan
Ass’n v. Letendre, 103 N.H. 64 (1960), from Gothic Metal
Lathing v. FDIC, 135 N.H. 262 [(1992)]?
III. Did the trial court err in finding that the so-called “blue form”
is the sole appropriate location on the writ for the required
recitations to perfect a mechanic’s lien, contrary to the
holdings in Manchester Federal Sav. and Loan Ass’n and
Holden Engineering & Surveying, Inc. v. Law Offices of
Raymond P. D’Amante, P.A., 142 N.H. 213 (1997) that the filing
is to be considered as an integrated [w]hole[?]
2
Answering these questions requires us to interpret the statutory requirements
for securing a mechanic’s lien, see RSA 447:10 (2002), which presents a
question of law that we review de novo. See Zorn v. Demetri, 158 N.H. 437,
438 (2009).
Under RSA 447:2, a person who performs labor or furnishes material, “to
the amount of $15 or more,” for building or repairing a house, has “a lien on
any material so furnished and on said structure, and on any right of the owner
to the lot of land on which it stands.” RSA 447:2 (2002). The lien continues for
120 days after the services are provided or the materials are furnished, RSA
447:9 (2002), and may be secured in accordance with RSA 447:10, which
provides: “Any such lien may be secured by attachment of the property upon
which it exists at any time while the lien continues, the writ and return thereon
distinctly expressing that purpose.” RSA 447:10.
The issue before us is the sufficiency of the writ.
Our cases set forth a three-part test to determine the
sufficiency of a writ of attachment for purposes of RSA 447:10. It
must state the purpose for which the attachment is brought,
describe the property to be attached with reasonable accuracy and
specificity, and direct the officer to attach that specific property.
Gothic Metal Lathing, 135 N.H. at 263. We have long required strict
compliance with the test. Id. Insistence upon strict compliance is warranted
because “[t]he remedy of attachment is in derogation of the common law,”
Maine Nat’l Bank v. Baker, 116 N.H. 185, 186 (1976) (discussing RSA chapter
511-A, and, in particular, RSA 511-A:8), and the statute affords an enhanced
right of recovery in the form of priority over certain other liens, see RSA
447:12-a (2002) (priority over construction mortgages). Accordingly, “[f]ailure
to comply with the specific statutory provisions of perfecting a mechanics lien
is usually fatal.” Rodd v. Titus Construction Co., 107 N.H. 264, 266 (1966); cf.
Gen. Insulation Co. v. Eckman Constr., 159 N.H. 601, 608 (2010) (noting that
failure to comply with RSA chapter 447’s performance bond provisions is
usually fatal).
The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred in failing to read the writ of
attachment and petition for ex parte mechanic’s lien together. It contends that
Manchester Savings &c. Ass’n v. Letendre, 103 N.H. 64 (1960), and Holden
Engineering and Surveying v. Law Offices of Raymond P. D’Amante, 142 N.H.
213 (1997), support the position that “the documents that make up a Writ of
Attachment, the Writ itself and the accompanying declaration or other
supporting documents, should be read together to determine whether the
purpose of the Writ is to perfect a mechanic’s lien.” The defendants, on the
other hand, assert that the “statute and case law make clear that it is the Writ
of Attachment itself that must be reviewed to determine compliance.” In
3
addition, they claim that “[t]he words the ‘writ and return’ clearly refer to the
blue Writ form not the pleading filed with the Court to obtain authority to
record the attachment.”
Our cases have not construed the statute as strictly as the defendants
suggest. Although we demand strict compliance with the statute’s
requirements, “strict compliance with a statute does not equate to strict
construction of its terms.” Impact Food Sales v. Evans, 160 N.H. 386, 399
(2010) (Hicks, J., dissenting). This is especially true where “[t]he purpose of
the mechanics’ lien law is remedial, to guarantee effective security to those who
furnish labor or materials which are used to enhance the value of the property
of others.” Innie v. W & R, Inc., 116 N.H. 315, 317 (1976). The general rule is
to construe remedial statutes liberally in favor of the person the statute is
intended to benefit. See, e.g., Stankiewicz v. City of Manchester, 156 N.H. 587,
594 (2007).
In Manchester Savings, the sufficiency of the writ of attachment was
challenged on the ground that the command to the sheriff was not in the writ,
as required by RSA 447:10, because it appeared on a separate sheet of paper
stapled to the second page of the specifications. Manchester Sav., 103 N.H. at
68. In rejecting that challenge, we noted that the statute contains no “express
direction as to the place where the command to attach and the statement of the
purpose thereof should be inserted.” Id. In addition, we noted that the entire
command to the sheriff in that case was too long to fit in the usual space
reserved for it in the writ. Id. We found the writ sufficient, concluding:
[W]hile in a technical sense we speak of a writ and a declaration, it
cannot be said as a practical matter that the two are necessarily
separate and distinct except as to content. . . . Each is an integral
and complementary portion of a whole, and to cause this whole to
serve its intended purpose they must be considered together. In
short, we believe the instrument here, including the writ proper,
the declaration and the lien command, must be regarded as a
whole and that RSA 447:10 so intended.
Id. at 69.
Similarly, in Holden Engineering, we rejected an overly technical reading
of RSA 447:10 that would have required the purpose to secure a mechanic’s
lien to be “explicitly stated twice, once in the writ and again in the return of
service.” Holden Eng’g, 142 N.H. at 215. We held that “the phrase ‘writ and
return’ contained in RSA 447:10 refers to the instrument as an integrated
whole, and that so long as the writ and return taken together distinctly express
that the attachment is made to secure a mechanic’s lien, the purpose of the
attachment is sufficiently stated.” Id. at 216.
4
We conclude that on the facts of this case, the “instrument,” Manchester
Sav., 103 N.H. at 69; Holden Eng’g, 142 N.H. at 216, to be assessed for
compliance with the statute consists of the writ of attachment and the petition
for ex parte mechanic’s lien, which was recorded with the writ and intended to
be taken together with it, as an integrated whole, for the purpose of securing
the lien.
We now address whether the writ and petition in this case meet the
three-part test for compliance. See Gothic Metal Lathing, 135 N.H. at 263.
The plaintiff asserts that they do because the petition states the purpose to
perfect a mechanic’s lien and identifies the real property to be attached, and
the writ of attachment directs the sheriff to attach that property.
The petition states that it is a “PETITION FOR EX PARTE MECHANICS
LIEN” (bolding and underlining omitted) and references RSA chapter 447. It
also specifically states that “[t]his attachment is to secure a Mechanics Lien
pursuant to RSA 447:10, against the specific real properties specified above.”
This language plainly expresses that the attachment’s purpose is to secure a
mechanic’s lien.
The petition also sought permission to attach “[a]ny and all Real estate
located at, but not limited, to 26 Odiorne Point Road, Portsmouth NH 03801,
aka Tucker’s Cove, Tax Map 224, Lot 10-002.” The defendant contends that
the petition failed to sufficiently describe the property because it “did not
specify the actual property subject to the lien but instead made reference to all
property of the Defendants” and “[i]n addition, . . . did not reference a Book and
Page, but instead a City Tax Map.” We reject the latter argument because we
have never required the property description to contain a book and page
reference; rather, our cases require only “a reasonably accurate description of
the property, so that the attached real estate may be identified with reasonable
certainty.” Innie, 116 N.H. at 317; see Gothic Metal Lathing, 135 N.H. at 263
(requiring property to be described “with reasonable accuracy and specificity”).
The description at issue here, which identifies the property by street address
and tax map designation, is sufficient under our test.
The more difficult question is whether the description fails because it
includes property in addition to 26 Odiorne Point Road. Because this issue of
overinclusion is also implicated under the third prong of the test, we address
that prong here as well. Specifically, the writ of attachment commands the
sheriff to “attach the goods or estate” of the defendants to be found in his
precinct, and the sheriff’s return indicates that the person making the
attachment attached “all the lands and tenements” of the defendants in
Rockingham County. We must determine, therefore, whether this overbreadth
in the command to attach is fatal.
5
As previously noted, RSA 447:2, in relevant part, creates a statutory lien
upon the house that was built or repaired with labor performed or materials
furnished by the attaching laborer or supplier, and upon the owner’s right in
the land on which that house stands. RSA 447:2. Thus, the lien arising under
RSA 447:2 is limited to the property on which the labor was performed or
materials furnished. RSA 447:10, in turn, provides for securing the lien
created under RSA 447:2 by attaching the property on which that lien exists,
which, again, is the property on which the work was performed. RSA 447:10.
We have stated that in order to secure a mechanic’s lien under RSA 447:10, the
plaintiff’s writ must “describe the property on which he claims a lien with
reasonable accuracy” and must “direct the officer to attach it to preserve his
lien.” Rodd, 107 N.H. at 266. To satisfy these requirements, we require the writ
to describe the property on which the labor was performed or the materials
furnished. RSA 447:2, :10.
We conclude that the writ of attachment and the petition for ex parte
mechanic’s lien, taken together, meet these requirements. Although the
property description and command to the sheriff include more property than
that upon which the lien created under RSA 447:2 exists, the instrument as a
whole delineates the extent of the plaintiff’s mechanic’s lien by identifying the
property on which the plaintiff performed work. Specifically, the petition for ex
parte mechanic’s lien states that the plaintiff
certifie[d] the following facts to establish probable cause for the
right to recover, and the amount thereof:
Defendants, Michael and Ann Marie Danley (“Danley”) entered into
a contract with Plaintiff by which Plaintiff agreed to provide
materials and services for construction of a new home on the
Defendants’ property, located at 26 Odiorne Point Road aka
Tucker’s Cove, Portsmouth, NH. Plaintiff performed the services
and as contracted, based upon the Defendants’ promise to pay for
the same. Despite repeated requests by the Plaintiff, Defendants
have failed and refused to remit payment for said services in the
amount of $45,391.75.
The petition also states:
Within the last 120 days Plaintiff has provided Defendants,
with goods and services utilized in the construction of a new home
on the property sought to be attached. . . . .
This attachment is to secure a Mechanics Lien pursuant to
RSA 447:10, against the specific real properties specified above.
6
Thus, although the description and command are overbroad, the petition
makes clear that the property at 26 Odiorne Point Road is the only property on
which the plaintiff may validly claim a mechanic’s lien under RSA 447:2.
Furthermore, several jurisdictions hold that the overinclusion of property
in a claimed mechanic’s lien does not invalidate the lien on the property
properly subject to it.
[I]t has often been held or stated that the inclusion of more land
than that to which the lien may properly attach does not vitiate the
lien upon so much of the land as is encompassed within the
description and to which a lien may properly attach, at least if the
description is not fraudulent or grossly misleading and innocent
third parties are not affected.
Annotation, Sufficiency of Notice, Claim, or Statement of Mechanic’s Lien with
Respect to Description or Location of Real Property, 52 A.L.R.2d 12, 83 (1957).
We adopt this rule and conclude that the plaintiff’s overinclusion of property to
be attached does not void its mechanic’s lien on the property validly subject to
it, i.e., 26 Odiorne Point Road. The statutory requirements as to that property
were met. See Adams Tree Serv., Inc. v. Transamerica Title Ins. Co., 511 P.2d
658, 663 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1973) (noting that “[a]lthough appellant did include too
much land in its description of the liened property, it cannot be said that
inclusion of such excess constitutes a description that is not ‘sufficient for
identification.’”). Any attempted assertion of a mechanic’s lien over property
not subject thereto under RSA 447:2 is simply ineffectual and void.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
7