THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-617
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ANDREW FARRINGTON
Argued: January 6, 2011
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Lucy H. Carrillo, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Meredith Lugo, public defender, of Keene, on the brief and orally, for the
defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Andrew Farrington, appeals his conviction
by a jury on one count of prohibited uses of computer services. See RSA 649-
B:4 (2007). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Fitzgerald, J.) erred
by denying his motion to dismiss based upon sufficiency of the evidence. We
affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In October 2007, the
twenty-one-year-old defendant lived in Londonderry where he owned a
computer with internet access. He had an account on the website
Facebook.com, which allows individuals to sign up for an account, list personal
information about themselves and establish connections with other users on
the site. Facebook also has several applications available to users, one of
which is called, “Are you interested?” Through this application, users can sign
up to have their photographs randomly sent out to other users with the
question, “are you interested?” The recipient can then choose one of three
options: (1) ignore the question; (2) answer it anonymously; or (3) answer the
question and include a reply with the recipient’s name.
The defendant received a photograph through this application from A.D.
in October 2007 and chose the third option. After their initial contact on
Facebook, A.D., who was thirteen years old at the time, and the defendant later
communicated through AIM, which is an internet messaging service provided
by America Online. The two communicated during October, November and
December 2007, but the earliest transcript of their messages presented at trial
was from an AIM chat that occurred on December 6. During that chat, the
defendant told A.D. that she was “cute as hell,” and that he wished she was
older so they could “go chill sometime.” When A.D. replied that she was “not
that young” and told the defendant she was fourteen, he told her that he “may
be able to deal with that.” The defendant also told A.D. that she looked a little
young in her picture but was “hott as hell,” and later told her she was “just so
damn cute.”
The defendant and A.D. chatted again on December 7, and A.D. told the
defendant that she was going to visit a friend in Londonderry. The defendant
replied, “what a tease,” “you’re so cute and you’ll be right in town.” The
defendant also told her to let him know if she wanted to get together while in
Londonderry.
On December 9, the defendant again suggested to A.D. that they should
“chill sometime” in Londonderry. Additionally, during that chat, A.D. told the
defendant that she had just taken a shower and he asked her, “how was ur
shower?” “nice and hot and wet?” He again suggested that they meet the next
time she came to Londonderry and A.D. replied that she would let him know
the next time she was in Londonderry.
During their next conversation, on December 11, A.D. told the defendant
that she was a cheerleader, and he replied, “that is wicked hott.” A.D. also told
the defendant that she was a “flyer” on the cheerleading team, and the
defendant asked, “don’t they usually make the flyers the hottest ones who are
in the best shape?” A few minutes later, the defendant again asked A.D. when
they could “chill” and also told her that he was “dying to see just ho[w] hott”
she was in person. He also told her that if she did not want to meet him, she
could just tell him that, but A.D. replied, “no[,] [I] do.”
2
On December 18, the defendant and A.D. chatted for about fifteen
minutes. At the conclusion of their conversation, A.D. said, “sweet dreams
don[’]t let the bed bugs bite haaa,” and the defendant replied, “[I]’ll be dreaming
of you.” The next evening, the defendant initiated a conversation with A.D. and
told her that he had a dream about her. When she asked him what happened
in the dream, he replied that she did not want to know because it involved
“dirty things.” A.D. answered, “no tell me,” and he replied, “well, you had IM’d
me and told me to come pick you up,” “so [I] did and we drove around talking
for a bit,” then you put your hand on my lap,” “and [I] ended up kissing you,”
“then somehow we ended up on the back seat.” The defendant then described
how they engaged in sexual intercourse. He also said, “[I] told you it was dirty”
and told her he could probably describe the dream more graphically.
After the defendant told A.D. about the dream, she told her friend, Peter
Dunn, about her conversations with the defendant and gave his AIM screen
name to Dunn. Approximately thirty minutes after the defendant told A.D.
about his dream, Dunn contacted the defendant to “mess around with him.”
Dunn told the defendant that he was A.D.’s brother and that A.D. thought the
defendant was “hot.” Later in their conversation, Dunn invited the defendant
to come over the next time his mother was not home and suggested that he,
the defendant and A.D. engage in sexual relations with one another. The
defendant responded that Dunn was “creepy” and that he was “not into that.”
However, when Dunn indicated that his “sister” was only thirteen and that the
defendant was much older, the defendant answered, “so?”
Later that evening, Dunn again engaged in conversation with the
defendant, this time by logging into his AIM account through his cell phone
and pretending to be A.D. Dunn, posing as A.D., told the defendant to visit her
sometime at her friend’s house in Londonderry. Later in the conversation, the
defendant and Dunn discussed whether they would meet in person:
[Defendant]: so what are you thinking? . . .
[Defendant]: do you want to hang out?
. . . .
[Dunn]: and your [sic] ok with having sex [with] me right? [L]ike
you wouldn[’]t tell anyone[?]
[Defendant]: well, if [I] did do that, [I] certainly wouldn’t tell anyone
[Defendant]: but who’s to say that that would happen[?]
[Dunn]: you don[’]t want to have sex?
3
[Defendant]: of course [I] do . . .
[Defendant]: but [I] mean, you’re a little illegal
The conversation then became increasingly sexually graphic and Dunn asked
the defendant if he would like “her” to perform oral sex on him and if he would
want to try anal sex. The defendant indicated that “[I] like to start with [oral
sex]” and that he would be willing to engage in anal sex with A.D. However, the
defendant did not ask to engage in sexual relations with the AIM user he
thought to be A.D.
Following this conversation, Dunn, again posing as A.D., and the
defendant made plans to meet in person, and Dunn provided the defendant
with the address of one of Dunn’s neighbors. On December 30, the defendant
drove to Nashua in an attempt to meet A.D. When Dunn saw the defendant’s
car, he called the police, who responded, but did not make contact with the
defendant that night. During a subsequent interrogation, the defendant stated
that he left after seeing a police cruiser because he felt uncomfortable and that
he later removed A.D. from his Facebook and MySpace pages because “the
whole thing just felt wrong.” He admitted however that he went to Nashua that
night “to meet an underage girl, um, to have sex with,” and that it was “implied
that I was interested in having sex with her that night[,] um, when I were to go
meet her.” He also told police that he brought condoms and lubrication when
he attempted to meet A.D. The defendant consented to a search of his home
computer and investigators found several chat sessions between the defendant
and A.D. At trial, A.D. testified that the defendant never asked to have sexual
intercourse with her and that they never discussed meeting to have sexual
intercourse. She also indicated that she was unsure why she did not tell the
defendant that she was uninterested in meeting him.
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss the
charge, arguing that the evidence was insufficient to prove that he attempted to
seduce, solicit, lure or entice A.D. If anything, the defendant argued, Dunn,
posing as A.D., attempted to seduce, solicit, lure or entice him. The trial court
denied the motion, ruling that it was a question for the jury. During jury
instructions, the court instructed the jury that they could consider only the
chat sessions to establish that the defendant used the internet with the
purpose to attempt to seduce, solicit, lure or entice A.D. The jury subsequently
convicted the defendant and he appealed.
The defendant’s sole argument on appeal is that the State introduced
insufficient evidence to prove that he attempted to seduce, solicit, lure or entice
A.D. to engage in sexual penetration. “To succeed on a motion to dismiss, the
defendant bears the burden of establishing that the evidence, viewed in its
entirety and with all reasonable inferences drawn in the State’s favor, was
4
insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that he was guilty of the crime
charged.” State v. Lacasse, 153 N.H. 670, 672 (2006). “[W]e view the evidence
and reasonable inferences arising therefrom in the manner most favorable to
the State.” Id. (quotation omitted). Additionally, “we review the evidence in
context, and not in isolation.” Id.
The defendant’s argument requires that we construe RSA 649-B:4. “We
review a trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo.” State v. Lamy, 158
N.H. 511, 515 (2009). “We are the final arbiters of the legislative intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “We begin by
examining the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used.” Id. (citations omitted). “We interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will neither consider what the legislature
might have said nor add language that the legislature did not see fit to
include.” Id. “We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” State v. Jennings, 159 N.H. 1, 3
(2009) (quotation and ellipses omitted). Finally, “[w]e construe Criminal Code
provisions according to the fair import of their terms and to promote justice.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
RSA 649-B:4 provides, in pertinent part:
Any person who knowingly utilizes a computer on-line service,
Internet service, or local bulletin board service to seduce, solicit,
lure, or entice, or attempt to seduce, solicit, lure, or entice, a child
or another person believed by the person to be a child, to commit
any of the following is guilty of a class B felony:
I. Any offense under RSA 632-A, relative to sexual assault and
related offenses.
The defendant contends that the trial court erred in denying his motion
to dismiss because the State did not present sufficient evidence that he
attempted to “seduce, solicit, lure, or entice” A.D. Instead, the defendant
asserts, “he merely responded to sexual questions and comments posed to
him.” The State argues that while the defendant never explicitly asked A.D. to
engage in sexual penetration with him, the statute does not require such
explicit conduct.
Our analysis begins with an examination of the statutory language,
ascribing the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. We previously
addressed the meaning of the words “seduce, solicit, lure, or entice” in State v.
Jennings. In Jennings, the defendant showed his daughter a pornographic
5
video on an internet website and was convicted of violating RSA 649-B:4.
Jennings, 159 N.H. at 2. He argued that he did not engage in any proscribed
conduct because “he did not utilize a computer on-line service, internet service
or bulletin board service to communicate with his daughter over the internet.”
Id. at 3 (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted). In determining that his
conduct did violate the statute, we interpreted the phrase, “to seduce, solicit,
lure, or entice.” Id. at 4-5. We determined that the plain and ordinary
meaning of “solicit” includes:
to make petition to: ENTREAT . . . to approach with a request or
plea . . . to move to action: serve as an urge or incentive to . . . to
strongly urge . . . insist upon . . . to entice or lead astray by or as if
by specious arguments: lure on and especially into evil . . . to
endeavor to obtain by asking or pleading: plead for . . . to seek
eagerly or actively . . . to have an effect on (a person or thing)
through some natural influence or property . . . to seek to affect
. . . to serve as a temptation or lure to: ATTRACT.
Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). Additionally, we noted that the plain and
ordinary meaning of “lure” includes: “to tempt with a promise of pleasure or
gain: ALLURE, ATTRACT, ENTICE, INVITE,” and that the plain and ordinary
meaning of “entice” includes: “to draw on by arousing hope or desire: ALLURE,
ATTRACT . . . to draw into evil ways: lead astray: TEMPT.” Id. at 8 (quotations
omitted).
Based upon these definitions, the defendant contends that all four words
in the statute require an explicit or affirmative request. We do not interpret the
statute so narrowly. Instead, all of the definitions draw upon the common
theme of tempting, attracting or leading someone astray. Nowhere in the plain
and ordinary meaning do we discern any requirement that the defendant must
explicitly or affirmatively ask the victim to engage in sexual penetration as the
defendant suggests. While we agree that the defendant did not explicitly or
affirmatively ask A.D. to engage in sexual penetration, a jury could have found
that the defendant intended his communications to attract, tempt or invite A.D.
In particular, from the beginning of his online relationship with A.D., the
defendant repeatedly told A.D. that he found her attractive and expressed his
desire to meet her in person on numerous occasions. The defendant also
continuously used sexual innuendos directed toward A.D. during their
conversations. When the defendant discovered A.D.’s age, he told her that he
might be able to “deal with” her age and asked if she had ever been involved
with older friends. He also called her a “tease” and told her “you’re so cute and
you’ll be right in town.” On another occasion, he told her “[I]’m dying to see
just ho[w] hott you are in person.” During another conversation, after A.D. told
the defendant she had just taken a shower, he asked her if the shower was
6
“nice and hot and wet.” In one of their final conversations, the defendant told
A.D. about a dream that involved him “f---ing [her] from behind,” and also told
her that he could be more “graphic.” Viewing the evidence in totality, the entire
course of the online relationship between the defendant and A.D. establishes
that he did attempt to “solicit, seduce, lure, or entice” A.D. See Lacasse, 153
N.H. at 673.
The defendant, nonetheless, points to the statements of A.D. and Dunn
representing himself as A.D. He argues that “he merely responded when the
subject of sexual activity was raised by . . . Dunn posing as [A.D.]” He
contends that Dunn asked him if he was “okay with having sex with” A.D. and
he responded that he would not tell anyone if they engaged in sexual relations,
but also stated, “who’s to say that that would happen.” The defendant also
argues that Dunn “spoke graphically about sexual matters” to him and invited
him to Nashua to engage in sexual intercourse, and that he “merely responded
to Dunn’s advances with interest.” Even assuming that the defendant’s
conversations with Dunn did not constitute conduct that runs afoul of RSA
649-B:4, the defendant’s argument ignores the totality of his conduct over a
three-month period. Accordingly, we conclude that the plain and ordinary
meaning of “seduce, solicit, lure, or entice” is contrary to the defendant’s
narrow interpretation of the phrase and we decline to adopt it.
Even if we could not resolve this issue based upon the plain and ordinary
meaning of the statutory language, in Jennings we examined the legislative
history of RSA 649-B:4 and determined it supported a broad reading of the
statute “in light of the statutory scheme’s overarching policy of preventing
computer pornography, child exploitation, and abuse offenses committed by
means of a computer.” Jennings, 159 N.H. at 8. In construing the statute, we
noted “that the legislative history acknowledges the new technology presented
by the computer, the expanse of possibilities presented by the internet, and the
need for new and broader statutes to assist law enforcement in the protection
of children from the types of dangers presented by the same.” Id. at 5.
We also reviewed RSA 639:3, III (2007), which was enacted in 1983 and
provides that “the solicitation by any person of a child under the age of 16 . . .
to engage in sexual penetration as defined by RSA 632-A:1, V, constitutes
endangering the welfare of such child.” We noted that in enacting RSA 632-
A:1, the legislature limited the statutory prohibition to only “solicitation” of a
child. Id. at 7. However, we concluded that the legislature later included the
additional terms “seduce . . . lure, or entice” in RSA 649-B:4 in a clear attempt
to “expand the statutory proscription.” Id. at 8. In light of the legislature’s
efforts “to target the expanding challenges presented by the powerful new
technologies of computers and the internet,” id. at 7, we cannot say that the
defendant’s overall pattern of behavior falls outside the conduct prohibited by
the statute. While he did not explicitly ask A.D. to engage in sexual
7
penetration with him, he used the internet to exploit A.D.’s youth and
innocence in an attempt to lure her into sexual activities. This is exactly the
type of conduct the legislature sought to prevent and to accept the defendant’s
argument would contravene the purpose of the statute. See id. at 7-8.
Our broad construction of RSA 649-B:4 is also in line with related federal
cases interpreting a United States Sentencing Guidelines sentencing
enhancement for use of a computer to entice a minor. See U.S. Sentencing
Guidelines Manual § 2G1.3(b)(3)(B) (2009) (“If the offense involved the use of a
computer or an interactive computer service to entice, encourage, offer, or
solicit a person to engage in prohibited sexual conduct with the minor, increase
by 2 levels.”). In United States v. Lay, 583 F.3d 436 (6th Cir. 2009), the
defendant pleaded guilty to traveling with intent to engage in illicit sexual
conduct, but appealed the application of the sentencing enhancement. Id. at
438. The court determined that although the defendant did not explicitly
propose sexual relations in a computer message, he still communicated via
computer with the victim with the apparent intention of having sexual relations
with her. Id. at 447. The court reasoned that
allow[ing] a predator to use a computer to develop relationships
with minor victims, so long as the ultimate consummation is first
proposed through offline communication, would not serve the
purpose of the enhancement. The computer-provided threat of
anonymous one-to-many communications by a sexual predator
exists whether the predator uses the Internet to make explicit
proposals of sexual activity or merely to strike up friendships with
potential victims. Either course allows the predator to contact
more potential victims, and to make initial contacts more
insidiously, than would be possible offline.
Id.; see also United States v. Reaves, 253 F.3d 1201, 1205 (10th Cir. 2001)
(“Congress’s concerns were not limited to a pedophile’s ability to use a
computer to directly contact increased numbers of children via the internet.
Instead, Congress emphasized a broader concern with the ability to exploit a
child’s general fascination with computer technology.”).
We agree with these federal courts that seducing, soliciting, luring or
enticing a child goes beyond explicitly asking the child to engage in sexual
relations. It is unlikely that a predator would specifically ask a child to engage
in illegal sexual conduct. Instead, a pedophile is much more likely to “use a
child’s fascination with computer technology as a lure to drag children into
sexual relationships.” Jennings, 159 N.H. at 6 (quotation omitted). Here, the
defendant did exactly that. He preyed upon A.D.’s youth and innocence to
develop a relationship with her, and had the ultimate goal of consummating a
sexual relationship.
8
The legislature’s goal of protecting children from exploitation over the
internet would be thwarted if an online predator was allowed to make repeated
sexual advances toward a child over the internet, so long as the perpetrator
made the specific request to engage in sexual relations offline. Accordingly,
given that the defendant told A.D. on several occasions that he found her
attractive, repeatedly asked to meet her in person, and made several other
flirtatious and sexually graphic remarks to her, a rational jury could have
found him guilty of violating RSA 649-B:4.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9