THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-373
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RICHARD LANGILL
Argued: June 10, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 30, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Jacqueline J. Rompre, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Richard Langill, appeals his
conviction on one count of burglary, RSA 635:1 (2007). This is the second time
that this case has been before us. See State v. Langill, 157 N.H. 77 (2008). In
the present appeal, the defendant contends that the Superior Court (Lewis, J.)
erred when it: (1) denied his motion to strike the testimony of the State’s
expert witness identifying the defendant’s fingerprint; (2) admitted into
evidence a photograph of the latent fingerprint; and (3) denied his motion to
dismiss. We reverse and remand.
I
The record supports the following facts. Karen Katz lived with her two
children in a first-floor apartment with a balcony. She had stored $1,200,
including ten $100 bills, in a locked box in the top drawer of her bedroom
dresser. When she left her home on the morning of March 25, 2004, she took
$20 from her lockbox. She returned home that afternoon and discovered that
all of the money in her lockbox was missing. In addition, $5 was missing from
a plastic bottle that her daughter used as a bank. There was no evidence of
forced entry into the apartment. The apartment manager testified that she had
misplaced a set of master keys to the apartment building sometime during the
summer of 2003.
At the time of the burglary, the defendant lived in an apartment in the
same building as Katz, which he shared with Justine DeCotis and her two
children. Katz testified that she did not know the defendant, but that prior to
the burglary, she occasionally saw him outside late at night or with the
children, and noticed that “when he would walk by your door, if your blinds
were open, he would like stare in.”
On the day Katz discovered that her money was missing, Derry police
officer James Belanger arrived at her apartment. He took the lockbox and the
plastic bottle to be processed for fingerprints. He also spoke with several
tenants in the building, including the defendant. The defendant initially told
Officer Belanger that he was ill and had not left his apartment all day.
However, he then corrected himself and said that he left his apartment to
retrieve his mail, which was in the same building as his apartment. Belanger
testified at trial that the defendant was nervous and responded to questions
slowly.
The next day, Christina Piccirilli, who worked for a salvage yard, sold a
1992 Ford Taurus to an individual whom she identified only as DeCotis’s
boyfriend. Piccirilli testified that the car was purchased with two $100 bills.
On March 30, Detective Joseph Bennett processed the lockbox and the plastic
bottle for fingerprints. He found four sets of latent fingerprints on the lockbox
and five on the bottle. He lifted the prints using lifters and placed the lifters in
sealed evidence bags that could not be opened without being cut. The lifters
were tagged and later transported to the New Hampshire Department of Safety
Forensic Laboratory (state lab) for further testing.
On April 1, Derry police officer Mike Houle went to Katz’s apartment to
process Katz’s bedroom dresser. He found one latent fingerprint on top of the
dresser close to the drawers, which he lifted with a two-by-four inch clear lifter.
He then placed the lifter into a plastic evidence bag, and completed a
transmittal form requesting further analysis from the state lab.
2
Lisa Corson, a criminalist at the state lab testified at trial about her
examination of certain fingerprints. She explained how fingerprint comparison
is conducted using the ACE-V methodology, and that ACE-V is an acronym
standing for Analysis, Comparison, Evaluation and Verification. Corson
testified that the fourth step of the ACE-V process requires that another
qualified examiner complete the first three stages of the ACE-V methodology to
determine whether the verifying examiner arrived at the same result as the
primary examiner.
Corson testified that in May 2004 the state lab received two separate
exhibits from the Derry Police Department, one containing five fingerprint lifts
and one containing a single fingerprint lift. Corson performed an analysis of
the prints in 2005. Regarding the exhibit containing five lifts, Corson testified
that none of these lifts contained identifiable latent prints. Regarding the
exhibit containing a single lift, Corson determined that it was an identifiable
fingerprint, which she was able to further analyze.
At trial, the jury was shown State’s Exhibit 1, a chart Corson had
prepared which compared a photograph of the single latent print and a known
print. Corson testified that the known print belonged to the defendant. Corson
described how she examined the single latent print along with the known print
using the ACE-V methodology. The initial step of the examination involved an
analysis of the latent print. Based upon her analysis, Corson concluded that
the latent and known prints had sufficient quality and enough detail to permit
her to continue with the second and third steps of the examination, which
involve a comparison and evaluation of the latent print and the known print.
Using Exhibit 1, Corson testified about the various similarities she found
between the latent print and the known print, and stated that she was able to
make an identification between the latent print and the known print.
When the prosecutor asked Corson if her work had been verified, the
defendant objected, arguing that the statement was hearsay and that it violated
his right to cross-examine witnesses against him. The State argued that the
testimony was admissible because it would be based upon Corson’s review of
documentation from the state lab reflecting that her work had been verified.
The trial court agreed that the verification testimony was hearsay, but
overruled the defendant’s objection, relying upon the business records
exception to the hearsay rule, and allowed the State to present evidence that
Corson’s opinion had been verified. The trial court stated:
[S]he doesn’t have to testify to . . . how well the verification was
performed, does she, for her to be able to say that she believes,
looking at the business records and looking at what she
understands, that her conclusion is okay under her methodology,
then you can cross-examine her on that. And maybe the State . . .
3
creates a problem for itself if it doesn’t produce the verification
person . . . .
The trial court instructed the prosecutor to rephrase her questions to “deal[ ]
with the business record exception.”
Thereafter, the prosecutor asked Corson to review State’s Exhibit 5,
consisting of Corson’s laboratory worksheets with her analysis of the latent
print. Corson testified that in 2005, it was the practice of the state lab for the
person verifying the work to note that fact in the records, and that “there was a
worksheet where they would sign off.” In describing the worksheet, Corson
testified that “[t]he last column is where the other examiner who is given the
latent for verification puts their initials and the date that they do their ACE to
the case.” She testified that the initials of the verifying examiner were Timothy
Jackson’s, and also stated, “In this case my work was verified by Timothy
Jackson.” On cross-examination, Corson agreed that she did not actually
know how Jackson conducted his verification, and that she could not speak to
the quality of his verification. On redirect, she testified that Jackson was
certified by the International Association of Identification (IAI) when he verified
her work. Jackson did not testify.
The court then permitted State’s Exhibit 5 to be received into evidence,
over the defendant’s objection. At a chambers conference regarding the court’s
evidentiary ruling on State’s Exhibit 5, the trial court stated:
[I]t was allowed to be introduced as a business record through the
foundation that it was regularly maintained in the course of
business, etcetera. And it was introduced for the purpose of
showing that a verification occurred. How good it was, whatever
was not the point here, but the business reflects that a verification
occurred.
That, as I understand it, under the methodology that was
described, would allow the witness here, Ms. Corson, to testify as
to her opinion under the methodology we’re dealing with. And
therefore I allowed it in.
. . . .
The only disturbing aspect of it I have here is that obviously by
just the — telling the jury that there was some verification here,
there is a kind of [sub silentio] implication that the verification is
consistent with what Ms. Corson said. And I — that’s a major
concern I have. And I would entertain arguments as to whether I
should be giving them some sort of limited instruction regarding
that later on . . . .
4
. . . .
It’s only being introduced for the fact that someone reputable, in a
position to do so marked on this paper verification which triggers
the ability of Ms. Corson to give her opinion under this
methodology.
Ultimately, the court refused to strike Corson’s testimony, but gave the jury
two limiting instructions regarding Corson’s testimony and Jackson’s
verification.
At the close of the evidence, the defendant objected to State’s Exhibit 1,
the chart Corson had prepared that compared a photograph of the single latent
print and a known print, being admitted into evidence. The defendant also
moved to strike Corson’s testimony that the latent print matched the
defendant’s print, and to dismiss the case on the grounds that the evidence
was legally insufficient to support a conviction. The court allowed State’s
Exhibit 1 to be admitted into evidence and denied both motions. The jury
found the defendant guilty of burglary. This appeal followed.
II
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in failing to strike
Corson’s identification of the fingerprint and in admitting the verification
evidence. The defendant contends that Corson’s testimony that her work had
been verified by Jackson constituted inadmissible hearsay and violated his
right to confrontation. Because we agree that Corson’s testimony regarding the
verification and verification evidence constituted inadmissible hearsay, we do
not reach the constitutional argument. See State (Premo Complainant) v.
Martineau, 148 N.H. 259, 260 (2002).
“Hearsay is generally defined as an extrajudicial statement offered in
court to show the truth of the matter asserted in the statement.” State v. Soldi,
145 N.H. 571, 575 (2000); see N.H. R. Ev. 801(c). The definition of “statement”
includes “an oral or written assertion.” N.H. R. Ev. 801(a). In general, such
extrajudicial statements, which are not made under oath or subject to cross-
examination, are less trustworthy than those made in court. State v. Cole, 139
N.H. 246, 249 (1994). Hearsay is not admissible into evidence unless it falls
within an exception. N.H. R. Ev. 802. We will reverse a trial court’s decision
that a statement is not hearsay or falls within an exception to the rule only if
the defendant demonstrates that the ruling is clearly untenable or
unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. State v. Connor, 156 N.H. 544, 546
(2007); State v. Pelletier, 149 N.H. 243, 253 (2003).
The trial court relied upon the business records exception to the hearsay
rule. On appeal, however, the State argues not that the evidence was
5
admissible under an exception to the hearsay rule, but that it was not offered
for its truth and, therefore, was not hearsay. According to the State, “Corson’s
testimony about the verification was not hearsay, but rather, a confirmation
that she fulfilled a specific methodology that allowed her to issue her opinion.”
We disagree.
Corson testified at trial that she forms her opinion after following the
analysis, comparison, and evaluation steps of the methodology. Once she
concludes that the prints match, the identification moves to the verification
phase. This fourth step of the ACE-V methodology requires that another
qualified examiner complete the first three stages, independent of the primary
examiner’s work, to determine whether he or she arrives at the same result as
the primary examiner. Specifically, Corson testified that “the latent [print] and
the known are given to another qualified examiner who will then conduct their
[sic] own analysis, comparison and evaluation on the latent to the known and
arrive at the same conclusion that [the initial examiner did].” She testified,
after reviewing the State laboratory work papers, that the initials of the
verifying examiner found in the appropriate column on the work papers
belonged to Jackson, and that “[i]n this case my work was verified by . . .
Jackson.” On redirect examination, Corson testified that Jackson was certified
by the IAI when he verified her work.
We conclude, as we did in State v. Connor, 156 N.H. at 546, that the
primary examiner’s testimony regarding the process undertaken and the
verifying examiner’s ultimate opinion was offered for its truth, as distinguished
from the mere satisfaction of procedure. Connor involved an identification that
Jackson made of fingerprints found at a crime scene and Jackson’s testimony
that Corson had verified his identification. Id. at 545. The defendant in
Connor argued that Jackson’s testimony about Corson’s verification was
hearsay and violated his right to confrontation, and that the trial court should
have stricken Jackson’s entire testimony. Id. at 546. The State argued that
Jackson could testify that Corson had verified his work because it was not
hearsay, and, even if it was hearsay, it was admissible under New Hampshire
Rule of Evidence 703. Id. at 546, 547. In concluding that Jackson’s testimony
regarding Corson’s verification of his work was hearsay because Corson’s
ultimate opinion was offered for its truth, we stated:
The verification process, as described by Jackson, supports our
conclusion. Jackson’s testimony clearly illustrates that the
verification is not conducted to ensure that he had followed the
applicable procedures. Corson did not simply check that the
equipment or procedure used by Jackson was proper or that
Jackson employed the correct number of comparison points in
making his determination. Rather, it is clear that her task was to
affirm Jackson’s identification by undertaking an independent
analysis, comparison and evaluation of the fingerprint, and
6
ultimately forming her own opinion. By its very nature, the
purpose of this verification, as described by Jackson, lies in the
truth of Corson’s opinion, that is, that her independent ACE
procedure resulted in the same conclusion, thus corroborating
Jackson’s opinion. Jackson’s testimony relating to the verification
process and Corson’s independent opinion extends well beyond
establishing Jackson’s compliance with procedure. Under these
circumstances, this evidence constitutes inadmissible hearsay
unless it falls under an exception to the rule.
Id. at 546-47 (citation omitted); see also People v. Smith, 628 N.E.2d 1176,
1181 (Ill. App. Ct. 1994) (fingerprint technician’s testimony that her
identification was verified by another technician was hearsay); State v. Wicker,
832 P.2d 127, 129 (Wash. Ct. App. 1992) (same). The same reasoning applies
here.
The State seeks to distinguish our prior decision, in part, on the ground
that in Connor, the testifying examiner stated that the verifying examiner had
determined that the latent print found “was, in fact, made by the left middle
finger from the individual whose name appears on the fingerprint card of David
Connor,” Connor, 156 N.H. at 546 (brackets omitted), whereas, in the present
case, Corson testified only that her work had been verified. We note, however
that in ordinary language, the definitions of “verify” include “to prove to be
true: establish the truth of” and “to swear or affirm the truth of.” Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 2543 (unabridged ed. 2002). Furthermore,
it is clear from Corson’s testimony in this case regarding the ACE-V
methodology that the verification step requires the verifying examiner to
perform the first three steps of the methodology to determine whether the
primary examiner’s conclusions were correct. Therefore, implicit in Corson’s
testimony that Jackson had verified her conclusion is the statement that
Jackson performed the ACE analysis, and, like Corson, reached the conclusion
that the latent print matched the defendant’s print. We see no meaningful
distinction between Corson testifying that a second examiner performed the
ACE analysis and affirmed the truth of her conclusion that the latent print
matched the defendant’s print, and Corson testifying that a second examiner
performed the ACE analysis and stated that the latent print matched the
defendant’s. As we reasoned in Connor, “By its very nature, the purpose of this
verification, as described by [the testifying examiner], lies in the truth of the
[verifying examiner’s] opinion, that is, that her independent ACE procedure
resulted in the same conclusion, thus corroborating [the testifying examiner’s]
opinion.” Connor, 156 N.H. at 547.
We are not persuaded by the State’s argument that Corson’s testimony
was not hearsay because it was “not offered for the truth of the matter asserted
because it was offered solely to establish the foundation that allowed Corson to
issue her opinion.” Having chosen to introduce fingerprint evidence based
7
upon ACE-V methodology, the State had the burden of presenting evidence
that each step in the ACE-V procedure was followed. Cf. State v. Dahood, 148
N.H. 723, 735 (2002) (results of HGN test only admissible if State establishes
proper foundation, including that test was properly administered). Because the
ACE-V methodology itself requires two experts to conclude, independently, that
the prints match, the State was required to prove that a second examiner
performed the ACE analysis and that he agreed with the primary examiner’s
opinion that the latent print matched the known print. Thus, it is clear that
Jackson’s out-of-court statement, “I verify this work,” communicates that he
agreed that the fingerprints matched, and was offered to prove the truth of the
matter asserted, that is, that he agreed that the fingerprints matched. We note
that the State did not seek to prove the admissibility of Corson’s opinion
outside the presence of the jury. Accordingly, we express no opinion as to
whether the State may prove the foundational requirements necessary for the
admissibility of fingerprint opinion testimony based on ACE-V methodology
outside the presence of the jury. See N.H. R. Ev. 104.
The State argues that the fact that the defendant’s cross-examination of
Corson established that Corson did not know the procedure that Jackson
followed and that she could not speak to the quality of his verification
illustrates that the testimony was both “significantly more limited” than it was
in Connor and was admitted only to establish that Corson complied with
procedure. We do not agree. Rather, the nature of the cross-examination
underscores the problem presented by the hearsay testimony. According to the
State’s evidence, under the ACE-V methodology, an examiner’s conclusion that
a set of prints match must be verified by a second examiner. Indeed, Corson
acknowledged on cross-examination that verification is critical to the
methodology. Thus, Corson’s testimony that her work was verified necessarily
assumes, and asks the trier of fact to assume, that Jackson performed the ACE
analysis, that he did so accurately, and that he agreed with Corson’s opinion
that the latent print matched the known print. As the cross-examination
makes clear, when the primary examiner testifies about the verification, the
defendant is unable to challenge the second examiner’s statement that the
prints matched. This is precisely the problem the rule against hearsay is
designed to address. See Cole, 139 N.H. at 249.
We also disagree with the State’s argument that the fact that limiting
instructions were given in this case should lead to a result different from the
one we reached in Connor. Prior to closing arguments, the court gave the jury
the following limiting instruction:
You have heard testimony about Timothy Jackson. Lisa Corson
identified initials of “TAJ” . . . as those of Timothy Jackson, a
criminalist at the laboratory. However Mr. Jackson did not testify
in this case. You are instructed that the only opinion before you
with regard to fingerprint identification is that of Ms. Corson and
8
not of the verifier, Mr. Jackson. You are not to consider the
verifier’s work in this case as an additional opinion or as any way a
supplement of Ms. Corson’s opinion. You must consider Ms.
Corson’s opinion on its own merits without regard to the verifier’s
actions as to this matter.
The next day, following closing arguments, the court read the full set of jury
instructions, which included the following limiting instruction:
Now, please be reminded that the only expert opinion before you
with regard to fingerprint identification is that of Ms. Corson and
not Mr. Jackson. You are not to consider any other examiner’s
work in this case as an additional opinion or in any way as a
supplement of Ms. Corson’s opinion. You must consider Ms.
Corson’s opinion on its own merits without regard to any other
examiner’s actions in this matter.
The State contends that these instructions prohibited the jury from considering
Jackson’s opinion for its truth (that is, that he agreed that the latent print
matched the defendant’s print). We do not believe that they can be read this
way. While the jury was instructed not to consider the verifier’s work as an
“additional opinion,” or as a “supplement to” Corson’s opinion, the instructions
still permitted the jury to conclude that the work had been verified. As we have
explained, the testimony that Jackson had verified Corson’s conclusion is
tantamount to testimony that Jackson had affirmed the truth of Corson’s
match and had concluded that the latent print matched the defendant’s print,
and is hearsay.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred when it denied the
defendant’s motion to strike Corson’s testimony and in admitting the
verification evidence. Because the fingerprint evidence was a critical piece of
evidence physically linking the defendant to the crime, we conclude that
admission of the testimony and the verification evidence prejudiced the
defendant. Therefore, we reverse and remand.
Because we reverse his conviction upon his first claim of error, we do not
reach the defendant’s argument that the trial court erred when it admitted into
evidence State’s Exhibit 1, consisting of a photograph of the latent print and
the defendant’s known print. We must, however, address the defendant’s
argument that the evidence presented to the trial court was insufficient to
reach a guilty verdict because, if the evidence were insufficient, the Double
Jeopardy Clauses of the State and Federal Constitutions would preclude a
remand for a new trial. State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666, 672-73 (2005).
9
III
In determining whether there was sufficient evidence to reach a guilty
verdict, we consider all the evidence, including evidence that we have
concluded was erroneously admitted. State v. Horak, 159 N.H. 576, 582-83
(2010); Lockhart v. Nelson, 488 U.S. 33, 34 (1988) (holding that “where the
evidence offered by the State and admitted by the trial court — whether
erroneously or not — would have been sufficient to sustain a guilty verdict, the
Double Jeopardy Clause does not preclude retrial”).
To prevail on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, a defendant
must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416,
424 (2003). Where, as in this case, the evidence is solely circumstantial, it
must exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State
and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in isolation. Id.
RSA 635:1, I (2007) provides, in pertinent part, that a person is guilty of
burglary “if he enters a building or occupied structure . . . with purpose to
commit a crime therein, unless the premises are at the time open to the public
or the actor is licensed or privileged to enter.”
We conclude, viewing the evidence and reasonable inferences from it in
the light most favorable to the State, that the evidence is sufficient to exclude
all rational conclusions other than that the defendant was guilty of burglary.
The defendant lived in the same apartment complex as Katz, and admitted to
being home on the day of the burglary and to leaving his apartment at one
point. The defendant could easily access Katz’s apartment because she lived
on the first floor of the building and her apartment had a ground-level balcony.
Furthermore, the apartment manager had lost the keys to the building the
previous summer. Katz testified that the defendant would “stare in” to her
apartment if the blinds to her apartment were open. When Officer Belanger
questioned the defendant about the incident, the defendant first told the officer
that he had been in his apartment all day, and then corrected himself, saying
that he left at one point to retrieve his mail. Officer Belanger testified that the
defendant was nervous during the questioning, had some difficulty answering
questions, and responded to questions slowly. In addition, there was evidence
that the defendant purchased a car from a salvage yard the day after the
robbery with two $100 dollar bills, and that the money taken from Katz’s
apartment came, in part, in the form of ten $100 dollar bills. Finally, and
critically, there was testimony that the defendant’s print matched a latent print
Officer Houle lifted from Katz’s dresser after the burglary.
10
The defendant’s argument that the evidence is insufficient because
Piccirilli never identified him as the man to whom she sold the 1992 Ford
Taurus does not alter our conclusion. Piccirilli sufficiently identified the man
as the defendant because she described him as DeCotis’s boyfriend, and the
evidence at trial established that the defendant lived with DeCotis at the time
of the burglary. We also disagree with the defendant that the evidence was
insufficient because there was no evidence that the defendant ever had
possession of the master keys for the apartments and that Katz’s testimony
that she would see the defendant staring into her apartment was inconclusive.
Considered alone, these facts may not exclude all rational conclusions except
guilt, but our task is to examine each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation. Evans, 150 N.H. at 424.
Finally, we disagree with the defendant that in assessing the sufficiency
of the evidence, we “must discount the fingerprint evidence given the lack of a
proven connection between the latent print taken and the latent print
examined.” The defendant argues that the trial court erred when it admitted
into evidence State’s Exhibit 1, the photograph of the latent print and the
defendant’s known print, on the grounds that there was “no evidence” linking
that latent print Corson examined to the one Officer Houle recovered at the
burglary scene. However, because we reverse the defendant’s conviction on the
grounds that the trial court erred when it denied his motion to strike Corson’s
identification and in admitting the verification evidence, we do not reach this
issue. We are unpersuaded by the defendant’s assertion, made without
citation to any legal authority, that in determining whether there was sufficient
evidence, we should discount the fingerprint evidence given the alleged “lack of
a proven connection” between the latent print taken and the latent print
examined. Cf. Horak, 159 N.H. at 582-83; Lockhart, 488 U.S. at 34.
Viewing all of the evidence and reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State, we hold that it was sufficient for the jury to exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Because, however, the trial court erred
when it denied the defendant’s motion to strike Corson’s testimony and in
admitting the verification evidence, we reverse the defendant’s conviction and
remand.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; HICKS, J., concurred
in part and dissented in part.
HICKS, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part. Because I agree
with the majority’s analysis in Part III of the opinion, I concur in that part of
the opinion to the extent that it finds the evidence was sufficient for the jury to
exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. However, for the reasons I
11
articulated in State v. Connor, 156 N.H. 544 (2007), I believe that Corson’s
verification testimony had a non-hearsay purpose and, thus, I respectfully
dissent from Part II of the opinion. Connor, 156 N.H. at 549-50 (Hicks, J.,
dissenting).
As in Connor, I find the non-hearsay purpose for the admission of the
fact of verification by an independent examiner is simply to show the effect on
the hearer, independent of its truth or falsity. Id. at 549 (Hicks, J., dissenting).
Accordingly, I continue to maintain that “verification evidence should be
admissible in some limited form with a limiting instruction.” Id. at 550 (Hicks,
J., dissenting).
Here, as the majority points out, the court gave the jury a limiting
instruction prior to closing arguments, instructing it that it was not to consider
the examiner’s work “as an additional opinion or as any way a supplement of
Ms. Corson’s opinion” and that it “must consider Ms. Corson’s opinion on its
own merits without regard to the verifier’s actions as to this matter.” The
following day, the court provided the jury with the full set of jury instructions,
which included another limiting instruction regarding Ms. Corson’s testimony
about the examiner’s work. I am satisfied that these instructions sufficiently
informed the jury that it was not to consider the verification testimony for its
truth. Cf. State v. Cosme, 157 N.H. 40, 46 (2008) (noting that “[j]urors are
presumed to follow the court’s instructions”). For these reasons, I respectfully
dissent from Part II of the opinion.
12