THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-316
ANNA H. CARDONE REVOCABLE TRUST, WESLEY CARDONE, TRUSTEE
v.
LINDA K. CARDONE & a.
Argued: November 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2010
The Munilaw Group, of Epsom (Tony F. Soltani on the brief and orally),
for the petitioner.
NyquistWeinstein Law Firm, of Manchester (Merrick C. Weinstein on the
brief and orally), for respondent Linda K. Cardone.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioner, Anna H. Cardone Revocable Trust,
Wesley Cardone, Trustee (hereinafter the Trust), appeals from orders of the
superior court denying its motions for entry of judgment and partial summary
judgment, while granting respondent Linda K. Cardone’s motion to strike
confession of judgment and her cross-motion for summary judgment. We
affirm in part, vacate in part, reverse in part, and remand.
I
The following facts were either found by the trial court or are undisputed.
The Trust was established by Cardone’s mother, Anna, who is now deceased.
In June 1998, Cardone used funds that the Trust made available to purchase a
condominium in Manchester from Robert and Jeanne Sullivan. The
conveyance was completed with a condominium warranty deed to Cardone,
which included the following clause:
This conveyance to the said Linda K. Cardone (Grantee) is
conditional and she may hold the within premises for so long as
she does not in any way pledge, alienate, or in any way
hypothecate any interest in the within conveyed premises to any
person or entity, nor make any attempt to do so, nor permit any
person or entity to exercise a lien or attachment against the within
described [premises] until June 12, 2008. Should this condition
and covenant be in any way violated or any attempt be made by
the said grantee to violate the within condition, the title in the
within [premises] shall without further act or action, revert to the
Anna H. Cardone Revocable living trust. The Trustee of the said
Trust, may in his/her sole discretion modify, release or discharge
the within condition in writing, under seal to be recorded.
The deed was signed by the Sullivans, by Anna Cardone as “execut[ing] the
within deed for the purposes therein contained,” and by Linda Cardone as
“accept[ing] the provisions . . . of this deed.”
The following June, Cardone executed a mortgage on the condominium
in favor of John R. Cook, in the amount of $11,400, as security for a debt that
she owed him. At various times, the City of Manchester imposed liens on the
condominium for unpaid property taxes.
In the summer of 2006, Cardone was medically incapacitated and
hospitalized; in July, the Hillsborough County Probate Court appointed her
sister, Kathleen Holmes, as guardian over her person and estate.
In August, the Trust filed a petition to quiet title against Cardone and
Cook, alleging that Cardone was “in breach of the covenant, condition and
reverter contained in the conveyance instrument.” The petition sought to
divest Cardone of her ownership and interest in the condominium, and also
sought a declaration that any purported security interest, mortgage, or
encumbrance claimed by Cook in the condominium was “null and void.”
Counsel retained by Holmes subsequently filed a confession of judgment for
Cardone, thereby waiving her right to file an answer and defenses to the Trust’s
petition. In January 2007, the Trust moved for entry of judgment.
2
In February, new counsel for Cardone, whose guardianship of her person
had been terminated by the probate court two months earlier, moved to strike
the earlier confession of judgment and objected to the Trust’s motion for entry
of judgment. The trial court denied the Trust’s motion and granted Cardone’s
motion to strike. The Trust then filed a motion to enter judgment pro confesso,
and a motion for reconsideration of the trial court’s earlier orders. Cardone
objected and filed an answer to the Trust’s original petition to quiet title. The
trial court subsequently denied the Trust’s motions.
In June, the Trust unsuccessfully moved for partial summary judgment.
In denying the motion, the Superior Court (McGuire, J.) noted that genuine
issues of material fact existed regarding both the intent of the parties in
creating a condition subsequent, and whether it was breached. The Trust
sought and received a conditional default and a final default judgment against
Cook, leaving Cardone as the sole active respondent in this case.
In August 2008, the Trust renewed its motion for partial summary
judgment. Cardone objected, and the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denied the
motion in February 2009. In March 2009, Cardone moved for entry of
judgment. The Superior Court (Smukler, J.) treated her motion as a cross-
motion for summary judgment and granted it. This appeal followed.
The Trust contends that the trial court erred: (1) in denying its January
2007 motion for entry of judgment and granting Cardone’s February 2007
motion to strike confession of judgment; and (2) in denying its August 2008
motion for partial summary judgment and granting Cardone’s March 2009
cross-motion for summary judgment. We address each argument in turn.
II
The Trust first contends that the trial court erred in denying its motion
for entry of judgment and in granting Cardone’s motion to strike confession of
judgment. We disagree.
A trial court has discretion in deciding whether to strike a confession of
judgment, and we will not disturb its ruling unless the court erred as a matter
of law or engaged in an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Hanover Inv.
Corp. v. Town of Hanover, 142 N.H. 812, 813 (1998); cf. State v. Lambert, 147
N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining “unsustainable exercise of discretion”
standard).
The Trust argues that Cardone’s filings, or lack thereof, which
culminated in her motion to strike confession of judgment, violated Superior
Court Rules 56 (withdrawal of records from court files), 131 (bill taken pro
confesso if defendant neglects to enter appearance on the return day, or
3
neglects to file plea, answer, or demurrer within the time proscribed), and 133
(requirements concerning the answer to a bill and defenses asserted). Cardone
contends that none of those rules applies to this case. Assuming, without
deciding, that these rules do apply, we cannot say that the trial court erred as
a matter of law or unsustainably exercised its discretion in striking the
confession of judgment. In denying the Trust’s subsequent motions for entry of
judgment pro confesso and for reconsideration, the trial court found that
Cardone “ha[d] demonstrated good cause and that justice require[d] that the
confession of judgment be set aside.”
The Preface to the Superior Court Rules states: “As good cause appears
and as justice may require, the court may waive the application of any rule.”
The trial court has broad discretion in determining whether to waive its rules,
and we will not reverse its decision absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Donnelly v. Eastman, 149 N.H. 631, 633 (2003). In contexts other
than those involving statutes of limitations, we have emphasized justice over
procedural technicalities. Id.
Here, the record is clear that when the Trust filed its petition to quiet title
against Cardone in August 2006, she was medically incapacitated,
hospitalized, and subject to a full guardianship over her person and estate.
The guardianship over her person remained in effect until December 12 of that
year. In response to the petition, counsel retained by Cardone’s guardian filed
a confession of judgment indicating that the guardian had reviewed the Trust’s
petition, and that the filing attorney represented the guardian, not Cardone. In
Cardone’s motion to strike the confession of judgment, filed after the
guardianship over her person was terminated, she objected to the
“confession . . . purportedly entered on her behalf,” and stated that she did
“not believe that her interests ha[d] been protected and desire[d] to fully contest
th[e] matter, through her own counsel, absent the prior restraints of the
guardianship.” In January 2007, the Trust moved for entry of judgment based
upon the confession of judgment. In her objection, Cardone stated, in part:
[My] interests were not fully and adequately represented by
counsel whom [my] guardian retained inasmuch as that counsel
did not take steps to oppose the Petition to Quiet Title in any way.
. . . [I] was medically incapacitated until at least October of
2006 and therefore could not be consulted regarding [my] position
on the Petition to Quiet Title against [me].
. . . The Guardian . . . had a conflict of interest inasmuch as
she is a beneficiary under the . . . Trust and, as such, stands to
profit in the event that ownership of the real property reverts to the
trust.
4
. . . .
. . . [My] interests were never adequately represented here
and, therefore, the court should not enter final judgment against
[me] but should maintain this matter on the active docket for
adjudication at the appropriate time.
The trial court denied the Trust’s motion for entry of judgment and
granted Cardone’s motion to strike. The Trust then filed a motion to enter
judgment pro confesso, and a motion for reconsideration of the trial court’s
earlier orders. Cardone objected and filed an answer to the Trust’s original
petition to quiet title.
In its order denying the Trust’s motions to enter judgment pro confesso
and for reconsideration of its earlier orders, the trial court noted Cardone’s
incapacitation and the failure of the attorney retained by the guardian to take
any steps to oppose the petition to quiet title. In balancing the assumed
violations of the superior court rules with the factual circumstances presented
to the trial court, we cannot say that it erred as a matter of law or engaged in
an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
The Trust further argues that had the trial court used the “seven-prong
test” referenced in McKinnon v. Kwong Wah Restaurant, 83 F.3d 498, 503 (1st
Cir. 1996), to determine whether a default judgment should be lifted, it would
have found that Cardone had failed to establish that either good cause or
justice required waiving the application of the superior court rules. The “test”
in McKinnon was a set of “general guidelines that . . . warrant[ed] consideration
by a [federal] district court in determining whether a default judgment should
be lifted” pursuant to a Federal Rule of Civil Procedure. McKinnon, 83 F.3d at
503. We note that the First Circuit acknowledged that good cause is a
“mutable standard, varying from situation to situation,” and that “[n]o precise
formula is suggested, for each case necessarily turns on its own unique facts.”
Id. To the extent that the Trust argues that we should apply the seven-prong
test here, we decline to do so. The First Circuit’s interpretation of a Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure concerning a default judgment is simply not applicable
in this case. Cf. Zola v. Kelley, 149 N.H. 648, 653 (2003) (interpretation of
Federal Rule of Evidence in United States Supreme Court opinion not binding
on our interpretation of New Hampshire Rule of Evidence).
Finally, the Trust, citing no authority, argues that its rights to
“appropriate legal and meaningful remedies . . . includ[ing] appellate rights”
under the State and Federal Constitutions have been abridged. Judicial review
is not warranted for complaints regarding adverse rulings without developed
legal argument, and neither passing reference to constitutional claims nor
casual invocations of constitutional rights without support by legal argument
5
or authority warrants extended consideration. We therefore decline to address
this argument further. See Radziewicz v. Town of Hudson, 159 N.H. 313, 318
(2009).
We affirm the trial court orders denying the Trust’s motion for entry of
judgment and granting Cardone’s motion to strike confession of judgment.
III
The Trust next contends that the trial court erred in denying its August
2008 renewed motion for partial summary judgment and in granting Cardone’s
March 2009 cross-motion for summary judgment.
We review the trial court’s grant of summary judgment by
considering the affidavits and other evidence, and the inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. If this review does not reveal any genuine issues of
material fact, i.e., facts that would affect the outcome of the
litigation, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, we will affirm. We review the trial court’s application
of law to the facts de novo.
Beckles v. Madden, 160 N.H. ___, ___, 993 A.2d 209, 213 (2010) (citations and
quotation omitted). Our decision in this case turns on our interpretation of the
language in the condominium warranty deed, which we review de novo. See
Duxbury-Fox v. Shakhnovich, 159 N.H. 275, 279 (2009) (interpretation of
deeds in a quiet title dispute ultimately to be resolved by this court); LeBaron v.
Wight, 156 N.H. 583, 585 (2007) (proper interpretation of a contract, such as a
deed, is a question of law for this court). Our determination of disputed deeds
is based upon the parties’ intentions, as best deciphered by construing the
deed’s language from the position of the parties at the time of the conveyance
and in light of surrounding circumstances. See Duxbury-Fox, 159 N.H. at 279.
Formalistic requirements in real estate conveyancing have largely given way to
effectuating the manifest intent of the parties, absent contrary public policy or
statute. Red Hill Outing Club v. Hammond, 143 N.H. 284, 286 (1998).
We first turn to the Trust’s contention that the trial court erred in
denying its August 2008 renewed motion for partial summary judgment. In its
order, the trial court stated, in part:
The provision of the deed at issue in this case states that, if . . .
Cardone breaches certain restrictions, then the property shall
without further act or action, revert to the . . . [T]rust. As stated in
[Cardone’s] objection, conditions subsequent are strictly construed
and, where ambiguous, are construed against forfeiture. This
6
condition subsequent claims that, upon the happening of a
particular event, the property will revert to the Trust.
(Quotation, citation, and emphasis omitted.) Both the trial court and Cardone
rely upon Red Hill Outing Club v. Hammond for the proposition that
“conditions subsequent are strictly construed and, where ambiguous, are
construed against forfeiture.” We agree, and reiterate what we stated in Red
Hill Outing Club:
The construction of deeds is an issue of law for this court.
The general rule in interpreting a deed is to determine the parties’
intent at the time of conveyance in light of the surrounding
circumstances. . . .
We are not convinced, however, that we should apply the
general rule of construction to conditions subsequent. The grantor
of a fee simple subject to condition subsequent shall have his exact
legal right, but no more. To defeat an estate of his own creation,
he must bring the grantee clearly within its letter. A fee simple
subject to condition subsequent is a conveyance of land in which
the grantor expressly retains the right of re-entry upon breach of a
stated condition, the exercise of which results in a forfeiture of
estate for the grantee. Because of the drastic consequence of a
breach, we have traditionally viewed conditions subsequent with
disfavor.
The passage of time has failed to increase the social value of
conditions subsequent. Unlike restrictive covenants, conditions
subsequent continue to be viewed with disfavor because of their
potential to cause a forfeiture of land. We disagree with the
defendants that the consequences of a forfeiture are no greater
than those of specific performance of a contract or an attachment
on property. A forfeiture by nature is a drastic remedy because in
most cases it is widely disproportionate to the breach. In addition,
restricted use of the land for a potentially indefinite duration
substantially diminishes the land’s marketability and development,
ultimately to the detriment of the community. Neither specific
performance, an equitable remedy at the court’s discretion, nor
attachment, applied to secure payment of judgment should a
plaintiff prevail, evokes the hardships associated with a condition
subsequent.
. . . .
7
The overwhelming majority of courts in other jurisdictions
also have continued to strictly construe conditions subsequent in
deeds with regard to their capacity to work a forfeiture. Our
position conforms to the great weight of authority from our sister
States.
Our decision today does not abrogate the guiding rule that
the intent of the parties to a deed is to be determined and
effectuated when possible. When it is a condition subsequent that
must be construed, however, the rule of strict construction
operates to confine the determination of intent to the face of the
deed and resolve all ambiguities against forfeiture.
Id. at 286-88 (citations, quotations, and brackets omitted).
In the condominium warranty deed, the condition subsequent reads:
This conveyance to the said Linda K. Cardone (Grantee) is
conditional and she may hold the within premises for so long as
she does not in any way pledge, alienate, or in any way
hypothecate any interest in the within conveyed premises to any
person or entity, nor make any attempt to do so, nor permit any
person or entity to exercise a lien or attachment against the within
described [premises] until June 12, 2008.
The deed also delineates the consequence if the condition subsequent were to
be breached:
Should this condition and covenant be in any way violated or any
attempt be made by the said grantee to violate the within
condition, the title in the within [premises] shall without further
act or action, revert to the Anna H. Cardone Revocable living trust.
The target of our strict construction of a condition subsequent is the
condition or triggering event, and not the consequence of the same. See 1 R.
Powell, Powell on Real Property § 13.05[2], at 13-50 (Michael Allan Wolf ed.,
2010) (courts narrowly interpret the language and surrounding facts to see if
the triggering event has occurred); Red Hill Outing Club, 143 N.H. at 288
(affirming trial court’s strict construction of condition subsequent’s triggering
event, and not consequences of alleged breach); see also Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 473 (unabridged ed. 2002) (defining “condition
subsequent” as “a condition whose fulfillment invalidates or modifies an estate,
right, or contract previously vested or in effect”); Black’s Law Dictionary 334
(9th ed. 2009) (defining “condition subsequent” as “A condition that, if it
8
occurs, will bring something else to an end; an event the existence of which, by
agreement of the parties, discharges a duty of performance that has arisen.”).
Here, the trial court strictly construed the delineated consequence, and
found that the use of the term “revert” resulted either in an impossibility or an
ambiguity. It erred in so doing. Instead, the trial court’s strict construction
analysis should have focused upon and made findings as to whether Cardone
had breached the condition subsequent — specifically, did she “in any way
pledge, alienate, or in any way hypothecate any interest in the within conveyed
premises to any person or entity, [or] make any attempt to do so, [or] permit
any person or entity to exercise a lien or attachment against the within
described [premises before] June 12, 2008.” In its earlier denial of the Trust’s
initial motion for partial summary judgment, the trial court found that genuine
issues of material fact existed on the question of breach. In her brief, Cardone
argues that none of her actions with regard to the condominium breached the
terms of the deed.
For the purpose of this analysis only, we assume, without deciding, that
Cardone’s actions did constitute a breach of the condition subsequent. As
such, we turn to an analysis of the consequence delineated in the
condominium warranty deed — that “the title in the within [premises] shall
without further act or action, revert to the Anna H. Cardone Revocable living
trust.” In doing so, we are not constrained by strict construction. Instead, we
look to the general rule and construe the deed based on the parties’ intentions
gleaned from construing the language of the deed from as nearly as possible
the position of the parties at the time of the conveyance and in light of
surrounding circumstances. Duxbury-Fox, 159 N.H. at 279. We remain
mindful that formalistic requirements in real estate conveyancing have largely
given way to effectuating the manifest intent of the parties, absent contrary
public policy or statute. Red Hill Outing Club, 143 N.H. at 286.
Cardone argues that use of the term “revert” in the deed, and the
consequent “apparent intent . . . to return the property to the trust,” created “a
stark ambiguity” because the Trust had never previously owned or possessed
the condominium. The trial court denied the Trust’s renewed motion for partial
summary judgment because it found that use of the term “revert” resulted
either in an impossibility or an ambiguity, stating:
The [Trust] asserts that it would boggle the legal minds
across the country as to how to make the language of any transfer
instrument any more clear than the one that is present here. If the
Trust is correct — the instrument is not ambiguous — it
nevertheless is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law. By
definition, it would be impossible for the property to revert to the
Trust because the Trust never owned the property. If, however, the
9
deed is ambiguous, the ultimate result remains the same. Because
the court construes an ambiguous condition subsequent against
forfeiture, the court will not interpret the reverter provision as
some other permissible transfer.
(Quotation and citations omitted.) We disagree that use of the term
“revert” here causes either an impossibility or ambiguity.
If we were to read the term “revert” in isolation and in an overly technical
sense, we agree that the title to the condominium could not “revert” to the
Trust, as the Trust had not previously owned the property. See, e.g., Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary, supra at 1943 (definition of “revert”
includes “to return to the proprietor or his heirs or assigns after the
termination of a particular estate or reversion granted by him”); Black’s Law
Dictionary, supra at 1284 (definition of “possibility of reverter” includes “a
future interest retained by a grantor after conveying a fee simple determinable,
so that the grantee’s estate terminates automatically and reverts to the grantor
if the terminating event ever occurs”). Given such a reading, the term “revert”
might either lead to confusion or refer to a legal impossibility in this case.
As previously detailed, however, we are not guided by such an overly
technical reading when construing the consequence delineated in the
condominium warranty deed. Here, the language of the clause (“Should this
condition . . . be in any way violated . . . the title in the within [premises] shall
without further act or action, revert to the Anna H. Cardone Revocable living
trust”) makes clear that the intent of the parties was for title to the
condominium to transfer to the Trust if the condition were breached. Having
specifically named the Trust, nothing in the language of the clause indicates
any intent for the title to transfer to either the Sullivans or their estate. As
such, use of the term “revert” was an unfortunate, but by no means a fatal,
choice of words. See, e.g., Hiller v. Loring, 136 A. 350, 351 (Me. 1927) (in the
interpretation of a will, where language used is inapt, crude, imperfect, or of
doubtful meaning, the language is subordinated to the intention of the testator,
and the term “‘revert’ may be construed as ‘go to’ or ‘pass to,’ regardless of the
fact that the taker has no prior interest in the property”).
Nor does any such confusion, or legal impossibility, create ambiguity in
the clause itself. See Lassonde v. Stanton, 157 N.H. 582, 594 (2008) (lack of
precision in contract clause does not create ambiguity). Instead, “[a]mbiguity
exists only when the parties could reasonably disagree as to a clause’s
meaning.” Id. Indeed, even if we were to decide that the term “revert” rendered
the clause in the deed ambiguous, the surrounding circumstances all point to
the Trust as the intended recipient of the title to the condominium if the
condition is breached.
10
Where the agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be
determined what the parties, under an objective standard,
mutually understood the ambiguous language to mean. In
applying the objective standard, a court should examine the
contract as a whole, the circumstances surrounding execution and
the object intended by the agreement, while keeping in mind the
goal of giving effect to the intention of the parties.
Found. for Seacoast Health v. HCA Health Servs. of N.H., 157 N.H. 487, 501
(2008) (citation and quotation omitted).
Here, the record is clear that the Trust provided Cardone with the funds
to purchase the condominium from the Sullivans. The condominium warranty
deed was signed by Cardone’s mother (the trustor), the Sullivans, and Cardone.
Cardone read and agreed to the language of the deed. In her deposition,
Cardone stated that she understood that the condominium would return to the
Trust if she violated any of the conditions in the deed. Kevin Sullivan, co-
executor of his parents’ estates, filed an affidavit stating:
To the best of my knowledge and belief, it was [the Sullivans’]
understanding that this paragraph meant exactly what it said in
that the condominium unit title would transfer to the trust
automatically if the conditions or the restrictions described in the
deed were violated.
Indeed, Cardone acknowledges in her brief that “[t]he apparent intent of the
deed [was] to return the property to the trust.” We do not believe that the
language of the clause can be reasonably read to mean anything but that title
to the condominium should transfer to the Trust if the condition were to be
breached. Consequently, we vacate the trial court’s denial of the Trust’s
renewed motion for summary judgment and remand for further proceedings in
accordance with this opinion.
Finally, we turn to the Trust’s contention that the trial court erred in
granting Cardone’s March 2009 cross-motion for summary judgment. In
granting the cross-motion, the trial court stated: “Cardone has established
that there are no genuine issues of material fact and that she is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.” We disagree.
Here, the trial court first reiterated the earlier analysis concerning
impossibility or ambiguity that it had employed in denying the Trust’s renewed
motion for summary judgment. For the reasons explained above, we disagree
with that analysis. The trial court then stated:
11
[T]he deed language [of “revert”] could be characterized as creating
either a reversionary interest or an executory interest.
. . . .
. . . Because forfeiture is a “drastic remedy” in either
scenario, the court will interpret a fee simple determinable subject
to an executory interest no differently than a fee simple subject to
condition subsequent. Thus, because the language purporting to
create a fee simple determinable subject to executory interest in
this case is ambiguous, the court will interpret it against forfeiture.
We need not decide whether the terminology used in the deed is more
appropriately deemed a fee simple determinable subject to an executory
interest or a fee simple subject to condition subsequent. In either case, our
analysis of the term “revert” is the same. Specifically, the language of the
clause makes clear that the parties’ intent was for title to the condominium to
transfer to the Trust if Cardone violated the terms of the deed. The Trust
having been specifically named, nothing in the language of the clause indicates
any intent that title transfer to either the Sullivans or their estate. While use of
the term “revert” was unfortunate, it was by no means a fatal choice of words.
Nor does the term “revert” create ambiguity in the clause itself, as we do not
believe that the language of the clause can be reasonably read to mean
anything but that title to the condominium should transfer to the Trust if
Cardone violates the terms of the deed.
In sum, we affirm the trial court orders denying the Trust’s motion for
entry of judgment and granting Cardone’s motion to strike confession of
judgment; we vacate the trial court’s order denying the Trust’s August 2008
renewed motion for partial summary judgment; we reverse the trial court’s
order granting Cardone’s March 2009 cross-motion for summary judgment;
and we remand for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part;
reversed in part; remanded.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
12