THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-348
IMPACT FOOD SALES, INC.
v.
CARL EVANS D/B/A WAREHOUSE CLUB DISTRIBUTING COMPANY
Argued: November 4, 2009
Opinion Issued: June 16, 2010
Law Offices of Thomas Morgan, P.C., of Salem (Thomas Morgan on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Ford & Weaver, P.A., of Portsmouth (Christopher J. Somma on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
BRODERICK, C.J. The defendant, Carl Evans d/b/a Warehouse Club
Distributing Company (Evans), appeals an order of the Superior Court
(McHugh, J.) denying his motions to vacate judgment and to dismiss. We
reverse.
The following facts are contained in the record. The plaintiff, Impact
Food Sales, Inc. (Impact Food), located in Salem, is in the business of buying
wholesale lots of food products. On November 26, 2007, its attorney executed
a writ of summons alleging that Evans accepted money from Impact Food for
the purchase of goods that were not delivered. Evans is a resident of the State
of Illinois.
On November 26, Impact Food’s attorney sent a letter to the Merrimack
County Sheriff enclosing a copy of the writ of summons, along with copies for
service on the New Hampshire Secretary of State and a check for $10.00,
pursuant to RSA 510:4 (1997). That day, Impact Food also sent a copy of the
same letter by certified mail to Evans. The secretary of state was served on
November 29, and the writ of summons and the affidavit of service from the
sheriff were filed with the superior court on December 10.
On January 31, 2008, Impact Food filed a motion for entry of default,
alleging that service on Evans had been completed “by having a copy of the writ
served upon the NH Secretary of State and consistent with RSA 510:4 plaintiff
mailed a copy of the writ to the defendant certified mail, return receipt
requested.” The motion further stated that:
4. Defendant appears to have been duly notified by the US
Postal Service on at least two occasions and did not arrange to pick
up copies of the certified mail.
5. In an effort to insure that the defendant was made fully
aware of this law suit against him, counsel for plaintiff again
mailed a copy of the writ of summons certified mail, return receipt
requested.
6. Plaintiff’s counsel has not yet received any response from the
US Postal Service, however, attached hereto is plaintiff’s counsel
file copy of a letter mailed first class mail to the same address for
the defendant as the certified mail on January 15, 2008 advising
the defendant of the process that had been served upon the
Secretary of State against him . . . .
7. This mail sent first class mail has not been returned by the
US Postal Service despite counsel’s use of a clearly addressed
envelope with a clearly marked return address.
In an affidavit of mailing attached to the motion, Impact Food’s attorney
attested that he “served the Secretary of State in accordance with RSA 510:4
and immediately mailed a copy of the process with a copy of the attached cover
letter certified mail . . . , however, the green post card return receipt requested
was never received back from the postal service.” The attached cover letter
referenced in the affidavit states, “Enclosed please find Writ of Summons along
with copies for service on the . . . Secretary of State.”
2
On February 7, the trial court granted Impact Food’s motion and a
default judgment was entered against Evans on May 6. On March 20, 2009,
Evans filed a motion to vacate judgment and motion to dismiss, stating that he
was never served in accordance with the statutory requirements set forth in
RSA 510:4 and thus the court lacked personal jurisdiction over him. In an
affidavit attached to the motion, he attested that he “was never served with the
Writ of Summons in this matter . . . [and] never signed a green card for any
certified mail alleged to have been sent to Carl Evans doing business as
Warehouse Club Distributing Company.” He further attested that he “was
notified of a judgment entered against [him] in New Hampshire when [he]
received a Citation to Discover Assets in the Circuit Court for the Nineteenth
Judicial Circuit – Lake County, Illinois that was issued on December 4, 2008.”
On April 23, the trial court denied the motion, ruling that “[a]dequate service
has been made in this essentially theft of money by the defendant case.” This
appeal followed.
On appeal, Evans argues that the trial court improperly found that he
was served in accordance with RSA 510:4 and erred in denying his motion to
vacate judgment and motion to dismiss. He argues that Impact Food failed to
follow the requirements of the statute and instead “attempted to create its own
service of process contrary to both New Hampshire Statute and existing case
law.” Impact Food responds that RSA 510:4 only requires that certified mail be
sent to the defendant and that additional service is optional. Based upon case
law from other states, Impact Food argues that when certified mail is
unclaimed, notice by regular mail is adequate.
RSA 510:4 is this state’s long-arm statute. South Down Recreation
Assoc. v. Moran, 141 N.H. 484, 486 (1996). In order to obtain jurisdiction over
an out-of-state defendant, proper service of process is required. Id. “Proper
service is separate from the due process requirement that the defendant have
minimum contacts with the jurisdiction.” Estate of Lunt v. Gaylor, 150 N.H.
96, 97 (2003) (quotation omitted). The interpretation of a statute is a question
of law, which we review de novo. Carlisle v. Frisbie Mem. Hosp., 152 N.H. 762,
773 (2005).
Pursuant to RSA 510:4, I, “Any person who is not an inhabitant of this
state and who . . . transacts any business within this state, commits a tortious
act within this state, or has the ownership, use, or possession of any real or
personal property situated in this state submits himself . . . to the jurisdiction
of the courts of this state . . . .” The method of service of process on persons
subject to the jurisdiction of this state is set forth in RSA 510:4, II. The statute
provides:
SERVICE OF PROCESS ON SECRETARY OF STATE. Service
of process upon any person who is subject to the jurisdiction of
3
this state, as provided in this section, may be made by leaving a
copy thereof, with a fee of $10, in the hands or office of the
secretary of state. Such service shall be of the same legal force
and effect as if served on the defendant at his abode or place of
business in the state or country where he resides and according to
the law of that state or country, provided that notice thereof and a
copy of the process is forthwith sent by registered mail, postage
prepaid, by the plaintiff or his attorney to the defendant at his last
known abode or place of business in the state or country in which
the defendant resides. The defendant’s return receipt and an
affidavit of the plaintiff or his attorney of compliance with the
section shall be appended to the process and entered therewith. In
the event that the notice and a copy of the process are not
delivered to or accepted by the defendant, the court may order
such additional notice, if any, as justice may require.
We note that according to RSA 21:32-a (2000), the words “registered mail”
when used in connection with the requirement for notice by mail “shall mean
either registered mail or certified mail.”
When construing a statute, we first examine the language found in the
statute and where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to
words used. Collden Corp. v. Town of Wolfeboro, 159 N.H. 747, 750 (2010).
When a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond
it for further indicators of legislative intent. Id. Courts can neither ignore the
plain language of the legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not
see fit to include. Id. We require “strict compliance with statutory
requirements for service of process.” South Down, 141 N.H. at 487; see
Lachapelle v. Town of Goffstown, 134 N.H. 478, 479-80 (1991). “Where a
statute points out a particular method of serving process . . . such method
must be followed . . . .” Bissonnette v. Alpine, Inc., 96 N.H. 419, 420 (1951).
Pursuant to RSA 510:4, II, in order to effect valid service of process over
a nonresident defendant, several steps must be taken. First, “[s]ervice of
process . . . may be made by leaving a copy thereof, with a fee of $10, in the
hands or office of the secretary of state.” RSA 510:4, II. Second, the plaintiff
must send a “notice thereof and a copy of the process” by registered mail,
postage prepaid, to the defendant at his last known abode or place of business
in the state or country in which the defendant resides. Id. Third, “[t]he
defendant’s return receipt and an affidavit of the plaintiff or his attorney of
compliance with [RSA 510:4, II]” must be attached to the process and filed with
the trial court. Id. If a copy of the process is not delivered to or accepted by
the defendant, the court may order additional notice. Id.
4
Impact Food did not follow this statutory procedure. Initially we note
that although the record is not clear, it appears that Impact Food sent a letter
to the sheriff’s office enclosing a writ of summons, along with copies for service
on the secretary of state and simultaneously sent a copy of the same letter by
certified mail to Evans. The statute, however, requires that the certified
mailing to the defendant include notice of the effected service on the secretary
of state, which it could not have done if the mailing to the defendant was
accomplished simultaneously with that to the sheriff’s office. This same issue
was addressed by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in
M & K Welding, Inc. v. Leasing Partners, LLC, 386 F.3d 361 (1st Cir. 2004).
In M & K Welding, to comply with the service of process requirements
under RSA 510:4, II, the plaintiff sent copies of a summons and complaint to
the Merrimack County Sheriff for service on the secretary of state. On the
same day, the plaintiff sent another copy of the documents by registered mail
to the defendant’s address in New Jersey. Id. at 363. In the letter to the
defendant, the plaintiff stated that it had on that day “forwarded copies of the
Writ of Summons and Complaint to the Merrimack County Sheriff for service
upon the New Hampshire Secretary of State, as required by statute.” Id.
(quotation omitted). The deputy sheriff’s return indicated that service on the
secretary of state was made on September 12, 2002. Id. At the defendant’s
office, the return receipt for the registered mail had been signed on September
5. Id.
The First Circuit initially reviewed the statutory language, stating that:
[T]he statute proclaims the effect of “service,” defined as leaving a
copy plus fee of $10 in the office of the Secretary, as having the
same effect as if “served on the defendant at his abode.” This is
immediately followed by the proviso, “provided that notice thereof
. . . is forthwith sent . . . to the defendant.” This can mean only
notice of the referent of “thereof,” which is “service” – not intention
to make service, expectation that service will take place, or
commencement of action hopefully leading to service. Here, notice
was given of a preliminary step to service on the Secretary, i.e.,
sending the documents to a county sheriff for eventual service. . . .
Moreover, “forthwith,” without any definite starting point,
loses all significance. In the case at bar, the time referenced could
have varied widely. As it happened, [plaintiff] maintains that it
meant that a copy of the process was properly sent immediately
after its letter requesting service was sent to a sheriff on September
5. But if actual service had been the triggering event, “forthwith”
would mean that a copy of the process would have been sent at
least a week later.
5
Id. at 366 (ellipses omitted). Expressing its opinion that it was likely “a New
Hampshire court would take literally the requirement in section 510:4, II that
notice be given of the actual service on the Secretary of State,” the Court
declined to stretch the meaning of “notice thereof” to include notice of actions
and stages short of completed service. Id. at 365-66.
We agree with the First Circuit’s construction of RSA 510:4, II. Black’s
Law Dictionary defines “service” as: “The formal delivery of a writ, summons,
or other legal process . . . [a]lso termed service of process.” Black’s Law
Dictionary 1491 (9th ed. 2009) (italics omitted). Accordingly, service of process
does not occur until the process is “in the hands or office of the secretary of
state.” RSA 510:4, II. Pursuant to RSA 510:4, III, the secretary of state shall
keep a record of all process served, “and said record shall show the date and
hour of service in the hands or office of the secretary of state.” (Emphasis
added.) Under the plain language of the statute, therefore, notice of service of
process on the secretary of state may not be given before the service has taken
place. To hold otherwise adds words to the statute that the legislature did not
see fit to include. See State Employees Assoc. of N.H. v. N.H. Div. of Personnel,
158 N.H. 338, 343 (2009) (we will not add language that the legislature did not
see fit to include).
In the case before us, Impact Food sent a letter on November 26 to the
Merrimack County Sheriff enclosing a copy of the writ of summons, along with
copies for service on the secretary of state. That same day, a copy of the letter
was sent by certified mail to Evans. The secretary of state was not served,
however, until November 29, and the writ and the affidavit of service from the
sheriff were not filed with the court until December 10. In order to comply with
the statute, Impact Food should have waited to give notice to Evans until after
it had effected service on the secretary of state. Short of that, the mailing to
Evans on November 26 only contained notice of “the commencement of, or
some preliminary stage of, the process of serving.” M & K Welding, 386 F.3d at
366.
Impact Food argues that Evans never raised this issue before the trial
court and therefore ought to be precluded from raising it for the first time on
appeal. We disagree and read Evans’ arguments made in his motion to vacate
judgment and motion to dismiss, and supporting memorandum of law, as
adequately raising this issue. See Plourde Sand & Gravel v. JGI Eastern, 154
N.H. 791, 799 (2007).
Impact Food also argues that it in fact complied with the requirement
that it first serve the secretary of state because on January 15, 2008, it sent a
second letter to Evans by certified mail enclosing a copy of the writ and
notifying Evans that “the NH Secretary of State has been served as your
registered agent in the state for transacting business within this state.”
6
However, assuming, without deciding, that the statement in the January 15
letter that the secretary of state had been served is sufficient to comply with
the statutory requirement that notice be given of the effected service on the
secretary of state, such service was likewise deficient. RSA 510:4, II requires
that notice of service on the secretary of state and a copy of the process be sent
“forthwith” to the defendant. Webster’s Dictionary defines “forthwith” as “with
dispatch : without delay : within a reasonable time . . . : IMMEDIATELY . . .
immediately after some preceding event.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 895 (unabridged ed. 2002). Accordingly, the term “forthwith”
connotes a sense of immediacy. Here, service on the secretary of state was
effected on November 29, 2007. In order for notice thereof and a copy of the
process to be sent “forthwith,” such mailing should have occurred immediately
after the effected service on the secretary of state. We cannot conclude that the
second letter mailed to Evans approximately six weeks later satisfies the
statutory requirement that notice be sent “forthwith.”
Finally, Impact Food argues that service was effected by sending the
copies it had sent by certified mail to the same address via first class mail.
RSA 510:4 does not authorize service on an out-of-state defendant by providing
notice by first class mail. However, RSA 510:4, II provides, “In the event that
the notice and a copy of the process are not delivered to or accepted by the
defendant, the court may order such additional notice, if any, as justice may
require.” (Emphasis added.) We do not interpret this plain language as
authorizing the plaintiff to attempt to effect service of process in a manner not
specified by the statute without a court order. See South Down, 141 N.H. at
489 (“[t]he manner of service of process prescribed by the legislature in cases
where jurisdiction is acquired under RSA 510:4, I, is via RSA 510:4, II. If that
method fails, then plaintiffs may request the superior court to order such
additional notice as the case requires, either by virtue of the last sentence of
RSA 510:4, II or RSA 510:8.”). Rather, under RSA 510:4, II, the legislature has
specifically provided that when the notice and a copy of the process are
undeliverable or not accepted, a court order is the sole authority for effecting
service of process by a method other than that set forth in the statute.
The plaintiff cites case law from other jurisdictions which holds that
when certified mail is returned unclaimed and there is evidence that regular
mail was received at the same address, then the defendant is deemed to be
avoiding service and service by regular mail is adequate. See, e.g., McFarland
v. Dippel, 756 So. 2d 618 (La. Ct. App.), cert. denied, 770 So. 2d 349 (La.
2000); First Resolution Inv. v. Seker, 795 A.2d 868 (N.J. 2002). The cases
cited, however, are governed by the specific language of the applicable statutes
or rules. In McFarland, “[u]nder the clear wording of [the long-arm statute], all
that is necessary to constitute service upon a non-resident . . . is that counsel
for the plaintiff send a certified copy of the citation and of the petition in the
suit to the defendant by registered or certified mail, or actually deliver it in
7
person. There is no requirement under [the statute] for a signed return
receipt.” McFarland, 756 So. 2d at 622. Likewise, in First Resolution, a court
rule governing service of a notification for wage execution mandated that
service “shall be made by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the party’s last known address; or if the party refuses to claim or to accept
delivery, by ordinary mail to the last known address.” First Resolution, 795
A.2d at 871 (quotation, ellipsis, and italics omitted).
Service is effected only if the provisions of the applicable statute are
complied with literally. For example, in Adams v. Sullivan, 110 N.H. 101
(1970), the brother-in-law of the defendant accommodated a deputy sheriff by
leaving a copy of a summons and complaint at the defendant’s home on the
sheriff’s behalf. Id. at 102. The applicable statute, RSA 510:2, provided that
process “shall be served by giving to the defendant or leaving at his abode an
attested copy thereof.” Id. at 103 (quotation omitted). Because “writs are
addressed to the sheriff in contemplation that he will serve them,” we affirmed
dismissal of the suit on the ground that, though actual notice was received,
service was not executed by a sheriff. Id. at 103-04. In South Down
Recreation, 141 N.H. at 485, out-of-state defendants were served in their home
community by a sheriff of that state. We held that RSA 510:4, II does not
authorize out-of-state personal service and that the only alternative method
recognized is a request to the trial court to order additional service. Id. at 487,
489. Finally, most recently, in Lunt, 150 N.H. at 97, although service on the
secretary of state had been made and, according to counsel, registered mail
had been sent to the defendants, we reversed the trial court’s denial of a
defendant’s motion to dismiss the suit for lack of personal jurisdiction because
there was no record of the registered mail service and return receipts of such
service on file with the court as required by RSA 510:4, II.
Citing Nault v. Tirado, 155 N.H. 449 (2007), and Duncan v. McDonough,
105 N.H. 308 (1964), the dissent states that “[t]he ‘overall purpose’ of our
statutes governing service of process is to ‘afford[ ] the defendant
constitutionally sufficient notice’” and that “the goal of RSA 510:4 must be ‘to
provide for notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to
apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an
opportunity to present their objections.’” Nault and Duncan, however, dealt
solely with RSA 510:2 and service on in-state defendants. RSA 510:4 was not
at issue in either of these two cases and thus they are neither controlling nor
persuasive regarding service on an out-of-state defendant.
In Nault, the issue before us was whether pursuant to RSA 510:2, service
had been properly perfected on a New Hampshire resident’s “abode.” Nault,
155 N.H. at 451. In Duncan, we concluded that the attempted service on an
in-state defendant at the defendant’s liability carrier’s office in Manchester,
rather than at his home address in Portsmouth, did not comply with the
8
mandates of RSA 510:2 that “all writs and other processes shall be served by
giving to the defendant or leaving at his abode an attested copy thereof . . . .”
Duncan, 105 N.H. at 309 (quotation omitted).
“Service of process accomplishes two purposes. First, it establishes the
court’s jurisdiction over the defendant or the res in connection with the action.
Second, it informs the defendant of the pendency and the particulars of the
proceeding. . . . [B]oth must be achieved before any constitutionally sufficient
proceedings can begin.” 4 R. Wiebusch, New Hampshire Practice, Civil Practice
and Procedure § 14.01, at 300-01 (2d ed. 1997) (emphasis added). Aside from
the fact that Nault and Duncan are construing RSA 510:2, which governs
resident service, and not RSA 510:4, which governs nonresident service, the
dissent’s conclusion that the purpose of our statutes governing service of
process is to afford constitutionally sufficient notice undermines the fact that
there are two underlying purposes to service of process: providing sufficient
notice and establishing the court’s jurisdiction over the defendant. While we
agree that notice of the pending action is given by a copy of the writ,
jurisdiction over the defendant is established by service. No case can proceed
without effected service on the defendant in the manner prescribed by law.
Indeed, the fact that a defendant has actual knowledge of attempted service
does not render the service effectual if the process was not served in
accordance with the requirements of the statute. See Adams, 110 N.H. at 103-
04.
Impact Food did not comply with the requirements set forth in RSA
510:4, II for effecting service of process on a nonresident defendant because
service on the secretary of state had not occurred prior to Impact Food’s first
certified mailing to Evans. “[A] default judgment issued without jurisdiction
over a defendant is void, . . . it remains vulnerable to being vacated at any time,
and . . . such jurisdiction depends on the proper service of process. . . .” M & K
Welding, 386 F.3d at 364. We hold that because the statutory requirements for
service of process were not met in this case, the out-of-state defendant was not
properly served and therefore the trial court never obtained personal
jurisdiction over him. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s order denying
Evan’s motion to vacate judgment and motion to dismiss. See Adams, 110
N.H. at 104-05 (RSA 508:10, permitting a new action within one year after
judgment, applies to a suit dismissed for defective service of process).
Reversed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; HICKS, J., dissented.
HICKS, J., dissenting. Because I believe that the service effected in this
case met all of the requirements of RSA 510:4, II (1997), I respectfully dissent.
9
As the majority correctly points out, we “consistently require strict
compliance with statutory requirements for service of process.” South Down
Recreation Assoc. v. Moran, 141 N.H. 484, 487 (1996). Determination of what
RSA 510:4, II requires entails an examination of the statute under our well-
settled rules of statutory construction. “When we interpret statutes, we look to
the plain meaning of the words used. . . . In our analysis, we will focus on the
statute as a whole, not on isolated words or phrases, presuming that the
legislature did not use superfluous or redundant words.” Id. (quotations and
citation omitted).
RSA 510:4, II provides:
Service of process upon any person who is subject to the
jurisdiction of this state, as provided in this section, may be made
by leaving a copy thereof, with a fee of $10, in the hands or office
of the secretary of state. Such service shall be of the same legal
force and effect as if served on the defendant at his abode or place
of business in the state or country where he resides and according
to the law of that state or country, provided that notice thereof and
a copy of the process is forthwith sent by registered mail, postage
prepaid, by the plaintiff or his attorney to the defendant at his last
known abode or place of business in the state or country in which
the defendant resides. The defendant’s return receipt and an
affidavit of the plaintiff or his attorney of compliance with the
section shall be appended to the process and entered therewith. In
the event that the notice and a copy of the process are not
delivered to or accepted by the defendant, the court may order
such additional notice, if any, as justice may require.
RSA 510:4, II.
Reading the statute as a whole, it sets forth three steps for effecting
service of process upon a nonresident defendant. The first two are unqualified
requirements: (1) “leaving a copy thereof, with a fee of $10, in the hands or
office of the secretary of state”; and (2) sending, “forthwith,” “notice thereof and
a copy of the process . . . by registered mail, postage prepaid, by the plaintiff or
his attorney to the defendant at his last known abode or place of business in
the state or country in which the defendant resides.” Id.
The majority does not note any deficiency in effecting the first step here,
and the record supports that the secretary of state was properly served. As to
the second step, the majority finds fault with the plaintiff simultaneously
sending a copy of the writ to the defendant by certified mail and to the sheriff
for service upon the secretary of state. Specifically, the majority states that
“[i]n order to comply with the statute, Impact Food should have waited to give
10
notice to Evans until after it had effected service on the secretary of state.” In
reaching its conclusion, the majority adopts the reasoning of the First Circuit
Court of Appeals in M & K Welding, Inc. v. Leasing Partners, LLC, 386 F.3d 361
(1st Cir. 2004). The First Circuit Court of Appeals’ interpretation of our long
arm statute, however, is not binding upon us, and we have never construed
that statute to require waiting for the return of service upon the secretary of
state. Nor would I do so now. The statute does not require it.
The First Circuit opined that “a New Hampshire court would take literally
the requirement in section 510:4, II that notice be given of the actual service on
the Secretary of State rather than the commencement of, or some preliminary
stage of, the process of serving.” M & K Welding, 386 F.3d at 365-66. I would
not parse the statute so finely. The statute requires that “notice thereof,”
which the First Circuit concluded “can mean only notice of the referent of
‘thereof,’ which is ‘service,’” id. at 366, must be sent to the defendant. While I
agree that “notice thereof” means notice of service upon the secretary of state, I
disagree that it requires notice that service has been completed. In my view, it
requires only notice that the plaintiff or his attorney has instituted service
upon the secretary of state in the customary way; namely, by forwarding the
writ to the sheriff with instructions to serve it.
This interpretation is consistent with our standards of statutory
construction. First, “[w]e will neither consider what the legislature might have
said nor add words that it did not see fit to include.” Walker v. Walker, 158
N.H. 602, 605 (2009) (quotation omitted). RSA 510:4, II itself makes no
mention of service by the sheriff or his return of service. Cf. Adams v. Sullivan,
110 N.H. 101, 103-04 (1970) (noting that RSA 510:2 does not specify who must
serve the defendant). Rather, service by the sheriff is implicit in the address of
the writs themselves “to the sheriff in contemplation that he will serve them.”
Id. at 104; see RSA 104:5 (2001); RSA 509:3 (1997).
We have opined that “sheriffs and their deputies, like other public
officers, are under a general duty to exercise reasonable skill and diligence in
the performance of their official duties.” Demers v. Bisbee, 106 N.H. 354, 356
(1965). One such official duty is that “[t]he sheriff and the sheriff’s deputies
shall serve and execute all writs and other precepts directed to the sheriff’s
department and issued from lawful authority.” RSA 104:5. The duty arises
upon delivery of the process to the sheriff and his acceptance thereof, and
while “mere proof of mailing of legal process to a sheriff is not of itself evidence
of delivery to the officer,” we have held that where process is sent to a sheriff by
registered mail and notice thereof is left at his residence, he is under a duty to
exercise reasonable diligence in retrieving the registered mail from the post
office. Demers, 106 N.H. at 356. Thus, the delivery of a writ to the sheriff sets
in motion a legally-prescribed procedure for service of process upon the
designated party. I would hold that notice to the defendant that the plaintiff or
11
his attorney has instituted this procedure constitutes “notice thereof,” i.e.,
notice of service, for purposes of RSA 510:4, II.
“Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in
enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme.” South Down Recreation, 141 N.H. at 487 (quotation
omitted). The “overall purpose” of our statutes governing service of process is
to “afford[] the defendant constitutionally sufficient notice.” Nault v. Tirado,
155 N.H. 449, 451 (2007). Accordingly, the goal of RSA 510:4 must be “to
provide for notice reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to
apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an
opportunity to present their objections.” Duncan v. McDonough, 105 N.H. 308,
309 (1964) (quotation omitted). Notice of the pendency, and nature, of the
action is given by the copy of the writ itself. Thus, we have noted that “[i]t is
not the return . . . but the service of the writ, that gives jurisdiction. The
return is merely evidence by which the court is informed that the defendant
has been served.” Bissonnette v. Alpine, Inc., 96 N.H. 419, 420 (1951)
(quotation omitted).
As one purpose of our service statutes is to “afford [the defendant] an
opportunity to present [his] objections,” Duncan, 105 N.H. at 309 (quotation
omitted), I would find the interpretation that most expeditiously provides
notice, and, therefore, gives the defendant the greatest length of time to prepare
his response, most consistent with that goal. Indeed, RSA 510:4, II reflects the
goal of expedition by directing that “notice thereof” be sent to the defendant
“forthwith.” RSA 510:4, II. I would conclude that simultaneous notice as
effected here was within the legislature’s contemplation and well satisfies the
statute.
As the majority notes, a second purpose of service is the establishment of
personal jurisdiction over the defendant. See Bissonnette, 96 N.H. at 420. I
believe that once the service statute was complied with, consistent with the
construction described herein, jurisdiction was established.
While, as previously noted, we “require strict compliance with statutory
requirements for service of process,” South Down Recreation, 141 N.H. at 487,
strict compliance with a statute does not equate to strict construction of its
terms. While the majority’s interpretation of “service,” based upon the term’s
definition in Black’s Law Dictionary (9th ed. 2009), is a possible one, it is not,
in my opinion, the most reasonable one. I would not “make a fortress out of
the dictionary,” but instead would heed the admonition to “remember that
statutes always have some purpose or object to accomplish.” Zorn v. Demetri,
158 N.H. 437, 440 (2009) (quotations omitted). That admonition is reflected in
our rule of statutory construction providing that “[w]here reasonably possible,
we will construe statutes to effectuate their underlying policies.” Appeal of
12
Rowan, 142 N.H, 67, 74 (1997) (quotation omitted). I believe it is reasonably
possible to construe RSA 510:4, II to authorize simultaneous service upon the
secretary of state and notice to the defendant. Such a construction serves all
of the purposes of effecting service and providing notice while also
accommodating the practicalities of legal practice. Thus, perhaps not by
coincidence, this is the construction placed upon the statute, and generally
followed, by practitioners in this state. The majority’s construction, on the
other hand is, in my view, both unnecessary and unreasonable.
The record reflects that the plaintiff copied the defendant on the letter he
sent to the sheriff, which itself stated: “Enclosed please find Writ of Summons
along with copies for service on the New Hampshire Secretary of State along
with a check in the amount of $10.00 made payable to the Secretary of State
pursuant to RSA 510:4.” I would hold that this is sufficient notice of service to
comply with the second step in RSA 510:4, II.
The third step is that “[t]he defendant’s return receipt and an affidavit of
the plaintiff or his attorney of compliance with the section shall be appended to
the process and entered therewith.” RSA 510:4, II. This third “requirement” is
qualified, however, by the sentence that follows it: “In the event that the notice
and a copy of the process are not delivered to or accepted by the defendant, the
court may order such additional notice, if any, as justice may require.” Id.
Reading the last two sentences of the statute together, if, as here, the notice
and copy of the process are not accepted by the defendant, they need not be
“appended to the process and entered therewith.” Id. In that case, “the court
may order such additional notice, if any, as justice may require.” Id. (emphasis
added). The plain import of this language is that there are cases in which no
additional notice is required. In this case, the trial court determined that
“[a]dequate service has been made.” I would read this as a finding that justice
required no additional notice.
The majority concludes that the provision for additional notice does not
“authoriz[e] the plaintiff to attempt to effect service of process in a manner not
specified by the statute without a court order.” Neither, however, does the
statute prohibit a plaintiff from voluntarily providing more notice than the
statute requires. I do not believe we should read the trial court’s order as an
after-the-fact sanction of an unauthorized method of service. Rather, in light of
my conclusion that the first two steps in RSA 510:4, II had been properly
completed prior to sending the letter by first class mail, I would read the court’s
order as an acknowledgment that all mandatory portions of the statute had
been complied with and that, whether in light of, or notwithstanding, the
additional notice by first class mail, no further notice was required. Granted,
the plaintiff could have asked the court whether additional notice was required
prior to sending the first class letter, see South Down Recreation, 141 N.H. at
489, and at that point, the court’s answer might have been different. While
13
such a step might have been prudent, however, it was not mandated by either
the plain language of the statute or our decision in South Down Recreation,
141 N.H. at 489 (stating that if method of service provided in RSA 510:4, II
“fails, then plaintiffs may request the superior court to order . . . additional
notice” (emphasis added)). I see no reason to fault the plaintiff in this case for
either doing something not prohibited, or failing to do something not required,
by the relevant statute.
Finally, Adams, South Down Recreation and Estate of Lunt v. Gaylor,
150 N.H. 96 (2003), are distinguishable and therefore not contrary to the
conclusion I reach. In Adams, service was not made by a sheriff, Adams, 110
N.H. at 103-04, and in South Down Recreation, the plaintiff did not attempt
service upon the secretary of state but rather effected abode service upon the
defendant in Massachusetts, a method of service not authorized by statute.
South Down Recreation, 141 N.H. at 485, 487. In the instant case, service was
properly made upon the secretary of state by a sheriff.
In Lunt, the plaintiff “had no record of the registered mail service [upon
the defendant] and had not filed the return receipts for service with the court.”
Lunt, 150 N.H. at 97. Furthermore, the trial court concluded that service was
defective. Id. By contrast, in this case, the plaintiff has proof of the registered
mail service and the return receipt is unavailable precisely because the notice
went unclaimed by the defendant. The trial court here concluded that service
was not defective, implicitly finding that no additional notice was required. See
Smith v. Lillian V. Donahue Trust, 157 N.H. 502, 508 (2008) (noting we
assume the trial court makes “all subsidiary findings necessary to support its
decision”). I would not disturb that determination. For all of the foregoing
reasons, I respectfully dissent.
14