THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham County Probate Court
No. 2009-210
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF PETER R.
Submitted: December 3, 2009
Opinion Issued: December 31, 2009
Edward W. R., by memorandum of law, pro se.
Law Office of Rebecca McBeath, of Portsmouth (Rebecca S. McBeath on
the brief), for the respondent.
MEMORANDUM OPINION
HICKS, J. The respondent, Peter R., appeals an order of the Rockingham
County Probate Court (Hurd, J.) appointing a guardian over his person. He
argues that the petitioner, his father, failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that he is incapacitated, that a guardianship is necessary, that there are no
available alternatives, and that a guardianship is the least restrictive form of
intervention. See RSA 464-A:9, III (2004). We affirm.
The record establishes the following facts. On December 22, 2008, the
petitioner filed a petition for guardianship because the respondent refused
medication for his psychotic disorder. See RSA 464-A:4 (2004). At trial, only
the petitioner and the respondent testified. The petitioner offered no expert
medical evidence in support of his petition. The court found the respondent to
be incapacitated and that a guardianship was necessary.
The respondent first argues that the evidence was insufficient to support
the probate court’s findings of incapacity and need for a guardianship. The
findings of fact of the probate court are final unless they are so plainly
erroneous that they could not be reasonably made. In re Guardianship of E.L.,
154 N.H. 292, 296 (2006); RSA 567-A:4 (2007). Because the respondent
challenges the sufficiency of the evidence, our task is to review the record to
determine whether it supports the probate court’s finding that the petitioner
proved the statutory components required for guardianship beyond a
reasonable doubt. See In re Guardianship of G.S., 157 N.H. 470, 473-74
(2008).
The respondent argues that the evidence submitted at the guardianship
hearing was insufficient to establish his incapacity because the petitioner failed
to introduce expert medical evidence. Incapacity is a legal, not a medical,
disability. See RSA 464-A:2, XI (2004). It refers to any person who has
suffered, is suffering, or is likely to suffer substantial harm due to an inability
to provide for his personal needs for food, clothing, shelter, health care or
safety. See id.; In re Guardianship of G.S., 157 N.H. at 473. There is a legal
presumption of capacity, and the petitioner bears the burden of proving
incapacity beyond a reasonable doubt by competent evidence. See RSA 464-
A:8, IV (2004). The petitioner testified that the respondent refused to take
medication recommended by his psychiatrist to treat a psychiatric disorder.
He further testified that the respondent had lost a lot of weight, was unable to
continue in his graduate school program, and was having behavioral problems,
culminating in his involuntary emergency admission to the New Hampshire
Hospital. He also introduced a January 14, 2009 notice of the decision of the
Merrimack County Probate Court in which the court found that the respondent
suffers from a psychotic disorder and ordered him to be admitted to the
hospital for a period not to exceed one year with a conditional discharge as
soon as appropriate. See RSA 135-C:34, :50 (2005). Such evidence supports
the conclusion, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the respondent is likely to
suffer substantial harm due to his inability to provide for his health care. See
RSA 464-A:2, XI. Accordingly, we conclude that the record supports the
probate court’s finding of incapacity.
The respondent next argues that since his hospitalization, he has
received adequate nutrition, has not committed any acts of violence, and has
cooperated with medical professionals. Therefore, he argues, the record does
not establish the need for a guardianship. Although the evidence shows that
the respondent’s condition has improved as a result of his hospitalization, the
record is sufficient to support the conclusion that the respondent will likely
discontinue his medication, resulting in harm to himself and possibly others, if
2
a guardian is not appointed. See In re Guardianship of E.L., 154 N.H. at 299
(“E.L.’s limited understanding of his mental illness, as well as his failure to
appreciate and consider the risks of interrupting a medication regime that has
effectively treated it, supports the finding that his ability to exercise sound
judgment about his medical treatment remains meaningfully impaired”).
Finally, the respondent argues that the petitioner failed to prove that no
available alternative resources exist, and that a guardianship is the least
restrictive form of intervention. See In re Guardianship of G.S., 157 N.H. at
476. We have held that when an individual has shown limited insight into his
mental illness and has impaired judgment regarding his need for medication,
the individual is not an appropriate candidate for a springing guardianship or a
health care power of attorney. See id.; see also In re Guardianship of E.L., 154
N.H. at 303. Upon this record, we conclude that it was not unreasonable for
the probate court to have found beyond a reasonable doubt that no less
restrictive alternative than a guardianship exists.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
3