THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-811
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
STEVEN MERRILL
Argued: May 4, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Jeffco & Starbranch, of Portsmouth (Harry N. Starbranch, Jr. on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from an order of the
Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) granting defendant Steven Merrill’s request to find
him not chargeable with a probation violation. See Sup. Ct. R. 8. We reverse
and remand.
The record supports the following. On December 7, 2007, the defendant
pleaded guilty in the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) to two counts of possession
of child pornography. See RSA 649-A:3 (2007). The trial court sentenced him
to a term in the Rockingham County House of Corrections and three years
probation “upon the usual terms of probation and any special terms of
probation determined by the Probation/Parole Officer.” The trial court
ordered the defendant “to participate meaningfully [in] and complete any
counseling, treatment and educational programs as directed by the
correctional authority or Probation/Parole Officer.” The trial court added
specific terms of probation requiring the defendant “to obtain [a] sex offender
evaluation within 60 days of release and follow all recommended treatment,”
and ordered that he “have no unsupervised contact with children under the
age of sixteen.”
Following his release from the house of corrections in April 2008, the
defendant met with a probation officer, and reviewed and signed a Terms and
Conditions of Adult Probation form. In addition to the specific conditions of
probation imposed by the trial court, the probation officer added a condition
that the defendant have “no computer access,” except for work purposes.
Presumably the probation officer added this condition because during the
investigation into the underlying offense, the defendant commented that he
wanted to view child pornography only after viewing adult pornography on his
computer.
In December 2008, two probation officers conducted a random visit and
inspection of the defendant’s home. They found a desktop computer and
seized it. The defendant was arrested after a preliminary forensics
examination of the computer revealed that it contained images of child
pornography. One of the probation officers filed a violation of probation
against the defendant, alleging that he had violated several conditions of his
probation, including the condition that he have no computer access.
The defendant moved for a finding of not chargeable on the violation of
the computer access condition, arguing that probation officers do not have
the authority “to impose additional terms of probation.” The trial court
granted the defendant’s request, and the State moved for an interlocutory
appeal. The trial court granted the State’s request and certified the following
questions:
A. Whether probation officers have the authority to impose
additional conditions of probation that are reasonably and
particularly related to the goals of probation where that authority
is specifically recognized in Superior Court Rule 107 and impliedly
recognized in RSA 504-A:12, which gives probation officers the
power and duty to take actions required to assist probationers in
establishing law-abiding lives, and whether such authority violated
the separation of powers clause of the New Hampshire
constitution.
2
B. Whether defendants are given sufficient notice under the Due
Process Clause of the New Hampshire Constitution that the
sentencing court may later modify their sentences or impose
additional punishment if they violate special conditions of
probation imposed after sentencing by their probation officers
where Rule 107, sentencing courts’ statements, and mittimuses
give defendants notice that probation officers may later impose
special conditions of probation, and where the Terms And
Conditions Of Probation forms signed by defendants give them
actual notice of those special conditions.
As a preliminary matter, the State argues that we should review these
questions under a plain error standard because the defendant failed to object
to the imposition of the condition of probation in a timely manner.
Specifically, the State argues that the defendant failed to challenge the
computer access condition in superior court at the time the probation officer
imposed it. We require parties to make a contemporaneous objection to afford
the trial court an opportunity to rule upon issues and correct errors. See
State v. Brum, 155 N.H. 408, 417 (2007). Here, the trial court ruled on the
issue when it was first presented with it. The State cites no cases in which we
have required a defendant to object to a condition of probation at the time the
probation officer reviews the Terms and Conditions of Adult Probation form.
We see no reason to do so here, and, therefore, conclude that the questions
are properly before us on review.
We turn now to the first certified question. Relying upon the language of
RSA 504-A:12 (2010), the defendant argues that because only the trial court
has the authority to impose additional conditions of probation, allowing
probation officers to do so violates the Separation of Powers Clause of the
State Constitution. The State counters that Superior Court Rule 107(l) and
RSA 504-A:12 grant probation officers the authority to impose special
conditions of probation. The State also argues that sentencing is a shared
function of the judicial, executive, and legislative branches.
We first address the defendant’s argument that probation officers do not
have the authority to impose additional conditions on probation. This requires
us to interpret RSA chapter 504-A, RSA 651:2, I, and Superior Court Rule
107. The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. State v. Kousounadis, 159 N.H. 413, 423 (2009). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. We first look
to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret a statute in the
context of the overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id.
RSA 651:2, I (2007) provides that persons convicted of felony offenses
3
“may be sentenced to . . . probation.” RSA 651:2, V(a) further provides that
“[a] person may be placed on probation if the court finds that such person is
in need of the supervision and guidance that the probation service can provide
under such conditions as the court may impose.”
RSA 504-A:12 delineates the powers and duties of probation and parole
officers.
II. To take charge of and to provide supervision to persons placed
on probation, parole, or lifetime supervision, attempting to assist
them in establishing law-abiding lives while monitoring their
behavior through office, home, work, and other contacts to insure
that they comply with their probation, parole, or lifetime
supervision conditions.
III. To report promptly to the appropriate court or the parole
board violations of probation or parole conditions which are
required by statute, the parole board, or the court or which, in the
opinion of the officer, are serious enough to warrant consideration
by the authority authorizing probation or parole. Such reports
shall include recommendations as to any actions which the officer
believes to be appropriate.
“Probation conditions” are those “restrictions and limitations established by
the court for the conduct and behavior of a probationer.” RSA 504-A:1, VII.
Superior Court Rule 107 sets forth the terms and conditions of
probation, and provides that probationers shall comply with “any other,
special conditions as may be imposed by the Court, the parole board or the
probation or parole officer.” Super. Ct. R. 107(l). This rule contemplates that
probation officers may set probation conditions, in addition to the standard
ones which probationers must follow.
The statutory language indicates the legislature has given “the court”
the authority to establish probation conditions. Here, the mittimus states that
the defendant is to be placed on probation upon “any special terms of
probation determined by the Probation/Parole officer.” Thus, the sentencing
court in effect imposed the computer access condition, and it is a “probation
condition” as defined by RSA 504-A:1, VII. Therefore, we reject the
defendant’s argument and conclude that the probation officer had the
authority to impose additional conditions on probation.
We next address the defendant’s argument that the addition of a
probation condition by a probation officer violates the separation of powers
guaranteed by Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution because the
executive branch is encroaching upon the judiciary’s role in sentencing. The
4
State counters that this does not violate the separation of powers and any
delegation by the judiciary is lawful.
The separation of powers among the legislative, executive and judicial
branches of government is an important part of its constitutional fabric.
Duquette v. Warden, N.H. State Prison, 154 N.H. 737, 746 (2007). Part I,
Article 37 of the State Constitution provides, in pertinent part: “In the
government of this state, the three essential powers thereof, to wit, the
legislative, executive, and judicial, ought to be kept as separate from, and
independent of each other, as the nature of a free government will admit.” We
have recognized, however, that the three branches of government, while
distinct, must “move in concert” whenever possible, as the practical and
efficient operation of government is not served by the erection of “impenetrable
barriers between the branches.” Petition of N.H. Bar Assoc., 151 N.H. 112,
116 (2004) (quotation omitted). The doctrine of separation of powers is
violated only when one branch usurps an essential power of another.
Duquette, 154 N.H. at 747. When the actions of one branch of government
defeat or materially impair the inherent functions of another branch, such
actions are unconstitutional. N.H. Bar Assoc., 151 N.H. at 116.
Although sentencing is an exclusively judicial function, Bussiere v.
Cunningham, Warden, 132 N.H. 747, 755 (1990), the executive and legislative
branches participate in the sentencing process. For example, the legislature
may constrict the independent exercise of judicial discretion in sentencing by
imposing mandatory sentences or circumscribing the court’s power to suspend
a sentence. Duquette, 154 N.H. at 747; State v. Dean, 115 N.H. 520, 523
(1975). The executive branch can offer sentencing recommendations and
enforces sentences imposed by the courts. See, e.g., RSA 504-A:12, I, VII.
Here, the executive branch assists the judiciary, and does not usurp or
detract from the power of the courts. Cf. N.H. Bar Assoc., 151 N.H. at 118.
The trial court retains the power to sentence defendants, and although the
executive branch may be authorized by the court to impose conditions of
probation, the judiciary retains the ultimate authority to review those
conditions and to vacate them if they are unreasonable. Thus, the separation
of powers is not violated by the judiciary’s delegation of authority to probation
officers to impose conditions of probation.
Moreover, we have recognized that probation officers need to “have a
thorough understanding of the [probationer] and his environment, including
his personal habits, his relationships with other persons, and what he is doing,
both at home and outside it,” and that “[i]t is equally important that this
information be kept up to date.” State v. Zeta Chi Fraternity, 142 N.H. 16, 29,
cert. denied, 522 U.S. 995 (1997). Probation officers, however, do not have
unlimited authority in this area, as conditions of probation must “further the
5
rehabilitation or supervision of the defendant.” Id. at 30. Here, the defendant
told police officers that his urges to view child pornography always happen
when he is at the computer looking at adult pornography. Therefore, the
condition the probation officer imposed was reasonable because it was
“essential to ensure the effective rehabilitation and supervision of the
defendant.” Id. at 31.
We now turn to the second certified question. We first consider the
arguments under the State Constitution, using federal cases only to aid in our
analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). The defendant argues
that the additional probation condition prohibiting him from using a computer
except for work purposes violated his due process rights because it was not
imposed at the sentencing hearing. Due process requires a sentencing court to
clearly state at the time of sentencing, in plain and certain terms, what
punishment it is imposing, the extent to which the court retains discretion to
impose punishment at a later date, and under what conditions the sentence
may be modified. State v. LeCouffe, 152 N.H. 148, 152 (2005). The sentencing
order must clearly communicate to the defendant the exact nature of the
sentence. Id.
Here, the imposition of the condition did not violate the defendant’s due
process rights. The trial court sentenced the defendant to three years of
probation “upon the usual terms of probation and any special terms of
probation determined by the [probation officer].” Because the defendant was
aware at the time of his sentencing that he was to abide by the conditions of
probation established by his probation officer, his due process rights were not
violated. See LeCouffe, 152 N.H. at 152.
The Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection than
does the State Constitution under these circumstances. United States v. Gallo,
20 F.3d 7, 12 (1st Cir. 1994). Accordingly, we reach the same result under the
Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6