THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2009-649
DONALD KIERSTEAD & a.
v.
STATE FARM FIRE AND CASUALTY COMPANY
Argued: March 31, 2010
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2010
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (W. Michael Dunn
and Karyl Roberts Martin on the brief, and Mr. Dunn orally), for the
petitioners.
Bouchard, Kleinman & Wright, P.A., of Hampton (Shenanne R. Tucker
and Kenneth G. Bouchard on the brief, and Ms. Tucker orally), for the
respondent.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Donald and Marilyn Kierstead,
appeal an order of the Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) dismissing their petition
for declaratory judgment as untimely. We affirm.
The following facts appear in the record. The petitioners were insured
under a policy issued by the respondent, State Farm Fire and Casualty
Company (State Farm). On November 20, 2007, one week after the policy
became effective, the petitioners’ residence, which State Farm insured, suffered
“complete fire damage.” On December 12, 2007, State Farm issued a
reservation of rights letter to the petitioners’ attorney, which stated that there
was “a question as to whether [State Farm] is obligated under the . . . policy”
for the petitioners’ loss because “[i]t is questionable whether [the petitioners]
have cooperated with [State Farm] in [its] investigation of th[eir] claim.” This
letter explained, in detail, the duties imposed upon the petitioners following a
loss, including the duty to submit to State Farm, within sixty days after the
loss, a signed, sworn proof of loss, and to cooperate fully with State Farm’s
investigation. The reservation of rights letter also stated: “No action shall be
brought unless there has been compliance with the policy provisions. The
action must be started within one year after the date of loss or damage.”
Also on December 12, 2007, State Farm sent a demand that the
petitioners submit a sworn proof of loss, as required by their policy. The
demand letter explained that State Farm was handling the petitioners’ claim
“under a Reservation of Rights” and stated: “Pursuant to New Hampshire Law
(RSA 407:15) any action against [State Farm] will be forever barred by law if
your writ is not served on the company within 12 months of the date of this
notice.”
On December 20, 2007, State Farm sent each petitioner a letter, which
explained that State Farm was investigating the petitioners’ claim under a
reservation of rights and which, like the December 12, 2007 letter, stated:
“Pursuant to New Hampshire Law (RSA 407:15) any action against [State Farm]
will be forever barred by law if your writ is not served on the company within
12 months of the date of this notice.”
On April 30, 2008, the petitioners filed a written complaint with the New
Hampshire Insurance Department about State Farm’s processing of their
claim, asserting that State Farm had failed to provide a status report since
February 2008, and asking the department to investigate how long State Farm
expected its investigation to take, whether additional information was required,
and “whether or not [State Farm] intend[s] to pay the claim or deny it.” The
petitioners wrote that they had “complied with everything that [State Farm had]
. . . asked of [them].”
State Farm responded to the complaint in a May 14, 2008 letter
explaining that the petitioners’ claim had been referred to the special
investigative unit “due to a number of suspicious loss indicators” and that,
despite repeated attempts, the petitioners had not fully cooperated with State
Farm’s investigation. State Farm explained that the petitioners had “canceled
two scheduled appointments” and that, when they informed State Farm that
they had retained counsel, State Farm “attempted to schedule the interview
2
through their attorney without success.” State Farm explained that after the
interviews were finally conducted in February 2008, it had asked the
petitioners to submit certain additional documentation, which they had failed
to do. The insurance department forwarded this letter to the petitioners on
May 28, 2008.
On June 24, 2008, State Farm acknowledged that it had received the
petitioners’ proof of loss and informed the petitioners that it neither accepted
nor rejected it. State Farm informed the petitioners in July 2008 that it was
still investigating their claim to determine its validity.
On September 2, 2008, State Farm notified Donald Kierstead that it had
questions about whether it was obligated on the claim because the petitioners
may not have cooperated, the loss may not have been accidental, and the
petitioners may have committed fraud. State Farm notified the petitioners
verbally on September 11, 2008, and in writing on September 15, 2008, that it
had decided to deny coverage for the claim because: (1) the fire was
intentionally set; (2) the petitioners failed to cooperate with the investigation;
and (3) they violated the fraud provisions of the insurance policy. On or about
January 16, 2009, the petitioners filed the instant petition for declaratory
judgment. State Farm moved to dismiss the petition, which the trial court
granted, and this appeal followed.
In reviewing a trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our task is to
determine whether the allegations in the petition are reasonably susceptible of
a construction that would permit recovery. Berry v. Watchtower Bible & Tract
Soc., 152 N.H. 407, 410 (2005). We assume all facts pleaded in the petition to
be true and construe all reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in the
petitioners’ favor. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests the
facts in the petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations constitute
a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant the motion to
dismiss. In the Matter of Lemieux & Lemieux, 157 N.H. 370, 373 (2008).
The petitioners first argue that the trial court erred by ruling that their
petition was untimely pursuant to RSA chapter 407. In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed
in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Zorn v. Demetri, 158 N.H.
437, 438 (2009). We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the context of
the overall statutory scheme. Appeal of Ashland Elec. Dept., 141 N.H. 336,
340 (1996). Our analysis must start with consideration of the plain meaning of
the relevant statutes, construing them, where reasonably possible, to effectuate
their underlying policies. Nashua School Dist. v. State, 140 N.H. 457, 458
(1995). Insofar as reasonably possible, we will construe the various statutory
provisions harmoniously. Id.
3
According to its title, RSA chapter 407 governs fire insurance contracts
and suits thereon. Because the parties do not appear to dispute that the
petitioners’ policy was a fire insurance contract within the meaning of RSA
chapter 407, we will assume, without deciding, that this is the case.
RSA 407:2 (2006) requires that all fire insurance policies “made, issued
or delivered” in this state conform “to all the provisions of the policy form”
found in RSA 407:22 (Supp. 2009). See Forbes Farm P’ship v. Farm Family
Mut. Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 200, 202 (2001); Janvrin v. Union Mut. Ins. Co., 128
N.H. 555, 556 (1987). The standard policy form set forth in RSA 407:22
contains a provision entitled “Suit,” which provides: “No suit or action on this
policy for the recovery of any claim shall be sustainable in any court of law or
equity unless the requirements of this policy shall have been complied with,
and unless commenced within 12 months next after inception of the loss.” The
petitioners’ State Farm policy contained a similarly worded provision, which
stated: “No action can be brought unless the policy provisions have been
complied with and the action is started within one year after the date of loss.”
RSA 407:15 (2006) provides: “Unless the [insurance] company shall
notify the insured that any action will be forever barred by law if his writ is not
served on the company within 12 months next after such notification, he may
bring his action at any time.” We have previously recognized that there is “an
apparent internal inconsistency in the statute between section 15 . . . and the
provision in the standard policy, section 22 . . . .” Hebert Manufacturing Co. v.
Northern Assurance Co., 108 N.H. 381, 385 (1967). In keeping with our
obligation to construe statutes that deal with similar subject matter “so that
they do not contradict each other, and so that they will lead to reasonable
results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the statute,” Nault v. N & L
Dev. Co., 146 N.H. 35, 38 (2001) (quotation omitted), we have construed RSA
407:22 as setting forth the twelve-month limitations period and RSA 407:15 as
requiring an insurer to give notice of this period before relying upon it. See
Janvrin, 128 N.H. at 556. We have explained that “RSA 407:15 and its
predecessors were enacted for the benefit of the insured.” Id. “The obvious
purpose of RSA 407:15 . . . is to allow the insurer to place a twelve month
limitation on actions against it only if it gives the insured specific notice of the
limitation.” Hebert Manufacturing Co., 108 N.H. at 384; see Maguire v.
Merrimack Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 125 N.H. 269, 271 (1984). “Such specific notice
removes the possibility of an insured failing to bring an action within the time
limit because he was ignorant of such a limitation.” Hebert Manufacturing Co.,
108 N.H. at 384.
We have also held that the twelve-month period begins to run from the
date of the notice, and not from the date of the insured’s loss as set forth in
RSA 407:22. Janvrin, 128 N.H. at 556 (“[I]n enacting RSA 407:15, the
legislature provided that the twelve months limitation period cannot begin to
4
run until the insurer gives the insured proper notice of the limitation.”); see
Hebert Manufacturing Co., 108 N.H. at 385-86 (“It seems probable that the
Legislature intended the new section 15 . . . to be controlling over the
provisions contained in the form of the policy set out in the new section 22.”).
In this case, it is immaterial whether the twelve-month period runs from either
date on which State Farm gave notice to the petitioners (December 12, 2007 or
December 20, 2007) or from the date of the fire (November 2007) because using
any of these dates, their January 2009 petition was untimely.
The petitioners argue that “[i]t is clear from the plain language of RSA
407:15 that the 12-month limitation period was not intended to apply to a
petition for declaratory judgment to determine coverage under a fire insurance
policy.” They assert that “[r]ead in context, this time limitation on commencing
an action against the insurer was only intended to apply to a writ for damages
arising from the insurer’s failure to pay a loss for which coverage was not
disputed.”
The petitioners’ reliance upon RSA 407:15 is misplaced because it is
merely the notice provision. Janvrin, 128 N.H. at 556. It does not provide the
limitation period. RSA 407:22 and the policy at issue provide the limitations
period, id., and pursuant to their plain language, this limitations period
governs both actions at law and equity.
RSA 407:22, by its express terms, pertains to “any claim” that is
“sustainable in any court of law or equity.” Thus, RSA 407:22 is not limited to
claims for damages, but also applies to claims in equity, such as declaratory
judgment petitions. Similarly, construing the language of the petitioners’ policy
“as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured based upon a
more than casual reading of the policy as a whole,” Bates v. Vt. Mut. Ins. Co.,
157 N.H. 391, 394 (2008) (quotation omitted), we conclude that the policy
provision limiting the time within which an insured may sue State Farm
applies to all possible legal actions, not just actions at law. The policy
provision specifically states that “[n]o action” may be brought unless brought
“within one year after the date of loss.” A reasonable insured would have
understood that this limitation applied to any possible action, not just an
action for damages.
The petitioners contend that had they brought their declaratory
judgment action before State Farm actually denied them coverage, it,
necessarily, would have been premature. To the contrary, the declaratory
judgment statute, RSA 491:22 (2010), “does not . . . require an actual denial of
coverage by an insurer before an insured [may] seek a determination of
coverage.” Binda v. Royal Ins. Co., 144 N.H. 613, 616 (2000). An insurer’s
denial of coverage is not necessary to render declaratory relief justiciable. Id.
at 617. “[T]he statute requires only that the insured know or be able to
5
reasonably discover facts which form the basis of a coverage dispute.” Id. at
616. The statute’s broad language embraces triggering circumstances that fall
short of an insurer’s actual denial of coverage. Id.
In Binda, for instance, we held that an insurer’s reservation of rights
letter sufficed to notify the insured of the facts giving rise to a coverage dispute
and, thus, to trigger the insured’s duty to file a declaratory judgment petition.
Id. at 616-18. Here, the record shows that the petitioners were sufficiently
alerted to the facts giving rise to a coverage dispute long before they filed their
declaratory judgment petition.
In State Farm’s original December 2007 reservation of rights letter, State
Farm notified the petitioners that there was “a question as to whether [State
Farm] is obligated under the . . . policy” for their loss because “[i]t is
questionable whether [the petitioners] have cooperated with [State Farm] in [its]
investigation of th[eir] claim.” The petitioners concede that this letter notified
them that “State Farm might deny coverage” if they “failed to cooperate with
the investigation.”
Subsequent correspondence made clear that State Farm continued to
have concerns about the petitioners’ level of cooperation with its investigation.
On May 5, 2008, for instance, State Farm notified the petitioners’ counsel that
the material they provided in lieu of completing the requisite proof of loss form
was incomplete and inadequate and that the failure to provide proof of loss
constituted a failure to comply with the policy.
Similarly, in its May 14, 2008 response to the petitioners’ insurance
department complaint, State Farm again cited concerns about their level of
cooperation, as well as about the fire’s origins. By no later than their receipt of
State Farm’s May 14, 2008 letter, the petitioners knew or reasonably could
have discovered the facts giving rise to a coverage dispute. By then, at the
latest, therefore, the petitioners’ duty to file their declaratory judgment petition
was triggered. See id. at 617.
The petitioners next argue that State Farm may not rely upon the twelve-
month limitations period because it failed to give proper notice as set forth in
RSA 407:15. The record shows that State Farm notified the petitioners, by
letter, on December 12, 2007, and December 20, 2007, that “[p]ursuant to New
Hampshire Law (RSA 407:15) any action against [State Farm] will be forever
barred by law if your writ is not served on the company within 12 months of
the date of this notice.” This notice complies with RSA 407:15.
The petitioners next assert that the twelve-month limitation was subject
to equitable tolling. Equitable tolling allows a party “to initiate an action
beyond the statute of limitations deadline,” but “is typically available only if the
6
claimant was prevented in some extraordinary way from exercising his or her
rights.” Portsmouth Country Club v. Town of Greenland, 152 N.H. 617, 623
(2005) (quotation omitted). Equitable tolling “applies principally if the plaintiff
is actively misled by the defendant about the cause of action.” Id. (quotation
omitted). Here, the petitioners failed to show that State Farm prevented them
“in some extraordinary way” from exercising their rights or misled them. See
Forbes Farm P’ship, 146 N.H. at 204. In fact, the record shows that State
Farm notified the petitioners on numerous occasions that it was investigating
their claim under a reservation of rights and that its investigation was not a
waiver of any right to deny them coverage.
The petitioners next contend that the twelve-month limitations period
should not have commenced to run until they knew or reasonably should have
discovered that a declaratory judgment action was necessary to determine
coverage under their policy. To support their argument, they rely upon cases
construing RSA 508:4, I (2010), which provides a three-year statute of
limitations period for “personal actions,” and which codifies the common law
discovery rule. See Kelleher v. Marvin Lumber & Cedar Co., 152 N.H. 813, 824
(2005). The petitioners, however, provide no authority for applying this rule to
the limitations periods set forth in RSA chapter 407, and we are aware of none.
We, therefore, decline to apply the “discovery rule” under the facts of this case.
Finally, the petitioners argue that the trial court should have ruled that
State Farm was equitably estopped from relying upon the twelve-month
limitations period. Estoppel precludes one party from asserting a position
contrary to one previously taken when it would be unfair to allow the party to
do so. Petition of Perkins, 147 N.H. 652, 655 (2002). A party claiming
equitable estoppel must prove: (1) a false representation or concealment of
material facts made with knowledge of those facts; (2) the party to whom the
representation was made must have been ignorant of the truth of the matter;
(3) the representation must have intentionally, or through culpable negligence,
induced the other party to rely upon it; and (4) the other party must have been
induced to rely upon the representation to his or her injury. Id. In addition,
the reliance upon the representation or concealment must have been
reasonable. Id. Reliance is unreasonable when the party asserting estoppel, at
the time of his or her reliance or at the time of the representation or
concealment, knew or should have known that the conduct or representation
was either improper, materially incorrect or misleading. Id. The petitioners
have not sufficiently alleged the elements required to sustain the application of
this theory. See Hanover Ins. Co. v. Grondin, 119 N.H. 394, 398 (1979).
Therefore, we hold that the trial court did not err by failing to apply it.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7