THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2009-309
IN THE MATTER OF
THEODORE J. GOODLANDER AND ELIZABETH M. TAMPOSI
Argued: September 8, 2010
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2011
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III on
the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Brennan, Caron, Lenehan & Iacopino, of Manchester (William E.
Brennan and Jaye L. Rancourt on the brief, and Mr. Brennan orally), for the
respondent.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Theodore J. Goodlander, appeals the final
divorce decree issued by the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.), which awarded him
alimony from the respondent, Elizabeth M. Tamposi, and a percentage of the
marital property. He argues that the trial court erred by: (1) finding that post-
divorce trust income that Tamposi may receive as a beneficiary of certain
family trusts is not marital property; (2) retroactively applying the Uniform
Trust Code (UTC), see RSA ch. 564-B (2007 & Supp. 2010); (3) using the wrong
legal standard to calculate alimony; (4) awarding a near equal division of the
parties’ non-trust assets; (5) awarding Tamposi 1.6 million dollars from the sale
of a family trust’s interest in the Boston Red Sox; and (6) allowing his adult
children to intervene in the divorce action. We affirm in part, vacate in part,
and remand.
I. Facts
The following facts are drawn from the record. The parties married on
January 25, 1982. Together they have three adult children. Prior to the
marriage, Tamposi worked for the Tamposi family business with her father,
Samuel Tamposi, Sr., and her five siblings. Goodlander worked in the
computer industry and was the owner of Cab Tech, Inc. (Cab Tech). During the
course of the marriage, Goodlander formed two additional companies, Storage
Computer Corporation (SCC), a publicly traded computer marketing and
manufacturing company, and Kristiania Corp. (Kristiania), a real estate holding
company. Ownership of the assets of Cab Tech, including all patents, was later
transferred to SCC. Goodlander gave each of the parties’ children a ten percent
share in SCC, while he maintained a twenty-five to thirty percent ownership
interest. Meanwhile, Tamposi left her position in the Tamposi family business
in 1989 to serve as the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs in
Washington D.C. In 1992, she ended her service in Washington D.C. and,
other than some consulting work, has not since been employed outside the
home.
That same year, Samuel Tamposi, Sr., established two trusts as part of a
comprehensive estate plan: the Samuel A. Tamposi, Sr. 1992 Trust, with
amendments (SAT Trust); and the Samuel A. Tamposi, Sr. 1994 Irrevocable
Trust. The trusts’ assets are worth approximately 72 million dollars and
consist primarily of real estate or entities that own and manage real estate. At
issue in this case is the SAT Trust. Sub-trusts were created for the benefit of
each sibling and his or her issue, to be funded by distributions from, and
governed by the terms of, the SAT Trust. A spendthrift provision of the SAT
Trust states that “[t]he interest of each beneficiary, and all payments of income
or principal to be made to or for any beneficiary, shall be free from interference
or control by any creditor or spouse (or divorced former spouse) of the
beneficiary.” Upon Samuel Tamposi, Sr.’s death in 1995, Tamposi and the
parties’ children became the beneficiaries of the Elizabeth Tamposi sub-trusts
(collectively, the EMT Trust).
Under the terms of the SAT Trust, each sub-trust, including the EMT
Trust, has a trustee with the discretion to pay “such amounts from the net
income and principal of the [sub-]trust and in such proportions among them as
the trustee considers necessary for [a beneficiary’s] education and maintenance
in health and reasonable comfort.” Tamposi and her children have been
receiving distributions from the EMT Trust since 1995.
2
In addition, Tamposi acquired certain minority interests in other real
estate entities during the course of the marriage, hereinafter referred to as the
“non-trust assets.” The non-trust assets are valued at approximately
$4,818,310. Income from the non-trust assets has been paid to Tamposi
according to her ownership interest in these entities.
Goodlander enjoyed success in his business endeavors during the first
twenty years of the parties’ marriage. However, beginning in 2003, the
computer industry experienced a market decline and Goodlander’s business
endeavors began to fail. Goodlander made efforts to revive his businesses,
including forfeiting his own salary. He has earned no income since 2003. By
2005, SCC stock had no value and was no longer publicly traded.
In an attempt to maintain the financial solvency of SCC, Goodlander
secretly withdrew, over a period of years, approximately $898,480 from his
children’s custodial accounts, for which he served as fiduciary and sole
custodian. He also secretly withdrew $80,000 from Tamposi’s personal bank
account with the use of a power of attorney granted to him for an unrelated
purpose. This money was lent to Kristiania, which lent it to SCC, in a failed
attempt to salvage the company.
In 2006, the parties separated and on May 16, 2007, Goodlander filed for
divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Although the parties’ children
originally intervened in this case in an attempt to protect their financial
interests, they withdrew their petition on the first day of trial. On January 21,
2009, following a six-day hearing, a divorce was granted on the basis of
irreconcilable differences.
In its final decree, the trial court awarded Tamposi the parties’ Gilford
home, as well as 49% of the non-trust assets. Goodlander was awarded 51% of
the non-trust assets. With respect to the EMT Trust, the trial court concluded
that “future distributions or the anticipated stream of income [from the EMT
Trust] are not a property interest subject to division, because under the terms
of this trust, any distribution is ‘a mere expectancy.’” As a result, the trial
court found that “Mr. Goodlander has no right to the corpus of the trusts, the
remainder, or beneficial interest. Other than the alimony that is awarded, he
has no right to any distribution from the SAT Trusts or the EMT Trust.”
As to alimony, the trial court concluded that under the provisions of the
UTC, Tamposi could not force a distribution from the EMT Trust to
accommodate an award of alimony unless it was to provide for “the most basic
food, shelter and medical needs” of her former spouse. Goodlander was
therefore awarded $50,000 per year in alimony to meet his “most basic needs,”
to be paid by the trustee of the EMT Trust to him directly. Goodlander appeals
3
the final divorce decree on several grounds. We address each of his arguments
in turn.
II. Trust Distributions as Marital Property
Goodlander first argues that the trial court erred in finding that any
post-divorce distributions from the EMT Trust are not marital property subject
to division. Specifically, he argues that Tamposi has a vested right in the SAT
Trust and, therefore, he is entitled to a portion of the future distributions she
receives through the EMT Trust. Therefore, he argues, the trial court erred in
concluding that Tamposi’s right to future distributions from the EMT Trust
rises only to the level of a “mere expectancy.” We disagree.
“[T]he trial court first determines, as a matter of law, what assets are
marital property under RSA 458:16-a, I, and thus subject to equitable
distribution, and then exercises its discretion to make an equitable distribution
of those assets.” In the Matter of Chamberlin & Chamberlin, 155 N.H. 13, 16
(2007). “Trial court determinations under RSA 458:16-a, I, are reviewed de
novo, while equitable divisions of property pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, II are
reviewed for an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id. Because Goodlander
challenges the ruling that future distributions of the EMT Trust are not marital
property, our review is de novo.
“[Marital] [p]roperty shall include all tangible and intangible property and
assets, real or personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to the
property is held in the name of either or both parties.” RSA 458:16-a, I (2004).
Here, the parties do not dispute that the corpus of the SAT Trust is not marital
property subject to division under the statute, as Tamposi has no right to
invade the trust corpus. See Chamberlin, 155 N.H. at 17 (“If neither the settlor
nor the settlor’s creditors may invade the corpus of an irrevocable trust, it
would be incongruous to count such a trust as a marital asset, interchangeable
with other assets upon which the parties freely may draw.”); see also RSA 564-
B:5-505 (a)(2). Nevertheless, Goodlander argues that because an independent
trustee is authorized to make distributions from the EMT Trust to Tamposi for
her “education, maintenance in health and reasonable comfort,” she has a
vested right to future distributions from the EMT Trust. In support of his
argument, Goodlander cites Chamberlin, in which we concluded that “the
marital interest subject to division is not the [trust corpus] itself but the
parties’ interest in the trust.” Chamberlin, 155 N.H. at 18 (quotation and
brackets omitted). While we agree that the parties’ interest in the trust is
paramount in determining whether the trust assets are marital property, we do
not agree that Tamposi’s interest in any future distributions of the EMT Trust
constitutes more than a mere expectancy.
4
“A perfect vested right can be no other than such as is not doubtful, or
depending on any contingency, but absolute, fixed and certain.” In the Matter
of Goldman & Elliott, 151 N.H. 770, 774 (2005) (quotation omitted).
[I]f a distribution to or for the benefit of a beneficiary is subject to
the exercise of the trustee’s discretion, whether or not the terms of
a trust include a standard to guide the trustee in making
distribution decisions, then the beneficiary’s interest is neither a
property interest nor an enforceable right, but a mere expectancy.
RSA 564-B:8-814(b).
Here, Tamposi’s hope for a discretionary distribution from the EMT Trust
is not a fixed, certain and absolute right. The terms of the SAT Trust state that
all assets of the SAT Trust are to be controlled and managed by investment
directors Samuel A. Tamposi, Jr. and Stephen A. Tamposi, Tamposi’s brothers.
The directors are given the powers of “management, control, handling,
financing, refinancing and structuring of any and all real estate interests,” as
well as “full power and authority to direct the retention or sale of all other
assets . . . included in the trust property.” Each sub-trust, including the EMT
Trust, is funded by distributions made from the SAT Trust by the investment
directors.
Testimony at the parties’ divorce hearing indicated that certain funds
generated from the SAT Trust assets are generally not reinvested; rather, the
practice of the investment directors has been to distribute such funds to the
sub-trusts once the balance of the “common account” of the SAT Trust reaches
approximately $50,000. Once funds have been distributed to the sub-trusts by
the investment directors, the trustee of each sub-trust has the discretion to
distribute those funds to the trust beneficiaries for their “education and
maintenance in health and reasonable comfort,” bearing in mind that he or she
has a fiduciary duty to all beneficiaries of the trust and must pay out taxes and
other expenses necessary to meet the trust’s financial obligations. A
beneficiary is thus twice removed from access to the trust assets – first, by the
investment directors’ discretion in making distributions to the sub-trusts, and
again by the trustee’s discretion to distribute any sub-trust funds to the
beneficiaries.
Samuel Tamposi, Jr. testified that beneficiaries have no authority to force
distributions by a trustee, and that any distributions are solely within the
trustee’s total authority and jurisdiction. Similarly, Attorney Joseph
McDonald, an expert on trusts and estates law, testified that the significance of
the third party trustee to the EMT Trust was that Tamposi “as a practical
matter, [has] no control to compel distributions.”
5
We further note that, in reviewing the language of the SAT Trust and its
sub-trusts in connection with a separate action initiated by Tamposi in probate
court, the probate court aptly noted:
That the trust instrument grants the trustee authority to distribute
principal and income is not a compelling argument for enabling the
trustee to issue mandates to or superintend the investment
directors. The investment directors make distributions to the
trustees that include income from investment assets as well as
proceeds from their sale. When cash is distributed to the sub-
trusts, it may be retained or distributed to the beneficiaries, in the
discretion of the trustee.
(Emphasis added.)
Nevertheless, Goodlander makes much of the following testimony of EMT
trustee Julie Shelton:
A. . . . The trustee may, from time to time, pay to or for
the benefit of [Tamposi], and [Tamposi’s] issue, from time to
time, living, or any one or more of them, such amounts from
the net income and principal of the trust, and in such
proportion among them, as the trustee considers necessary
for their education and maintenance and health and
reasonable comfort, taking into consideration the income
and cash resources known to the trustee to be available for
such purposes from the other source.
. . . .
Q. So is it your testimony you have unfettered discretion
to do whatever you want?
A. No, of course not.
This exchange does not support the proposition that Tamposi has control over
trust distributions. Shelton owes a fiduciary duty to all beneficiaries of the
trust. See RSA 564-B:8-802 (“A trustee shall administer, invest and manage
the trust and distribute the trust property solely in the interests of the
beneficiaries.”); RSA 564-B:8-803 (“If a trust has 2 or more beneficiaries, the
trustee shall act impartially in administering, investing, managing, and
distributing the trust property, giving due regard to the beneficiaries’ respective
interests.”); RSA 564-B:8-804 (“A trustee shall administer, invest, and manage
the trust and distribute the trust property as a prudent person would . . . .”);
RSA 564-B:8-810(a) (“A trustee shall keep adequate records of the
6
administration of the trust.”); RSA 564-B:8-811 (“A trustee shall take
reasonable steps to enforce claims of the trust and to defend claims against the
trust.”). Thus, while the trustee does not have unfettered discretion to do
whatever she wants with funds from the trust, she nonetheless possesses
discretion to distribute to the beneficiaries, or retain in the sub-trusts, funds
disbursed by the investment directors.
Because the trustee of the EMT Trust has the sole discretion to distribute
funds to the beneficiaries, including Tamposi, any interest Tamposi has in
future distributions fits squarely within the definition provided by the UTC for
a “mere expectancy.” RSA 564-B:8-814(b). That is, any distribution to or for
the benefit of Tamposi “is subject to the exercise of the trustee’s discretion,
whether or not the terms of a trust include a standard to guide the trustee in
making distribution decisions.” Id. Accordingly, Tamposi’s interest in future
distributions of the EMT Trust “is neither a property interest nor an
enforceable right, but a mere expectancy.” Id.
Goodlander argues that under Tuttle v. New Hampshire Medical
Malpractice Joint Underwriting Assoc., 159 N.H. 627 (2010), Tamposi’s
beneficial interest in the SAT Trust is equivalent to a vested right. We find
Tuttle distinguishable. In Tuttle, policyholders of the Joint Underwriting
Association (JUA) alleged that pursuant to their contracts with the JUA and
certain administrative rules, they had a vested right in any excess surplus
premiums collected by the JUA. Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 634. In concluding that
the petitioners did have such a vested right, we emphasized that “the JUA
regulations, rather than conferring discretion, mandate one or both of two
options for application of any excess surplus, both of which inure to the
policyholders’ direct financial benefit.” Id. at 646 (emphasis added). Thus, it
was only under those limited circumstances that we concluded a beneficial
interest may constitute a vested property right, subject to protection. Id. at
644-45.
Here, it is precisely because there is no mandated financial benefit to
Tamposi from the EMT Trust that her interest is not vested. Because the
trustee of the EMT Trust has the discretion to retain funds within the sub-trust
or to distribute funds for the benefit of the other beneficiaries, none of the
beneficiaries possess a vested interest in future trust distributions. Tamposi is
not empowered to direct disbursement of EMT Trust funds for her benefit.
Goodlander asserts in passing that Tamposi has the right to appoint
herself as trustee and to directly access the EMT Trust assets. The record,
however, does not support this assertion. The trust instrument does not
indicate Tamposi may appoint herself as trustee. Further, while it is
undisputed that she won the right, via litigation against the investment
7
directors, to appoint a trustee of her choice for the EMT Trust, the undisputed
testimony of expert witness Attorney McDonald was as follows:
And then we had this dust up in the probate court followed by a
settlement in 2006 which effectively revoked certain provisions of
the trust, and that gave [Tamposi] the ability to appoint her own
trustee and that’s where Julie [Shelton] came into the picture, and
also gave her a very common power in trust documents to remove
and replace that trustee as well.
But that trustee is restricted. [Tamposi’s] power is restricted to
a successor trustee that is not [Tamposi] herself, [or] any of
[Tamposi’s descendants]. It’s got to be a so-called disinterested
trustee, no beneficial interest in the trust estate, and it can’t be
anyone related or subordinate to [Tamposi] or any other
beneficiary.
Thus, Tamposi may not simply appoint herself as trustee in order to access the
EMT Trust funds.
III. Retroactive Application of the UTC Language
Goodlander argues alternatively that the language of the UTC, which
defines a distribution subject to a trustee’s discretion as a mere expectancy,
should not be applied retroactively in this case because its application is highly
injurious to him. See RSA 564-B:8-814(b). We do not find this argument
persuasive.
Here, the UTC specifically states that “this chapter applies to all trusts
created before, on, or after its effective date,” and that “this chapter applies to
all judicial proceedings concerning trusts commenced on or after its effective
date.” RSA 564-B:11-1104(a)(1)-(2). The provision containing the “mere
expectancy” language at issue, RSA 564-B:8-814(b), became effective
September 9, 2008. Thus, the question here is whether the application of the
UTC provisions to the SAT and EMT trusts, which were created before
September 9, 2008, is prohibited.
Part I, Article 23 of the New Hampshire Constitution states that
“[r]etrospective laws are highly injurious, oppressive, and unjust. No such
laws, therefore, should be made, either for the decision of civil causes, or the
punishment of offenses.” In Tuttle, we noted that “every statute which takes
away or impairs vested rights, acquired under existing laws, or creates a new
obligation, imposes a new duty, or attaches a new disability, in respect to
transactions or considerations already past, must be deemed retrospective.”
Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 641 (quotation omitted). As we have previously stated:
8
Unless otherwise inhibited by either the State or Federal
Constitutions, the Legislature may change existing laws, both
statutory or common, at its pleasure, but in so doing, it may not
deprive a person of a property right theretofore acquired under
existing law. Those rights are designated as vested rights, and to
be vested, a right must be more than a mere expectation based on
an anticipation of the continuance of existing law; it must have
become a title, legal or equitable, to the present or future
enforcement of a demand, or a legal exemption from the demand of
another. If, before a right becomes vested in a person, the law
upon which it is based is repealed, that particular person no longer
has a remedy to enforce his claim, and if final relief has not been
granted to him on the enforcement of a demand before such repeal,
then no relief can be granted on his demand after the effective date
of the repeal.
Goldman, 151 N.H. at 774 (quotation omitted). Therefore, retroactive
application of a new law is prohibited only if it affects an individual’s
substantive, vested rights. Id. at 772.
In order to discern whether Goodlander had a vested right prior to the
2008 enactment of RSA 564-B:8-814, we must look to the language of the prior
statute. “We are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in
the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H.
448, 451 (2005). “When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the
plain and ordinary meaning to the words used.” Bennett v. Town of
Hampstead, 157 N.H. 477, 483 (2008). “We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language that the legislature did not see fit to include.” Farmington
Teachers, 158 N.H. at 456 (quotation omitted).
Here, an analysis of the previous version of RSA 564-B:8-814 does not
lead us to conclude that Tamposi’s beneficial interest in the EMT Trust is
equivalent to a vested right. See RSA 564-B:8-814 (2007). Prior to the
adoption of the “mere expectancy” language in 2008, the relevant portion of
RSA 564-B:8-814 read as follows:
(a) Notwithstanding the breadth of discretion granted to a
trustee in the terms of the trust, including the use of such terms
as “absolute,” “sole,” or “uncontrolled,” the trustee shall exercise a
discretionary power in good faith and in accordance with the terms
and purposes of the trust and the interests of the beneficiaries.
(b) [U]nless the terms of the trust expressly indicate that a
rule in this subsection does not apply:
9
(1) A person other than a settlor who is a beneficiary and
trustee of a trust that confers on the trustee a power to make
discretionary distributions to or for the trustee’s personal
benefit may exercise the power only in accordance with an
ascertainable standard; and
(2) a trustee may not exercise a power to make
discretionary distributions to satisfy a legal obligation of
support that the trustee personally owes another person.
This language gives no indication that a beneficial interest in a trust is
equivalent to a vested interest. Indeed, it merely indicates that commonly used
terms for the discretionary power of a trustee, such as “absolute,” “sole,” and
“uncontrolled,” nonetheless require a trustee to act in accordance with the
terms of the trust and in the interests of the beneficiaries. Here, the terms of
the trust provide that a trustee, who is not also a beneficiary, has the
discretion to distribute sub-trust funds to the beneficiaries for their “education
and maintenance in health and reasonable comfort,” bearing in mind that the
trustee has a fiduciary duty to all beneficiaries of the trust. However, as noted
above, Tamposi is not empowered to direct the funds from the EMT Trust for
her benefit because, under the terms of the SAT Trust, the EMT trustee is
permitted the discretion to retain funds within the sub-trust or to distribute
funds for the benefit of any one beneficiary, taking into account what is in the
best interests of all the beneficiaries. Thus, Tamposi’s interest in future trust
distributions was not vested prior to the 2008 enactment of RSA 564-B:8-
814(b) because the previous statute did not grant her legal title to future
distributions, or the right to force distributions for her own benefit. See
Goldman, 151 N.H. at 774.
As we have determined that Tamposi, as a beneficiary, has no vested
right to the future distribution of funds from the EMT Trust, Goodlander,
whose status is that of a non-beneficiary spouse, does not possess a vested,
substantive right to any future distributions of the EMT Trust. Accordingly,
the trial court did not err in retroactively applying the provisions of the UTC.
See RSA 564-B:8-814(b).
IV. Alimony Standard
Goodlander next argues that the trial court erred in determining alimony
based upon the UTC in contravention of the alimony provisions of RSA 458:19
(Supp. 2010). See RSA 564:5-503 (b)(2). We hold that the trial court erred in
its application of the controlling law.
10
RSA 458:19 sets forth the standards for an award of alimony. It
provides:
Upon motion of either party for alimony payments, the court shall
make orders for the payment of alimony to the party in need of
alimony . . . [if] the court finds that:
(a) The party in need lacks sufficient income, property, or
both, including property apportioned in accordance with RSA
458:16-a [regarding property division], to provide for such
party’s reasonable needs, taking into account the style of
living to which the parties have become accustomed during
the marriage; and
(b) The party from whom alimony is sought is able to meet
reasonable needs while meeting those of the party seeking
alimony, taking into account the style of living to which the
parties have become accustomed during the marriage; and
(c) The party in need is unable to be self-supporting
through appropriate employment at a standard of living that
meets reasonable needs . . . .
RSA 458:19, I (Supp. 2010). RSA 458:19, IV(b) further provides:
In determining the amount of alimony, the court shall consider the
length of the marriage; the age, health, social or economic status,
occupation, amount and sources of income, the property awarded
under RSA 458:16-a, vocational skills, employability, estate,
liabilities, and needs of each of the parties; the opportunity of each
for future acquisition of capital assets and income; the fault of
either party as defined in RSA 458:16-a, II(l); and the federal tax
consequences of the order.
The UTC’s provisions are applicable only to a limited, specified extent. In
general:
A beneficiary may not transfer an interest in a trust in violation of
a valid spendthrift provision and, except as otherwise provided
[herein], a creditor or assignee of the beneficiary may not reach the
interest or a distribution by the trustee before its receipt by the
beneficiary.
RSA 564-B:5-502(c). However, the UTC sets forth a limited exception to this
general rule. A spendthrift provision is unenforceable against:
11
a beneficiary’s spouse or former spouse who has a judgment or
court order against the beneficiary for alimony but only for and to
the extent that such judgment or court order expressly specifies
the alimony amount attributable to the most basic food, shelter
and medical needs of the spouse or former spouse . . . .
RSA 564-B:5-503(b)(2). The UTC further states:
To the extent a trustee has not complied with a standard of
distribution or has abused a discretion . . . the court shall direct
the trustee to pay to the . . . former spouse such amount as is
equitable under the circumstances but not more than the amount
the trustee would have been required to distribute to or for the
benefit of the beneficiary had the trustee complied with the
standard or not abused the discretion and with respect to alimony,
only for and to the extent that the judgment or court order
expressly specifies the alimony amount attributable to the most
basic food, shelter, and medical needs of the spouse or former
spouse.
RSA 564-B:5-504(c)(2).
Goodlander argues that for the trial court to have applied the UTC “most
basic needs” provision, it must have concluded that it repealed, either
expressly or by implication, the provisions of RSA 458:19. We disagree with
this assertion and conclude that a plain reading of the statutes evinces that
RSA 458:19 is the standard for determining alimony, while the UTC restricts
the amount of alimony that may be paid from funds of an irrevocable trust
containing a spendthrift provision. See RSA 564-B:5-503(b)(2). The statutory
provisions are therefore not conflicting; but for the UTC’s limited exception that
allows access to a trust’s funds to meet a former spouse’s basic needs, a trust
beneficiary’s interest would not be reachable by that former spouse prior to
receipt by the beneficiary. Thus, the UTC protects, but only to a limited extent,
a trust beneficiary's former spouse who has been awarded alimony under the
standard set forth in RSA 458:19.
Here, it is undisputed that Goodlander has generated no steady income
since 2003 and that Tamposi has not been steadily employed since 1992.
Moreover, as between the parties, Goodlander was awarded fifty-one percent of
the income-generating non-trust assets, to offset the award of the marital home
to Tamposi. Notwithstanding the property division, however, the trial court
found Goodlander was “entitled to alimony based on the current income
available to him for support.” In so finding, the trial court found that an award
of alimony was appropriate because “Mr. Goodlander has no funds with which
to support himself in even a modest lifestyle, which is not what the parties
12
enjoyed during the marriage,” while Tamposi “has benefited from some
distributions from the EMT Trusts.”
Nevertheless, the trial court awarded Goodlander alimony contingent
upon Tamposi receiving distributions from the EMT Trust, and then only to
meet his “most basic needs.” Specifically, the trial court determined, “Mr.
Goodlander is awarded $50,000 per year in alimony to meet his ‘most basic
needs’ . . . . Ms. Tamposi shall pay him fifty percent of any distribution she
receives from the EMT Trusts up to $50,000 per calendar year, which the EMT
Trust trustee shall pay to him directly.”
While the trial court expressly specified the amount of alimony it found
attributable to Goodlander’s most basic needs, it erred in failing to first
conduct the requisite analysis of Goodlander’s “reasonable needs” under RSA
458:19, as well as Tamposi’s ability to meet those needs. Rather than making
findings as to Goodlander’s reasonable needs, the trial court made findings
only as to his “most basic needs,” and then made payment of that amount
contingent on Tamposi’s receipt of trust distributions. This was error. Under
the provisions of the UTC, a former spouse is entitled to seek a trust
distribution to meet his or her most basic needs regardless of whether a trustee
makes a distribution to the beneficiary. See RSA 564-B:5-503(b)(2); RSA 564-
B:5-504(c)(2). Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s alimony order and
remand to the trial court to determine an award of alimony consistent with this
opinion.
V. Division of Assets Outside the Trusts
Goodlander further argues that the trial court should have taken into
account Tamposi’s interest in the EMT Trust when dividing the non-trust
assets and awarded him all of the parties’ non-trust assets to offset the interest
Tamposi has in the EMT Trust that cannot be assigned to him. In support of
this argument, Goodlander cites Lawlor & Lawlor, 123 N.H. 163 (1983), and In
the Matter of Hampers & Hampers, 154 N.H. 275 (2006), for the proposition
that assets outside of the marital property that are held by one party are
properly considered by the trial court in dividing the marital property. We find
both Lawlor and Hampers distinguishable.
In Lawlor, the husband’s vested, though undistributed, legacy under a
deceased parent’s will was properly considered by the trial court in dividing the
parties’ marital assets. Lawlor, 123 N.H. at 165-66. As noted above, Tamposi’s
interest in any future distributions from the EMT Trust is only a mere
expectancy. Similarly, in Hampers, the husband had power over a revocable
trust worth an estimated 15 million dollars, which he created during the
course of the marriage. Hampers, 154 N.H. at 278. In dividing the parties’
13
marital assets, the trial court properly took into account the husband’s interest
in the trust, which was plainly more than a mere expectancy. Id. at 285-86.
“As we afford trial courts broad discretion in determining matters of
property distribution in fashioning a final divorce decree, we will not overturn
the trial court’s decision absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.” Id. at
285. “If the court’s findings can reasonably be made on the evidence
presented, they will stand.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Here, the trial court properly refused to take into account potential
future distributions from the EMT Trust, and concluded that “but for the
remaining debts related to the funds taken from the children’s custodial
accounts . . . [,] an essentially equal division [of the marital property] is fair.”
See RSA 564-B:8-814(b). Given all the circumstances, we do not conclude that
the trial court erred in declining to award Goodlander the entirety of the
parties’ assets.
We note that Goodlander challenges the trial court’s finding that the
non-trust assets were acquired by Tamposi “primarily by gift or inheritance
from her father.” He notes that several witnesses testified that a number of
Tamposi’s non-trust assets were neither given to her nor inherited. Thus,
Goodlander asserts the trial judge erred in dividing the non-trust assets “in
only a 51/49% formula because [the trial court] thought the bulk of them came
by gift from Ms. Tamposi’s father.” We find no error.
Whether the assets owned by Tamposi were gifts, inherited or earned, the
trial court specifically stated that “considered in context of all the evidence, the
Court does not conclude the source of [the non-trust] assets warrants an
uneven split.” On the record before us, we do not find that the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in dividing the marital assets.
VI. Red Sox Sale Proceeds
Goodlander further argues that the trial court erred in failing to properly
take into account Tamposi’s share of the proceeds from the SAT Trust’s sale of
its interest in the Boston Red Sox. We disagree.
In January 2008 the investment directors of the SAT Trust sold certain
shares held by the trust in the Boston Red Sox. The EMT Trust’s portion of the
proceeds amounted to approximately 1.6 million dollars, the distribution of
which the trial court enjoined until issuance of the final decree. The
undisputed testimony at trial was that these proceeds are an asset of the EMT
Trust. Trustee Julie Shelton initiated litigation on behalf of the trust to force
the sale of the Boston Red Sox shares, and at least twenty-five percent of the
proceeds allocated to the EMT Trust were earmarked for attorney’s fees.
14
As discussed above, the beneficiaries’ interests in future distributions
from the EMT Trust constitutes a mere expectancy. See RSA 564-B:8-814(b).
Because Tamposi has no right to force distributions from the EMT Trust, the
trial court did not err in declining to impute assets of the EMT Trust to
Tamposi. Accordingly, the trial court properly excluded the Red Sox sale
proceeds in its distribution of the marital assets.
VII. Children As Intervenors
Finally, Goodlander argues that the trial court erred by allowing the
children to intervene in the parties’ divorce. We find no error.
“A person who seeks to intervene in a case must have a right involved in
the trial and his interest must be direct and apparent; such as would suffer if
not indeed be sacrificed were the court to deny the privilege.” In the Matter of
Stapleford & Stapleford, 156 N.H. 260, 263 (2007) (quotation omitted). Here,
the parties’ children originally intervened for the purpose of protecting their
interests in the EMT Trust in light of Goodlander’s assertions that he is entitled
to an award of some portion of trust funds distributed to Tamposi. As the
children are also beneficiaries of the EMT Trust, any such award to Goodlander
would directly affect their financial interests. Additionally, the children
intervened to ensure that the court would take into account the significant
debt owed to them by Goodlander.
Although the children were permitted to withdraw from the proceeding
on the first day of trial, Goodlander argues that they should have been
prevented from intervening in the first instance based upon our holding in
Stapleford. In Stapleford, the divorcing parties’ minor children attempted to
intervene in order to participate in the parenting plan. Id. at 262. We
concluded that the minor children were not entitled to intervene because
minors do not enjoy the same legal rights as do adults. Id. at 263. Here,
however, two of the children were adults when the divorce action was initiated
and the third reached the age of majority during the pendency of the
proceedings. Moreover, the Goodlander children intervened for the purpose of
protecting their direct financial interests, and not to interject their opinions as
to any parenting issues.
We are also unconvinced that Goodlander was financially harmed by the
children’s limited intervention in the case. The record reflects that the
children’s discovery requests were minimal and directly related to the issues in
dispute. Under all the circumstances, we conclude the trial court did not
unsustainably exercise its discretion in allowing the children’s intervention.
Finally, to the extent Goodlander argues that the children should have
been prevented from intervening because they had an alternative, adequate
15
remedy at law, this argument was not properly preserved and we therefore
decline to address it. See LaMontagne Builders v. Brooks, 154 N.H. 252, 258
(2006) (“This court has consistently held that we will not consider issues raised
on appeal that were not presented in the lower court.” (quotation omitted)).
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DUGGAN, J., concurred; HORTON, J., retired, specially assigned under
RSA 490:3, concurred.
16