THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-533
ONE BEACON INSURANCE, LLC
v.
M&M PIZZA, INC.
Argued: May 4, 2010
Opinion Issued: August 19, 2010
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (Jeremy D. Eggleton on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Boyle, Morrissey & Campo, P.C., of Manchester (Thomas J. Fay and
Andrew B. Ranks on the brief, and Mr. Fay orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, M&M Pizza, Inc., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (McHugh, J.), denying its motion for summary judgment and
granting summary judgment in favor of the plaintiff, One Beacon Insurance,
LLC. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The following facts appear in the trial court’s order on the parties’
motions for summary judgment. M&M owns and operates a Domino’s Pizza
franchise located in a strip mall at 61 Crystal Avenue in Derry. Centercorp
Retail Properties, Inc. owns the property and is M&M’s commercial landlord. In
November 2002, Nathaniel Box, an M&M employee, slipped and fell behind the
premises. During the evening dinner rush, M&M required its delivery
employees to park behind the mall and enter through the rear door of the
pizzeria. In compliance with this policy, after returning from a pizza delivery,
Box parked near the rear door to the pizzeria. While walking around the front
of his vehicle, he slipped and fell on ice and was injured.
Box sued Centercorp and other parties, but did not sue M&M. Following
mediation, Centercorp settled with Box. One Beacon, Centercorp’s insurer and
subrogee, paid Box $185,000 to release his claims against Centercorp.
Although One Beacon invited M&M to attend the mediation, M&M declined to
do so. Subsequently, One Beacon brought suit against M&M, seeking
indemnification for payments it made to Box on behalf of Centercorp. M&M
moved for summary judgment, and One Beacon filed a cross-motion for
summary judgment. The trial court granted judgment in favor of One Beacon.
The trial court denied M&M’s motion for reconsideration, and this appeal
followed.
When reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. S. N.H. Med. Ctr. v. Hayes,
159 N.H. 711, 715 (2010). If this review does not reveal any genuine issues of
material fact, i.e., facts that would affect the outcome of the litigation, and if
the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm. Id.
We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
M&M raises two arguments on appeal: (1) that its lease with Centercorp
did not require it to indemnify One Beacon for Box’s injuries; and (2) that,
although M&M did not attend the mediation between Centercorp and Box,
M&M did not waive its right to challenge the subsequent settlement. We
address each of M&M’s arguments in turn.
First, M&M argues that section seventeen of the lease does not require it
to indemnify One Beacon for Box’s injuries because they occurred outside the
pizzeria, and neither Box’s, nor M&M’s, action involved the use or operation of
the premises at the time of his injury. One Beacon counters that
indemnification is required under section seventeen because: (1) Box’s delivery
work was an integral part of M&M’s pizza operations; (2) Box was employed by
M&M; (3) Box was acting within the scope of his employment when he was
injured; and (4) Box parked behind the rear entrance pursuant to M&M policy.
The interpretation of the language of a lease, like any contract language,
is ultimately an issue for the court to decide. Cf. Merchants Mut. Ins. Co. v.
Laighton Homes, 153 N.H. 485, 487 (2006); Gulf Ins. Co. v. AMSCO, 153 N.H.
28, 34 (2005) (“When there is an express contract for indemnity, the rights of
2
the surety are not to be determined by general indemnity principles, but by the
letter of the contract for indemnification.”). Because the interpretation of a
contract is a question of law, we review the trial court’s interpretation de novo.
In the Matter of Taber-McCarthy & McCarthy, 160 N.H. 112, 115 (2010). When
interpreting a written agreement, we give the language used by the parties its
reasonable meaning, considering the circumstances and the context in which
the agreement was negotiated, and reading the document as a whole. Id.
Absent ambiguity, we determine the parties’ intent from the plain
meaning of the language used in the contract. Id. The words and phrases
used by the parties will be assigned their common meaning, and we will
ascertain the intended purpose of the contract based upon the meaning that
would be given to it by a reasonable person. Found. for Seacoast Health v.
HCA Health Servs. of N.H., 157 N.H. 487, 492 (2008). We construe express
indemnity agreements narrowly, Dunn v. CLD Paving, 140 N.H. 120, 122
(1995), particularly when they purport to shift responsibility for an entity’s
negligence to another. Merrimack School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140
N.H. 9, 12 (1995).
Section seventeen of the lease provides that M&M must “indemnify and
save [Centercorp] harmless from and against any and all liability and damages,
costs and expenses, including reasonable counsel fees, and from and against
any and all suits, claims and demands of any kind or nature . . . growing out of
the condition, maintenance, repair, alteration, use, occupation or operation of
the leased premises.” We have interpreted the phrase “growing out of” as
synonymous with “arising out of.” Pro Con Constr. v. Acadia Ins. Co., 147 N.H.
470, 472 (2002); see also Philbrick v. Liberty Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 389,
391 (2007).
In Pro Con, we examined a commercial general liability policy, which
provided that:
WHO IS AN INSURED is amended to include as an insured any person or
organization for whom you are performing operations if you and such
person or organization have agreed in a contract or agreement that such
person or organization be added as an additional insured on your policy.
Such person or organization is an additional insured only with respect to
liability arising out of your ongoing operations performed for that
insured.
Pro Con, 147 N.H. at 471. In Pro Con, we reasoned that, “to warrant coverage
arising out of [the] ongoing operations performed for Pro Con, the ongoing
operations need not have been the proximate cause of the injuries but the
causal connection between the two must be more than tenuous.” Id. at 472;
see also Akerley v. Hartford Ins. Group., 136 N.H. 433, 439 (1992). In other
3
words, “some causal nexus must link [the] ongoing operations and the
injuries.” Pro Con, 147 N.H. at 472. “While the causal connection need not be
‘proximate’ as that term is used in the more demanding evidentiary area of tort
law, the causal connection must still exist.” Id.
Applying this standard, the trial court here concluded that “Box’s
delivery mission and the location where he parked his car . . . were” governed
by the indemnification provision because they were “circumstances ‘growing
out of the . . . use, occupation or operation of the leased premises.’” We agree.
According to the lease, M&M used the premises as “a bakery, store, and carry-
out for pizza and related foods and beverages and those items customarily
sold . . . in a Domino’s Pizza store and for all other operations necessary or
incidental to the conduct of its business.” Given that the pizzeria offered
delivery services to its customers, “[t]he delivery of pizza and related products”
was “an operation ‘necessary or incidental to the conduct’” of the pizzeria.
When Box was injured, he had parked his vehicle behind the mall pursuant to
M&M policy, and was going back into the pizzeria to continue delivering pizzas.
Accordingly, we agree that the nexus between the pizzeria’s operations and
Box’s injuries trigger the broad indemnification provision of the lease
agreement. See id.
M&M, pointing to other lease provisions, contends that they “effectively
set out a comprehensive liability scheme where M&M is responsible for
anything imaginable occurring within the leased premises while Centercorp
retains responsibility for liability outside the leased premises.” Specifically,
M&M relies upon the preamble to the lease, which defines the leased premises
as “a portion of the premises located at 61 Crystal Ave., Derry, NH 03038, the
leased premises consisting of 1,088 Sq. Ft. +/-.” M&M also highlights other
lease provisions, which require Centercorp to provide snow and ice removal
and general maintenance in certain common areas, and the insurance
provision of the lease, which only requires M&M to obtain liability insurance
“‘on the leased premises.’” One Beacon counters that these other provisions in
the lease do not modify the plain language of section seventeen.
The trial court rejected M&M’s argument that “other provisions of the
[l]ease foreclose [its] indemnification liability.” As noted by the trial court, even
though the lease required M&M to retain “[c]omprehensive liability insurance
on the leased premises and the Facilities thereon,” the broad and unambiguous
language of the indemnity clause still required M&M to indemnify Centercorp
for “liability and damages, costs and expenses . . . growing out of the condition,
maintenance, repair, alteration, use, occupation or operation of the premises.”
We decline to dismiss the broad language of “growing out of” as “mere
surplusage.” See Commercial Union Assurance Co. v. Brown Co., 120 N.H.
620, 623 (1980).
4
Similarly, even though other lease provisions require Centercorp to
maintain certain common areas, these independent obligations do not
eliminate M&M’s obligation to indemnify Centercorp. See Tanguay v. Marston,
127 N.H. 572, 578 (1986). We have noted that:
a lessor and lessee in a lease of commercial real estate may agree on
which party will maintain the leased premises and which party will be
liable for injuries caused by improper failure to maintain. Both parties to
the commercial lease must be free to make their own bargain. We
recognize that a lease of commercial real estate is in many ways much
like any other commercial contract, where we allow the parties to assign
risks and obligations between themselves.
Id. (citations omitted).
We next consider M&M’s argument that One Beacon never offered M&M
the opportunity to approve the settlement or defend the case, contrary to
Morrissette v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 114 N.H. 384, 388 (1974). M&M asks us
to remand this case to the trial court and to require One Beacon to prove
Centercorp’s actual liability to Box. One Beacon, however, maintains that the
principles of Morrissette do not apply to express contractual indemnification
agreements such as the lease, and, alternatively, that, pursuant to Morrissette,
its letter requesting M&M’s presence at the mediation provided M&M with
notice and an opportunity to defend.
“A right to indemnity arises where one is legally required to pay an
obligation for which another is primarily liable.” Id. at 387 (quotation and
brackets omitted). In New Hampshire, “an indemnitee’s unilateral acts of
settlement, albeit reasonable and undertaken in good faith, cannot bind the
indemnitor; notice and an opportunity to defend are the indispensable due
process satisfying elements.” Coco v. Jaskunas, 159 N.H. 515, 520 (2009)
(quotation and brackets omitted). Accordingly, “[w]hile a prejudgment payment
in settlement does not extinguish a right of indemnity, the [third-party plaintiff]
must show that the settlement was made under legal compulsion, rather than
as a mere volunteer, for indemnity is not available for payment voluntarily
made.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted).
If the indemnitor approves the settlement or defends unsuccessfully
against the original claim, he cannot later question the indemnitee’s
liability to the original claimant. If the indemnitor declines to take either
course, then the indemnitee will only be required to show potential
liability to the original plaintiff in order to support his claim over against
the indemnitor.
5
Id. “In the event that no offer is made to the indemnitor to either approve or
defend, then the indemnitee should have the burden of showing actual liability
to the original plaintiff.” Morrissette, 114 N.H. at 389 (citations omitted).
Thus, absent notice and the opportunity to defend, One Beacon must
demonstrate Centercorp’s actual liability to Box; however, if M&M received
notice and an opportunity to defend, then One Beacon need only show
Centercorp’s potential liability to Box. See id.
Counsel for Centercorp sent a letter, dated July 19, 2007, to M&M,
indicating that Box’s lawsuit against Centercorp was scheduled for mediation
on August 8. In the letter, Centercorp asked M&M to “attend with authority to
contribute money toward the settlement of this case.” Centercorp asserted
that, under the lease, M&M “is contractually required to indemnify Centercorp
for its legal costs and damages incurred in defending this case.” Centercorp
also notified M&M that it “intend[ed] to bring a third party action against
[M&M] to seek recovery of any amounts it is required to pay . . . Box.”
In its order on the parties’ motions for summary judgment, the trial court
ruled that:
Despite being notified of the conference at which Centercorp and its
subrogee, One Beacon, settled the responsibilities as among the parties
to the underlying personal injury suit, M&M declined to appear at or
participate in that conference. M&M thus passed up its opportunity to
dispute the amount offered to Box, and must therefore indemnify
Centercorp and its subrogee One Beacon for the full amount paid.
We agree with the trial court that, based upon the facts before us, One
Beacon’s letter to M&M gave M&M sufficient notice and an opportunity to
defend the suit against Box. However, the trial court erred when it ruled that
M&M was therefore required to indemnify One Beacon “for the full amount
paid,” because the trial court failed to require One Beacon to demonstrate
Centercorp’s potential liability to Box. See id. On remand, the trial court
should apply the standard set forth in Morrissette and determine whether One
Beacon has demonstrated Centercorp’s potential liability to Box. See id.
One Beacon argues that the principles outlined in Morrissette do not
apply to express indemnification agreements, such as the lease at issue here.
Specifically, One Beacon argues that “Morrissette involved a common law or
implied indemnification,” and that “the notice standards it enunciates have
never been applied in a contractual indemnification scenario like the one in
this case.” However, we did not limit our decision in Morrissette to implied
indemnification, and we see no reason why we should do so here. Indeed, we
have applied the standards set forth in Morrissette in the context of an express
statutory requirement for the defendant to defend the plaintiffs’ deed “against
6
the lawful claims and demands of all persons” pursuant to RSA 477:27. Coco,
159 N.H. at 519 (emphasis omitted). We also note that, in attempting to
distinguish express and implied indemnification with respect to the
applicability of the Morrissette standard, One Beacon cites no authority in
which another court has made such a distinction, and we have found none.
See Casey v. Ryder Truck Rental, Inc., 2005 WL 1150228, at *8 (E.D.N.Y. May
16, 2005) (noting that requiring notice and an opportunity to defend “appear[s]
to apply regardless of whether . . . indemnification arises in the context of a
contractual provision or in the context of a claim based on common law
equitable principles”).
Given this result, we need not address the parties’ remaining arguments.
Affirmed in part;
reversed in part;
and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7