THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Manchester District Court
No. 2009-027
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CHRISTOPHER HORAK
Argued: November 17, 2009
Opinion Issued: January 14, 2010
Orville B. Fitch, II, acting attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Christopher Horak, appeals his conviction of
sexual assault for engaging in sexual contact with a person thirteen years of
age or older whom he knew to be mentally defective. See RSA 632-A:4, I(a), :2,
I(h) (2007). We reverse and remand.
The Manchester District Court (Champagne, J.) could have found the
following facts. At the time of the assault, the defendant lived with the
complainant and her mother and had been the boyfriend of the complainant’s
mother for nine years. The complainant, who was then twenty-two years old,
was born with disabilities and required daily care such as changing her diapers
and assistance with showering, dressing and brushing her teeth. On
weekdays, while her mother worked, the complainant attended the Moore
Center, an organization providing services for people with acquired brain
disorders and developmental disabilities.
On April 24, 2008, the complainant’s mother dropped the complainant
off at the Moore Center. The complainant was crying and informed her nurse
about an incident that had occurred with the defendant that morning. The
police were contacted, and the defendant was charged by complaint with
having committed sexual assault, in that:
[The defendant did] [p]urposely engage in sexual conduct with [the
complainant] 08/18/85, whom he knows to be mentally defective,
to wit: did expose his bare penis to her and then told her to touch
his bare penis, to which she complied, which can be reasonably
construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification.
The defendant was tried in Manchester District Court and convicted. On
appeal, he argues that the trial court erred in: (1) finding that the State proved
both that the complainant was mentally defective and that the defendant knew
she was mentally defective; and (2) ruling that the complainant was competent
to testify. We address the second issue first.
“Whether a witness is competent to testify is a question of law for the
trial court.” State v. Mills, 136 N.H. 46, 49 (1992). “Where the record supports
the court’s determination of competency, we will not disturb that determination
absent an [unsustainable exercise] of discretion.” State v. Aikens, 135 N.H.
569, 571 (1992) (quotation omitted); see State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296
(2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion standard). “Because so
much depends on the trial court’s firsthand observations of the witness, its
conclusion that the witness is competent is entitled to great deference.” State
v. Briere, 138 N.H. 617, 620 (1994).
Under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 601, “[w]itnesses are presumed
competent to testify, . . . [a]lthough this presumption may be overcome by
findings that the witness ‘lacks sufficient capacity to observe, remember and
narrate as well as understand the duty to tell the truth’ . . . .” Id. (quoting N.H.
R. Ev. 601(b)). The defendant challenges the complainant’s capacity with
respect to an understanding of the duty to tell the truth. Specifically, he
contends that the record fails to demonstrate both the complainant’s “ability to
distinguish the truth from a lie, as well as [her ability] to appreciate her
personal obligation to tell the truth.”
2
Implicit in an understanding of the duty to tell the truth is an
understanding of the distinction between the truth and a lie. See State v.
Brown, 138 N.H. 649, 653 (1994) (record supported finding of competency
where, inter alia, witness “was able to distinguish between the truth and lies”);
State v. St. John, 120 N.H. 61, 63 (1980) (evidence supported finding that
witness understood the duty to tell the truth where, inter alia, she
“demonstrated that she knew the difference between a lie and the truth”). To
determine whether a finding that the complainant possessed such an
understanding is sustainable, we examine the record in some depth.
On direct examination of the complainant, the prosecutor inquired:
Q. And now do you know the difference between telling the
truth and a lie?
A. Yeah.
Q. And is it -- is it good or bad to tell the truth?
A. I’m not sure about that.
Q. Is it good or bad to tell a lie?
A. No, I’m not sure about the lie.
Q. And do you want to tell the truth?
A. Of course.
After the complainant testified that it was very cold out that day, the
prosecutor asked, “So if I told you it was hot out today, would that be the truth
or would that be a lie?” The complainant responded, “The truth.” Similarly,
after the complainant testified that she, her mother, and her nurse had been at
a prior meeting with the prosecutor, the prosecutor asked, “[I]f I said that [the
nurse] wasn’t there when we met before, is that the truth or is that a lie?” The
complainant answered, “The truth.” The prosecutor then asked the
complainant why she would want to tell the truth and the complainant stated,
“Because I have to get it out.”
On voir dire, the defense attorney asked her whether it is “okay to
sometimes lie?” The following exchange then took place:
A. Oh, well, sometimes to lie.
Q. Can you say that again . . . ?
3
A. Sometimes is a lie.
Q. When is [it] okay to lie?
A. Well, that’s a hard question. I don’t know what is a lie, but – I
don’t know what is a lie. I don’t know a lie. I can’t remember. I can’t
remember anything.
Q. So can you think of any examples when it’s okay to lie?
A. Yeah.
Q. Can you tell us one of those examples?
A. What’s that?
Q. When it’s okay to lie?
A. That’s a hard question to ask. I don’t -- I don’t know what it is.
Oh, man, I can’t remember anything of this, oh, God. I can’t get it all
out. I’m here to tell the truth. I’m here to tell the truth of what
happened.
Finally, the trial court questioned the complainant. After asking the
complainant to identify what the judge held in his hand, to which she replied,
“Pen,” the judge asked whether, if he told her what he was holding was a glass,
“would I be lying or would I be telling the truth?” The complainant responded,
“What do you mean?” The judge again asked whether, if someone told the
complainant what the judge was holding was a glass, “would that person be
lying or telling the truth?” The complainant answered, “A lie.”
The court then asked the complainant to explain in her own words what
it meant to tell the truth. In response, she appears to have tried to recount the
assault, to which defense counsel objected. The prosecutor urged the court to
defer making a competency evaluation, allow the complainant to testify and
evaluate her competency based upon her testimony “throughout . . . the course
of the trial.” After concluding that it must make a determination of competency
before a witness testifies, the court stated that it had one more question for the
complainant. The court asked:
THE COURT: . . . Can you tell me what happens if somebody
lies?
A. What do you mean?
4
THE COURT: Well, that’s what I want to know from you. What
happens if somebody lies? They don’t tell the truth? What do you think
happens to people?
A. Oh, boy. They get in trouble when they lie.
The court then ruled that the complainant was competent to testify.
The State asserts that the complainant’s answers support the
determination of competency. It contends that although she “was unable to
define ‘truth;’ or ‘lie,’ . . . she was able to tell the court that she wanted to tell
the truth, that people got into trouble when they lied, and that it would be a lie
to call his pen a glass.” The defendant, on the other hand, argues that a single
correct answer among a number of incorrect ones cannot establish
competency, as a witness giving random answers, would, as a matter of
probability, at some point get one answer right. Thus, the defendant asserts:
[A]s a policy matter, if [the complainant’s] testimony suffices to
establish competency, Rule 601(b) hardly filters the testimony of
any witness. Nearly any witness can fail to answer several basic
and highly leading questions about the ability to testify truthfully,
as [the complainant] did, eventually can get one answer “right,” as
[the complainant] did, and be deemed competent, as [the
complainant] was.
We agree with the defendant that the complainant’s single correct
answer, considered together with her prior incorrect ones, does not
demonstrate that she understood the difference between the truth and a lie.
We cannot agree with the State that “[a]fter confusing voir dire from both sides,
the trial court was able to cut through the confusion.” Rather, the record
shows only that the trial court was able to elicit a correct response to the same
type of question that both parties had previously posed and to which the
complainant had responded incorrectly.
The State cites a number of cases from other jurisdictions for the general
proposition that “the failure of a witness to state clearly the difference between
a lie and the truth does not render the witness incompetent to testify.” State v.
Pettis, 488 A.2d 704, 706 (R.I. 1985) (involving testimony by a mentally
impaired thirteen year old girl). We do not disagree; nevertheless, as Chief
Justice Brock stated in his dissent in Mills: “Although the witness need not
utter any ‘magic words’ indicating that he or she understands the difference
between the truth and a lie or the importance of telling the truth, some
indication of the witness’s understanding must be apparent on the record.”
Mills, 136 N.H. at 54 (Brock, C.J. dissenting).
5
We also acknowledge, as the State emphasizes, that the trial court had
the opportunity to observe the complainant’s demeanor firsthand, while we, in
reviewing a competency determination, “must act on a cold record.” Id. at 50
(quotation omitted). Thus, in general, “[b]ecause so much depends upon his
observation of the witness, the trial court’s conclusion that [a witness] was
competent is entitled to great deference.” Id. (quotation, citation and brackets
omitted). Such deference is not, however, absolute. Rather, “[t]he question is
not whether we would have ruled as the trial court did, but whether there is
sufficient evidence in the record to ground the finding.” Id. (emphasis added).
The record in this case simply fails to support the trial court’s finding of
competency. Although the complainant was eventually able to identify an
incorrect statement as a lie, that answer must be assessed in context with the
complainant’s prior faulty attempts to distinguish the truth from a lie and her
expressions of confusion over the concepts of truth and falsehood. Cf. People
v. Sutherland, 743 N.E.2d 1007, 1014 (Ill. App. Ct. 2000) (noting that “one
imperfect response to a question is insufficient to invalidate a finding of
competency in light of the totality of the responses”), appeal denied, 755 N.E.2d
482 (Ill. 2001), cert. denied, 534 U.S. 1105 (2002). We conclude that the
complainant’s testimony, as a whole, fails to demonstrate that she understood
the distinction between truth and falsehood, and therefore failed to
demonstrate that she understood the duty to tell the truth.
The defendant also argues that the State failed to prove that the
complainant is mentally defective and that the defendant knew she is mentally
defective. “We address this argument because if the evidence was insufficient
to support the conviction, the Double Jeopardy Clauses of both the New
Hampshire and United States Constitutions would preclude a new trial.” State
v. Fuller, 147 N.H. 210, 213 (2001). In determining whether the evidence was
sufficient, however, we consider all the evidence, including the testimony of the
complainant that we previously concluded was erroneously admitted; thus, we
adopt for purposes of our state constitutional analysis the United States
Supreme Court’s standard under the Federal Double Jeopardy Clause. See
Lockhart v. Nelson, 488 U.S. 33, 34 (1988) (holding that “where the evidence
offered by the State and admitted by the trial court ― whether erroneously or
not ― would have been sufficient to sustain a guilty verdict, the Double
Jeopardy Clause does not preclude retrial”).
“To prevail on his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence
and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State,
could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Littlefield, 152
N.H. 331, 350 (2005) (quotation omitted). We held in State v. Frost, 141 N.H.
493, 497 (1996):
6
[A] complainant is “mentally defective” within the meaning of RSA
632-A:2, I(h) only if he or she (1) suffers from a “mental disease or
defect” and (2) is incapable of freely arriving at an independent
choice whether or not to engage in sexual conduct. The second
prong addresses a person’s capacity to appraise in a meaningful
way the physical nature and consequences of his or her sexual
conduct, including its potential to cause pregnancy or disease.
The emphasis is on the individual’s capacity ― capacity to learn
about physical consequences and to make a decision based on
whatever evaluative process the person chooses to employ, as long
as the decision is legitimately the person’s own.
The defendant likens this case to State v. Call, 139 N.H. 102 (1994), in
which we found the evidence insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the victim was mentally defective. He asserts that, as in Call: (1) there
was no expert or medical testimony that the complainant is mentally defective
within the meaning of the statute; and (2) the complainant’s “testimony that
she resisted [the defendant’s] advances, by telling him to leave her alone and
calling out to her mother . . . undercut[s] the State’s claim with regard to the
‘mentally defective’ element.”
While we took note of the lack of expert or medical testimony “to describe
or explain the victim’s mental condition” in Call, id. at 104, we have never
required expert testimony on this issue. Rather, the absence of such evidence
in Call was just one ground for the conclusion that “[o]n this state of the record
alone, nothing indicates that the victim was incapable of legally consenting to
the act.” Id. Here, there was evidence from the complainant’s mother that she
had been born with disabilities, and that she cannot read. Both the mother
and nurse testified as to the complainant’s need for assistance with daily
activities such as dressing and maintaining hygiene. Although the mother was
not allowed to testify as to the complainant’s medical diagnosis, the evidence
demonstrated that her disabilities were mental as well as physical: her
attendance at the Moore Center, an organization providing services for people
with acquired brain disorders and developmental disabilities, as well as her
own testimony which, as we concluded above, failed to establish her
competency as a witness, all support a finding that the complainant suffers
from a mental disorder or defect. Call, in which the evidence as to the nature
of the victim’s disabilities and limitations was apparently less specific, is
factually distinguishable. See id. (noting that witnesses testified that victim
was “handicapped,” “looked mentally retarded” and that there was “something
mentally wrong” with her).
Call is also factually distinguishable on the issue of resistance to the
assault. The evidence in Call indicated that the victim told the defendant to
stop and eventually forced him to stop, demonstrating a clear lack of consent
7
and, by negative inference, possession of the capacity to consent. Id. at 103-
04. Here, while the complainant testified that she told the defendant “to leave
me alone” and tried to call out for her mother, her testimony indicates
confusion about the sexual act taking place. She testified that her reaction
was, “what are you doing? . . . And I’m like, why are you trying to make me
touch it? Why are you doing that?” On this record, we cannot say that “no
rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences
from it in the light most favorable to the State,” Littlefield, 152 N.H. at 350
(quotation omitted), could have found that the complainant did not have the
“capacity to appraise in a meaningful way the physical nature and
consequences of . . . sexual conduct.” Frost, 141 N.H. at 497. Accordingly, we
conclude that the evidence was sufficient to show that the complainant was
mentally defective within the meaning of the statute.
The defendant next contends that even if the State proved the “mentally
defective” element, it failed to prove that the defendant knew that the
complainant is mentally defective. Generally, a defendant’s culpable mental
state is proven through circumstantial evidence, State v. DiNapoli, 149 N.H.
514, 516 (2003), and, “[w]hen the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must
exclude all rational conclusions except guilt.” Littlefield, 152 N.H. at 350.
Nevertheless, in employing this standard, “we still consider the evidence in the
light most favorable to the State and examine each evidentiary item in context,
not in isolation.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The evidence indicated that the defendant had dated the complainant’s
mother for nine years, that he was living with them at the time of the assault
and that he would help put the complainant to bed. Thus, we cannot conclude
that no rational trier of fact could find that the defendant knew about the
complainant’s mental and physical limitations. The defendant nevertheless
contends that the State “did not prove he knew she was incapable of choosing
whether or not to engage in sexual conduct.” We disagree. As the State points
out, the complainant testified about her confusion at the time of the assault.
The State argues that the defendant’s “observations of her confusion at the
pertinent time and his firsthand awareness of her level of impairment, taken in
the light most favorable to the State, lead to only one conclusion: that he knew
that [the complainant] was mentally defective within the meaning of the
statute.” We conclude that the evidence on this point was sufficient.
Reversed and remanded.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
8