THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord Family Division
No. 2009-556
IN THE MATTER OF PATRICIA MARTIN AND MICHAEL MARTIN
Argued: June 10, 2010
Opinion Issued: August 19, 2010
Daniel C. Proctor, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Puckhaber Law Offices, PLLC, of Concord (Diane M. Puckhaber on the
brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, J. The petitioner, Patricia Martin (mother), appeals an order
of the Concord Family Division (Gordon, J.) approving the final decree of
divorce from the respondent, Michael Martin (father), recommended by the
Marital Master (Rein, M.). The mother also appeals an order of the Family
Division (Carbon, J.) approving the marital master’s denial of her motion to
reconsider. We affirm.
The record supports the following relevant facts. The parties met in 2002
and were married in 2004. They are the parents of a son, who was born in
June 2007. Shortly after their son was born, the mother discovered that the
father had been having an affair.
The mother filed for divorce in September 2007. As part of the divorce
proceedings, the mother sought permission to relocate with the son to Rhode
Island where her parents live. The family division denied her request, stating
in the parenting plan attached to the final decree that the mother “is not
permitted to remove [the son]’s residence from the State of New Hampshire and
to a location farther away from [the father]’s residence than is her current
residence in Derry.” The parenting plan established a rotating parenting
schedule to coincide with the father’s rotating work schedule. In addition, it
included a provision regarding future parenting disagreements, stating:
In the future, if the parents have a disagreement about parenting
issues, the parents shall try to work it out in the best interest of
the child(ren). If the parents are unable to work out the
disagreement, they shall seek the help of a neutral third party to
assist them. Only if the parents are unable to work out the
disagreement after seeking third party assistance will they ask the
court to decide the issue.
The mother moved for reconsideration of rulings in the final decree
relevant to relocation, the parenting schedule and the future disagreements
provision, which the family division denied. On appeal, the mother argues that
the trial court erred by: (1) denying her request to relocate; (2) instituting the
rotating parenting schedule; and (3) mandating neutral third party assistance
before instituting further legal proceedings with respect to future parenting
disagreements. At oral argument, the mother conceded that the rotating
parenting schedule issue is now moot because the father’s work schedule has
changed. Accordingly, we address only the mother’s arguments concerning
relocation and the future parenting disagreements provision.
I. Relocation
The mother argues that the trial court erred by denying her request for
permission to relocate because it incorrectly interpreted and applied RSA 461-
A:12 (Supp. 2009), the statute that the parties agree governs this issue. RSA
461-A:12, V provides, in relevant part that:
The parent seeking permission to relocate bears the initial
burden of demonstrating, by a preponderance of the evidence, that:
(a) The relocation is for a legitimate purpose; and
(b) The proposed location is reasonable in light of that
purpose.
The statute further provides that “[i]f the burden of proof established in
paragraph V is met, the burden shifts to the other parent to prove, by a
2
preponderance of the evidence, that the proposed relocation is not in the best
interest of the child.” RSA 461-A:12, VI.
When determining matters of child custody, a trial court’s overriding
concern is the best interest of the child. In the Matter of Mannion & Mannion,
155 N.H. 52, 55 (2007). In doing so, the trial court has wide discretion, and we
will not overturn its determination unless there has been an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. Id. This means that we review the record only to
determine whether it contains an objective basis to sustain the trial court’s
discretionary judgment. Id. The trial court’s determination in any custody
case depends to a large extent upon the firsthand assessment of the credibility
of witnesses, as well as the character and temperament of the parents, and the
findings of the trial court are binding upon this court if supported by the
evidence. Id.
Resolving the issue in this appeal, however, also requires that we
interpret RSA 461-A:12. We review a trial court’s statutory interpretation de
novo. See In the Matter of Choy & Choy, 154 N.H. 707, 711 (2007). In matters
of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislative intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. In the Matter of
Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. 498, 503-04 (2007). We begin our analysis by
looking to the language of the statute itself. In the Matter of LaRue & Bedard,
156 N.H. 378, 380 (2007). In examining the language of the statute, we ascribe
the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. In the Matter of Carr &
Edmonds, 156 N.H. at 504. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as
written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or add
language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. If the language is
plain and unambiguous, then we need not look beyond it for further indication
of legislative intent. In the Matter of LaRue & Bedard, 156 N.H. at 380. We
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. In the Matter of Carr & Edmunds, 156 N.H. at 504.
Pursuant to its plain meaning, RSA 461-A:12, V requires that in this
case, the mother must demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
her request to relocate is for a legitimate purpose and that the proposed
location, Rhode Island, is reasonable in light of that purpose. Neither party
argues that the statute is ambiguous. We, therefore, need not look beyond it
for further indication of legislative intent. In the Matter of LaRue & Bedard,
156 N.H. at 380.
The trial court found that the “primary reason [the mother] wants to
move is to avoid ongoing interaction with the father” and to “get away from
[him].” It also found that there was “no evidence that [the father] is any threat
to [the mother], or that he has conducted himself in a way as to cause her to
fear [for] her safety.” These findings are supported by evidence, including the
3
mother’s own testimony and the report of the guardian ad litem, and are,
accordingly, binding upon us. In the Matter of Mannion & Mannion, 155 N.H.
at 55.
The mother argues that the statutory term “legitimate” means only that
she must set forth a subjectively legitimate reason for wanting to relocate, and
that the court must then consider whether Rhode Island is an objectively
reasonable location. She contends that her needs for emotional and financial
support from her Rhode Island family constitute subjectively legitimate reasons
under the statute. Assuming, without deciding, that the mother’s
interpretation of “legitimate” is correct, her argument still fails.
While the mother testified that she sought to relocate to receive financial
and emotional support from her family, the trial court found that the relocation
would not result in an improvement to her financial status. Specifically, it
noted that she currently has full time employment in New Hampshire but no
comparable job prospects in Rhode Island. With respect to emotional support,
the mother’s counseling records, submitted in the appendix to her brief,
indicate that she has not had a strong relationship with her parents in the
past.
As noted above, the trial court found that the primary reason she wants
to move is to avoid ongoing interaction with the father and to get away from
him. The mother does not argue that the trial court erred as a matter of law in
concluding that wanting to “get away” is not a legitimate reason. Thus, even if
we accept the mother’s definition of “legitimate” as a subjective determination,
upon the facts of this case, she cannot prevail, and we need not further
address her argument.
In light of the trial court’s findings, we agree with its legal conclusion
that the mother failed to carry her burden of demonstrating that she seeks
relocation for a legitimate purpose. Therefore, we need not consider whether
Rhode Island is a reasonable location, see RSA 461-A:12, V(b), nor need we
consider whether the father has proved, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that relocating to Rhode Island is not in the son’s best interest, see RSA 461-
A:12, VI.
II. Future Parenting Disagreements
The mother argues that the parenting plan provision stating that the
parents “shall seek the help of a neutral third party” before petitioning the
court in the event of future disagreements about parenting issues violates her
constitutional rights to due process and access to the courts. See N.H. CONST.
pt. I, art. 14; U.S. CONST. amend. XIV. She contends that the compulsory
word “shall” bars the parties from accessing the courts and restricts her rights
4
to seek judicial relief for her grievances. She further argues that due process
requires that she “be provided with the opportunity of an initial hearing and
access to the courts, before being sent to a ‘third party process.’” We first
address her claims under the State Constitution, and cite federal opinions for
guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Due process under Part I, Article 14 “provides that all citizens have a
right to the redress of their actionable injuries.” Gould v. Concord Hospital,
126 N.H. 405, 409 (1985). “The article does not prohibit all impairments of the
right of access to the courts.” Estate of Cargill v. City of Rochester, 119 N.H.
661, 665 (1979), appeal dismissed, 445 U.S. 921 (1980). “Reasonable
regulations regarding the commencement of suits do not automatically violate
the constitutional guaranty that justice will be administered promptly.”
Opinion of the Justices (Limitation of Civil Actions), 137 N.H. 260, 269 (1993).
We cannot accept the mother’s contention that the provision at issue
bars judicial relief for future parenting disagreements. The provision at issue
neither infringes upon nor denies that right. It imposes no specific
requirement that the assistance of a neutral third party must be of any
particular nature or duration or even that the third party must have actually
provided assistance. It permits either party to seek judicial relief, as long as
that party demonstrates that the parents first sought the assistance of a
neutral third party. Thus, the mother’s concern that one parent could use this
provision to cause undue delay is not supported by its plain meaning. Cf.
Opinion of the Justices, 137 N.H. at 269 (“[W]e do not rule out the possibility
that the lapse of time inherent in extended litigation could rise to a
constitutional violation in a given case.”). Similarly, because we conclude that
the provision has no deleterious effect upon the mother’s access to judicial
relief, we need not address her argument that it implicates “her fundamental
rights as a parent.”
The Federal Constitution offers the mother no greater protection than the
State Constitution with regard to her claims of error. See id.; Woods v. Holy
Cross Hospital, 591 F.2d 1164, 1174 n.16 (5th Cir. 1979) (noting that a Florida
statute permitting access to courts only after mediation of a medical
malpractice claim is not a denial of court access). Accordingly, we reach the
same result under the Federal Constitution.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5