THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2009-145
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
HAROLD OAKES
Argued: September 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti on the brief and orally), for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Harold Oakes, appeals his conviction on two
counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault and one count of felonious
sexual assault. See RSA 632-A:2 (2007) (amended 2008); RSA 632-A:3 (2007)
(amended 2008). He argues that the Superior Court (Bornstein, J.) erred by:
(1) denying his motion to dismiss for insufficient evidence; (2) denying his
motion to compel depositions; (3) permitting the State to amend the
indictments; (4) granting the State’s motion to exclude evidence of the victim’s
prior and subsequent allegations of sexual assault; (5) granting the State’s
motion to exclude the defendant from testifying about the duration of his
interview with the police; and (6) ordering restitution. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. On November 8, 2007, Sadie
Tetreault, a foster care mother, reported to the Vermont Department of
Children and Families (DCF) that the defendant had sexually abused her foster
daughter, E.N., a child under the age of thirteen. The DCF Investigator
reported the allegations to the Enfield Police Department.
The Enfield Police contacted the defendant and interviewed him for one
and a half hours on December 1, 2007. On December 6, 2007, the defendant
arrived at the police station at 9:00 a.m. to take a polygraph test. After the
polygraph, a detective interviewed him from 12:30 p.m. to 3:40 p.m.
On February 15, 2008, the defendant was indicted on two counts of
aggravated felonious sexual assault and one count of sexual assault. In July
2008, he filed a motion to compel deposition testimony from both of his
interviewing officers and the polygraph examiner in order to develop evidence
that he had given a false confession. The State objected, arguing that the
individuals had already provided detailed statements, rendering depositions
unnecessary. The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, finding that the
relevant issues were not complex, the defendant could discover the information
by “other means,” and the depositions were not “necessary.” See RSA 517:13,
II (2007); State v. Fernandez, 152 N.H. 233 (2005).
In August 2008, the State moved to amend the original indictments to
expand the time frame of the alleged incidents from January 1, 2005 through
December 1, 2005, to January 1, 2005 through September 1, 2006. The State
argued that time was not an element of the offense and the amendments were
“a matter of form and not substance.” The defendant filed no objection. On
September 3, 2008, the trial court granted the motion.
In November 2008, the defendant filed a motion to exclude any testimony
about the polygraph examination and results, which the trial court granted. In
response, the State moved that the defendant be precluded from discussing the
time of his arrival at the police station, arguing that it would confuse the jury
since the State was not permitted to discuss the polygraph test. Over the
defendant’s objection, the trial court granted the State’s motion, ruling that the
defendant could not testify to the time he spent in the police station for the
polygraph test if the State didn’t “have an opportunity to explain what [the
polygraph examiner] was doing there or why.”
Before trial, the State filed a motion to exclude evidence of the victim’s
prior and subsequent sexual assault allegations, after receiving notification
from the defendant that he intended to call three witnesses to testify that the
2
victim falsely accused them of sexual assault. The State argued that the
evidence was not admissible pursuant to Superior Court Rule 100-A and New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403. The State further argued that the evidence
was irrelevant and would result in a “trial within a trial,” because the victim
maintained that the assaults did occur. The defendant objected, arguing that:
(1) Superior Court Rule 100-A does not apply to “false allegations” of sexual
activity; (2) the victim was not unfairly prejudiced under Rule 403 because she
cannot “justify deceit”; and (3) the evidence was relevant to the victim’s
credibility. The trial court granted the State’s motion, finding the prior
allegations had minimal probative value that was “substantially outweighed by
the danger of unfair prejudice - - confusion of the issues and misleading the
jury.”
At the conclusion of the State’s case, the defendant orally moved to
dismiss the three charges, arguing that the State failed to prove the defendant
committed any of the acts “for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification,”
an element of RSA 632-A:2, II (2007). He further argued that the State failed to
satisfy its burden on the remaining charge brought pursuant to RSA 632-A:3.
The trial court, construing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State,
ruled that the State had “produced sufficient evidence from which a reasonable
jury could infer or find guilt,” and denied the defendant’s motion.
On the last day of trial, the State filed a motion in limine to prevent the
defendant from testifying to the time of his arrival at the police station for his
second interview. The defendant had referenced the time period in his opening
statement and in the testimony of two defense witnesses. The State argued
that the ruling on the defendant’s previous motion in limine excluded all
references to the polygraph, including the length of time that the defendant
was in the station to take it. The defendant did not object, stating, “No, I
believe that’s all decided and agreed to, Your Honor.” The trial court granted
the State’s motion, finding it consistent with its previous ruling on the motion
to exclude the polygraph testimony, where the court had found that “the
evidence regarding the time at which [the polygraph examiner] arrived” was
inadmissible.
The jury convicted the defendant on all three charges. As part of its
sentencing recommendation, the State requested restitution to pay for any
future counseling for the victim. Because the victim had not yet incurred
medical bills, the State recommended an amount not to exceed $10,000. The
State indicated that once a bill was submitted from the victim, the defendant or
the department of corrections could request a hearing to review the
submission. The trial court imposed restitution consistent with the State’s
request. The defendant objected, arguing that it was an unconstitutional
indefinite sentence without any basis in the record. The trial court found that
“in the context of this particular sentence,” it was not unconstitutional because
3
the victim was likely to incur counseling costs and the sentence imposed a
ceiling on those costs. Additionally, the trial court found that the defendant
could “challenge the amount of restitution if he disputes the reasonableness of
the bills.”
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence
On appeal, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient to
support his convictions. The State counters that the victim’s testimony
describing the assaults, and the defendant’s written and oral statements to
police, were sufficient to establish the elements of the three charges.
In challenging the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant must “prove
that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable
inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could have found
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Ericson, 159 N.H. 379, 385 (2009).
We will consider the entire trial record because the defendant chose to present
a case after unsuccessfully moving to dismiss the indictments. Id.
At trial, the victim testified that the defendant touched her several times
on her vagina and her buttocks. She testified that the defendant complimented
her body, and that he threatened her and her family if she told anyone about
what had occurred. She further testified that the defendant digitally
penetrated her, and she marked a plastic glove indicating the depth of
penetration. The officer who conducted the first interview with the defendant
testified that he admitted to being alone with the victim “[f]our times.” In
response to the officer’s question whether he ever thought about “touching a
kid,” the defendant stated, “everybody thinks about it.”
The officer who conducted the second interview of the defendant testified
that he admitted to “tickle wrestling” with the victim and purposely inserting
his fingertips into her, but stopped because “he knew it was wrong.” He read
aloud the defendant’s written statement that “[o]nly tips of a finger was [sic]
inserted when I touched her.” He also read aloud an apology letter that the
defendant wrote to the victim that stated, “I am sorry for the incident that
occurred, but it was an accident and I would like to apologize to you. I hope
you can forgive me about [sic] this.”
The defendant testified that any touching of the victim that may have
occurred was accidental. He testified that the second interview was “very
aggressive,” and that he could not remember writing a statement because his
“brain was fried” by the end of the interview. He testified that he was
“browbeated” [sic] during the interview and that his written statement used the
officer’s words, not his own words.
4
The evaluation of witness credibility and the weight given to witnesses’
testimony “were issues for the jury to resolve.” State v. Spinale, 156 N.H. 456,
465 (2007). The jury heard contradictory testimony from the witnesses, but
found the defendant guilty on all three counts. “The jury was free to accept or
reject any portion of the victim’s testimony in its deliberations. When there is
conflicting factual testimony, we defer to the findings of the jury unless no
reasonable person could have come to the same conclusion.” Ericson, 159
N.H. at 386 (citation omitted).
In viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, the
testimony of the victim and the police officers provided more than sufficient
evidence for a rational trier of fact to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt on
all three counts. In so holding, we reject the defendant’s argument that the
indictments “should have been merged for sentencing” because the evidence
was “insufficient to prove multiple acts.” The trial court did not err in denying
the defendant’s motion to dismiss.
II. Motion to Compel Depositions
The defendant argues that depositions of the interviewing police officers
and polygraph examiner were necessary to support his claim that he made a
false and/or involuntary confession. He argues that there was no other way to
determine the “methodology used by the police in their interrogation of him.”
The State argues that the interview techniques used by the officers were
“within the defendant’s personal knowledge.” The State noted that the
defendant “could have moved to exclude his confession as involuntary and
questioned the same witnesses at an evidentiary hearing.” The trial court,
relying on RSA 517:13, II and Fernandez, denied the request, finding that the
issues were not “complex” and the depositions were not “necessary,” because
the defendant could discover the information by “other means.” See
Fernandez, 152 N.H. at 236-37; RSA 517:13, II.
We will evaluate the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion under
the unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See Fernandez, 152 N.H. at
236. “To prevail, the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id.
Under RSA 517:13, II, the trial court has the discretion to compel
depositions of a witness in a criminal case where the moving party shows by “a
preponderance of the evidence that such deposition is necessary.” RSA 517:13,
II. A deposition is necessary “[t]o ensure a fair trial, avoid surprise or for other
good cause shown.” RSA 517:13, II(b). “In determining the necessity, the court
shall consider the complexity of the issues involved, other opportunities or
information available to discover the information sought by the deposition, and
any other special or exceptional circumstances which may exist.” Id.
5
In Fernandez, we upheld the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s
request for depositions because the defendant had “ample information to
prepare his defense.” Fernandez, 152 N.H. at 236 (quotation omitted). The
defendant attempts to distinguish Fernandez, arguing that here the partial
transcript and officers’ reports were insufficient. However, as the trial court
found, the defendant could have challenged the voluntariness of his confession
and moved to suppress it. At the hearing, the defendant would have had an
opportunity to cross-examine both of the officers and the polygraph examiner.
See, e.g., State v. Hall, 148 N.H. 671, 672 (2002) (explaining standard for
evaluating voluntariness of a confession after suppression hearing). Here, as in
Fernandez, “the trial court weighed the statutory factors and properly ruled
that the defendant had not met his burden of establishing necessity.”
Fernandez, 152 N.H. at 236 (quotation omitted).
In his brief, the defendant makes passing reference to “Part I, Article 15
of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth, Sixth and Fourteenth
Amendments to the United States Constitution.” “Because the defendant has
not developed his constitutional arguments, we decline to address them.” State
v. Lott, 152 N.H. 436, 443 (2005); see State v. Chick, 141 N.H. 503, 504 (1996)
(defendant waived constitutional claims by failing to elaborate on them.).
III. Amendments to the Indictments
The defendant argues that, although he did not object to the
amendments of his indictments below, the trial court committed plain error in
granting the State’s motion. He argues that the amendments were “a
substantive change in the charge” and not merely “a change in the form.” In
response, the State argues that time was not an element of any of the charged
offenses; thus, the amendments were a change in form, not substance. The
State further argues that the change was not prejudicial because the defendant
did not assert “an alibi defense” or other “defense based on lack of
opportunity.”
The plain error rule allows us to exercise our discretion to correct errors
not raised in the trial court that affect “substantial rights.” Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
To find plain error: “(1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain[;] (3) the
error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the
fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” State v.
Hancock, 156 N.H. 301, 303 (2007) (quotation omitted). We find error under
this rule “sparingly,” and only to prevent “a miscarriage of justice.” State v.
Matey, 153 N.H. 263, 266 (2006) (quotations omitted).
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution provides that “no subject shall
be held to answer for any crime, or offense, until the same is fully and plainly,
substantially and formally, described to him.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15. A
6
defendant “has a right to rely upon the information contained in an indictment
in preparing his defense, and a court cannot permit a defendant to be tried on
charges that are not made in the indictment against him.” State v. Erickson,
129 N.H. 515, 519 (1987) (quotation omitted). A trial court “may amend
indictments in form, but not in substance.” State v. Bathalon, 146 N.H. 485,
489 (2001); see RSA 601:8 (2001). Amendments in form are permissible
because “they do not jeopardize the right to be tried only on charges that have
been passed on by a grand jury.” State v. Elliott, 133 N.H. 759, 764 (1990)
(quotation omitted). Some amendments are not easily classified as affecting
the form or the substance of the indictment. Id.
[B]etween these two extremes is the amendment that does not alter
the crime charged in an indictment, but changes an allegation in
the indictment that has the effect of specifying and circumscribing
the scope of the crime alleged; for instance, an allegation of how
the crime was committed. Such an allegation is part of the
indictment's substance, but it is not as protected from trial court
amendment as an element of the offense charged.
Id. (quotation and citation omitted). The test for whether a changed allegation
“causes an impermissible amendment of the indictment is whether the change
prejudices the defendant either in his ability to understand properly the
charges against him or in his ability to prepare his defense.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
Here, the State’s amendment of the indictments was a change in the
allegation, which had the “effect of specifying and circumscribing the scope of
the crime alleged.” Id. (quotation omitted). Thus, the defendant must prove
that the change prejudiced his ability to “understand properly the charges” or
“prepare his defense.” Id. (quotation omitted). The defendant argues that he
prepared a defense only to any alleged assaults occurring between January 1,
2005 and December 1, 2005. We find no merit to this argument. During his
interview at the police station, the defendant admitted to being alone with the
victim on four occasions. At trial the defendant testified that he never touched
the victim, and any touching that may have occurred was accidental. This
argument does not rely upon the originally specified time frame. The defendant
has never asserted an alibi defense or lack of access to the victim; nor has he
established any prejudice to his defense due to the change in the time frame of
the indictments.
Further, the trial court granted the State’s motion on September 3, 2008.
The defendant’s trial was held in mid-November 2008. The defendant had
sufficient time to understand the charges and prepare any additional defenses
before trial. See id. The trial court committed no error, much less plain error,
in permitting amendment of the indictments.
7
IV. Evidence of the Victim’s Prior and Subsequent Allegations of Assault
Before trial, the defendant sought to introduce testimony from three
witnesses that the victim had made false allegations of sexual misconduct
against others, both before and after the allegations against the defendant.
The defendant argues that the trial court’s order granting the State’s motion to
exclude this evidence denied the defendant “the opportunity to inquire into and
cross-examine the truthfulness of his accuser.” The defendant argues that
under a Kornbrekke analysis, the victim’s “history of making false sexual abuse
allegations” was probative. See State v. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. 821 (2008). The
State argues that under Rule 608(b) of the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence,
the inquiry on cross-examination is only admissible if it is “probative of
truthfulness or untruthfulness.” The State argues that for none of the
witnesses “can it be said that the accusation was shown to be false, even by a
preponderance of the evidence.” In its brief, the State seeks to distinguish
Kornbrekke.
We afford the trial courts “broad discretion to determine the scope of
cross-examination or the admissibility of evidence.” Id. at 823. We review
challenges to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings under our unsustainable
exercise of discretion standard and reverse only if the rulings are clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case. State v. Forbes,
157 N.H. 570, 572 (2008).
Under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 608(b):
Specific instances of the conduct of a witness, for the purpose of
attacking or supporting the witness’ credibility, other than
conviction of crime as provided in Rule § 609, may not be proved
by extrinsic evidence. They may, however, in the discretion of the
court, if probative of truthfulness or untruthfulness, be inquired
into on cross examination of the witness . . . concerning the
witness’ character for truthfulness or untruthfulness . . . .
This Rule is limited by New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 403, which provides,
in pertinent part: “Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion
of the issues, or misleading the jury . . . .”
A. Extrinsic Evidence
As an initial matter, the defendant’s assertion that the three witnesses
would have testified at trial that the victim “had lied about allegations of sexual
misconduct” is immaterial because the defendant relies only upon the
Kornbrekke factors in his brief. (Quotation omitted). Kornbrekke applies
8
exclusively to cross-examination of a victim. Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 828.
Under Rule 608(b), extrinsic evidence presents a separate issue. See N.H. R.
Ev. 608(b). Typically, extrinsic evidence is not permitted to attack the
credibility of the victim. Id. “[D]efense counsel may cross-examine a State
witness about conduct that is probative of the witness’s character for
truthfulness or untruthfulness, but must take the answer the witness gives on
cross-examination.” State v. Kelly, 160 N.H. 190, 202 (2010) (quotation
omitted).
With other allegations of sexual assault, we have created an exception to
this bar on extrinsic evidence “where the allegations are similar, and the
proffered evidence is highly probative of the material issue of the complainant’s
motives.” State v. Ellsworth, 142 N.H. 710, 719 (1998). Thus, the defendant is
permitted to introduce extrinsic evidence of the victim’s prior allegations where
“the prior allegations were demonstrably false, which we interpret to mean
clearly and convincingly untrue.” State v. Brum, 155 N.H. 408, 414 (2007)
(quotations omitted).
The defendant relies solely upon the Kornbrekke factors in his brief,
thereby electing not to rely upon Ellsworth or the Rule 608(b) requirements for
the admission of extrinsic evidence. See Ellsworth, 142 N.H. at 719; N.H. R.
Ev. 608(b). Thus, we decline to address the trial court’s exclusion of extrinsic
evidence of the victim’s allegedly false allegations through the three witnesses’
testimony.
B. Cross-Examination
A trial court must also determine whether the evidence is admissible
during cross-examination of the victim under Rules 403 and 608(b). Kelly, 160
N.H. at 200. In Kornbrekke, we reiterated the factors that the trial court
should consider in determining the “interplay between Rules 403 and 608” to
determine the “degree of probative value” of the evidence:
(1) whether the testimony of the witness is crucial or unimportant;
(2) the extent to which the evidence is probative of truthfulness or
untruthfulness; (3) the extent to which the evidence is also
probative of other relevant matters: (4) the extent to which the act
of untruthfulness is connected to the case; (5) the extent to which
the circumstances surrounding the specific instances of conduct
are similar to the circumstances surrounding the giving of the
witness’s testimony; (6) the nearness or remoteness in time of the
specific instances to trial; (7) the likelihood that the alleged
specific-instances conduct in fact occurred; (8) the extent to which
specific-instances evidence is cumulative or unnecessary in light of
other evidence already received on credibility; and (9) whether
9
specific-instances evidence is needed to rebut other evidence
concerning credibility.
Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 825.
In their written and oral motions to the trial court, both parties relied
solely upon the Rules of Evidence and did not address the Kornbrekke factors.
Thus, the trial court relied solely on an analysis of Rule 403 in determining
that the “probative value of those allegations is minimal at best and that any
probative value they may have is substantially outweighed by the danger of
unfair prejudice - - confusion of the issues and misleading the jury.” See N.H.
R. Ev. 403. We will review the trial court’s decision to determine whether its
ruling reflects analysis of the factors we reiterated in Kornbrekke for
determining the admissibility of a victim’s prior false allegations during the
victim’s cross-examination. See Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 825.
In Kornbrekke, the victim had previously accused a man of sexual
assault and later recanted her statement in writing. Id. at 823. Here, the
victim made accusations of sexual assault against three other individuals, one
prior and two subsequent to the allegations in this case. DCF deemed the prior
instance substantiated. Although the perpetrator agreed to attend sex offender
counseling during which he admitted to the assaults, he was never charged.
DCF deemed the two subsequent allegations unsubstantiated for lack of
evidence, but not falsity.
Unlike Kornbrekke where the victim recanted her statement in writing,
id. at 823, the victim here maintains that the assaults did occur. We stated in
Kornbrekke, “The likelihood . . . the complainant in fact made a prior false
accusation . . . is a critical factor to the probative value analysis in this case. If
no such false accusation was made, then the cross-examination is not
probative of the complainant’s character for truthfulness or untruthfulness.”
Id. at 826.
“The defendant need not prove that a prior accusation was demonstrably
false in order to cross-examine the complainant about it; rather, the trial court
must assess whether the prior accusation is probative of truthfulness or
untruthfulness and otherwise admissible.” Id. at 824. In Brum, the fact “[t]hat
no charges related to the prior incident were filed did not transform the
account into a false one, and the trial court could have reasonably found that
the account was not probative of the complainant’s truthfulness or
untruthfulness.” Id. at 827; see Brum, 155 N.H. at 413-14.
A “critical factor” in the Kornbrekke analysis is whether the other
allegations of sexual assault were false; if they were not false, the evidence is
not relevant to show “untruthfulness” of the victim on cross-examination.
10
Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 826; see N.H. R. Ev. 608(b). Here, the “critical factor”
is missing. Id. The trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion
when it excluded evidence of the victim’s prior and subsequent allegations of
sexual assault under Rule 403, where there was a substantiated finding of
abuse in one instance and no evidence to show that any of the allegations was,
in fact, false. See N.H. R. Ev. 403. While the trial court should have specifically
applied the Kornbrekke factors, its rulings under Rule 403 were nevertheless
consistent with them. See Kornbrekke, 156 N.H. at 825.
V. Defendant’s Testimony
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in granting the State’s
motions that prevented him from testifying to the length of time that he spent
at the police station during his second interview and, thereby, misled the jury.
He contends that the trial court denied him the opportunity to show that his
confession was involuntary, a question for the jury to decide. The State
responds that the defendant’s motion to exclude testimony about the polygraph
examination prevented him from using the time spent conducting the
polygraph to his advantage at trial. The State argues that it would unfairly
mislead the jury to suggest that time spent conducting the defendant’s
polygraph examination was a part of the interrogation.
We hold that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion by
excluding testimony of the time the defendant arrived at the police station.
Rule 403 provides that evidence may be excluded from trial “if its probative
value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion
of the issues, or misleading the jury.” N.H. R. Ev. 403. “We accord the trial
court considerable deference in determining the admissibility of evidence,” and
we review challenges to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. State v. Giddens, 155 N.H. 175,
179 (2007). We will reverse the trial court only if the rulings are clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case. Forbes, 157 N.H.
at 572.
The trial court ruled that the defendant could not testify to the time he
spent in the police station for the polygraph test if the State could not explain
why the defendant was present in the station. If the defendant were to have
testified that he spent the morning at the police station with no reference to the
polygraph exam, the jury would have been misled by reasonably concluding
that the defendant had been interrogated for an additional three hours.
Under the “specific contradiction” branch of the opening-the-door
doctrine, the State would have been entitled “to introduce previously
suppressed or otherwise inadmissible evidence to counter the misleading
11
advantage” created by the defendant. State v. Wamala, 158 N.H. 583, 589
(2009).
When a defendant leaves the trier of fact with a false or misleading
impression, the State is entitled to counter with evidence to refute
the impression created by the defendant and cure the misleading
advantage. This rule prevents a defendant from successfully
excluding inadmissible evidence favorable to the State and then
selectively introducing pieces of this evidence for his own
advantage, without allowing the prosecution to place the evidence
in its proper context.
State v. Carlson, 146 N.H. 52, 56 (2001) (quotation omitted).
We note that other state and federal jurisdictions allow the prosecutor to
introduce testimony about a polygraph examination to rebut the defendant’s
testimony that his confession was coerced or involuntary. See United States v.
Allard, 464 F.3d 529, 534 (5th Cir. 2006) (“[A] polygraph examination is
admissible where it is not offered to prove the truth of the polygraph result, but
instead is offered for a limited purpose such as rebutting a defendant's
assertion that his confession was coerced.”); United States v. Johnson, 816
F.2d 918, 923 (3d Cir. 1987) (“[E]vidence concerning a polygraph examination
may be introduced to rebut an assertion of coercion of a confession . . . .”);
United States v. Kampiles, 609 F.2d 1233, 1244 (7th Cir. 1979) (“It would have
been unfair to allow defendant to present his account of his admissions, based
upon the alleged threats of [the Agent], without allowing the Government to
demonstrate the extent to which failure of the polygraph precipitated the
confession.”), cert. denied, 446 U.S. 954 (1980); People v. Jefferson, 705 N.E.2d
56, 61 (Ill. 1998) (“[T]he trial judge in this case correctly permitted the State to
rebut the defendant's claim of coercion with polygraph evidence.”); State v.
Baldwin, 808 S.W.2d 384, 392 (Mo. Ct. App. 1991) (“[T]estimony regarding the
polygraph was admissible to rebut the evidence elicited by the defendant about
the duration and circumstances of her interrogation . . . .”); State v. Hart, 791
P.2d 125, 127 (Or. 1990) (en banc) (“[I]f a defendant chooses to object to the
admission in evidence of a confession . . . [as involuntary] because of a
polygraph examination, the state in rebuttal is not precluded from offering the
statements or that they originated in a polygraph examination.”).
Having persuaded the trial court to exclude testimony about the
polygraph examination, the defendant was not entitled to present evidence that
would have misled the jury absent the excluded evidence. Accordingly, we
cannot say that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in
granting the State’s motions to exclude the defendant’s testimony about the
time of his arrival at the police station.
12
VI. Jury Instruction
During oral argument, the defendant for the first time challenged the
trial court’s jury instruction on the voluntariness of his confession. The
instruction provided that the jury should consider “the length of time that the
[d]efendant was questioned” as a consideration of the voluntariness of the
confession. The defendant did not object to the jury instruction at trial, nor did
he raise the instruction as an issue in his notice of appeal. Therefore, we
decline to address this argument and deem it waived. See LaMontagne
Builders v. Bowman Brook Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 276 (2003).
VII. Restitution
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred when it ordered
him to make restitution to the victim in an amount not to exceed $10,000 for
any counseling costs the victim may incur in the future as a result of the
defendant’s crime. He contends that the sentence to pay restitution is too
indefinite. To the extent that the defendant intends to raise this argument
under the State Constitution, we conclude that he has failed to preserve it for
our review. To preserve a state constitutional claim, the defendant must:
(1) raise it in the trial court; and (2) specifically invoke a provision of the State
Constitution in his brief. State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632 (1986). In the
trial court, the defendant argued that this sentence was unconstitutional under
State v. Rau, 129 N.H. 126 (1987). Even if we assume, without deciding, that
referring to Rau was sufficient to raise the issue in the trial court, the
defendant has failed to specifically invoke a provision of the State Constitution
in his brief. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. at 632; see State v. Reynolds, 124 N.H. 428,
432 (1984) (although defendant’s brief referred extensively to state case law,
the defendant did not cite a New Hampshire constitutional provision and thus
did not raise a state constitutional issue). Accordingly, we will not perform a
state constitutional analysis. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. at 633.
We also decline to perform a federal constitutional analysis. In the trial
court, the defendant did not refer to the Federal Constitution. Thus, he has
failed to demonstrate that he preserved a federal constitutional argument for
our review. See State v. DeCato, 156 N.H. 570, 573 (2007).
Therefore, we analyze only whether the trial court’s restitution order
complies with New Hampshire statutory law. RSA 651:61-a, I (2007) states, in
pertinent part: “The legislature finds and declares that the victims of crimes
often suffer losses through no fault of their own . . . . It is the purpose of this
act to establish a presumption that the victim will be compensated by the
offender who is responsible for the loss.” RSA 651:61-a, II (2007) explains:
“The legislature does not intend that restitution be contingent upon an
offender’s current ability to pay or upon the availability of other compensation.
13
The legislature intends that the court increase, to the maximum extent
feasible, the number of instances in which victims receive restitution.” RSA
651:62, V (2007) defines restitution, in part, as “money or service provided by
the offender to compensate a victim for economic loss.” RSA 651:62, III (2007)
explains that economic loss “means out-of-pocket losses or other expenses
incurred as a direct result of a criminal offense.” Pursuant to RSA 651:63, I
(Supp. 2009), “[a]ny offender may be sentenced to make restitution in an
amount determined by the court.” If a court chooses not to order restitution, it
must state its reasons therefore. RSA 651:63, I. “Restitution may be ordered
regardless of the offender’s ability to pay and regardless of the availability of
other compensation”; however, it “is not intended to compensate the victim
more than once for the same injury.” Id.
“Determining the appropriate restitution amount is within the discretion
of the trial court. If the factual basis for restitution is disputed, however, the
State must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the loss or damage is
causally connected to the offense and bears a significant relationship to the
offense.” State v. Eno, 143 N.H. 465, 470 (1999) (citation and quotation
omitted).
We conclude that the trial court’s order requiring the defendant to pay
restitution to the victim in the future up to a maximum of $10,000 for
counseling costs occasioned by his crime does not violate the applicable
statutes. Nothing in these statutes precludes a trial court from ordering a
defendant to pay restitution for future economic losses caused by his or her
crime. Accordingly, the trial court did not err by ordering the defendant to pay
restitution to the victim in the future for counseling costs she incurs as a
result of his crime.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
14