THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-641
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GERALD NELSON
Argued: September 8, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 27, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Gerald Nelson, appeals the decision of the
Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) denying his motion to dismiss his indictment for
failure to comply with the time limits imposed by the Interstate Agreement on
Detainers. See RSA 606-A:1 (2001). We affirm.
The following facts are not in dispute or are supported by the record. In
October 2008, while the defendant was incarcerated in Maine, he was indicted
in Rockingham County on one charge of deceptive forestry business practice.
See RSA 227-J:15 (Supp. 2009). On January 14, 2009, the State received the
defendant’s request for a speedy trial pursuant to the Interstate Agreement on
Detainers (IAD). RSA 606-A:1. The IAD establishes procedures for the
resolution of outstanding charges against a prisoner being held in another
state. Id.; State v. Sprague, 146 N.H. 334, 335-36 (2001). The IAD requires
that a defendant “be brought to trial within 180 days” after “his request for a
final disposition” is provided to the prosecuting officer. RSA 606-A:1, art. III(a).
The defendant was arraigned on February 19, 2009. He appeared
without counsel and the trial court entered a plea of not guilty on his behalf.
Trial was scheduled for March 9, 2009. At the arraignment, the defendant
requested court-appointed counsel. The trial court instructed him that if he
wanted appointed counsel, “it means we can’t have your trial on March 9th.
The lawyer has to get prepared and read the file and understand the case.”
The trial court asked whether he understood, to which the defendant replied, “I
did not know that, no. . . . I do now, yes.” The trial court then stated:
There are certain deadlines in the IAD law that require you to be
tried within a certain amount of time, but if you need time for a
lawyer, then that portion of time that you need is going to be
stayed. So it won’t count against the - - time-wise in the IAD.
The trial court then asked if the defendant understood, to which he replied, “I
do now, yes.” The trial court then continued the trial and scheduled a status
conference for March 23, 2009.
Defense counsel was present at the March 23 status conference. The
trial judge suggested a trial date in November, to which defense counsel
replied, “Is there any way we can do it quicker, like in a quick date? I can be
ready real quick.” The trial judge suggested a week in August, and the State
suggested the week of August 3, 2009. The trial judge agreed to the week of
August 3, to which defense counsel replied, “Thanks.” The court scheduled the
final pretrial conference for July 23, 2009, and defense counsel stated,
“Okay. . . Thank you.”
At the final pretrial conference on July 23, the defendant filed a motion
to dismiss the indictment for violation of the IAD time limits, asserting that 183
days had passed between his request for disposition and the conference date.
This calculation did not include the seven days between the defendant’s
request for counsel on February 19 and the public defender’s appointment on
February 26. The State objected to the motion, arguing that the entire time
period from February 19 to March 23 should be tolled as a reasonable and
necessary continuance to allow defense counsel to prepare for trial. The State
calculated that, by excluding those thirty-two days, only 169 days would have
passed under the IAD on August 3, 2009, the date of trial.
2
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion, finding that it had granted
a reasonable and necessary continuance for good cause to allow defense
counsel to adequately prepare for trial. The trial court tolled the time period
from January 21, 2009, the day the defendant was notified of the arraignment
and received a financial affidavit, to February 26, 2009, the day counsel was
appointed for the defendant. The defendant filed a motion to reconsider, which
was denied. Simultaneously, the State moved for clarification of the tolling
dates, arguing that the defendant waived his IAD rights and the tolling
occurred from February 19 to March 23. The trial court granted the State’s
motion “consistent with [paragraph] 10.” Paragraph ten of the State’s motion
reads: “Therefore the time between February 19, 2009 and March 23, 2009, a
total of 32 days, should be excluded from the 180 day limit. Thus on August 3,
2009 the total days counted against the limit would be 169 days . . . .” On
August 7, 2009, the defendant pled guilty, but reserved the right to appeal the
denial of his motion to dismiss. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the 180-day time limit imposed by the IAD
began to run on January 14, 2009, the day he requested the disposition of his
detainer, and expired before his trial on August 3, 2009. His opening brief,
however, addresses only the trial court’s first order on the motion to dismiss; it
does not address the trial court’s subsequent clarification of the tolled period in
response to the State’s motion.
The State argues that the defendant waived his appeal by failing to
address the trial court’s subsequent order in his opening brief. (We note that
the defendant did address it in his reply brief.) Additionally, the State argues
that the trial court properly tolled the IAD limitation period from February 19,
2009, the day the defendant requested court-appointed counsel, to March 23,
2009, the day of the status conference, to allow defense counsel to prepare for
trial. The State further argues that the defendant waived his right to a speedy
trial under the IAD by agreeing to a trial date outside of the 180-day time limit.
The denial of the defendant’s motion to dismiss an indictment under the
IAD presents a question of law, which we review de novo. State v. Brown, 157
N.H. 555, 556 (2008). In addition, “[a]s a congressionally sanctioned interstate
compact, the IAD is a federal law subject to federal construction.” Id. at 557.
We assume, without deciding, that the defendant did not waive his
objection to the trial court’s clarification order by failing to address it in his
opening brief. Both parties agree that January 14, 2009, the day the State
received notice of the defendant’s request for disposition of detainer, is the
commencement date of the 180-day time limit. See Fex v. Michigan, 507 U.S.
43, 51 (1993). The defendant concedes that the limitation period was tolled
from February 19 to February 26 while the trial court appointed defense
3
counsel. Thus, the issue is whether the trial court correctly ruled that the IAD
limitation period was tolled from February 26 to March 23. We hold that it did.
The 180-day limitation period under the IAD can be extended in three
circumstances. Brown, 157 N.H. at 557. First, the IAD provides that “for good
cause shown in open court, the prisoner or his counsel being present, the court
having jurisdiction of the matter may grant any necessary or reasonable
continuance.” RSA 606-A:1, art. III(a). Second, “the running of said time
periods shall be tolled whenever and for as long as the prisoner is unable to
stand trial, as determined by the court having jurisdiction of the matter.” Id. at
art. VI(a). Third, “in certain circumstances, a defendant may waive his IAD
speedy trial rights.” Brown, 157 N.H. at 557; State v. McGann, 126 N.H. 316,
321 (1985).
We find that the trial court granted a necessary and reasonable
continuance for “good cause shown” to allow defense counsel to prepare for
trial. RSA 606-A:1, art. III(a). There is “good cause” to grant a “reasonable”
and “necessary” continuance to allow defense counsel “time for adequate trial
preparation.” State v. Brown, 125 N.H. 346, 350 (1984). Here, the defendant
chose not to go to trial without counsel and instead sought court-appointed
counsel. The trial was delayed to allow the court to appoint counsel and to give
counsel the opportunity to prepare for a “meaningful” status conference.
“Delays in bringing the defendant to trial caused by the defendant’s request or
a delay to accommodate the defendant are not counted toward the [IAD] time
limit.” Sprague, 146 N.H. at 337.
We also find that the defendant waived the IAD time limits from February
19 to March 26. The trial court clearly advised the defendant at his
arraignment that he was entitled to court-appointed counsel, but that this
appointment would delay his trial date. The trial court explained that defense
counsel would need time to “get prepared and read the file and understand the
case.” The defendant indicated that he understood. The trial court explained
to the defendant that the time during which appointed counsel could prepare
for trial would be “stayed” under the IAD. The defendant again indicated that
he understood. The trial court continued the trial scheduled for March 9,
2009, and scheduled instead a status conference on March 23, 2009, to “give
the lawyer enough time” for a “meaningful” conference. The defendant
understood and expressed his assent.
At oral argument, both parties addressed the extent to which State v.
Dolbeare, 140 N.H. 84 (1995), remains good law in light of New York v. Hill,
528 U.S. 110 (2000). In Dolbeare, the defendant did not object when the court
rescheduled his trial date outside of the IAD time limits. Id. at 85. We held
that the trial court properly dismissed the indictment because his silence alone
did not amount to a waiver. Id. at 87. Subsequently, the United States
4
Supreme Court held that defense counsel’s agreement to a trial date outside of
the IAD limits constituted a waiver of the time limits. Hill, 528 U.S. at 118.
We need not decide the viability of Dolbeare, however, as the facts of Dolbeare
are distinguishable from the present case. Here, the defendant was not merely
silent; he affirmatively assented to the continuance after the implications of it
were adequately explained to him.
In summary, we hold that the trial court had good cause to grant a
reasonable and necessary continuance to allow defense counsel to adequately
prepare for trial. We further hold that the defendant waived his IAD speedy
trial rights for the entire period from his arraignment on February 19 until the
status conference on March 23, for this adequate preparation. Since the trial
court properly tolled the IAD time limits during this period, the defendant was
brought to trial within the 180-day limit required by the IAD; thus, the trial
court properly denied the defendant’s motion to dismiss.
In light of these holdings, we need not decide whether defense counsel
waived the IAD time limits by agreeing to a trial date outside of the 180-day
period.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5