THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2009-199
JUDY ATWATER & a.
v.
TOWN OF PLAINFIELD
Argued: January 20, 2010
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2010
Clauson Atwood & Spaneas, of Hanover (Bradford T. Atwood on the brief,
and K. William Clauson orally), for the petitioners.
Schuster, Buttrey & Wing, P.A., of Lebanon (Barry C. Schuster on the
brief and orally), for the respondent, Town of Plainfield.
Thomas R. Hanna, of Keene, by brief and orally, for the intervenor,
Townline Equipment Sales, Inc.
BRODERICK, C.J. The petitioners, Judy Atwater, Carolyn and John
McNellis, Diane MacDonald, and Ralph Demasi, appeal an order of the
Superior Court (Arnold, J.) dismissing their appeal of a decision of the Town of
Plainfield Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) for lack of jurisdiction. We affirm.
I
The record reveals the following facts. At a hearing on August 7, 2006,
the Plainfield Planning Board (planning board) voted to conditionally approve
an application for site plan review of the intervenor, Townline Equipment Sales,
Inc. (Townline). On August 9, 2006, the town administrator, who also serves
as the official zoning administrator, sent a formal written notice of the planning
board’s decision to Townline. The decision stated that the planning board “has
conditionally approved the site plan review for the new Townline Equipment
Facility,” subject to a specific “precedent condition” and four specific
“subsequent conditions.” On August 23, 2006, after Townline’s engineers
submitted revised site plans addressing the conditions of approval, the
planning board gave final approval to the application.
The petitioners challenged the site plan approval in both superior court
and the ZBA. On September 5, they filed a verified petition in superior court
pursuant to RSA 677:15 to review the planning board’s decision, and on
September 6, they filed a “Petition to Appeal Planning Board Decision of Zoning
Issue Under RSA 676:5 (III)” with the ZBA. We previously resolved procedural
issues related to the superior court petition in Atwater v. Town of Plainfield,
156 N.H. 265 (2007). At issue in this appeal is whether the appeal to the ZBA
was timely filed.
On September 25, 2006, the ZBA denied the appeal on the grounds that
it was filed late. In a letter to the petitioners’ counsel, the ZBA stated:
The Board of Adjustment is in receipt of your “Petition to Appeal
Planning Board Decision of Zoning Issue under RSA 676:5 (III).”
Under the terms of that statute, appeals to the zoning board must
be made within a reasonable time “as provided by the rules of the
board.” Section 5.5 of the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance provides
that appeals of matters like those subject to RSA 676:5 must be
appealed to the zoning board within fifteen days of the action
which is the subject of the appeal.
Since the appeal was received on September 6, 2006 and the
Planning Board action on which the appeal is based occurred on
August 9, 2006, more than fifteen days elapsed and therefore the
zoning board is without jurisdiction to hear the appeal and
therefore declines to take any action on this matter.
The petitioners moved for reconsideration, arguing that: (1) their appeal was
made before the fifteen-day deadline; and (2) the fifteen-day period did not
begin to run until August 23, 2006. The ZBA denied the request for
reconsideration.
2
The petitioners appealed to superior court. Townline was allowed to
intervene. The Town of Plainfield (Town) and Townline each moved to dismiss
the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, arguing that the petitioners had
failed to exhaust their administrative remedies because they had not filed a
timely appeal with the ZBA. The petitioners objected. They argued that section
5.5 of the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance (ordinance) does not provide for a fifteen-
day deadline for an RSA 676:5, III appeal; that because section 5.5 is silent
regarding this appeal period, the reasonable time standard of RSA 676:5, I,
applies; and, therefore, they had filed their ZBA appeal within a “reasonable
time.” They also argued that the Town should be estopped from claiming
anything other than a thirty-day appeal period because the town administrator
and zoning administrator had advised them that their appeal would be timely if
it were filed within thirty days. The petitioners later supplemented their
objection, arguing that the appeal period did not begin to run until August 23,
2006, when the precedent condition for final approval had been met.
Shortly after filing their supplemental objection, the petitioners filed a
summary memorandum opposing the motions to dismiss. The petitioners
stated, among other things, that the Town had recently revealed in a pleading
that the Plainfield ZBA did have its own “Rules of Procedure.” The petitioners
had been unaware of the existence of these rules. The petitioners argued that
article 7.1 of the “Zoning Board of Adjustment, Plainfield, New Hampshire,
Rules of Procedure” expressly provides that RSA chapter 676 appeals to the
ZBA must be filed within thirty days of the date of the signing of the
administrative decision being appealed.
The superior court ruled that the petitioners failed to preserve both the
argument that because the rules of the board do not define “reasonable time”
as fifteen days, they filed within a “reasonable time,” and the estoppel
argument because they did not raise them in their motion for reconsideration
before the ZBA. The trial court also ruled that the planning board’s decision
with regard to the zoning issue was ripe for appeal on August 9, 2006.
Therefore, because the petitioners did not file an appeal with the ZBA within
fifteen days of August 9, their appeal was untimely. This appeal followed.
II
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the trial court erred when it
dismissed their appeal because: (1) the appeal period began to run on August
23, 2006, the date of the planning board’s final approval of Townline’s
application for site plan review; (2) even if the appeal period began to run on
August 9, their appeal was timely filed because the rules of the zoning board
provide for a thirty-day deadline for an RSA 676:5 appeal; (3) the fifteen-day
appeal period set forth in section 5.5 of the ordinance does not apply, and the
petitioners filed their appeal “within a reasonable time”; and (4) the Town
3
should be estopped from asserting the untimeliness of the appeal. The Town
and Townline contend that the appeal period began on August 9. They also
argue that we should decline to address the remaining arguments because the
petitioners failed to raise them in their motion for reconsideration before the
ZBA.
“Generally, in ruling upon a motion to dismiss, the trial court must
determine whether the allegations contained in the plaintiff’s pleadings
sufficiently establish a basis upon which relief may be granted.” Provencher v.
Buzzell-Plourde Assoc., 142 N.H. 848, 852-53 (1998). In making this
determination, the court would normally accept all facts pleaded by the
plaintiff as true and view those facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.
Id. at 853. However, when “the motion to dismiss does not challenge the
sufficiency of the plaintiff’s legal claim but, instead, raises certain defenses, the
trial court must look beyond the plaintiff’s unsubstantiated allegations and
determine, based on the facts, whether the plaintiff has sufficiently
demonstrated his right to claim relief.” Id. (quotation omitted). An assertion
that a claim should be dismissed because the trial court lacks jurisdiction to
hear the claim due to the plaintiff’s failure to exhaust its administrative
remedies is one such defense. We will uphold a trial court’s ruling in such a
case unless its decision is not supported by the evidence or is legally
erroneous. Mt. Valley Mall Assocs. v. Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642,
647 (2000).
III
We first address the petitioners’ argument that the trial court erred when
it dismissed their appeal because the appeal period began to run on August 23,
2006, and not, as the trial court found, on August 9, 2006. The petitioners
argue that because the planning board’s August 9, 2006 vote to conditionally
approve the application for site plan review contained a precedent condition, it
was not a final appealable decision. According to the petitioners, a zoning
issue is not appealable until a planning board renders its final approval of the
site plan. We disagree.
The question of when a planning board decision interpreting a zoning
ordinance becomes appealable presents an issue of statutory construction.
The interpretation and application of a statute is a question of law, and we
review the superior court’s ruling on that issue de novo. Cardinal Dev. Corp. v.
Town of Winchester Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 157 N.H. 710, 713 (2008).
When construing a statute, “[w]e first examine the language found in the
statute and where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
words used.” Appeal of Garrison Place Real Estate Inv. Trust, 159 N.H. 539,
542 (2009) (quotation omitted). However, “[w]e do not consider words and
phrases in isolation . . . but within the context of the statute as a whole,” in
4
order to “better discern the legislature’s intent and to interpret statutory
language in light of the policy or purpose sought to be advanced by the
statutory scheme.” Franklin Lodge of Elks v. Marcoux, 149 N.H. 581, 585
(2003).
To decide the question presented, we consider the language of two
related statutory provisions. RSA 677:15, I (Supp. 2009) provides, in pertinent
part:
Any persons aggrieved by any decision of the planning board
concerning a plat or subdivision may present to the superior court
a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal or
unreasonable in whole or in part and specifying the grounds upon
which the same is claimed to be illegal or unreasonable. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the
date upon which the board voted to approve or disapprove the
application . . . . This paragraph shall not apply to planning board
decisions appealable to the board of adjustment pursuant to RSA
676:5, III.
RSA 676:5, III (2008), in turn, sets forth procedures for appeals to a board of
adjustment. It provides, in pertinent part:
If, in the exercise of subdivision or site plan review, the
planning board makes any decision or determination which is
based upon the terms of the zoning ordinance, or upon any
construction, interpretation, or application of the zoning
ordinance, which would be appealable to the board of adjustment
if it had been made by the administrative officer, then such
decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment under this
section . . . .
RSA 676:5, I (2008) states that “[a]ppeals to the board of adjustment
concerning any matter within the board’s powers . . . may be taken by any
person aggrieved . . . . Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as
provided by the rules of the board . . . .”
Read together, RSA 677:15, I, and RSA 676:5, III establish two separate
avenues of appeal from a decision of the planning board, depending upon the
nature of the claim. See Hoffman v. Town of Gilford, 147 N.H. 85, 88 (2001). A
party may appeal planning decisions directly to the superior court pursuant to
RSA 677:15, I. However, when the planning board makes a decision “based
upon the terms of the zoning ordinance, or upon any construction,
interpretation, or application of the zoning ordinance,” a party must first
appeal that decision to the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to RSA 676:5,
5
III. Only after the board of adjustment has rendered a decision may the issue
be appealed to the superior court pursuant to RSA 677:4 (Supp. 2009).
The plain language of RSA 677:15, I, makes clear that planning issues
are ripe for appeal to the superior court when the board has voted to approve
or disapprove the application, and that such appeals are to be taken within
thirty days of that approval or disapproval. However, RSA 677:15, I,
specifically exempts from these appeal requirements appeals pursuant to RSA
676:5, III. The plain language of RSA 676:5, III, in turn, makes clear that when
a planning board makes a decision applying or interpreting a zoning ordinance,
that decision must be appealed to the zoning board of adjustment pursuant to
the procedures set forth for appeals to the board of adjustment under RSA
676:5. RSA 676:5, I, provides that such appeals “shall be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board,” but is silent as to when
the appeal period begins to run. Absent direction from the language, we look
to the overall policy and purpose sought to be advanced by the statutory
scheme to aid in our determination. See Smith v. N.H. Bd. of Psychologists,
138 N.H. 548, 551 (1994) (where statute silent as to remedy for violation of
time limit, court looked to statutory goals to determine appropriate mode of
enforcement).
As we have noted, RSA 677:15, I, and RSA 676:5, III together create two
separate appeal processes when a planning board decision is based upon both
zoning and planning issues. While the statutes allow a party to appeal
planning issues associated with a plat or subdivision directly to the superior
court, they also provide for an initial layer of review at the local level for
decisions involving the interpretation or application of a zoning ordinance.
Hoffman, 147 N.H. at 88. The legislature has provided this initial layer of
review “to ensure uniform application of local zoning laws.” Id. at 88. We
believe that the overall policy and purpose sought to be advanced by this
statutory scheme is best served by interpreting RSA 676:5, III to mean that a
planning board decision about a zoning ordinance is ripe and appealable to the
ZBA when such a decision is made. This will allow a zoning board to correct
any alleged errors made by the planning board as early as possible in the
application review process. We agree with the superior court that “it makes
little sense to require that the planning board’s approval of a site plan be final
before a party can appeal to the ZBA on a zoning issue ‘including something as
fundamental as whether the proposed use is allowed by the zoning ordinance.’”
This is not a case in which requiring a party to wait until a planning
board has voted to approve or disapprove the application to bring the appeal
would better apply judicial or administrative resources. Cf. Piane v. Town of
Conway, 118 N.H. 883, 884 (1978) (policy of looking less favorably upon
requests for interlocutory appeals in civil cases better applies judicial
resources). To the contrary, as the Town and Townline point out, planning
6
board reviews may involve months of reviews and meetings. Zoning
determinations are often made by a planning board at the very beginning of the
application review process, and subsequent decisions by a planning board are
often based upon these zoning determinations. Allowing or requiring parties to
wait until a final vote of the board before challenging zoning determinations
would be inefficient, and would impose significant hardship on applicants
seeking site plan approval. As a practical matter, it makes far more sense to
resolve the question of whether a planning board’s interpretation or application
of the zoning ordinance is accurate as early as possible in the application
review process.
Nothing in the plain language of RSA 677:15, I, or RSA 676:5, III requires
that the planning board first complete its consideration of the planning issues
involved in a site plan review, or that the applicant satisfy the conditions
imposed on a site plan application prior to the zoning board considering the
zoning issues on appeal. Indeed, RSA 676:5, III speaks of appealing
determinations made “in the exercise of . . . site plan review,” and, unlike RSA
677:15, does not identify the date of the planning board vote to approve or
disapprove the application as the date upon which the appeal period begins to
run.
The petitioners argue that the planning board’s imposition of a
“precedent condition” to its site plan approval is “critical to the timing of an
appeal in this case.” According to the petitioners, it is only after the condition
precedent has been satisfied that there is a “final approval that is a ‘decision of
the planning board’ from which an aggrieved party may appeal.” However, the
cases the petitioners cite in support of this proposition involve direct appeals of
planning board decisions to the superior court under RSA 677:15, see Prop.
Portfolio Group v. Town of Derry, 154 N.H. 610 (2006), or its predecessor, RSA
36:34, see Sklar Realty v. Town of Merrimack, 125 N.H. 321 (1984); Totty v.
Grantham Planning Board, 120 N.H. 388 (1980), overruled in part on other
grounds by Winslow v. Holderness Planning Board, 125 N.H. 262, 269 (1984).
While these cases hold that only final approval constitutes a decision of the
planning board that may be appealed to the superior court pursuant to RSA
677:15, we agree with the superior court that “there is no indication either in
these cases or in RSA 676:5, III, that the parties must wait for final approval of
the site plan before they bring an appeal to the ZBA challenging the planning
board’s interpretation or application of a zoning ordinance.”
Because none of the parties contends that the decision to conditionally
approve the application for site plan review was made on August 7, we assume
without deciding, as the trial court did, that the date of the decision was
August 9. The board voted to approve Townline’s site plan at a hearing on
August 7. The planning board then informed Townline that it had approved
the site plan in a letter dated August 9. While the planning board imposed a
7
condition precedent on final approval of the overall site plan, the condition did
not implicate any issue appealable to the ZBA. Therefore, as the superior court
found, “Although the planning board may not have rendered final approval of
the plan until August 23, it had already made a decision regarding the zoning
issue on August 9.”
IV
We next consider whether the petitioners failed to timely file their appeal
because they did not file within fifteen days of the August 9 decision. The
petitioners argue: (1) that the rules of the zoning board provide for a thirty-day
deadline for an RSA 676:5 appeal; (2) regardless of whether the rules of the
board apply, the fifteen-day appeal period set forth in section 5.5 of the
ordinance does not apply, and the petitioners filed their appeal within a
“reasonable time”; and (3) even if their appeal period is fifteen days, the Town
should be estopped from asserting the untimeliness of the appeal. The
superior court ruled, and the Town and Townline argue on appeal, that the
petitioners failed to preserve these arguments because they did not raise them
in their motion for reconsideration before the ZBA. We agree.
RSA 677:3, I (2008) provides, in pertinent part:
No appeal from any order or decision of the zoning board of
adjustment . . . shall be taken unless the appellant shall have
made application for rehearing . . . and, when such application
shall have been made, no ground not set forth in the application
shall be urged, relied on, or given any consideration by a court
unless the court for good cause shown shall allow the appellant to
specify additional grounds.
“The statutory scheme is based upon the principle that the local board should
have the first opportunity to pass upon any alleged errors in its decisions so
that the court may have the benefit of the board’s judgment in hearing the
appeal.” Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. Town of Wilton, 153 N.H. 234,
238-39 (2006) (quotation omitted). Thus, if a party fails to set forth in its
motion for rehearing alleged errors with respect to the ZBA’s decision, the party
is barred from raising those grounds in an appeal to the superior court unless
the court, for good cause shown, orders otherwise. Id. at 239.
The petitioners argued at the superior court level, and on appeal to this
court, that the ZBA erred when it concluded that the petitioners had only
fifteen days to appeal the planning board’s decision to the ZBA. The superior
court declined to address this argument because the petitioners failed to raise
it in the motion for reconsideration they filed with the ZBA. The superior
court’s ruling is amply supported by the record.
8
The record reflects that the ZBA concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to
hear the petitioners’ appeal because RSA 676:5, I, requires appeals to be filed
“within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board,” and,
according to the ZBA, section 5.5 of the ordinance “provides that appeals of
matters like those subject to RSA 676:5 must be appealed to the zoning board
within fifteen days of the action which is the subject of the appeal.” Because
the planning board’s decision had been made on August 9, and the appeal was
filed September 6, the ZBA concluded that it lacked jurisdiction to hear the
appeal. The petitioners moved for reconsideration, arguing that their appeal
was made before the 15-day deadline, and that the appeal period did not begin
until August 23. The petitioners did not, however, challenge the ZBA’s
conclusion that the length of the appeal period was fifteen days. Following the
denial of their motion for reconsideration, the petitioners appealed to superior
court. The Town and Townline filed motions to dismiss, to which the
petitioners objected. In their objection, the petitioners initially argued that
section 5.5 of the ordinance did not apply to an RSA 676:5, III appeal of the
planning board’s approval of an application for site plan review. They asserted
that, “[s]ince the 15 day appeal period set forth in § 5.5 of the Ordinance does
not apply and the ‘rules of the board’ are otherwise silent as to a specific time
period, then the Court must determine whether the plaintiffs filed their appeal
with the ZBA within a ‘reasonable time.’” In its response to the petitioners’
objection, the Town stated that the ZBA did, in fact, have rules of procedure,
which were available at the Town office.
Thereafter, the petitioners filed a summary memorandum opposing the
motions to dismiss. The petitioners argued, for the first time, that RSA 676:5,
I, makes clear that appeals taken pursuant to the statute “shall be taken
within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board,” and that the
rules of the board actually define the appeal period in such cases to be thirty
days, not fifteen days. In ruling on the motions to dismiss, the superior court
acknowledged that there “may be merit to [the petitioners’] argument” that the
applicable rules of the board do not define “reasonable time” as fifteen days,
and that an appeal brought within thirty days of the planning board’s decision
is sufficient, but ruled that it would not consider the issue because the
petitioners had failed to raise it in their motion for reconsideration with the
ZBA.
On appeal, the petitioners argue that they should not be barred from
arguing that the length of the appeal period is thirty days because they were
not “aware of the existence of the ZBA’s Rules of Procedure . . . until well after
their appeal to the superior court, despite their best efforts to determine when
an appeal was due.” To the extent that the petitioners argue that this provides
“good cause” to allow them to raise the issue in superior court despite the fact
that it was not raised at the ZBA, we find this argument unpersuasive.
9
RSA 676:5, I, makes clear that the ZBA’s rules of procedure dictate the
length of the appeal period. The Town represented in its pleadings at the trial
court level that the ZBA has rules that are available for inspection at the Town
office. Townline has represented on appeal that the rules of procedure were
available for public inspection at the Plainfield Town Clerk’s Office throughout
the entire appeal period. The petitioners have not challenged either
representation. Nor have the petitioners asserted that they ever requested a
copy of the ZBA rules of procedure from the Town, or that they at any point
went to the Town Clerk’s Office and asked to see the rules of procedure.
The petitioners also argue that the superior court erred in dismissing
their appeal because, regardless of whether the rules of the ZBA apply, the
fifteen-day appeal period set forth in section 5.5 of the zoning ordinance does
not apply, and the petitioners filed their appeal within a “reasonable time.”
Again, the record reflects that the petitioners’ motion for reconsideration did
not challenge the ZBA’s conclusion that the length of the appeal period was
fifteen days. Therefore, the superior court did not err when it declined to
consider this argument.
Finally, the petitioners argue that the superior court erred in dismissing
their appeal because the Town should be estopped from claiming anything
other than a thirty-day appeal period. According to the petitioners, the town
and zoning administrator informed Atwater that she had thirty days from
August 7, 2006, to appeal the planning board’s decision, and the petitioners
reasonably relied upon that date when filing their appeal. The trial court
declined to address this argument because the petitioners failed to raise it in
the motion for reconsideration they filed with the ZBA. The record indicates
that the issue was raised for the first time at the trial court, in the petitioners’
objection to the Town’s and Townline’s motions to dismiss. Accordingly, the
trial court did not err by declining to consider it.
Because we conclude that the petitioners’ RSA 676:5 appeal period began
to run with the planning board’s conditional approval of the application for site
plan review, and that the superior court did not err by declining to address the
petitioners’ remaining arguments, we affirm.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
10