THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-770
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DANIEL J. LETENDRE
Argued: October 14, 2010
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. Following a jury trial, the defendant, Daniel J. Letendre,
was convicted of two counts of aggravated felonious sexual assault and two
counts of simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a (2007); RSA 632-A:2 (2007). On
appeal, he argues that the Trial Court (Abramson, J.) erroneously: (1) admitted
statements the victim made concerning the defendant; and (2) permitted the
victim’s guardian ad litem to sit with her during her testimony. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant and the
ten-year-old victim, E.M., lived in the same apartment building. On March 18,
2008, E.M.’s parents went outside to investigate a loud noise, while E.M.
remained in the building. She testified that during this time the defendant
sexually assaulted her. While outside, E.M.’s parents observed her and the
defendant descending a staircase that was visible from the outside. Both
parents testified that E.M. was shaking and looked “like something happened,”
or as “if she had done something.”
E.M.’s mother then questioned her privately, and E.M.’s father contacted
the police. E.M. was subsequently taken to the hospital by ambulance where
she made statements to a sexual assault nurse examiner implicating the
defendant.
The State also alleged two other encounters between E.M. and the
defendant, which occurred between February 1 and March 17, 2008. The State
alleged that during one of these encounters, E.M. and the defendant engaged in
sexual intercourse, and in another, the defendant kissed E.M. using his
tongue. The defendant was indicted on four counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault and was also charged by information with two counts of simple
assault.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion in limine to exclude as hearsay
the statements E.M. made to Michelle McMurray, the sexual assault nurse
examiner, because they were made “for purposes of a criminal investigation
and not for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment.” The court denied the
motion. The defendant renewed his objection at trial and the court overruled
the objection after a hearing.
The defense also objected to the guardian ad litem’s request to sit beside
E.M. during her testimony, arguing that the guardian ad litem’s presence
would lend the victim’s testimony greater credibility and improperly affect the
emotions of the jury. The court also overruled this objection.
After the close of the State’s case, the court dismissed two of the counts
of aggravated felonious sexual assault. The jury convicted the defendant on
the remaining charges. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in admitting the
hearsay statements E.M. made to McMurray because there was insufficient
evidence to conclude that E.M. intended to make the statements for purposes
of medical diagnosis or treatment as required by New Hampshire Rule of
Evidence 803(4).
“We accord the trial court considerable deference in determining the
admissibility of evidence, and we will not disturb its decision absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion.” State v. Legere, 157 N.H. 746, 758
(2008), cert. denied, 129 S. Ct. 1623 (2009) (quotation omitted). To
demonstrate an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must show
2
that the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the
prejudice of his case. Id.
“Hearsay is generally defined as an extrajudicial statement offered in
court to show the truth of the matter asserted in the statement.” State v. Soldi,
145 N.H. 571, 575 (2000) (quotation omitted). Hearsay evidence is generally
inadmissible, subject to certain well-delineated exceptions. Id.; see also N.H.
R. Ev. 801(c), 802.
One such exception, “Statements for Purposes of Medical Diagnosis or
Treatment,” applies to:
[s]tatements made for purposes of medical diagnosis or treatment
and describing medical history, or past or present symptoms, pain,
or sensations, or the inception or general character of the cause or
external source thereof insofar as reasonably pertinent to diagnosis
or treatment, regardless of to whom the statements are made, or
when the statements are made, if the court, in its discretion,
affirmatively finds that the proffered statements were made under
circumstances indicating their trustworthiness.
N.H. R. Ev. 803(4). The rationale for this exception is that statements made
with the purpose of obtaining medical attention are usually made with the
motivation to obtain an accurate diagnosis or proper treatment and thus there
is normally no incentive to fabricate. Soldi, 145 N.H. at 575-76.
We have interpreted Rule 803(4) as having a three-part test for the
exception to apply. State v. Graf, 143 N.H. 294, 303 (1999). “A court must
find first that the declarant intended to make the statements to obtain a
medical diagnosis or treatment.” State v. Roberts, 130 N.H. 731, 740 (1993).
Second, “the statements must describe medical history, or symptoms, pain,
sensations, or their cause or source to an extent reasonably pertinent to
diagnosis or treatment.” Id. at 741 (quotation omitted). Third, the court must
find that the circumstances surrounding the statements support their
trustworthiness. Id. at 743.
The defendant challenges the trial court’s findings regarding only part
one of this test. With respect to part one’s intent requirement, “we require
extra care in determining the declarant's intent” when the declarant is a child.
Graf, 143 N.H. at 303-04 (quotations omitted). This is because “[i]t is difficult
for a court to discover whether a young child completely understands the
purpose for which information is being obtained from her.” State v. Wade, 136
N.H. 750, 755 (1993).
The defendant argues that the first part was not met because E.M. “never
asked for nor declined any medical treatment, nor did [she] make any physical
3
complaints to McMurray that might have indicated she was seeking medical
assistance.” The defendant relies upon Wade, in which a five-year-old child
revealed to a pediatrician that she had been sexually assaulted. Id. at 752.
The trial court admitted her statements under Rule 803(4), stating, “[T]his falls
within 803(4), as this is taking a medical history. The doctor has testified what
his purposes were, and that he had concerns with respect to the safety of the
child . . . .” Id. at 753 (quotation omitted). The trial court also admitted similar
statements the child made to a gynecologist. Id. We reversed because,
although the doctors testified about their states of mind and intentions in
speaking with and examining the child, nothing in the record shed any light on
the child’s intentions in making the hearsay statements. Id. at 756.
Additionally, the trial court’s ruling indicated that it had conflated parts one
and two of the Rule 803(4) test. Id. at 756-57.
Here, however, the trial court considered each part of the Rule 803(4)
test separately and articulated the evidence that satisfied each part. With
respect to the first part, the court stated:
The first [part] is the declarant’s intent in making the
statements, which can be established by circumstantial evidence,
and in finding that this prong has been met, the Court notes that
she knew she was going to the hospital. The declarant knew she
was going to the hospital to be treated. And I base this on her fear
that she specifically testified that she knew if she went to the
hospital she was going to get a shot. In fact, I think her testimony
was that she did get a shot. But she certainly was aware what
could happen to her if she went to the hospital and that it would
involve treatment.
Further, the temporal relationship between the declarant’s
complaints, the upheaval in her home, and her visit by ambulance
to the hospital supports a finding that the declarant knew the
reason for her hospital visit [to be] related to both her physical and
her emotional health.
And finally, Nurse McMurray had explained to her what her
role as a nurse was and what the reasons for the exam were before
[E.M.] made the statements, so she knew at the time that she
made those statements that it involved treatment. So the first
prong has been met.
We conclude that the record contains ample evidence to support the trial
court’s finding of the declarant’s intent. E.M. was taken to the hospital by
ambulance shortly after she spoke with her mother about the defendant and
observed her parents crying in response to her revelations. Cf. State v. White,
145 N.H. 544, 555 (2000) (“temporal proximity” between complaints,
4
“emotional upheaval” surrounding the incident, and visit to the hospital
supports finding that declarant had requisite intent), cert. denied, 533 U.S.
932 (2001), petition for habeas corpus denied by White v. Coplan, 296 F. Supp.
2d 46 (D.N.H. 2003), vacated on fed’l constitutional grounds, 399 F.3d 18 (1st
Cir.), cert. denied, 546 U.S. 972 (2005). Later, when McMurray asked E.M.
why she had been taken to the hospital, she responded that “she was at
somebody’s house that was a couple of doors down from her, and that she was
in this person’s apartment where she had some [sexual] relations” with that
person. She also testified that she feared going to the hospital because she
might need to get a shot. Thus, E.M. associated hospitals with medical
treatment and understood the reason for her visit to the hospital to be related
to “sexual relations.”
While it is true that E.M. never complained of pain, see White 145 N.H.
at 555 (child’s complaint of pain was factor in finding that child understood
that hospital visit was for medical purpose), we disagree with the defendant’s
contention that she made no “complaints, let alone medical complaints,” and
that there was no evidence offered as to whether E.M. exhibited symptoms or
made any complaints that required an ambulance. E.M.’s parents testified that
she was “shak[ing] like something happened,” that she was noticeably upset
and scared, and that her arms were in “a protective position.” Later, after
E.M.’s mother questioned her privately, E.M. was “crying, yelling for mommy.”
This testimony supports an inference that E.M. was scared and upset about
what happened and that she understood that it affected her health and well-
being.
McMurray also testified that she explained to E.M. before questioning or
examining her that McMurray’s “role as a nurse was to make sure that she was
physically okay, that she didn’t have any bumps or bruises, of course in
terminology that she would understand, but that she didn’t have any bumps or
bruises that needed any kind of medical attention at that time.” While this
testimony is direct evidence of McMurray’s intent, it is also circumstantial
evidence of E.M.’s intent. See United States v. Renville, 779 F.2d 430, 438-39
(8th Cir. 1985) (eleven-year-old child’s statements to doctor admissible where
he explained to child before questioning her that his examination and
questions were necessary to treat her); see also Wade, 136 N.H. at 756 (citing
Renville for same proposition). A ten-year-old child could be expected to
understand such an explanation and tailor her statements to the medical
purpose McMurray articulated. Cf. White, 145 N.H. at 555 (inferring that
twelve- and eight-year-old declarants could be expected to understand medical
purpose of a visit to the hospital).
Finally, the defendant argues that an existing relationship between a
child and doctor is relevant to the child’s understanding of the purpose of a
medical visit. See Graf, 143 N.H. at 304. We agree that this factor, should it
be present, is relevant to determining the child’s understanding. However, we
5
have never held that this factor must be present for the Rule 803(4) exception
to apply. We therefore hold that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise
its discretion in finding that the first part of the Rule 803(4) test was satisfied.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in permitting the
guardian ad litem to sit beside E.M. during her testimony. Specifically, he
argues that “there was an insufficient basis upon which to find that such an
extraordinary accommodation was necessary.” He contends that “the
accommodation unfairly and improperly appealed to the emotions of the jury
and bolstered E.M.’s credibility.”
Before the State called E.M. to the stand, the guardian ad litem
requested to sit beside E.M. during her testimony. The guardian ad litem
indicated that her request was “based on what the victim ha[d] said to [her].”
Our case law and evidentiary rules make clear that the trial court enjoys
broad discretion in regulating the proceedings before it. See, e.g., Sabinson v.
Trustees of Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 461 (2010); N.H. R. Ev. 611(a).
We have also recognized that there is a legitimate state interest in “reduc[ing]
the trauma experienced by child victims during the judicial process.” State v.
LaPorte, 134 N.H. 73, 77 (1991). While we have never addressed the specific
issue of allowing support persons to accompany child witnesses while
testifying, numerous other jurisdictions have permitted such involvement. See,
e.g., State v. Menzies, 603 A.2d 419 (Conn. App. Ct.) (guardian ad litem sat
with six-year-old witness), cert. denied, 608 A.2d 690 (Conn. 1992); Baxter v.
State, 522 N.E.2d 362 (Ind. 1988) (mother held the hand of her nine-year-old
during testimony); State v. Johnson, 528 N.E.2d 567 (Ohio Ct. App. 1986)
(eight-year-old sat on aunt’s lap); Com. v. Pankraz, 554 A.2d 974 (Pa. Super.
Ct.) (four-year-old sat on grandmother’s lap), appeal denied, 563 A.2d 887 (Pa.
1989); Mosby v. State, 703 S.W.2d 714 (Tex. Ct. App. 1985) (guardian ad litem
sat 15-20 feet behind eleven-year-old witness). Additionally, a federal statute
sanctions the practice: “A child testifying at or attending a judicial proceeding
shall have the right to be accompanied by an adult attendant to provide
emotional support to the child.” 18 U.S.C. § 3509(i) (2006); see also Cal. Penal
Code § 868.5 (Deering Supp. 2010); Idaho Code § 19-3023 (Michie 2004); Mich.
Comp. Laws Ann. § 600.2163a(4) (West 2010).
The defendant urges us to require extensive safeguards before allowing a
support person to sit with a witness. He argues that we should adopt the
holding in State v. T.E., 775 A.2d 686 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div.), cert. denied,
784 A.2d 719 (N.J. 2001), which identified nine “factors to guide the trial
judge’s discretion in determining whether to permit” a support person to sit
with or assist a witness. These factors include a requirement for a preliminary
showing of “substantial need” for the accommodation, an opportunity for the
defendant to propose alternatives, a cautionary instruction to the support
6
person, and an instruction advising the jury of the support person’s purpose.
Id. at 697-98.
We decline the defendant’s invitation to set forth specific factors that a
trial court must consider in making such a determination. The trial courts are
well-equipped to identify and apply the relevant factors in each case. The trial
judge is in the best position to make a determination as to whether a third
party should accompany or support a child witness during testimony, and as
such we will not disturb the trial court’s ruling absent an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.
In this case, we cannot say that the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion in allowing the guardian ad litem to sit with the child witness
while she testified. According to the record, the child witness herself requested
that the guardian accompany her on the witness stand. The judge paid close
attention to the witness’s testimony to ensure that the guardian’s presence did
not influence it, and at defense counsel’s request, even asked the prosecutor to
direct the witness to look at the prosecutor and not at the guardian.
Considering the witness’s age and the subject matter of the testimony, it was
well within the trial judge’s discretion to allow the guardian to sit with the child
during her testimony.
The defendant further argues that the trial court should have given a
cautionary instruction to the jury to explain who the guardian was and that the
jury was not to give the witness’s testimony any additional weight as a result of
the guardian’s presence. The defendant never requested such an instruction at
trial. However, the jury should not be left to speculate as to the support
person’s role in the proceedings. Therefore, in the future, trial courts should
give a cautionary instruction, sua sponte, when a support person accompanies
a child witness while testifying. The instruction should identify the role of the
support person, and “advise the jurors that the purpose of the support person
is to attempt to place the child at ease while testifying and that the presence of
the support person should not affect their assessment of the credibility of the
child’s testimony.” T.E., 775 A.2d at 698. Because no instruction was
requested in this case, however, we cannot say that the failure to give such an
instruction was error. Cf. State v. Simonds, 135 N.H. 203, 207 (1991)
(defendant could not complain of error on appeal when he failed to request
limiting instruction or object to its absence at trial); State v. Hebert, 158 N.H.
306, 315 (2009) (defendant must object to trial court’s failure to give limiting
instruction to preserve issue for appellate review).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7