THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-745
ALLIANZ GLOBAL RISKS U.S. INSURANCE CO. & a.
v.
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE & a.
Argued: June 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 10, 2010
Campbell Campbell Edwards & Conroy, of Boston, Massachusetts (Adam
A. Larson on the brief) and Denenberg Tuffley, PLLC, of Southfield, Michigan
(Charles R. Tuffley & a. on the brief, and Jeffrey R. Learned orally), for the
plaintiffs.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Kevin H. O’Neill, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for defendant State of New Hampshire.
Ransmeier & Spellman, P.C. of Concord (Daniel J. Mullen on the
memorandum of law and orally) and Ronald F. Kehoe, assistant attorney
general, of Boston, Massachusetts, on the memorandum of law, for defendant
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiffs, Allianz Global Risks U.S. Insurance
Company (Allianz) and Henkel Corporation (Henkel), appeal a ruling of the
Superior Court (McHugh, J.) denying their motion for summary judgment and
granting summary judgment to the defendants, the State of New Hampshire
and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. We affirm.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or are undisputed
by the parties. Henkel, a manufacturer of adhesives and related products,
owns a sixteen-acre parcel of land in Seabrook that abuts Interstate Route 95
(I-95) near the New Hampshire-Massachusetts border. At all relevant times,
Allianz insured the property. Beginning on May 13, 2006, the area experienced
extraordinary rainfall of up to ten inches. Henkel’s property was flooded,
causing extensive damage to Henkel’s personal and real property. As a result,
Allianz paid Henkel in excess of two million dollars, while Henkel remained
responsible for its insurance policy’s $500,000 deductible. The building that
houses Henkel’s operations had flooded once before, during a hurricane in
October 1996.
The pertinent portion of I-95 was constructed in 1948 and was widened
in 1967. The defendants shared responsibility for building a deceleration lane
near the Henkel property in 1998.
The plaintiffs commenced this action in July 2007, alleging one count of
inverse condemnation.
In their claim against the State of New Hampshire, they contend that,
but for the design and construction of I-95, Henkel’s property would not have
flooded. As to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, they allege that
construction of the deceleration lane contributed to the conditions that caused
the flood.
The plaintiffs rely on the report of their expert geoscientist, Dr. Theodore
Hromadka, who concluded that the highway embankment acted as a dam,
forcing excessive amounts of water to be deposited on Henkel’s property. He
identified two factors that contributed to the 2006 flood damage: (1) the size
and location of a culvert running under I-95, which caused a ponding of water
on the Henkel property; and (2) the construction of the deceleration lane that
reduced culvert flow, raising ponding elevations on the property.
In contrast, the State’s expert identified the inadequacy of a culvert
under Henkel’s building as the cause of the 2006 flood damage. That culvert is
Henkel’s responsibility and is much smaller than the I-95 culvert. Both
experts agreed that the rainfalls which caused both the 1996 and 2006 floods,
in which some ten inches of rain fell over a one or two day period, were rare
2
and unusual events. The State’s expert described both storms as “100 year
occurrences.”
The trial court ruled that, as a matter of law, the plaintiffs’ inverse
condemnation claim failed for three reasons. First, “the loss of use of the
Henkel Corporation property was temporary, not permanent, and therefore did
not result in a ‘taking.’” Second, damage to the Henkel property during the
2006 flood was caused by an act of God. Third, no reasonable jury could have
found that an act or omission on the part of either of the defendants caused or
contributed to the flood.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that, contrary to the trial court’s ruling, a
temporary taking of real property is compensable under New Hampshire law.
They further allege that, apart from a taking of Henkel’s real property, there
was also a $1 million permanent taking of Henkel’s personal property which
was destroyed in the flood. The plaintiffs further maintain that summary
judgment was not warranted because genuine issues of material fact remained
as to whether the flood damage resulted from an act of God and whether acts
or omissions of the defendants caused or contributed to the flood damage.
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Big League Entm’t v.
Brox Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). “If our review of that evidence discloses
no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.”
Id. “We review the trial’s court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.”
Id.
“Inverse condemnation occurs when a governmental body takes property
in fact but does not formally exercise the power of eminent domain. Inverse
condemnation may be effected through either physical act or regulation. We
look to the individual circumstances of each case to determine whether there is
an unconstitutional taking.” Pennichuck Corp. v. City of Nashua, 152 N.H.
729, 733 (2005) (citations omitted).
The plaintiffs are correct that temporary takings of property are
compensable in New Hampshire. See Smith v. Town of Wolfeboro, 136 N.H.
337 (1992); Burrows v. City of Keene, 121 N.H. 590 (1981); Sundell v. Town of
New London, 119 N.H. 839 (1979). “Governmental action which substantially
interferes with, or deprives a person of, the use of his property in whole or in
part, may . . . constitute a taking, even if the land itself is not taken.” Sundell,
119 N.H. at 845 (upholding an inverse condemnation claim for injury to the
property rights of landowners where algae blooms caused by the defendant’s
3
intentional discharge of effluent had polluted waters adjacent to plaintiffs’
shoreline, but would dissipate over time).
To prevail on an inverse condemnation claim, however, a plaintiff “must
establish that treatment under takings law, as opposed to tort law, is
appropriate under the circumstances.” Ridge Line, Inc. v. United States, 346
F.3d 1346, 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2003). First, “a property loss compensable as a
taking only results when the government intends to invade a protected property
interest or the asserted invasion is the direct, natural, or probable result of an
authorized activity and not the incidental or consequential injury inflicted by
the action.” Id. (quotation and citation omitted; emphasis added). Second, the
court must “consider whether the government’s interference with any property
rights of [the plaintiff] was substantial and frequent enough to rise to the level
of a taking.” Id. at 1357; Cary v. United States, 552 F.3d 1373, 1376-77 (Fed.
Cir. 2009).
“[I]solated invasions, such as one or two floodings, do not make a taking,
but repeated invasions of the same type have often been held to result in an
involuntary servitude.” Ridge Line, 346 F.3d at 1357 (quotation omitted).
“Generally speaking, property may be taken by the invasion of water where
subjected to intermittent, but inevitably recurring, inundation due to
authorized Government action.” Barnes v. United States, 538 F.2d 865, 870
(Ct. Cl. 1976) (finding a taking of plaintiffs’ land which was flooded on an
intermittent, but sustained basis as a result of intentional releases from a
government reservoir system, where the parties stipulated that the releases
would continue in future years). “Government-induced flooding not proved to
be inevitably recurring occupies the category of mere consequential injury, or
tort.” Id. “[I]n order to create an enforceable liability against the Government,
it is at least necessary that the overflow be the direct result of the structure,
and constitute an actual, permanent invasion of the land, amounting to an
appropriation and not merely an injury to the property.” Sanguinetti v. United
States, 264 U.S. 146, 149 (1924).
The plaintiffs cite Capitol Plumbing & Heating Supply Co. v. State of New
Hampshire, 116 N.H. 513 (1976), in which recovery was permitted though
“there was no indication the event which caused the compensable temporary
taking was likely to recur.” In that case, however, the property owner’s legal
right of way was taken under the State’s eminent domain power and thus not
subject to the recurrence requirement. Here, the plaintiffs have produced no
evidence that the circumstances which caused the flood damage are inevitably
recurring. On the contrary, experts for both sides agreed that the 2006 storm
was a rare event. Under the circumstances, we conclude that there has been
no taking of Henkel’s real property.
4
As to the plaintiffs’ allegation that there was a permanent taking of
Henkel’s personal property destroyed in the flood, the plaintiffs acknowledged
at oral argument that New Hampshire case law has not recognized claims for
the inverse condemnation of personalty. They urge us to do so now and cite
Hawkins v. City of La Grande, 843 P.2d 400 (Or. 1992), in which the Oregon
Supreme Court ruled that a jury should be allowed to consider a claim for
inverse condemnation of personal property where no land was taken. That
case, however, provides no support because the personal property damage
there allegedly occurred as a result of intentional governmental conduct that
directly caused the personal property loss. When unusual weather conditions
threatened the overflow of La Grande’s sewer ponds, employees of the city’s
sewer treatment plant intentionally released sewage-laden water, which flooded
the plaintiffs’ farmland, killing crops and livestock. Here, however, the
governmental conduct at issue – the construction of I-95 – did not constitute
an intentional invasion of Henkel’s property; thus, the personal property
damage constituted, at most, consequential damage resulting from government
conduct.
We recognize that several states permit claims for the inverse
condemnation of personal property, including California, Florida, Louisiana,
and Missouri. See Sutfin v. State, 67 Cal. Rptr. 665, 666 (Cal. Ct. App. 1968);
Flatt v. City of Brooksville, 368 So. 2d 631 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1979);
Holzenthal v. Sewerage & Water Bd. of New Orleans, 950 So. 2d 55 (La. Ct.
App. 2007); Shade v. Missouri Highway and Transp. Com’n, 69 S.W.3d 503
(Mo. Ct. App. 2001).
Even states that allow compensation for the inverse condemnation of
personal property, however, preserve the distinction between compensable
takings and mere consequential injuries, even for the total destruction of
personal property. See South Florida Water v. Basore of Florida, 723 So. 2d
287, 289 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1998) (holding that the destruction of crops in
that case was “a consequential damage resulting from the temporary flooding
and not a constitutional taking”); Broward County v. Rhodes, 624 So. 2d 319
(Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1993) (concluding, “[u]nless Plaintiffs can demonstrate that
a taking of constitutional dimension has occurred, any recovery would be
limited to Plaintiffs’ companion claim of negligence”); cf. In re Forfeiture of 1976
Kenworth Truck, 576 So. 2d 261 (Fla. 1990) (finding meritorious inverse
condemnation claim where plaintiff’s truck was not returned for two years after
government lost forfeiture proceedings and court ordered the truck’s return).
The facts of Warner/Elektra/Atlantic Corp. v. County of DuPage, 991
F.2d 1280 (7th Cir. 1993), are similar to those here. The plaintiff’s warehouse
was located 800 feet from a county highway. A drainage ditch along the
property ran under the highway. Torrential rains caused the drainage ditch to
overflow and flood the warehouse on two occasions. There was evidence at trial
5
that alterations to the highway had contributed to the flooding by impeding
drainage flow. The plaintiff alleged inverse condemnation of the personal
property in the warehouse that had been destroyed by the flood waters. Under
these circumstances, the court characterized the destruction of the personal
property not as a taking, but as consequential damage. Id. at 1285.
We conclude that, as in Warner/Elektra/Atlantic, the alleged destruction
of Henkel’s personalty constituted only consequential damage and, accordingly,
is not compensable as a taking. Thus, we need not address whether an inverse
condemnation claim is cognizable for loss of personalty. In light of our decision
here, we need not address the plaintiffs’ remaining arguments.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6