THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-451
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
SAAD MOUSSA
Argued: February 16, 2012
Opinion Issued: August 31, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Saad Moussa, appeals his convictions, and
sentences, on three counts of stalking, see RSA 633:3-a (Supp. 2004) (amended
2005, 2006), entered following a jury trial in Superior Court (McHugh, J.). We
affirm.
I. Background
The jury could have found, or the record supports, the following facts. In
2005, the Rockingham County grand jury returned three indictments against
the defendant, each alleging a separate incident of stalking the victim, to whom
he had been married for approximately eleven years. According to the victim’s
testimony, they were divorced at the time of trial. Each charged incident
involved the defendant allegedly sending a letter to the victim “after having
been served with or otherwise provided notice of a protective order issued by
the Salem Family Court on 12/10/04, that prohibited him from having contact
with [her].”
On the morning of trial, the defendant’s appointed lawyer, Neil Reardon,
informed the court that he “had spoken with [the defendant] earlier and [the
defendant] asked [him] not to represent him,” and that the defendant had “also
sent [him] correspondence to that effect.” After hearing from the defendant, the
court stated: “Well, here’s where we are. I mean, if you don’t want him to
represent you, I’m not going to force it on you, but I’m not going to continue the
case either, you’re going to represent yourself. If you want to do that, you can.”
The defendant confirmed that his “final decision” was that he did not want
Reardon. He said that he would represent himself, but asked the court to give
him “a little bit more time” to conduct the investigation he claimed Reardon
had not done. The court denied that request and asked Reardon to stay in the
courtroom in case “something should come up or [the defendant] changes his
mind.” On the second day of trial, after the defendant had absented himself
from the proceedings, the court released Reardon from further involvement in
the case.
At trial, the victim testified that each of the letters was written in Arabic
in the defendant’s handwriting. Nevertheless, each letter purported to be from
someone other than the defendant – specifically, in the words of the first letter,
“a benefactor and a family friend.” The first and second letters were
purportedly sent by Carlos Santana, with return addresses of New York City
and the Bronx, respectively. The third had no return address but was
postmarked from Manchester, New Hampshire. The State produced evidence
that the defendant’s fingerprints were found on each letter. The victim also
testified that some of the letters repeated threats the defendant had made to
her in the past: “Exactly – same words in them.”
The third letter mentioned “a Lebanese who was in prison with [the
defendant] and he got out from jail.” The letter further stated, “As far as I
know, that guy seeking trouble.” Salem Police Sergeant Eric Lamb testified
that he investigated that claim and discovered that an individual named Oner
Nusret had been incarcerated with the defendant and had been released. The
victim testified that she did not know anyone by that name.
On cross-examining the victim, the defendant inquired how he could
have sent a letter to her if he was in custody at the time. He asked, “Does she
2
have a stamp from the jail or not?” The State addressed this issue in its
closing argument:
[The defendant] says to you, I couldn’t possibly have sent these
[letters]. He told you he was incarcerated at the time and they
don’t come from the jail. Folks, no one is saying he put these in
the mailbox himself. You’re not required to find that he did. It’s
not something that has to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
. . . Nothing is going to prevent him from putting this letter in
another envelope, sending it to a friend who can drop it in the
mail because he knows these letters can’t come from him.
The defendant was convicted of all three counts and sentenced on each
to three and a half to seven years in state prison, to run consecutively and to
run consecutively to the defendant’s previously-imposed sentences. He now
appeals his convictions and sentences.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in: (1) requiring him to
choose between self-representation and representation by a lawyer he wanted
to dismiss; (2) making certain evidentiary rulings; (3) denying his request for
counsel at sentencing; and (4) imposing felony sentences. We address each
argument in turn.
II. Analysis
A. Representation Choice
The defendant first contends that because “[t]he right to counsel
encompasses the right to the effective assistance of counsel,” the trial court
could not put him “to the choice between representation at trial by a lawyer
who has deficiently prepared for trial, and self-representation.” While the
defendant’s claim implicates his constitutional right to counsel, he has not
cited a specific provision of the State Constitution on this issue either below or
on appeal. We therefore address his claim only under the Sixth Amendment to
the Federal Constitution. See State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632-33 (1986).
“It is well-established that it is within the [trial] court’s discretion to force
a defendant to choose between proceeding to trial with an unwanted attorney
and representing [him]self.” United States v. Woodard, 291 F.3d 95, 106 (1st
Cir. 2002).
The right of an accused to counsel of his choice . . . is not absolute.
. . . Thus, a trial court has discretion to limit the exercise of the right,
and, in doing so, should balance the defendant’s interest in retaining
3
counsel of his choice against the public’s interest in the prompt, fair and
ethical administration of justice.
United States v. Richardson, 894 F.2d 492, 496 (1st Cir. 1990) (quotation
omitted). We therefore review the trial court’s ruling on this issue for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Cf. Woodard, 291 F.3d at 106 (appellate
court reviews denial of request for substitute counsel for abuse of discretion);
State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise
of discretion standard).
The defendant did not request substitute counsel, but instead sought a
continuance to prepare to proceed pro se. Nevertheless, the issue is analogous
to a request for substitute counsel because the crux of both claims is the
unconstitutionality of a forced choice between self-representation and
ineffective assistance of counsel. Cf. Woodard, 291 F.3d at 106. Accordingly,
we find the following test, from the United States Court of Appeals for the First
Circuit, instructive:
When a defendant voices objections to counsel, the trial court
should inquire into the reasons for the dissatisfaction. In
evaluating whether a [trial] court’s denial of [a] motion for
substitution of counsel constituted an [unsustainable exercise] of
discretion, we consider the following factors: the timeliness of the
motion, the adequacy of the court’s inquiry into the defendant’s
complaint, and whether the conflict between the defendant and his
counsel was so great that it resulted in a total lack of
communication preventing an adequate defense.
Id. at 107 (quotations and citation omitted).
With regard to the first factor, the State argues that the defendant
“waited until the day of trial to tell the court he was dissatisfied with” Reardon.
The defendant counters that he expressed concerns about Reardon’s
representation as early as January 5, 2009, two months before the start of trial
on March 16, 2009. The record of the pretrial conference on January 5
indicates that the defendant had concerns about discovery and the infrequency
of communication between Reardon and himself. He did not attempt to
dismiss Reardon at that time, however, and the court addressed his concerns
about discovery by continuing trial for two months and securing Reardon’s
agreement that if, after having reviewed the letters at issue, “there’s something
in those letters that ma[de] [him] think that it’s in [the defendant’s] best
interest to contact witnesses and have them potentially testify, . . . [he] would
do that.”
4
The defendant’s first attempt to dismiss Reardon appears to have been in
a letter to him dated February 21, 2009, claiming that although he had
represented the defendant for nearly two months and had almost one month to
conduct discovery, he did nothing. The defendant stated, “you didn’t do
anything or you file any motion in my behalf in this case, and NO visit from
you.” The letter, which was sent to the trial court, concluded, “I believe the
communication between us has broken down, and I NO longer wish for you to
represent me.” In a letter to the court dated the same day, the defendant
stated that he would like to address these issues “at the hearing on March 5,”
and requested to be transported to the court for the hearing. There appears to
have been no hearing on March 5. Thus, the defendant contends that his “first
opportunity . . . to address the court in person came on March 16, the first day
of trial.”
The defendant asserts that the foregoing facts belie the inference urged
by the State that he waited until the commencement of trial to complain about
Reardon “in order to disrupt the proceedings.” Regardless of the defendant’s
motivation, however, the remedy he sought would have “necessitate[d] a last-
minute continuance,” and we therefore “accord extraordinary deference to the
[trial] court’s decision” on the matter. Id. (quotation omitted).
The second factor assesses “the adequacy of the court’s inquiry into the
defendant’s complaint.” Id. (quotation omitted). Here, the court allowed the
defendant to explain his dissatisfaction with Reardon. The defendant stated
that communications with Reardon had “broken down” and that Reardon had
failed to conduct a proper investigation. The defendant explained that he had
provided Reardon with a list of witnesses he wanted to subpoena, but Reardon
had declined to subpoena nearly all of them. The defendant maintained that
his witnesses could have sent the letters to his wife. He also stated that he
wanted to call a witness from the jail where he was incarcerated to testify that
all mail sent from there was stamped. The lack of such a stamp on the letters
to his wife, he contended, would prove that those letters were not sent from the
prison, and thus, inferentially, could not have been sent by him. He stated
that his wife had access to his office, seeming to suggest that she could have
obtained paper with his fingerprints on it. In addition, he wanted to identify
any other fingerprints on the letters, as they could have been from “the person
who sent that letter to [his] wife.”
The court then sought input from Reardon, who stated that the
defendant wanted him to perform an investigation that he thought was
unnecessary: “[T]here’s relevant evidence in this case as to whether or not [the
defendant] wrote these letters and his fingerprints are on the letters and other
fingerprints could be or could not be, but that’s subject for cross-examination.”
He further explained:
5
[H]e wants me to pursue frivolous avenues that don’t go anywhere
and I’ve tried to explain that to him and I don’t want to do
nonsensical things in front of a jury because . . . it will only hurt
his case. And I’m trying to help this man if he’d only listen to me.
But he wants me to pursue evidence and witnesses that aren’t
relevant, Judge.
I mean, I went through his witness list with him and there
were a couple of witnesses that I think are relevant until I inquired
of one and he definitely indicated that he didn’t have any relevant
information.
We conclude that the court conducted an adequate inquiry.
The final factor considers “whether the conflict between the defendant
and his counsel was so great that it resulted in a total lack of communication
preventing an adequate defense.” Id. (quotation omitted). In other words, the
reviewing court must determine whether there was good cause for substitution
of counsel. United States v. Allen, 789 F.2d 90, 93 (1st Cir. 1986). “Good
cause for substitution of counsel cannot be determined solely according to the
subjective standard of what the defendant perceives.” Id. (quotation omitted).
In this case, we must determine whether Reardon’s preparation was so
deficient as to constitute ineffective assistance. Cf. Monroe v. United States,
389 A.2d 811, 820 (D.C. 1978) (noting that “allegations of the inability of
counsel to render effective assistance at trial due to lack of preparation rise to
the level of a claim of a Sixth Amendment deprivation”).
“An attorney is not obligated to pursue weak options when it appears, in
light of informed professional judgment, that a defense is implausible or
insubstantial.” Woodard, 291 F.3d at 108 (quotation omitted).
[S]trategic choices made after thorough investigation of law and
facts relevant to plausible options are virtually unchallengeable;
and strategic choices made after less than complete investigation
are reasonable precisely to the extent that reasonable professional
judgments support the limitations on investigation. In other words
counsel has a duty to make reasonable investigations or to make a
reasonable decision that makes particular investigations
unnecessary. In any ineffectiveness case, a particular decision not
to investigate must be directly assessed for reasonableness in all
the circumstances, applying a heavy measure of deference to
counsel’s judgments.
Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 690-91 (1984).
6
The defendant argues that Reardon’s assertion that he could make the
point about the lack of a prison stamp on cross-examination, and the trial
court’s finding on that issue, “demonstrated a failure to understand the nature
and significance of the evidence.” He contends that “[a]t the March 16,
hearing, [he] proffered that jail policies would have prevented him from
enclosing the . . . letters and envelopes in mail sent from the jail even to a third
person, without the letters and envelopes bearing a jail stamp.”
We note that it is not clear that the defendant’s proffer related to the
internal contents of an envelope mailed from the prison. The defendant told
the trial court that he had twice spoken with a prison official, whom he
identified as “Captain Church” or “Lieutenant Captain Church,” who had “said
no mail sent from the prison, okay, from the – from the jail without stamp. . . .
I need letter sent[] out from the prison should be stamped. As the result of
what I see in the copy, there’s no stamp present and that letter is not sent in
the prison.” He stated that even if the envelope was his, “you need that
envelope sent from the prison and should be stamped.”
Even assuming, however, that the defendant did make such a proffer, we
find no error. The State notes that Reardon did not say that he failed to
investigate the jail’s mail policy, but rather that he planned to cross-examine
the State’s witnesses on that issue. It then argues:
Reardon’s remarks strongly suggest that he had made such an
inquiry, and had discovered that, in fact, the jail would only have
stamped the outer envelope, thus making it possible for the State’s
theory to be valid. It is entirely understandable that Reardon did
not make his comments more explicit, since this would have made
the State’s job easier. His comment that he was “reserving those
issues for cross-examination,” implied that he was planning to
exploit the State’s failure to call a jail witness who could confirm
this policy. It seems more than a possibility that the trial court in
this case understood Reardon’s remarks in this light, and therefore
urged the defendant for a second time to retain Reardon as his
counsel.
(Citations omitted.)
We, of course, have no way of knowing whether the State’s supposition is
true. This uncertainty, however, underscores the high degree of deference with
which we review counsel’s performance. See id. at 689. “Because of the
difficulties inherent in making the evaluation, a court must indulge a strong
presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable
professional assistance; that is, the defendant must overcome the presumption
that, under the circumstances, the challenged action might be considered
7
sound trial strategy.” Id. (quotation omitted). The defendant here has failed to
overcome that presumption. “[A]pplying a heavy measure of deference to”
Reardon’s judgment, we cannot say that his strategic decision not to subpoena
Church was not supported by reasonable professional judgment. Id. at 691.
Accordingly, the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in
requiring the defendant to choose between self-representation and
representation by Reardon.
B. Evidentiary Rulings
The defendant next argues that certain evidentiary rulings by the trial
court constituted plan error.
The plain error rule allows us to exercise our discretion to
correct errors not raised before the trial court. For us to find plain
error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be plain; and (3)
the error must affect substantial rights. Generally, to satisfy the
burden of demonstrating that an error affected substantial rights,
the defendant must demonstrate that the error was prejudicial,
i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding. If all three of
these conditions are met, we may then exercise our discretion to
correct a forfeited error only if the error meets a fourth criterion:
the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public
reputation of judicial proceedings. This rule is used sparingly,
however, and is limited to those circumstances in which a
miscarriage of justice would otherwise result.
State v. Euliano, 161 N.H. 601, 605 (2011) (quotation and citations omitted).
1. Hearsay
The defendant asserts that the court erroneously admitted hearsay in the
form of statements by Sergeant Lamb that: (1) the victim told him she
recognized the defendant’s handwriting on the letters; (2) prison officials
confirmed the release of a Lebanese man named Nusret; (3) Nusret told him
that he knew the defendant from time they spent in jail together; and (4) the
victim told him she did not know Nusret.
The State argues that Sergeant Lamb’s testimony that the victim told him
she did not know Nusret is merely duplicative of her own testimony to that
effect. The same is true of Sergeant Lamb’s testimony about her recognition of
the defendant’s handwriting.
An allegedly wrongful admission of hearsay testimony does not
constitute plain error if such testimony is merely cumulative to
8
other evidence properly admitted. A defendant is not prejudiced by
hearsay testimony that is merely cumulative of evidence already
before the trial court, especially if that evidence was presented by
another witness who was subject to cross-examination.
State v. Garth, 352 S.W.3d 644, 656-57 (Mo. Ct. App. 2011) (citation omitted).
We find no plain error with respect to that testimony.
The State argues that the other challenged “testimony about Nusret,
which was minor circumstantial evidence tending to show that the defendant
wrote the letters, was inconsequential.” We agree. The significance of the
testimony about Nusret’s actual existence was minimal, particularly because
the State was not required to prove the truth of the assertions made in the
letters. To the extent the State relied upon the testimony to show that the
defendant wrote the letters, by reflecting knowledge that allegedly only the
defendant would have possessed, it was inconsequential in light of all the other
evidence pointing to him as the author of the letters, including his handwriting
and fingerprints. Because the defendant has not demonstrated that the alleged
error affected the outcome of the proceeding, we do not find plain error. See
Euliano, 161 N.H. at 605.
2. Fingerprint Evidence
The defendant next challenges the fingerprint evidence on the ground
that the State failed to establish a foundation for the fingerprint cards allegedly
bearing known prints of the defendant. At trial, Sergeant Lamb was asked to
explain how the “procedure work[s]” for having “something transferred to the
lab for fingerprinting.” After describing the general procedure, he stated that in
this case, he completed an evidence examination request form in which he
“asked for comparison prints to a known suspect, [the defendant].”
The State’s fingerprint examination expert testified that she performed a
fingerprint analysis on each of the three letters. She was asked if she had “a
sample of the defendant’s fingerprints in this case to compare the [latent
fingerprints on the letters] to,” and she replied, “Yes. I had a known recording
of them.” Specifically, she testified that she had two cards. The first bore the
defendant’s name and an address of “8 Lawrence Road, Salem, New
Hampshire.” The second bore an address of “Route 28, Manor Motel, Room
226.” She confirmed that the prints on both cards were of the same person.
The jury heard the victim testify that she lived at 8 Lawrence Road, Salem, New
Hampshire.
The defendant notes that the State failed to introduce testimony from the
person who took the prints purporting to be his on the cards and “introduced
9
nothing about a system of collecting and maintaining fingerprint records.” He
argues:
Insofar as the card was prepared out-of-court, the link asserted on
the card between [himself] and the fingerprint amounted to
hearsay. In order to justify the admission of that out-of-court
statement, the State had to introduce a foundation sufficient to
bring the hearsay within some exception.
(Citation omitted.) Noting that a foundation for fingerprint cards is often laid
using the business records exception, see State v. Howe, 159 N.H. 366, 373
(2009), he contends that the State failed to lay such a foundation here. He
then cites a number of out-of-state cases finding error in the admission of
unauthenticated fingerprint cards. See Louis v. State, 647 So. 2d 324 (Fla.
Dist. Ct. App. 1994); State v. Rich, 359 S.E.2d 281 (S.C. 1987); cf. State v.
Foster, 200 S.E.2d 782, 793 (N.C. 1973) (although card not introduced, court
noted in dicta that its admission would have been error).
These cases, as well as Howe, are inapposite, however, because the State
never sought to introduce the fingerprint cards purporting to bear the
defendant’s fingerprints. The defendant’s challenge, then, is not to the
admissibility of the cards themselves, but to the admission of the fingerprint
expert’s testimony. Thus, he argues: “In the absence of a foundation adequate
to link the known fingerprint on the cards to [him], the experts’ testimony
purporting to identify [him] as the source of the latent prints found on the
letters should not have been admitted.”
A more analogous case, then, is the Georgia Supreme Court’s decision in
Roebuck v. State, 586 S.E.2d 651 (Ga. 2003):
Appellant contends that the print card is hearsay, because it
was never formally tendered and admitted as a business record.
However, the testimony of the expert is what connects Appellant to
the crime, and admissibility of that inculpatory testimony does not
depend upon the admission of the print used by the witness to
compare with the one taken at the murder scene. Even if the
failure to proffer the print card as a business record renders it
hearsay, the rule in this state is that an expert may base his
opinion on hearsay. The presence of hearsay does not mandate
the exclusion of the testimony; rather, the weight given the
testimony is a question for the jury.
Roebuck, 586 S.E.2d at 655 (quotation, citations, brackets and ellipsis
omitted). Similarly, the court in In re D.Y., 34 A.3d 177 (Pa. Super. Ct. 2011),
concluded that the trial court did not err in admitting the opinion testimony of
10
a fingerprint technician linking latent fingerprints from the crime scene to the
appellant:
In this particular case, Technician Parson compared latent
fingerprints taken from the scene of the burglary at Ms. Francis’
home with a “ten print card” on file with the Philadelphia Police
Department, and determined that the fingerprints taken from Ms.
Francis’ home belonged to Appellant. The only issue is whether
the trial court abused its discretion in permitting Technician
Parson to testify to an alleged hearsay statement – i.e. that
Appellant’s name and fingerprints were on the ten print card. We
find that because Technician Parson was an expert and relied
upon the hearsay statement to form his opinion, he was properly
permitted to testify to the hearsay statement under [Pennsylvania
Rule of Evidence] 703 and 705.
In re D.Y., 34 A.3d at 182. We note that New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 703
is identical to Pennsylvania Rule of Evidence 703, and provides, in part, that
“[i]f of a type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field in
forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the facts or data [upon which
the expert’s opinion or inference is based] need not be admissible in evidence.”
N.H. R. Ev. 703. We also note that the defendant does not raise a
Confrontation Clause issue. Cf. Williams v. Illinois, No. 10-8505, 2012 WL
2202981, at * 6 (U.S. June 18, 2012) (plurality opinion) (concluding that “[o]ut
of court statements that are related by the expert solely for the purpose of
explaining the assumptions on which that opinion rests are not offered for their
truth and thus fall outside the scope of the Confrontation Clause”).
We need not go as far as Roebuck and In re D.Y, however. Because our
review on this issue is for plain error, it is not necessary for us to determine
whether there was actual error where the defendant has not met any of the
remaining prongs of the plain error analysis. First, even assuming, without
deciding, that it was error to admit the fingerprint examination expert’s
testimony without a more thorough foundation, the error is not plain. “For the
purposes of the plain error rule, an error is plain if it was or should have been
obvious in the sense that the governing law was clearly settled to the contrary.”
State v. Ortiz, 162 N.H. 585, 591 (2011) (quotation omitted). “The trial court’s
error in this matter could not have been ‘clear’ or ‘unequivocally obvious’
because this case presents an issue of first impression.” Id. We have not been
asked previously to decide whether Rule 703 permits admission of expert
testimony linking latent fingerprints with ostensibly “known” prints without an
adequate foundation linking the “known” prints to the defendant. Accordingly,
the error, if any, is not plain.
11
Moreover, the defendant has not demonstrated either that the error
affected substantial rights, “i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding,”
or “seriously affect[ed] the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Euliano, 161 N.H. at 605. The defendant has not argued that
the print cards are not in fact genuine; i.e., that the prints on the cards are not
his. Cf. United States v. Shields, 573 F.2d 18, 20, 22 (10th Cir. 1978) (finding
no plain error affecting substantial rights in admission of handwriting analysis
expert’s testimony, although “none of the documents used for comparison
purposes were identified at trial, admitted in evidence or found by the trial
court to contain the [defendant’s] genuine signature,” where “[n]o actual
challenge was made to the genuineness of the handwriting comparisons
testified to by” the expert). Moreover, the State asserts that the cards’
authenticity was supported by circumstantial evidence, specifically, the
presence of the defendant’s name and address on the cards, and cites Thomas
v. State, 824 So. 2d 1 (Ala. Crim. App. 1999), overruled on other grounds by Ex
parte Carter, 889 So. 2d 528, 533 (Ala. 2004), as rejecting “a similar claim of
plain error” where, inter alia, the card contained the defendant’s name, date of
birth, social security number, height, eye color, sex and race. Thomas, 824 So.
2d at 15, 64. The Thomas court concluded that “[a]lthough the prosecution
should have laid a proper foundation for the card, by other information, the
record presents ample circumstantial evidence from which one could
reasonably conclude that the fingerprints on [the card] were those of [the
defendant].” Id. at 64. Although the challenge raised here was to the
admission of hearsay rather than a lack of authentication, Thomas presents
sufficient factual similarity to inform our decision.
We emphasize that “[a] timely objection in the trial court as to the
foundation of technical evidence is necessary to give the State the opportunity
to correct any deficiency in the proof.” People v. Sparks, 780 N.E.2d 781, 784
(Ill. App. Ct. 2002). In this case, where the genuineness of the cards was not
challenged and their authenticity was supported by circumstantial evidence,
and where other evidence identifying the defendant as the letters’ author was
admitted at trial, including recognition of his handwriting and the similarity of
threats in the letters to prior threats made by him, we conclude that the
defendant has not demonstrated error affecting his substantial rights. See
United States v. Ward, 182 Fed. Appx. 779, 793 (10th Cir. 2006).
C. Comments on Evidence
The defendant next argues that the trial court committed plain error in
commenting on the evidence. Specifically, he argues that in the presence of the
jury, “the court described [the victim] as having testified that [the defendant]
physically abused her during their marriage,” and, in doing so, “endorsed the
most incriminating and damaging interpretation of [her] ambiguous testimony
on that point.”
12
At trial, the defendant cross-examined the victim about her fear of him,
asking, “What I did to you in my life?” and, specifically, “Did I push you? Did
I punch you? Did I threaten you?” The State objected and the victim did not
respond. After a break in the proceedings, the victim testified that the
defendant was “intimidating” throughout their marriage and “threatening” once
she decided to leave. Specifically, she testified that he threatened to “kill [her]
and send [her] dead in a box before Christmas to [her] family.”
During redirect, the State asked:
Q. Now the defendant asked you if he ever hurt you,
threatened you, things of that nature. Did the defendant ever hurt
you?
A. He used to – he was violent in a way – he did not consider
himself violent.
Q: Now you said that he was violent. What would he do?
THE COURT: Well, let me stop. Let me just remind the
State too that we’re trying here, the three letters and whether or
not there’s a basis for her feeling threatened. Her testimony is, as
yet unchanged, that she had a good faith basis for feeling
threatened.
[THE STATE]: I understand that but just for the record,
Judge, he opened the door when he asked her if he was violent
towards her, pushed her, hit her, anything of that nature which is
–
THE COURT: And her answer to the general question is
yes. I don’t think we need to know the details.
The defendant asserts that in her cross-examination testimony, the
victim “unequivocally alleged verbal threats, but . . . did not clearly allege
physical violence,” and that her testimony, therefore, “reflects at least some
ambiguity as to the issue of physical abuse.” He then argues that the court
erroneously “endorsed the most incriminating interpretation of [the victim’s]
testimony” by “saying that . . . [she] did allege physical violence.” We disagree.
“[A] trial judge is not prohibited from summarizing the evidence, so long
as he does not manifest bias in the presentation of evidence.” Euliano, 161
N.H. at 607 (quotation and brackets omitted). The court stated that the
victim’s “answer to the general question is yes” and that there was no need to
13
inquire into the details. (Emphasis added.) Given the immediately preceding
reference by the State to the defendant’s inquiring of the victim whether “he
was violent towards her, pushed her, hit her, anything of that nature,” we
interpret the “general question” to mean whether he was violent and the
“details” to refer to whether he pushed or hit her. Because the victim testified
that the defendant “was violent in a way,” the court’s comment on the evidence
was not inaccurate. The remainder of the court’s statement advised the State
that whether the violence involved physical abuse, such as pushing or hitting,
was irrelevant. We fail to see how these comments prejudiced the defendant,
and, therefore, “we are not persuaded that [they] give rise to plain error
affecting the defendant’s substantial rights.” Id. at 606.
D. Sentencing
Having rejected the defendant’s first two claims of error, we affirm his
conviction. We now turn to the defendant’s challenges to his sentence.
1. Request for Counsel
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his request for
counsel at sentencing. In a motion dated May 12, 2009, the defendant alleged
that he “had filed and sen[t] a Financial Affidavit for appoint[ment] of counsel
to represent[] [him] at the sentence hearing” and asked the court to “[a]ppoint[]
counsel[] to represent[] [him] in this matter.” The State objected at the
sentencing hearing on May 27, arguing that the defendant had waived his right
to counsel at trial “and this is obviously a continuation of the trial proceeding.”
The court stated from the bench that during the nearly five years the defendant
had been involved with the criminal justice system, he had been represented by
several lawyers, including Attorney Reardon and Attorney Joe Malfitani:
Joe Malfitani, who’s one of the top five criminal lawyers in this
state and has been for many years, has represented him. Neil
Reardon has also been a 25-year lawyer, dealing exclusively in
criminal matters, has represented him. And in both of those
instances, he was unable to communicate and work with those
lawyers. It would be highly unlikely that any other lawyer that I
might appoint for him would have any more success tha[n] those
seasoned criminal lawyers have had in the past, and that’s why I’m
not appointing a lawyer for him with respect to the issue of
sentencing.
In a written order issued following the sentencing hearing, the court
named six “experienced criminal lawyers” who had represented the defendant
since the indictments were handed down, and added, “Again, it is worth
repeating that the fact that the defendant did not have counsel was due
14
exclusively to his inability to work with a series of lawyers appointed for him in
the past.”
On appeal, the defendant challenges the denial of appointed counsel at
sentencing under the State and Federal Constitutions. Because “the defendant
failed to raise a state constitutional claim in the trial court,” however, “we . . .
confine our constitutional analysis to the requirements of the Federal
Constitution.” Euliano, 161 N.H. at 608. We review the court’s decision for an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See, e.g., United States v. Irorere, 228
F.3d 816, 827 (7th Cir. 2000); cf. Lambert, 147 N.H. at 296 (explaining
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard).
Though the right to counsel was originally a trial right, the
Supreme Court has extended the right to various “critical” stages
of the prosecution and has held that sentencing is one such
“critical” stage. Thus, whenever a defendant is denied counsel
during sentencing, the Supreme Court has uniformly found
constitutional error without any showing of prejudice.
Robinson v. Ignacio, 360 F.3d 1044, 1056 (9th Cir. 2004) (citations omitted).
That the defendant has previously waived his right to counsel at trial does not
justify a denial of counsel at sentencing. See id. at 1058-59. Thus, several
federal circuits have concluded:
[A] defendant who has waived his right to counsel may nonetheless
re-assert that right for the purposes of a sentencing proceeding
and cannot be denied on the grounds that the defendant has
previously waived that right. Instead, the trial court must have a
sufficient reason if that request is to be denied.
Id. at 1059.
The reason given here was the defendant’s inability to work with his
attorneys in the past. Other courts have upheld that reason as sufficient to
justify denial of counsel at sentencing. For instance, the court in Irorere found
no error where the trial “court found that the defendant, through his own
conduct, had already frustrated four attempts by the district court to provide
[him] with representation and had thereby waived his right to counsel.”
Irorere, 228 F.3d at 827. Similarly, in United States v. Sutcliffe, 505 F.3d 944,
(9th Cir. 2007), the court held:
Defendant was not unconstitutionally deprived of his right to
counsel at sentencing . . . [where] Defendant’s conduct forced
several successively appointed trial attorneys to request
withdrawal from representation, and the court eventually held that
15
Defendant had implicitly waived his right to counsel. . . .
Defendant was not entitled to the appointment of yet another
attorney to represent him at sentencing, having already waived
that right through his conduct . . . .
Sutcliffe, 505 F.3d at 962 (reviewing issue de novo).
We find these cases persuasive. Although the mere fact of a prior waiver
of counsel does not justify a denial of counsel at sentencing, the lesson of
Irorere and Sutcliffe is that the trial court may look to the circumstances
surrounding that waiver in determining whether the defendant has also
effectively waived his right to counsel at sentencing. “Whether the defendant
has waived his right to counsel is a practical determination that depends on
the particular facts and circumstances of each case, including the conduct of
the accused.” Irorere, 228 F.3d at 827 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “A
defendant can waive his right to counsel through conduct as well as words,”
United States v. Traeger, 289 F.3d 461, 475 (7th Cir. 2002) – in particular,
“through his own contumacious conduct.” Irorere, 228 F.3d at 826. We
conclude that a trial court making the determination here at issue is entitled to
take into account that it is dealing with “a defendant who refused to cooperate
with numerous appointed counsel.” United States v. Fazzini, 871 F.2d 635,
642 (7th Cir. 1989). The court here did not rely upon the mere fact of the prior
waiver, but explicitly explained that the denial of the defendant’s request for
counsel “was due exclusively to his inability to work with a series of lawyers
appointed for him in the past.” We find no unsustainable exercise of
discretion.
2. Felony Sentences
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by imposing
felony sentences. He contends that because RSA 633:3-a, VI “authorizes only
misdemeanor sentences under the circumstances here, the court committed
plain error in imposing felony sentences.”
RSA 633:3-a, VI (1996), the stalking statute, provides:
(a) Any person convicted of a violation of this section and who
has one or more prior stalking convictions in this state or another
state when the second or subsequent offense occurs within 7 years
following the date of the first or prior offense shall be guilty of a
class B felony.
(b) In all other cases, any person who is convicted of a
violation of this section shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor.
16
(Emphasis added.) The defendant points out that his prior conviction in 2004
was for violating a protective order, and not stalking.
The defendant’s indictments, however, also reference RSA 173-B:9, IV (c),
dealing with violations of domestic violence protective orders, and the State
contends that his felony sentences are authorized by that statute. RSA 173-
B:9, IV provides in relevant part:
Any person convicted under RSA 173-B:9, III, or who has been
convicted in another jurisdiction of violating a protective order
enforceable under the laws of this state, who, within 6 years of
such conviction or the completion of the sentence imposed for
such conviction, whichever is later, subsequently commits and is
convicted of one or more offenses involving abuse may be charged
with an enhanced penalty for each subsequent offense as follows:
. . .
(c) If the subsequent offense would otherwise constitute a class
A misdemeanor, it may be charged as a class B felony;
. . . .
RSA 173-B:9, IV (2002) (emphasis added). “Abuse” is defined to include
“[i]nterference with freedom as defined in RSA 633:1 through RSA 633:3-a.”
RSA 173-B:1, I(d) (2002) (amended 2010). Thus, the crime of stalking, as
defined in RSA 633:3-a, constitutes abuse for purposes of RSA 173-B:9, IV.
The parties appear to agree that RSA 173-B:9, IV and RSA 633:3-a, VI,
as applied to this case, ostensibly conflict, with RSA 173-B:9, IV authorizing
felony sentencing and RSA 633:3-a, VI prohibiting it. The issue before us,
then, is one of statutory construction.
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter
of legislative intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. We first examine the language of the
statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words
used. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the context of the
overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Our goal is to apply
statutes in light of the legislature’s intent in enacting them and in
light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory
scheme.
State v. Kidder, 150 N.H. 600, 602 (2004) (quotation and citations omitted). In
addition, “[w]e construe provisions of the Criminal Code according to the fair
17
import of their terms and to promote justice.” State v. Burke, 162 N.H. 459,
461 (2011) (quotation omitted); RSA 625:3 (2007).
The defendant urges another rule of statutory construction: “When
interpreting two statutes which deal with a similar subject matter, we construe
them so that they do not contradict each other, and so that they will lead to
reasonable results and effectuate the legislative purpose of the statute.”
Sanborn Regional Sch. Dist. v. Budget Comm. of the Sanborn Regional Sch.
Dist., 150 N.H. 241, 242 (2003) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). He also notes
that we will avoid an interpretation that renders a statutory term superfluous
or that leads to an absurd result. See State v. Duran, 158 N.H. 146, 155
(2008). He posits that RSA 173-B:9, IV can be read as not including stalking
convictions under RSA 633:3-a so long as that interpretation does not “render[]
RSA 173-B:1, I(d)’s reference to the stalking statute superfluous.” He then
asserts, “That problem does not arise here, though, because the inclusion of
stalking within the definition of ‘abuse’ has applications outside the criminal
sentencing context controlled by RSA 633:3-a, VI.” He cites, for instance, RSA
173-B:2, II (2002); :4, I (2002), and :5 (Supp. 2011).
We cannot subscribe to the defendant’s strained interpretation of these
statutes. As the State notes, to do so would require us to read an exception
into RSA 173-B:9, IV(c), so that it would apply to subsequent offenses “except
for offenses under RSA 633:3-a.” (Quotation omitted.) We do not, however,
“pick and choose those portions of the language we find controlling and subvert
those we do not,” and “[w]e will neither consider what the legislature might
have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include.” Id.
We instead find the following rule instructive:
It is a well-recognized rule of statutory construction that
where one statute deals with a subject in general terms, and
another deals with a part of the same subject in a more detailed
way, the latter will be regarded as an exception to the general
enactment where the two conflict.
Appeal of Johnson, 161 N.H. 419, 424 (2011) (quotation omitted). The State
points out that while RSA 633:3-a deals with stalking in general, RSA 173-B:9,
IV(c) applies to “a much more specific subset of the general group of offen[ses]
covered by RSA 633:3-a”; namely, “those offenses . . . committed ‘by a family or
household member or by a current or former sexual or intimate partner, where
such conduct is determined to constitute a credible present threat to the
petitioner’s safety,’ and where the defendant has previously been convicted of
violating a protective order.” (Quoting RSA 173-B:1, I (Supp. 2011).) The State
also notes that RSA 173-B:9, IV was enacted in 1999, six years after RSA
633:3-a, IV. “When a conflict exists between two statutes, the later statute will
18
control, especially when the later statute deals with a subject in a specific way
and the earlier enactment treats that subject in a general fashion.” Petition of
Public Serv. Co. of N.H., 130 N.H. 265, 283 (1988) (quotation omitted).
We conclude that RSA 173-B:9, IV applies in this case. We point out
that we need not find an implied repeal of RSA 633:3-a, VI to reach that
conclusion. See Board of Selectmen v. Planning Bd, 118 N.H. 150, 152-53
(1978) (noting that “implied repeal of former statutes is a disfavored doctrine in
this State”). Rather, we conclude that to the extent the statutes conflict, RSA
173-B:9, IV, as the more specific statute, controls. See Johnson, 161 N.H. at
424. We find this conclusion further supported by RSA 173-B:9, IV’s
“enhanced penalty” designation. RSA 173-B:9, IV. Accordingly, the trial court
did not err in imposing felony sentences, and, therefore, the defendant has
failed to meet the first prong of the plain error test. See Euliano, 161 N.H. at
605.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
19