THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-647
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JONATHAN A. PERFETTO
Argued: June 23, 2010
Opinion Issued: September 17, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union Foundation, of Concord (Barbara R.
Keshen on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Jonathan A. Perfetto, appeals an order
issued by the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying his motion to amend the
conditions of his suspended sentence. We affirm.
The following facts are undisputed. On March 13, 2002, the defendant
pleaded guilty to sixty-one counts of possession of child pornography. RSA
649-A:3 (2007) (amended 2008). As part of the plea agreement, the defendant
was sentenced to a stand committed term of three to seven years at the state
prison and four consecutive suspended sentences of three and a half to seven
years each. One condition of the suspended sentences is that the defendant
have no contact with minors under the age of seventeen. The defendant served
his stand committed sentence and was released in October of 2008.
The defendant moved to amend the conditions of his suspended
sentences so that he could attend meetings at the Manchester South
Congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses while being supervised by an elder
member of the congregation. The congregation is family-oriented, and children
are regularly present at the worship meetings. The defendant also requested
that he be allowed to converse among the entire congregation both before and
after the meetings. Without a hearing, the trial court denied the defendant’s
motion “for the reasons stated in the State’s objection.”
On appeal, the defendant asserts that the trial court’s order violates his
constitutional rights to religious freedom. He argues that the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution and Part I, Article 5 of the New Hampshire
Constitution require that when those rights are limited, the government must
utilize the “least restrictive alternative.” The defendant contends that the
prohibition on contact with minors impinges on his constitutional rights and
that the trial court erred by not tailoring the condition to satisfy the least
restrictive alternative test. He also claims that his due process rights under
the New Hampshire Constitution were violated when the trial court did not
hold a hearing on his motion. The State argues, among other things, that
these issues have not been preserved for appeal. Assuming, without deciding,
that his claims have been preserved, we first address the defendant’s religious
freedom argument under the State Constitution, citing federal opinions for
guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 5 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides:
Every individual has a natural and unalienable right to worship
God according to the dictates of his own conscience, and reason;
and no subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained, in his
person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping God in the manner and
season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience; or for
his religious profession, sentiments, or persuasion; provided he
doth not disturb the public peace or disturb others in their
religious worship.
The defendant contends that by not amending the conditions of his suspended
sentences to allow him to attend the congregation of his choice, he is being
deprived of the right to the free exercise of his religion. While the defendant is
not on probation, both the defendant and the State agree that the analytical
framework governing restrictions on probationers applies here.
2
The parties disagree, however, as to the standard for determining
whether a probation condition should be upheld. The defendant argues that
where a condition affects a probationer’s fundamental rights, the State must
show that the condition is the least restrictive alternative available. The State
counters that conditions of probation need only bear a reasonable relationship
to the rehabilitation of the probationer and protection of the public. At oral
argument, the defendant further asserted that the government must establish
a compelling interest to warrant infringing on a probationer’s fundamental
rights. For the purpose of this appeal, we will assume that the defendant’s
fundamental rights have been infringed.
“To remain at liberty under a suspended sentence is not a matter of right
but a matter of grace.” State v. Kessler, 13 P.3d 1200, 1205 (Ariz. Ct. App.
2000) (quotation omitted). “[P]robationers, like parolees and prisoners,
properly are subject to limitations from which ordinary persons are free,” but
“these limitations in the aggregate must serve the ends of probation.” United
States v. Consuelo-Gonzalez, 521 F.2d 259, 265 (9th Cir. 1975). “Conditions
that unquestionably restrict otherwise inviolable constitutional rights may
properly be subject to special scrutiny to determine whether the limitation does
in fact serve the dual objectives of rehabilitation and public safety.” Id.
“However, a court will not strike down conditions of release, even if they
implicate fundamental rights, if such conditions are reasonably related to the
ends of rehabilitation and protection of the public from recidivism.” United
States v. Schave, 186 F.3d 839, 843 (7th Cir. 1999).
We have previously held that to be constitutionally permissible, a
condition authorizing random warrantless searches of a probationer must be
reasonably related to the supervision and rehabilitation of the probationer.
State v. Zeta Chi Fraternity, 142 N.H. 16, 30 (1997); see also State v.
Berrocales, 141 N.H. 262, 263-64 (1996). We have not yet applied this test
where probation conditions potentially affect a probationer’s freedom of
religion. The defendant urges us, instead, to look to In re Caulk, 125 N.H. 226,
230 (1984) (holding that the State demonstrated an interest sufficiently
compelling to override a prisoner’s privacy right to fast until death), and hold
that there must be a compelling governmental interest to warrant restricting a
probationer’s fundamental rights. We decline to adopt such a requirement.
Merely because a convicted individual’s fundamental rights are
involved should not make a probation condition which limits those
rights automatically suspect. The development of a sensible
probationary system necessarily requires that the trial court be
vested with broad discretionary powers. It also requires that any
condition which is imposed following conviction, whether or not it
touches upon “preferred” rights, must be viewed in the context of
the [underlying goals of probation]. Thus, the crucial
3
determination in testing probationary conditions is not the degree
of “preference” which may be accorded those rights limited by the
condition, but rather whether the limitations are primarily
designed to affect the rehabilitation of the probationer or insure
the protection of the public.
Consuelo-Gonzalez, 521 F.2d at 265 n.14.
We note that the condition in this case does not directly infringe on the
defendant’s free exercise of his religion: it is instead facially neutral and applies
to the defendant’s conduct regardless of whether he is in a church or
elsewhere. Under these circumstances, we see no reason to require the State
to show a compelling government interest. Cf. Employment Div., Ore. Dept. of
Human Res. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872 (1990) (facially neutral, generally
applicable laws that incidentally touch upon an individual’s free exercise of
religion do not require the government to show a compelling interest); State v.
Emery, 593 A.2d 77, 80 n. (Vt. 1991) (because probation conditions are facially
neutral and have only an incidental impact on the defendant’s religious
freedom, analysis under the traditional freedom of religion standards is not
required).
The decision in People v. Branson, 360 N.W.2d 614 (Mich. Ct. App.
1984), is instructive. In Branson, two probationers were prohibited from living
at a religious encampment and limited to only four hours of religious services
at the encampment each week. Id. at 615. The court rejected the probationers’
constitutional claims, finding that the conditions bore a logical relationship to
their rehabilitation. Id. at 616-17. Because the underlying crime involved
violence against a young child living at the same religious encampment, the
court found that it was entirely appropriate to restrict the probationers’ time at
the encampment to further the ends of protecting the children of the
encampment. Id. at 616. The court noted that “[i]t is important to distinguish
between freedom of belief, which may not be restricted, and freedom to act,
which, as conduct, may be regulated.” Id. at 617. The court found that while
the probationers were limited in the time they could spend at the encampment,
the condition was neither absolute nor prohibitive because any member of their
religious community could join them in religious activities in an unlimited
fashion. Id.
Here, the defendant’s freedom of belief has not been restricted. He may
still practice his religion in ways that do not violate the condition of his
sentences, including the use of books and video and audio recordings. He may
also arrange bible study with elders from his congregation and attend meetings
at a congregation where minors are not present. While the defendant may
prefer to attend the congregation of his choosing, as a result of his suspended
4
sentences, he “properly [is] subject to limitations from which ordinary persons
are free.” Consuelo-Gonzalez, 521 F.2d at 265.
The dispositive question here is whether the suspension condition is
reasonably related to the rehabilitation or supervision of the defendant. See
Zeta Chi Fraternity, 142 N.H. at 30 (“In order for the grounds for the probation
condition to be reasonable, it need only further the rehabilitation or
supervision of the defendant.”). The record amply supports the conclusion that
the condition furthers these goals, and at oral argument the defendant
conceded as much. The defendant was convicted of sixty-one counts of
possessing child pornography. Prohibiting him from having contact with
children provides protection to the class of individuals exploited by him and
furthers his rehabilitation by limiting the circumstances which could lead to
his reoffending.
Because the Federal Constitution does not provide any greater protection
than does the State Constitution with regard to the defendant’s claims of error,
we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution. See Schave, 186
F.3d at 843.
The defendant also contends that the trial court violated his state due
process rights by not holding a hearing on his motion. See N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 15. “Our threshold determination in a procedural due process claim is
whether the challenged procedures concern a legally protected interest.” State
v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 637, cert. denied, 130 S. Ct. 748 (2009) (quotation
omitted). Assuming that the defendant has shown that his claim concerns a
legally protected interest, we cannot say that he was due any more process
than was provided by the trial court. “The requirements of due process are
flexible and call for such procedural protections as the particular situation
demands.” Id. at 642.
The parties do not dispute any of the relevant facts relating to the
defendant’s conviction and the condition of his suspended sentences. Neither
is there any dispute that minors will be present at the congregation’s meetings.
In his motion, the defendant outlined his proposed amendment to the
suspension conditions and referred to his constitutional rights. The State
objected and set forth the reasons for its argument that the subject condition
properly met constitutional standards. In his appeal brief, the defendant
contends that the court should have held a hearing to determine whether his
proposal would further the interests of his supervision, to hear testimony
regarding the size of the congregation and the number of minors attending
meetings, to evaluate the defendant’s risk to reoffend, and to make
observations of the proposed chaperone. None of these arguments were
asserted by the defendant in his motion. While the defendant may now point
5
to issues that could have been explored at a hearing, we do not conclude that
under these circumstances, due process required a hearing.
Furthermore, the defendant has not demonstrated that a hearing would
have established his entitlement to relief. The sentencing judge is accorded
broad discretion in imposing conditions of probation or suspension so long as
those conditions are reasonably related to the rehabilitation and supervision of
the defendant. See RSA 651:2, V(a) (2007) (“A person may be placed on
probation . . . under such conditions as the court may impose.”). Because the
conditions of the defendant’s suspended sentence are reasonably related to his
rehabilitation and supervision, the defendant would not be entitled to the
requested relief regardless of additional evidence he may have presented at a
hearing. Cf. Grote v. Powell, 132 N.H. 96, 99 (1989) (in habeas corpus
proceeding, “the court need not hold a hearing if the existing record of the case
clearly indicates that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief requested on the
grounds alleged”).
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
6