THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
Nos. 2009-102
2009-103
GENERAL INSULATION COMPANY
v.
ECKMAN CONSTRUCTION & a.
Argued: October 15, 2009
Opinion Issued: January 28, 2010
Sherman Law, PLLC, of Portsmouth (John P. Sherman on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Thomas J.
Donovan and Michael J. Kenison on the brief, and Mr. Kenison orally), for
respondents Eckman Construction, Northern Peabody, LLC and North
American Specialty Insurance Company.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Andover, Massachusetts (George R.
Moore and Anthony S. Augeri on the brief, and Mr. Moore orally), for
respondents Youngblood Co., Inc. and International Fidelity Insurance
Company.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, General Insulation Company, appeals from
an order of the Superior Court (Abramson, J.) granting the motions to dismiss
filed by respondents Eckman Construction (Eckman), Northern Peabody LLC
(Northern Peabody), North American Specialty Insurance Company (North
American), Youngblood Co., Inc. (Youngblood) and International Fidelity
Insurance Company (International Fidelity) (collectively, the moving
respondents). The trial court dismissed the petitioner’s petitions to enforce
statutory performance bonds because the petitioner failed to provide the
respondents with copies of the petitions within one year of filing its claims as
required by RSA 447:18 (2002). See RSA 447:16, :17 (Supp. 2009). The court
also dismissed the petitioner’s alternative claims for unjust
enrichment/restitution and quantum meruit because the petitions failed to
allege sufficient facts to support them. We affirm and remand.
I. Background
The record evidences the following facts. The petitioner claims that the
respondents did not pay for insulation and related materials it supplied to
respondent R & H Enterprises d/b/a Advanced Insulation (Advanced
Insulation) for a bonded project known as “Bedford Middle/High School
Project” in Bedford. Eckman was the general contractor on the project.
Northern Peabody and Youngblood were subcontractors to Eckman; Advanced
Insulation was a subcontractor to Northern Peabody and Youngblood.
According to the petitioner, North American was the surety on the statutory
performance bond issued to Northern Peabody, and International Fidelity was
the surety on the statutory performance bond issued to Youngblood. See RSA
447:16.
On March 15, 2007, the petitioner filed a notice of claim in superior
court pursuant to RSA 447:17. It amended this notice of claim on May 3,
2007. On March 6, 2008, the petitioner filed petitions in superior court to
enforce the statutory bonds and to assert common law claims for unjust
enrichment/restitution and quantum meruit. See RSA 447:18. The petitioner
did not provide the respondents with copies of its petitions, however, until
August 2008, after the court issued orders of notice to the respondents. See id;
see also Super. Ct. R. 124. The moving respondents moved to dismiss the
petitions, which the trial court granted, and this appeal followed. Advanced
Insulation did not join the motions to dismiss filed by the other respondents
and did not separately file a motion to dismiss. Accordingly, the petitioner’s
petitions against Advanced Insulation remain pending and we express no
opinion as to their validity.
2
II. Discussion
A. Compliance with RSA 447:18
1. Standard of Review
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erroneously interpreted
RSA 447:18 to require it to send copies of its petitions to the moving
respondents within one year of filing its claim under RSA 447:17. We review
the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Chesley v. Harvey Indus.,
157 N.H. 211, 213 (2008).
We are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the
words of the statute considered as a whole. Appeal of Parkland Med. Ctr., 158
N.H. 67, 72 (2008). We first examine the language of the statute, and, where
possible, ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. When
a statute’s language is plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for
further indication of legislative intent, and we will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation. Liam Hooksett, LLC v. Boynton, 157
N.H. 625, 628 (2008). Additionally, we do not consider words and phrases in
isolation, but within the context of the statute as a whole. Franklin Lodge of
Elks v. Marcoux, 149 N.H. 581, 585 (2003). This enables us to better discern
the legislature’s intent and to interpret statutory language in light of the policy
or purpose sought to be advanced by the statutory scheme. Id.
2. Overview
We begin with a brief general discussion regarding bonds issued for
public works projects and the statutory scheme that governs such bonds. “A
bond is a three-party instrument by which one party (the surety) guarantees or
promises a second party (the owner or general contractor) the successful
performance of contract obligations owed to the second party by its principal
(the contractor or subcontractor).” 3 S. Stein, Construction Law Appendix 9J,
at App. 9-27 (Sept. 2006). Three kinds of bonds are common in construction:
bid bonds, performance bonds, and payment bonds. Id. A bid bond
guarantees that the bidder will enter into the contract for the bid amount. Id.
“A performance bond guarantees to the owner that a prime contractor will
perform according to the contract referenced in the bond.” Id.; see Wolfeboro
Neck Prop. Owners Assoc. v. Town of Wolfeboro, 146 N.H. 449, 453 (2001). “A
payment bond assures the owner that the prime contractor will pay its
subcontractors and suppliers, who might otherwise file liens against the
owner’s property.” 3 Stein, supra at App. 9-27. “A performance bond is one
3
exacted for the protection of the public body to guarantee completion of a
project,” while “[a] payment bond is exacted for the protection of materialmen,
suppliers, and laborers who otherwise might be without recourse for payment
of their claims against the municipality.” 14 P. Loughlin, New Hampshire
Practice, Local Government Law § 789, at 45 (1995). In New Hampshire, “[a]ny
municipal contracts, especially capital building contracts, must have
provisions requiring the posting of performance and/or payment bonds.” Id.
“Performance and payment bonds can be separate documents or may be
combined.” 3 Stein, supra at App. 9-27.
RSA 447:16 to :18 govern bonding for public works projects. Although it
appears that these statutes only apply to payment bonds, see Loughlin, supra
§ 789, at 46, no party argues that they do not govern the bonds at issue even
though the petitioner characterizes them as performance bonds. We, therefore,
assume for the purposes of this appeal that RSA 447:16 to :18 govern the
bonds at issue.
RSA 447:16 provides:
Officers, public boards, agents or other persons who contract
in behalf of the state or any political subdivision thereof for the
construction, repair or rebuilding of public buildings, public
highways, bridges or other public works shall if said contract
involves an expenditure of $25,000, and may if it involves an
expenditure of less amount, obtain as a condition precedent to the
execution of the contract, sufficient security, by bond or otherwise,
in an amount equal to at least 100 percent of the contract price, or
of the estimated cost of the work if no aggregate price is agreed
upon, conditioned upon the payment by the contractors and
subcontractors for all labor performed or furnished, for all
equipment hired, including trucks, for all material used and for
fuels, lubricants, power, tools, hardware and supplies purchased
by said principal and used in carrying out said contract, and for
labor and parts furnished upon the order of said contractor for the
repair of equipment used in carrying out said contract.
The purpose of this provision, which was first enacted in 1927, is “to furnish
an alternative security to lienors, in general more practically adapted to protect
them and at the same time to save the state or municipality from annoyance.”
Petition of Keyser, 97 N.H. 404, 407 (1952) (quotation omitted); Guard Rail
Erectors Inc. v. Company, 86 N.H. 349, 350 (1933).
To obtain the benefit of bonds issued pursuant to RSA 447:16, a
claimant must “within 90 days after the completion and acceptance of the
project by the contracting party” file with the proper public entity “a statement
4
of the claim.” RSA 447:17. A copy of the statement of claim is then “sent by
mail by the office where it is filed to the principal and surety.” Id. We have
held that the failure to comply with the statutory requirement that a statement
of claim be filed with the designated party “is usually held fatal.” American
Fidelity Co. v. Cray, 105 N.H. 132, 136 (1963); see Fastrack Crushing Servs. v.
Abatement Int’l/Advatex Assocs., 149 N.H. 661, 666 (2003) (Fastrack I). We
have also held that giving notice within the ninety-day period required by RSA
447:17 is a condition precedent to any claim against a statutory bond. See
Fastrack Crushing Servs. v. Abatement Int’l/Advatex Assocs., 153 N.H. 284,
287 (2006) (Fastrack II).
“[T]he main purpose of [this] notice requirement is to provide parties with
an opportunity to settle the claim without resorting to litigation.” Mountain
Envtl. v. Abatement Int’l/Advatex Assocs., 149 N.H. 671, 674 (2003). Another
purpose is to allow the prime contractor to pay his subcontractors “without
fear of additional liability to sub-subcontractors or materialmen.” Fastrack II,
153 N.H. at 287 (quotation omitted). The notice required by RSA 447:17 “thus
prevents both double payments by prime contractors and the alternative of
interminable delay in settlements between contractors and subcontractors.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
In the event that there is no settlement, a claimant may sue on a
statutory bond provided that the claimant, “within one year after filing [the
notice of claim],” files a petition in superior court to enforce the claim “with
copy to the principal and surety, and such further notice as the court may
order.” RSA 447:18. The court then “shall examine all claims having been
duly filed” and hold a hearing, “with notice to all creditors who have filed
claims as herein provided, and to the principal and surety or sureties, and find
the respective amounts due such party claimants.” Id. The court may require
“the attendance of any official with whom claims have been filed, with such
claims, or require such official to furnish a copy of such claims” for the court’s
use. Id. As with the failure to comply with RSA 447:17, we have held that the
failure to comply with RSA 447:18 is “usually held fatal.” Cray, 105 N.H. at
136.
In addition to the remedy of seeking payment on the bond, RSA 447:15
(2002) allows for a mechanic’s lien to attach “to any money due or to become
due from the state or from any political subdivision thereof by virtue of any
contract for any public work or construct, alteration, or repair, in the
performance of which contract the lienor participated by performing labor or
furnishing materials or supplies.” The purpose of this lien provision “is to put
those who supply materials [and labor] for the erection of state property on a
parity, in respect to their liens, with those who perform a like service for private
owners.” American Bridge Co. v. Company, 87 N.H. 62, 63 (1934); see Lyle
Signs, Inc. v. Evroks Corp., 132 N.H. 156, 158 (1989).
5
3. Interpretation of RSA 447:18
RSA 447:18 provides, in pertinent part: “Said claimant shall, within one
year after filing such claim, file a petition in the superior court . . . to enforce
his claim or intervene in a petition already filed, with copy to the principal and
surety, and such further notice as the court may order.” “Pursuant to general
rules of statutory construction, the word ‘shall’ is a command, which requires
mandatory enforcement.” Fastrack I, 149 N.H. at 664-65 (quotation omitted).
Substantial compliance with this statute does not suffice. See id. at 666. “Our
law is well settled that in giving statutory notice the requirements of the statute
must be strictly observed.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The petitioner concedes that it did not provide copies of its petitions to
the moving respondents until August 2008, more than one year after filing its
March 2007 claim. The petitioner argues that, nonetheless, it complied with
RSA 447:18 because “[t]he one year statute of limitations contained in RSA
447:18 qualifies and relates only to the date of the filing for the Petition to
Enforce” and “does not create a specific obligation to provide a Respondent a
copy of such Petition within a specific timeframe (i.e., one year).”
“Although the legislature is not compelled to follow technical rules of
grammar and composition, a widely accepted method of statutory construction
is to read and examine the text of the statute and draw inferences concerning
its meaning from its composition and structure.” In re Richard M., 127 N.H.
12, 17 (1985) (quotation omitted). Here, we must determine to what subject
the phrase “within one year after filing such claim” applies.
“Where a sentence contains several antecedents and several consequents
they are to be read distributively. The words are to be applied to the subjects
that seem most properly related by context and applicability.” 2A N. Singer &
J.D. Singer, Statutes and Statutory Construction § 47.26, at 438 (7th ed.
2007). Thus, “[w]here several words granting power, authority, and obligation
are found at the beginning of a clause, it is not necessary that each of the
words apply to the several branches of the clause. It may be construed
reddendo singula singulis and the words giving power and authority limited to
particular subjects and those of obligation applied to others.” Id. at 441.
In this case, the subjects most properly related to the phrase “within one
year after filing such claim” are “file a petition” and “with copy to principal and
surety.” It would not make sense to apply the phrase to “such further notice as
the court may order” because a petitioner has no control over when a court will
issue orders for further notice. As the petitioner contends: “[I]t is impossible
for a party filing a Petition to predict when a particular Court might be able to
receive, process, and return an Order of Notice for service on a Respondent.”
We will not interpret a statute to require such an illogical result. State v.
6
Yates, 152 N.H. 245, 255 (2005); see General Electric Co. v. Dole, 105 N.H.
477, 479 (1964).
Further aiding our construction is the fact that the phrase “with copy to
principal and surety” is separated from the phrase “file a petition” with a
comma and that there is a conjunction separating “such further notice as
ordered by the court” from the rest of the sentence. This indicates that the two
phrases “file a petition” and “with copy to principal and surety” are to be read
together, while the phrase “such further notice as ordered by the court” is to be
read on its own.
The petitioner argues that it is “absurd” to require a petitioner to provide
a respondent with “two (2) copies of the exact same pleading.” We disagree.
New Hampshire is not alone in requiring a petitioner to provide separate notice
of the filing of a lawsuit under similar circumstances. See N.M. Stat. Ann.
§ 48-2A-9 (Michie 1995) (requiring that written notice of lawsuit to obtain
satisfaction of stop notice be mailed to subject of lawsuit within five days after
date suit was filed).
Moreover, construing the statute to require a petitioner to provide the
principal and surety with a copy of the petition to enforce the bond in addition
to “such further notice as the court may order” is consistent with the last
antecedent rule. See Mountain Valley Mall Assocs. v. Municipality of Conway,
144 N.H. 642, 652 (2000). The last antecedent rule, a subset of reddendo
singula singulis, “is the general rule of statutory as well as grammatical
construction that a modifying clause is confined to the last antecedent unless
there is something in the subject matter or dominant purpose which requires a
different interpretation.” Id. (quotation omitted); see L. Jellum, Mastering
Statutory Interpretation 84 (2008); Singer & Singer, supra § 47.33, at 487-89.
This rule has been adopted by statute. See RSA 21:14 (2000); Piper v.
Railroad, 75 N.H. 435, 442 (1910). RSA 21:14 provides: “The words ‘said’ and
‘such,’ when used by way of reference to any person or thing, shall apply to the
same person or thing last mentioned.” See Piper, 75 N.H. at 442. Applying
this rule, “such further notice” means that the copy of the petition given to
principal and surety when the petition is filed is in addition to any court-
ordered notice. The copy of the petition given when the petition is first filed is
the first notice and court-ordered notice given thereafter is “such further
notice.” In other words, the statute requires that the petitioner provide the
respondents with two copies of the same pleading, once when the petitioner
first files the petition and again when the petitioner is ordered to serve the
respondents by the trial court.
In this case, because the petitioner did not provide the moving
respondents with a copy of its petitions within one year after filing its notice of
7
claim, the petitioner did not strictly comply with RSA 447:18, and the trial
court did not err by dismissing its petitions. See Fastrack I, 149 N.H. at 666.
B. Unjust Enrichment/Restitution and Quantum Meruit Claims
The petitioner next asserts that the trial court erred by dismissing its
alternative claims for unjust enrichment/restitution and quantum meruit. The
petitioner contends that, contrary to the trial court’s decision, its petitions
alleged sufficient facts to establish these claims against the moving
respondents.
“In reviewing a motion to dismiss, our standard of review is whether the
allegations in the petitioner[’s] pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a
construction that would permit recovery.” McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72,
73 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). We assume the petitioner’s
pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to it. Id. We need not assume the truth of statements in the
petitioner’s pleadings, however, that are merely conclusions of law. In the
Matter of Kenick & Bailey, 156 N.H. 356, 358 (2007). We then engage in a
threshold inquiry that tests the facts in the petition against the applicable law,
and if the allegations constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was
improper to grant the motion to dismiss. McNamara, 157 N.H. at 73.
The petitioner’s petitions failed to allege facts sufficient to state either a
claim for restitution or for quantum meruit recovery against the moving
respondents. Restitution and quantum meruit recovery based upon “unjust
enrichment are allowed by the courts as alternative remedies to an action for
damages for breach of contract.” 26 R. Lord, Williston on Contracts § 68:1, at
5 (4th ed. 2003); see Kondrat v. Freedom School Board, 138 N.H. 683, 686
(1994). We first address the petitioner’s restitution claim.
“A plaintiff is entitled to restitution for unjust enrichment if the
defendant received a benefit and it would be unconscionable for the defendant
to retain that benefit.” Nat’l Employment Serv. Corp. v. Olsten Staffing Serv.,
145 N.H. 158, 163 (2000). “The party seeking restitution must establish not
only unjust enrichment, but that the person sought to be charged had
wrongfully secured a benefit or passively received one which it would be
unconscionable to retain, and unjust enrichment generally does not form an
independent basis for a cause of action.” 42 C.J.S. Implied Contracts § 10, at
17 (2007); see Kowalski v. Cedars of Portsmouth Condo. Assoc., 146 N.H. 130,
133 (2001).
The petitioner’s petitions alleged only that the respondents “received a
substantial benefit without compensating Petitioner for same,” which it would
be “unconscionable” for them to retain. These are legal conclusions, however,
8
which we are not obliged to accept as true. See In the Matter of Kenick &
Bailey, 156 N.H. at 358. The petitions alleged no predicate facts to support
these legal conclusions, and, therefore, failed to state a claim for restitution.
See Cray, 105 N.H. at 137 (concluding, even assuming that surety received
benefit from materials furnished by respondent, “this is not sufficient in itself
to impose a duty of restitution”).
We next turn to the petitioner’s claim for quantum meruit recovery.
While “[d]amages in unjust enrichment are measured by the value of what was
inequitably retained[,] [i]n quantum meruit, by contrast, the damages . . . are
based on the value of the services provided by the plaintiff.” Paffhausen v.
Balano, 708 A.2d 269, 271 (Me. 1998) (citation omitted). “A valid claim in
quantum meruit requires [that]: . . . (1) services were rendered to the defendant
by the plaintiff; (2) with the knowledge and consent of the defendant; and (3)
under circumstances that make it reasonable for the plaintiff to expect
payment.” Id. (quotation omitted). The petitioner’s petitions did not allege any
of these requisite facts, and, thus, failed to state a claim for quantum meruit
recovery against the moving respondents.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s
dismissal of the petitioner’s petitions against the moving respondents.
Affirmed and remanded.
HORTON, J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred;
BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, dissented.
BROCK, C.J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, dissenting.
This case involves a petition to enforce a bond filed by the petitioner, General
Insulation Company (General Insulation), for materials it supplied on the
bonded project known as “Bedford Middle/High School” in Bedford. Despite
General Insulation having timely filed its notice of claim pursuant to RSA
447:17 (Supp. 2009) and its petition to enforce pursuant to RSA 447:18 (2002),
the trial court still dismissed the petition as untimely merely because the
principals and sureties on the project did not receive copies of the petition until
General Insulation, complying with the court’s order of notice, served copies on
them. See Super. Ct. R. 124. The trial court ruled that, even though General
Insulation’s petition was filed within one year of its notice of claim, the fact that
the principals and sureties did not obtain their copies of the petition until
sometime later was fatal to General Insulation’s petition. The plurality,
elevating form over substance, affirms. I cannot join such a decision.
The filing of a claim to enforce a bond involves two steps. First, a
statement of claim is filed “within 90 days after the completion and acceptance
of the project by the contracting party.” RSA 447:17. The public entity with
9
which the claim is filed is then responsible for sending a copy of the statement
of claim to the principal and surety. Id. “[T]he main purpose of [this] notice
requirement is to provide parties with an opportunity to settle the claim
without resorting to litigation.” Mountain Envtl. v. Abatement Int’l/Advatex
Assocs., 149 N.H. 671, 674 (2003).
The second step, governed by RSA 447:18, is to file the petition to
enforce the claim. To be timely, the petition must be filed “within one year
after filing [the notice of claim].” RSA 447:18. As part of this process, the
claimant must provide a copy of the petition to the principal and surety “and
such further notice as the court may order.” Id. (emphasis added).
In this case, it is undisputed that General Insulation timely filed both its
notice of claim and its petition to enforce its claim. General Insulation filed its
notice of claim on March 15, 2007, and its petition on March 6, 2008, well
within one year of its notice of claim. Pursuant to Superior Court Rule 124
and RSA 447:18, the trial court issued its orders of notice on August 1, 2008,
which were returnable on September 2, 2008. General Insulation diligently
complied with the court’s orders and served the principals and sureties on the
project on August 6 and August 8, respectively.
Nonetheless, the trial court ruled, and the plurality agrees, that General
Insulation’s petition was untimely because the principals and sureties received
copies of it in August 2008 instead of before March 15, 2008 (within one year of
General Insulation’s notice of claim). This result is not only unfair, but is
contrary to the plain language of RSA 447:18.
RSA 447:18 provides, in pertinent part: “Said claimant shall, within one
year after filing such claim, file a petition in the superior court . . . to enforce
his claim or intervene in a petition already filed, with copy to the principal and
surety, and such further notice as the court may order.” The meaning of this
statute is plain. The phrase “within one year after filing such claim” is set off
by commas, and, thus, modifies only the phrase “file a petition.” Accordingly,
as long as the petition is filed within this one-year period, it is timely under
RSA 447:18.
The next phrases in RSA 447:18 must be read together. They require the
claimant to provide a copy of the petition to the principal and surety “and such
further notice as the court may order.” The use of the words “and such
further” makes clear that the claimant need not provide a copy of the petition
to the principal and surety until the court issues its orders of notice as
required by Superior Court Rule 124. The copy of the petition provided to the
principal and surety is the first “notice” that the “court may order.” The
claimant, however, is also required to provide “such further notice as the court
may order.” (Emphasis added.)
10
Nothing in RSA 447:18 requires that the claimant’s compliance with the
court’s orders of notice occur within one year after the claimant’s notice of
claim has been filed. The clear intent of this statutory provision is to set the
date by which a claimant must file a petition, not the date by which copies of
the petition must be given to the principal and surety.
Justices Duggan and Horton, using an analytical process grounded in
linguistic sophistry and shrouded in Latin to divine legislative intent, conclude
that “the statute requires that the petitioner provide the respondents with two
copies of the same pleading, once when the petitioner first files the petition and
again when the petitioner is ordered to serve the respondents by the trial
court.” Unfazed by the lack of logic in its conclusion, the plurality argues that
“New Hampshire is not alone in requiring a petitioner to provide separate notice
of the filing of a lawsuit under similar circumstances.” (Emphasis added.) In
support of this statement, the plurality cites a New Mexico statute, which it
describes as “requiring that written notice of lawsuit to obtain satisfaction of
stop notice be mailed to subject of lawsuit within five days after date suit was
filed.” The New Mexico statute relied upon, however, involves the issuance of
“stop notices,” which require a construction lender or owner to withhold
construction funds equal to the amount of the claim stated in the stop notice.
See N.M. Stat. Ann. § 48-2A-8(A) (Michie 1998). Because the stop notice limits
the ability of the lender or owner to disburse construction funds to the
contractor until the claim is satisfied or adjudicated by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the statute requires both that a lawsuit be filed between thirty and
sixty days after the stop notice is delivered and that notice of the lawsuit be
mailed within five days after the suit is filed. See N.M. Stat. Ann. § 48-2A-9(A).
The purpose of requiring notice within five days is obvious – it is important that
the lender or owner know quickly whether a lawsuit has been filed since funds
that could otherwise be disbursed are tied up by the stop notice, and the
period for filing a lawsuit expires after sixty days. This sharply contrasts with
the instant case, which simply involves a suit upon a bond that can be filed up
to a year and ninety days after the completion and acceptance of the project.
By no means are these situations remotely “similar.”
In construing RSA 447:18, the plurality relies, in part, upon our rule that
substantial compliance with the statutory notice requirements of RSA chapter
447 does not suffice; strict compliance is required. See Fastrack Crushing
Servs. v. Abatement Int’l/Advatex Assocs., 149 N.H. 661, 666 (2003). This
reliance is misplaced. This rule is of no assistance in construing exactly what
RSA 447:18 requires. Nothing in this rule compels the court to adopt a
construction of the statute that is unjust and unfair.
Rather than slavishly following arcane canons of statutory construction,
we should look to what the legislature intended. See Chagnon v. Union-Leader
Co., 104 N.H. 472, 474 (1963) (legislative intent, not arbitrary canons of
11
statutory construction, is controlling), superseded on other grounds by statute
as stated in Hanchett v. Brezner Tanning Co., 107 N.H. 236 (1966). Because,
as the petitioner rightly observes, no purpose of the statute would be advanced
by construing the statute, as the plurality does, as requiring the petitioner to
provide the respondents with two copies of the exact same pleading, we should
reject that construction. This is particularly apt here, where a common sense
reading of the statute, as set forth above, avoids absurdity and is consistent
with the legislature’s obvious intent. Moreover, the result reached by the
plurality is draconian given the petitioner’s and its attorney’s reasonable
interpretation and reliance upon the statutory language at issue.
Here, because the petitioner timely filed its petitions and provided the
respondents with copies of them after the court issued orders of notice, the
petitioner fully complied with RSA 447:18. I would hold, therefore, that the
trial court erred when it dismissed the petitioner’s petitions to enforce the
bonds at issue. Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.
12