THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Manchester District Court
No. 2010-563
HOLLOWAY AUTOMOTIVE GROUP d/b/a HOLLOWAY MOTOR CARS OF
MANCHESTER
v.
GORAN LUCIC & a.
Argued: September 15, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 14, 2011
Coughlin, Rainboth, Murphy & Lown, P.A., of Portsmouth (Bradley M.
Lown on the brief and orally), for the plaintiff.
Sherman Law, PLLC, of Portsmouth (John P. Sherman on the brief and
orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendants, Sedo, Inc. (the corporation) and its
founder, president and sole shareholder, Goran Lucic, appeal an order of the
Manchester District Court (DeVries, J.) ruling that both the corporation and
Lucic are liable to the plaintiff, Holloway Automotive Group d/b/a Holloway
Motor Cars of Manchester (Holloway), for breach of contract. We affirm the
trial court’s enforcement of a liquidated damages provision in the parties’
contract, but conclude that the district court lacked equitable jurisdiction to
pierce the corporate veil. Therefore, we vacate the award against Lucic as well
as the award of attorney’s fees, and remand.
I. Background
The trial court could have found the following facts. Holloway is an
authorized dealer of Mercedes-Benz North America (Mercedes-Benz).
Mercedes-Benz prohibits Holloway “from exporting new Mercedes-Benz vehicles
outside the exclusive sales territory of North America” and “assess[es] charges
against [Holloway] for each new Mercedes-Benz vehicle it sells or leases which
is exported from North America within one (1) year.” Thus, export of a vehicle
that Holloway sells, even when Holloway neither knows of nor consents to the
export, subjects Holloway to certain penalties and fees. Holloway requires
customers to enter into a no-export agreement to minimize Holloway’s export-
penalty exposure.
In May 2008, Lucic, on behalf of the corporation, paid $99,000 for two
Holloway vehicles and signed two identical agreements promising “not [to]
export the [v]ehicles[s] outside North America . . . for a period of one (1) year.”
Each agreement also provided that if the vehicle was exported within a year,
“regardless of whether the [corporation] or any other party actually cause[d] the
export of the [v]ehicle,” the corporation would pay Holloway $7,500 as
liquidated damages. In the event of a breach, each agreement made the
corporation liable for the reasonable attorney’s fees Holloway incurred to
enforce it. Lucic assured Holloway that he had no interest in exporting
because he planned to lend the vehicles to contractors working for him on a
Massachusetts consulting project. Satisfied with these assurances, Holloway
delivered the vehicles.
Less than two weeks later, both vehicles were exported. As a result,
Holloway sued the corporation and Lucic, individually as its alter ego, seeking
$7,500 liquidated damages plus attorney’s fees for each vehicle. The
defendants argued that the liquidated damages clause was unenforceable
because the only penalty Mercedes-Benz actually assessed against Holloway
was a $300 per vehicle administrative fee. This fee, the defendants contended,
was grossly disproportionate to the $7,500 per-vehicle liquidated sum, making
the damages provision an unenforceable penalty.
Holloway presented evidence that its contractual relationship with
Mercedes-Benz required it to pay a commission if a foreign dealer discovered
the exported vehicles in its sales territory. Although, at the time of trial, no
foreign dealer had sought to collect any commission, the dealers had the right
2
to do so at any time. The defendants did not introduce evidence concerning
the amount of Holloway’s potential liability under the commission provision or
the likelihood that Holloway would have to pay a foreign dealer.
The district court found that the corporation had breached the no-export
agreements and enforced the liquidated damages provisions; it also pierced the
corporate veil to hold Lucic personally liable for the breaches. The defendants
contend that the district court erred in finding that: (1) the liquidated damages
provisions of the agreements are enforceable; (2) it had jurisdiction to pierce
the corporate veil; and (3) an award of attorney’s fees to Holloway was proper.
II. Liquidated Damages
Each liquidated damages clause at issue states:
THE PARTIES AGREE THAT IT WOULD BE IMPRACTICAL OR
DIFFICULT TO FIX THE ACTUAL DAMAGES TO [HOLLOWAY] IF
THE VEHICLE IS EXPORTED OUT OF NORTH AMERICA.
THEREFORE, IF THE VEHICLE IS EXPORTED OUTSIDE NORTH
AMERICA WITHIN ONE[ ]YEAR OF THE DATE OF THIS
AGREEMENT, THE UNDERSIGNED SHALL BE OBLIGATED TO
PAY [HOLLOWAY] THE SUM OF SEVEN THOUSAND FIVE
HUNDRED DOLLARS ($7,500.00) AS LIQUIDATED DAMAGES
. . . .
(Emphasis omitted.) The defendants argue that this provision is an
unenforceable penalty because Holloway suffered only de minimis damages as
a result of the breach.
“The central objective behind the system of contract remedies is
compensatory, not punitive.” Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 356
comment a at 157 (1981). As a result, liquidated damages so disproportionate
to the actual damage a breach will likely cause that they “coerce performance
of the underlying agreement by penalizing non-performance and making a
breach prohibitively and unreasonably costly” are void. 24 R. Lord, Williston
on Contracts § 65:1, at 223 (4th ed. 2002). On the other hand, because “the
possibility of a damage award . . . by its nature . . . induce[s] performance,” the
mere fact that a liquidated damages provision encourages a party to perform,
rather than to breach, does not make it a penalty. Id. at 231.
Three criteria distinguish a valid liquidated damages clause from an
unenforceable penalty. In a valid clause: (1) the damages anticipated as a
result of the breach are uncertain in amount or difficult to prove; (2) the parties
3
intended to liquidate damages in advance; and (3) the amount agreed upon is
reasonable and not greatly disproportionate to the presumable loss or injury.
Orr v. Goodwin, 157 N.H. 511, 514 (2008). Here, the parties agree that the
liquidated damages provision meets the first two criteria; thus, we limit our
analysis to the third criterion – the reasonableness of the agreed amount.
We employ a two-part test to determine whether a liquidated sum is
reasonable. First, we assess whether the amount “was a reasonable estimate
of difficult-to-ascertain damages at the time the parties agreed to it.” Shallow
Brook Assoc’s v. Dube, 135 N.H. 40, 48 (1991) (quotation omitted). Next, we
ask whether actual damages are “easily ascertainable” after a breach. See id.
at 49 (quotation omitted). “[I]f the actual damages turn out to be easily
ascertainable, we must then consider whether the stipulated sum is
unreasonable and grossly disproportionate to the actual damages from a
breach.” Orr, 157 N.H. at 515. If the stipulated sum is grossly
disproportionate to easily ascertainable, actual damages, the provision is an
unenforceable penalty, and the aggrieved party will be awarded no more than
the actual damages. Id.
The defendants, as the parties alleging that the liquidated amount is
unreasonable, bear the burden of proof. Id. On appeal, we determine whether
a reasonable person could have arrived at the same determination as the trial
court, based upon the evidence, and we will not upset the trial court’s finding
as long as it is substantiated by the record and is not erroneous as a matter of
law. Id.
Because there is no argument to the contrary, we conclude that the
liquidated sum here was a reasonable estimate at the time the parties executed
the agreements and proceed to the next step, which is a “retrospective
appraisal” to determine whether the parties’ initial expectations conform to
reality after the breach. Id. at 515-16. Holloway’s only out-of-pocket damages
to date are a $300 per vehicle administrative fee that Mercedes-Benz assessed.
Holloway argues, however, that it faces “ongoing[,] potential damages” as a
result of the defendants’ breach and that these potential damages make its
actual damages difficult to ascertain.
We agree that the possibility of speculative, future damages rendered
Holloway’s actual damages difficult to ascertain. Parties employ liquidated
damages clauses “to avoid later controversy over the amount of actual damages
resulting from a breach” when “damages are speculative or difficult to
ascertain.” Ladco Properties XVII v. Jefferson-Pilot Life Ins., 531 F.3d 718, 720
(8th Cir. 2008). Our retrospective appraisal simply acknowledges that,
although pre-breach damages may have been speculative, occasionally the
4
damages after a breach are certain. See Orr, 157 N.H. at 515. In such a case,
enforcing a clause that, in reality, is clearly and grossly disproportionate to the
actual loss effectively penalizes the party in breach.
As a result, only “easily ascertainable” damages, meaning damages that
are no longer speculative at the time of trial, trigger the retrospective appraisal.
If, at the time of trial, damages remain speculative or difficult to ascertain, “the
estimate of the court or jury may not accord with the principle of compensation
any more than does the advance estimate of the parties.” Restatement
(Second) of Contracts, supra § 356 comment b at 158. When faced with the
very uncertainty the parties initially sought to avoid, a court should fix
damages at the figure to which the parties initially agreed and enforce the
liquidated amount.
The defendants argue that it was Holloway’s burden to show that its
actual damages were reasonably certain and that Holloway failed to meet this
burden because its damages remained speculative at trial. Cf. Witte v.
Desmarais, 136 N.H. 179, 188 (1992). This argument misapprehends our
liquidated damages rules. The burden was not upon Holloway to show that
future damages were reasonably certain. Rather, it was incumbent upon the
defendants, the parties seeking to invalidate the clause, to prove that
Holloway’s damages were easily ascertainable and grossly disproportionate to
the liquidated sum. Orr, 157 N.H. at 515. The defendants do not argue that
they satisfied this burden, and, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s
enforcement of the liquidated damages clause against the corporation.
III. Piercing the Corporate Veil
The parties dispute whether the district court had jurisdiction to pierce
the corporate veil and hold Lucic personally liable for the corporation’s breach.
Before turning to the merits of this issue, we address Holloway’s argument that
the defendants waived any objection to the district court’s subject matter
jurisdiction by not objecting at trial. To the contrary, “the issue of subject
matter jurisdiction may be raised at any time in the proceedings because
jurisdiction cannot be conferred where it does not already exist.” Route 12
Books & Video v. Town of Troy, 149 N.H. 569, 575 (2003).
As to the merits, “[t]he doctrine of piercing the corporate veil is an
equitable remedy,” and neither party contends otherwise. LaMontagne
Builders v. Bowman Brook Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 274 (2003)
(quotation omitted). We have noted on several occasions that the district court
lacks general equitable power. See, e.g., Matte v. Shippee, 152 N.H. 216, 223
(2005). “The ultimate determination as to whether the trial court ha[d]
5
jurisdiction in this case is a question of law subject to de novo review.” In the
Matter of O’Neil & O’Neil, 159 N.H. 615, 622 (2010).
Holloway first contends the district court does, in fact, have general
equitable power. It argues that because the district court and superior court
have concurrent jurisdiction in civil cases with less than $25,000 in damages,
the two courts necessarily have concurrent powers to fashion general equitable
remedies in these cases. See RSA 498:1 (2010); RSA 502-A:14, II (2010). This
argument conflates jurisdiction to hear a case with the power to grant a
remedy. Contrary to Holloway’s assertions, whatever the district court’s
jurisdiction, it has no general power to grant an equitable remedy such as
piercing the corporate veil.
Next, Holloway argues that, by piercing the corporate veil, the trial court
properly exercised its inherent power to sanction Lucic for testifying falsely.
See State v. Martina, 135 N.H. 111, 115-16 (1991). We reject this argument
because piercing the corporate veil is not a sanction at all; it is an “equitable
remedy.” LaMontagne Builders, 150 N.H. at 274 (quotation omitted).
Moreover, as its order makes clear, the trial court pierced the veil because it
determined Lucic used the corporate identity to “promote an injustice or fraud
upon [Holloway].” This “fraud” occurred not in the courtroom at trial, but in
Holloway’s showroom months earlier.
Similarly, we reject Holloway’s argument that the district court held
Lucic individually liable without piercing the corporate veil. The corporation,
not Lucic as an individual, purchased the vehicles and entered into the no-
export agreements, and the trial court’s order explains that the veil-piercing
doctrine justified Lucic’s personal liability. Thus, the only basis for Lucic’s
individual liability was the one the district court cited – piercing the corporate
veil. Because the district court lacked jurisdiction to grant this remedy, we
vacate its order holding Lucic personally liable.
Finally, although Holloway asserts the district court’s findings are res
judicata in Holloway’s pending superior court action to pierce the corporate
veil, we decline to consider this argument as the issue is not properly before
us.
IV. Attorney’s Fees
The defendants argue that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion by awarding Holloway’s attorney’s fees. We review a trial court’s
award of attorney’s fees under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard, and if there is some support in the record for the trial court’s
6
determination, we will uphold it. LaMontagne Builders v. Brooks, 154 N.H.
252, 261-62 (2006). Where a party prevails upon some claims but not others,
and the successful and unsuccessful claims are analytically severable, any fee
award should be reduced to exclude time spent on unsuccessful claims. Id. at
261.
Here, although Holloway prevailed against the corporation, Holloway did
not prevail against Lucic individually. Therefore, we vacate the current fee
award and remand to the trial court to determine whether the veil-piercing and
breach of contract claims are “analytically severable” and, if so, the amount by
which the trial court must reduce its initial fee award. See id. Only the
corporation will be liable for any attorney’s fees.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DUGGAN, HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7