THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Tax and Land Appeals
No. 2010-094
APPEAL OF CITY OF LEBANON
(New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals)
Argued: September 16, 2010
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2011
Gardner Fulton & Waugh, P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (Shawn M. Tanguay on
the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Sulloway & Hollis, PLLC, of Concord (Margaret H. Nelson on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The City of Lebanon (city), appeals a decision of the New
Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA) granting Colonial Plaza
Realty Trust (trust) an abatement of taxes imposed on its property for the years
2006 and 2007. We affirm.
The following facts are supported by the record. The trust owns two
adjacent parcels located at 3 and 5 Airport Road in Lebanon, identified on the
city’s Tax Map 114 as Lots 6 and 8 respectively. In 2004, the trust entered into
a ground lease with GP West Lebanon, LLC (GP West) to allow GP West to build
and operate a Walgreens drug store on Lot 6. The terms of the lease allow GP
West to sublease the property to Walgreen Eastern Co., Inc. (Walgreen), making
Walgreen the effective tenant under the lease. The lease term is for seventy-five
years with Walgreen having the right to terminate the lease at specified periods
after the first twenty-five years.
The lease provides Walgreen with, among other rights and
responsibilities, the responsibility to demolish any existing improvements and
“construct a building and improvements for the initial use as a Walgreens
store” and the right to enter into agreements with utility companies. In
addition, it states that Walgreen “shall maintain and repair all portions of the
Leased Premises, Building and Site Improvements.” With respect to real estate
taxes, the lease provides, in pertinent part:
(a) Tenant shall pay all taxes levied or assessed against the
Premises (“Real Estate Taxes”) before such taxes become
delinquent and shall be deemed to be “Additional Rent”. . . .
(i) Landlord shall have all real estate tax bills for the
Premises forwarded by the applicable taxing authorities
directly to Tenant and, at Tenant’s request, if possible, the
real estate tax bills shall be in the name of Tenant or
Subtenant. . . .
. . . .
(iii) Tenant shall have the right, at its expense, to seek
a reduction or abatement in, or otherwise challenge, the Real
Estate Taxes for the Premises. Tenant may contest such real
estate taxes in its own or in Landlord’s name and Landlord
agrees to provide Tenant with all reasonable assistance (at
no cost to Landlord) in such contest, including, joining in
and signing pleadings. Any reduction or refund of Real
Estate Taxes obtained shall be paid or credited to Tenant, as
the case may be.. . .
On August 24, 2007, the trust filed a tax appeal with the BTLA
contesting the 2006 and 2007 assessments of Lot 8 pursuant to RSA 76:16-a.
See RSA 76:16-a (2003). In its appeal, the trust did not indicate that it owned
Lot 6 as well as Lot 8. At some point, Walgreen filed a separate tax appeal
contesting the 2006 and 2007 tax assessments of Lot 6. As part of the trust’s
appeal process, the BTLA requested that the city “provide map/lot numbers . . .
for all property owned by the [trust], whether or not appealed.” The city
identified Lots 6 and 8 as being owned by the trust.
2
On December 21, the BTLA notified the trust’s tax representative of “a
discrepancy between the [city’s] information regarding other property owned
and the appeal form you submitted.” The BTLA asked the trust to verify
whether it also owned the property on Lot 6. The trust’s tax representative
responded by stating, “Regarding additional properties owned: We concur with
the City of Lebanon that Map 114/Lot 6 is under the same ownership and
should be included in this docket.”
Thereafter, an issue arose regarding “whether there was an agreement
between the [trust] and the [city] that . . . [Lot 6] . . . would not be part of the
appeal for each tax year.” Following a hearing on this issue, the BTLA ruled
that “no agreement existed between [the trust] and [the city] to the effect that
Lot 6 would not be a part of the [trust’s] appeals.” The BTLA then identified
what it deemed to be a “larger substantive issue”:
whether the City, in the [trust’s] appeals, can offset any
overassessment on the Colonial Plaza shopping center (Lot 8)
against any underassessment of the Walgreen drug store (Lot 6).
The board notes the parties take conflicting positions on this issue
based on several lines of authority, including Appeal of Sunapee,
126 N.H. 214, 217 (1985), cited by the City, and the board’s
August 26, 2008 “Wal-Mart” Order, submitted as Taxpayer Exhibit
No. 2.
The BTLA deferred ruling on this issue, which it referred to as the “one estate
or two” issue.
Subsequently, both parties submitted memoranda of law. The city
argued that because the trust owns Lot 6 and Lot 8, the assessments of both
lots must be considered in determining whether the assessments of Lot 8 were
disproportionate or illegal under Appeal of Town of Sunapee, 126 N.H. 214
(1985). Conversely, the trust maintained that Lot 6 and Lot 8 “should be
treated as separate estates for the purposes of determining the fair and
proportional assessments of each lot under New Hampshire law.” According to
the trust, since Walgreen consented to be taxed on Lot 6 and has exclusive
possession and use of Lot 6 for up to seventy-five years, the trust should not
have to present evidence regarding the proper valuation of Lot 6 in its appeal of
the assessments on Lot 8.
The BTLA found that the lots are separate estates for purposes of the tax
abatement appeals and, thus, the trust did not have to present evidence as to
the valuation of Lot 6 in its appeals. According to the BTLA, in doing so, it gave
“operative significance to the words used by the legislature in RSA 76:16 and
76:16-a, which give[] ‘any person aggrieved’ by a tax assessment the right to
3
contest it.” It further relied upon RSA 73:10, which provides that “[r]eal . . .
property shall be taxed to the person claiming the same, or to the person who
is in the possession and actual occupancy therof, if such person will consent to
be taxed for the same.” RSA 73:10 (Supp. 2010).
The BTLA noted that the city’s argument “raise[d] an admittedly close
question of law on which reasonable minds may disagree.” However, it
ultimately relied upon its reasoning in a prior order on a separate appeal with
similar facts involving the city and Wal-Mart (Wal-Mart appeal). In the Wal-
Mart appeal, the BTLA found that “because Wal-Mart [was] ‘in the possession
and actual occupancy’ of the real estate and ha[d] consented to being taxed for
all of the collective fee interests” of the lot despite not being the fee simple
owner of the land, it was the “‘taxpayer’” and the lot
assessment reflects the share of the common tax burden Wal-Mart
has consented to be assessed for.
To hold, as the City argues, that the collective multiple fee
interests of [the landowner] (be the [sic] land only or land and
building) in the various parcels with some [of the landowner’s]
interest . . . comprise the estate that must be considered under
Sunapee would result in a contorted and complicated valuation
process that is not envisioned by the statutes or case law.
Thus, the BTLA ultimately concluded that Wal-Mart, not the landowner, was
the “‘person aggrieved’” by the tax for the tax years under appeal and was “the
taxpayer whose total estate must be considered to determine proportionality
under Sunapee.”
Applying this reasoning to the trust’s appeal, the BTLA found that “it
would be impractical, as well as unduly burdensome and arguably unfair, to
require either [the trust] or Walgreen to be held to an evidentiary standard
requiring each taxpayer to rebut the possibility the other property (Lot 6 in the
[trust] appeals and Lot 8 in the Walgreen appeals) was underassessed.” Thus,
the BTLA ruled that “the assessments challenged by [the trust] (Lot 8) and
Walgreen (Lot 6) w[ould] be judged for proportionality separately.”
On August 20, 2009, the BTLA conducted a hearing on the merits of the
trust’s appeals. The city moved to dismiss based upon standing and the ‘‘one
estate or two” issue. The BTLA denied both motions. Subsequently, the BTLA
ordered an abatement of the assessments on Lot 8. The city’s motion for
rehearing on the “one estate or two” issue was denied, and this appeal followed.
4
Appeals from decisions of the BTLA are governed by RSA chapter 541.
See Appeal of Kat Paw Acres Trust, 156 N.H. 536, 537 (2007).
[T]he burden of proof shall be upon the party seeking to set aside
any order or decision of the [BTLA] to show that the same is clearly
unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of the [BTLA] upon all
questions of fact properly before it shall be deemed to be prima
facie lawful and reasonable; and the order or decision appealed
from shall not be set aside or vacated except for errors of law,
unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.
RSA 541:13 (2007); see Appeal of Town of Wolfeboro, 152 N.H. 455, 458 (2005).
The city argues that the BTLA erred in failing to apply the correct
standard for proving disproportionate tax assessment as laid out in Appeal of
Town of Sunapee. The city maintains that “the legal obligations of the due
process and equal protection clauses of the New Hampshire Constitution as
they relate to taxation, as aptly put forth in Appeal of Town of Sunapee, must
be universally-applied” to allow every person in the state to receive his
constitutional benefits under these clauses.
Appeal of Town of Sunapee involved a request for an abatement of taxes
by “taxpayers [who] owned two adjoining lots in Sunapee.” Appeal of Town of
Sunapee, 126 N.H. at 215. The parties seeking the abatement were the
taxpayers for both lots. See id. We stated:
When a taxpayer challenges an assessment on a given parcel of
land, the [BTLA] must consider assessments on any other of the
taxpayer’s properties, for a taxpayer is not entitled to an abatement
on any given parcel unless the aggregate valuation placed on all of
his property is unfavorably disproportionate to the assessment of
property generally in the [city]. Justice does not require the
correction of errors of valuation whose joint effect is not injurious
to the appellant.
When a taxpayer owns two parcels, then, a request for
abatement on the first will always require consideration of the
assessment on the second.
Id. at 217 (quotation and citations omitted); see Bemis &c. Bag Co. v.
Claremont, 98 N.H. 446, 451 (1954).
5
Put another way, to determine if
the assessment placed on [the taxpayer’s] property as a whole is
disproportionately higher in relation to its true value than is the
case as to other property in general in the taxing district . . . all of
[the taxpayer’s] taxable estate in the city and its total tax must be
considered regardless of any agreement as to any part thereof
which might have been arrived at between the [taxpayer and the
municipality].
Bemis &c. Bag Co., 98 N.H. at 451 (citation omitted) (involving a petition for
abatement of tax on stock in trade).
We have not had occasion to address the circumstances presented in this
case where the taxpayer owns two lots but is the taxpayer with respect to only
one lot. We now clarify that when a taxpayer owns more than one parcel in
any given municipality, a request for abatement on one will always require
consideration of the assessment on any other parcels for which the owner is
also the taxpayer.
This approach comports with the purpose of the standard laid out in
Appeal of Town of Sunapee and Bemis &c. Bag Co. for determining whether an
individual taxpayer is entitled to an abatement by requiring the taxpayer to
present evidence of assessments only on property for which it has a tax
burden. The standard stems from the constitutional principle “that all taxes
on ‘estates’ shall be proportional and reasonable (Const. Pt. II, Art. 5) which
means equal and just.” Id. at 450. “Equality in the burden of taxation cannot
exist without uniformity in the mode of assessment as well as in the rate of
taxation.” Id.
Indeed, it is the taxpayer who bears the burden of paying the tax. See
Black’s Law Dictionary 1600 (9th ed. 2009) (defining “taxpayer” as “[o]ne who
pays or is subject to a tax”). Because the taxpayer bears the burden of any
disproportionate tax, it follows that the taxpayer shall be entitled to the benefit
of any abatement. It would be contrary to the constitutional requirement of
proportional and reasonable taxation to require the taxpayer to present
evidence of assessments on property that it owns but for which it does not pay
the tax, i.e., property for which it does not bear any of the burden.
Accordingly, we decline to adopt such an approach.
In this case, the BTLA did not err in concluding that, for the tax years in
question, the trust was the taxpayer with respect to Lot 8 and Walgreen was
the taxpayer with respect to Lot 6. See RSA 73:10; Appeal of Reid, 143 N.H.
246, 249 (1998) (finding that leasehold interests are taxable if the leases are
6
either perpetual, renewable indefinitely or the leaseholder agrees to pay taxes
on the value of the land). Although the trust owns both lots, it paid taxes on
only Lot 8. Since the trust was the taxpayer with respect to only Lot 8, not Lot
6, its taxable estate for purposes of an abatement of taxes on Lot 8 was only
Lot 8. See Bemis &c. Bag Co., 98 N.H. at 450. Therefore, when the trust
challenged the assessments on Lot 8 as disproportional to its share of the
common tax burden for 2006 and 2007, it was required to submit evidence
regarding the assessments on only Lot 8. See id. at 451. Accordingly, it was
not clearly unreasonable or unlawful for the BTLA to find that Lot 6 and Lot 8
were separate estates for purposes of the trust’s tax abatement appeal and that
only the assessments on Lot 8 would be considered in the trust’s appeal.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7