THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-656
CLAIRE CROWLEY & a.
v.
TOWN OF LOUDON
THE LEDGES GOLF LINKS, INC.
v.
CLAIRE CROWLEY
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 8, 2011
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.C., of Concord (Michael R. Callahan
and Samantha D. Elliott on the brief, and Mr. Callahan orally), for petitioners
Residents of Green View Drive.
Hebert & Dolder, PLLC, of Concord, for Claire Crowley, filed no brief.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Barton L. Mayer on the joint brief and
orally), for respondent Town of Loudon.
Steiner Law, PLLC, of Concord (R. James Steiner on the joint brief and
orally), for The Ledges Golf Links, Inc.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, Residents of Green View Drive (the
Residents), appeal an order of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) that: (1) found
no “occasion” to lay out Green View Drive as a class V public highway; (2)
partially granted and partially denied the petition to quiet title filed by The
Ledges Golf Links, Inc. (The Ledges) against Claire Crowley; and (3) ruled that
Ms. Crowley was responsible for the continued maintenance of Green View
Drive and could recover road maintenance costs from the Residents. We affirm
in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The record supports the following facts. Green View Drive is located in
Loudon and provides access to a portion of the golf course operated by The
Ledges and to the homes owned by the Residents. Respondent Town of Loudon
(Town) has classified Green View Drive as a private roadway.
In 1997, before Green View Drive was built, the golf course property,
then owned by Ms. Crowley and her husband, William Crowley, was sold to the
Loudon Country Club, Inc. Also in 1997, Mr. Crowley petitioned the Town’s
planning board to approve a residential subdivision on his land, which
surrounded the golf course. His plan was for a small subdivision to be served
by a private road. Mr. Crowley received planning board approval for his
subdivision plan in January 2000; the approved plan included an “access road
to be privately maintained.” The access road later became Green View Drive.
In December 1999, the country club sold the golf course property to The
Ledges. At some point, while constructing Green View Drive, Mr. Crowley
mistakenly located a portion of the road on golf course property. As a result,
he entered into a May 2000 settlement agreement with The Ledges and others
to resolve this issue. The settlement agreement provided, among other things,
that Mr. Crowley would “grant to the Ledges an easement for the Ledges to
have use of [Green View Drive] for all golf course purposes.” The agreement
also provided that each party to the agreement “shall have full use of [Green
View Drive]” to access that party’s real property and that each party would
“share equally in the cost of maintaining and repairing [Green View Drive].”
In August 2000, the Crowleys and The Ledges entered into an easement
agreement “in consideration of” the May 2000 settlement agreement. Under
the easement agreement, the Crowleys granted to the Ledges “[a] permanent
easement . . . to repair, maintain, and/or replace” on the Crowleys’ property,
including Green View Drive, “any portion of the Golf Course Infrastructure,”
which was defined as “any water, electrical or similar system or portion thereof
. . . presently located” on the Crowleys’ land.
The Crowleys and The Ledges entered into another easement agreement
in September 2001, in which the Crowleys granted to The Ledges “[a]
2
permanent easement to use for all golf course purposes” a particular portion of
the Crowleys’ property. Like the August 2000 easement, the September 2001
easement included a grant of a permanent easement to The Ledges “to repair,
maintain, and/or replace any portion of the Golf Course Infrastructure,” which
the September 2001 easement defined as “any water, electrical or similar
system or portion thereof” currently on the Crowleys’ land.
After Mr. Crowley died, Ms. Crowley petitioned the Town’s board of
selectmen to accept Green View Drive as a town road. Her petition was denied
in March 2007. Ms. Crowley again petitioned the Town to accept Green View
Drive as a public road in November 2008; the Residents joined in this request.
The Town denied the petition. Ms. Crowley and the Residents then petitioned
the superior court to lay out Green View Drive as a public road. See RSA
231:38, I (2009). While this action was pending, The Ledges successfully
moved to intervene. The Ledges also brought a quiet title action against Ms.
Crowley. The trial court consolidated the petitioners’ petition about Green View
Drive with The Ledges’ petition to quiet title, and ultimately decided that there
was no “occasion” for laying out Green View Drive as a town road and granted
The Ledges’ petition in part. The trial court also decided that Ms. Crowley is
responsible for the continued maintenance of Green View Drive. In response to
Ms. Crowley’s motion, the trial court further ruled that she “continues to be
entitled to recover road maintenance costs from Green View Drive residents as
she has in the past.” This appeal, in which Ms. Crowley has not participated,
followed.
I. Quiet Title Petition
We first address the Residents’ challenge to the trial court’s decision in
The Ledges’ quiet title action. In an action to quiet title, the burden is on each
party to prove good title as against all other parties whose rights may be
affected by the court’s decree. Austin v. Silver, 162 N.H. 352, 353 (2011). We
will uphold the trial court’s determination unless it is erroneous as a matter of
law or unsupported by the evidence. Id.
The Residents argue that the trial court erred when it decided that The
Ledges “has a permanent easement to use . . . Green View Drive . . . for [golf]
cart paths.” Resolving this issue requires that we interpret the pertinent
easement agreements. We review the trial court’s interpretation de novo. See
Close v. Fisette, 146 N.H. 480, 484 (2001). When interpreting an agreement,
we give the language used by the parties its reasonable meaning, considering
the circumstances and the context in which the agreement was negotiated, and
reading the document as a whole. Birch Broad. v. Capitol Broad. Corp., 161
N.H. 192, 196 (2010). We give an agreement the meaning intended by the
parties when they wrote it. Id.
3
“The language of a contract is ambiguous if the parties to the contract
could reasonably disagree as to the meaning of that language.” Id. (quotation
omitted). If the agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be determined,
under an objective standard, what the parties, as reasonable people, mutually
understood the ambiguous language to mean. Id. Applying an objective
standard to determine what the parties, as reasonable people, mutually
understood the ambiguous language to mean necessarily involves factual
findings by the trial court to which we will defer if they are supported by the
evidence and are not legally erroneous. Id. at 197.
Both the August 2000 and September 2001 easement agreements gave
The Ledges a “permanent easement” to maintain and repair “any water,
electrical or similar system or portion thereof” on the Crowleys’ property, which
included Green View Drive. As the trial court aptly observed, the plain
language of both agreements does not demonstrate that The Ledges had an
express easement to use Green View Drive “for all golf course purposes,”
despite the May 2000 settlement agreement requiring such an easement to be
granted. In the trial court’s words: “Although the settlement agreement states
that Mr. Crowley would grant such an easement, the subsequent documents
do not follow through.”
Nevertheless, the trial court construed the August 2000 and September
2001 agreements as granting The Ledges an easement to use Green View Drive
for the purpose of golf cart travel. The trial court reached this conclusion by
relying, in part, upon a dictionary definition of “infrastructure.” Based upon
this definition, the court ruled that golf cart paths were included under the
terms of the August 2000 and September 2001 easement agreements because
the golf cart paths were part of the golf course’s infrastructure. The court
further concluded that because the golf cart paths are now within the right-of-
way of Green View Drive, and have been in this approximate location since the
easement was created, “the Ledges has a permanent easement to use the Green
View Drive right-of-way for the cart paths.” See White v. Hotel Co., 68 N.H. 38,
43 (1894) (under express grant, grantees take “by implication whatever rights
[are] reasonably necessary to enable them to enjoy [the easement] beneficially”).
We agree with the Residents that the trial court erred by relying upon the
dictionary definition of the term “infrastructure.” Common usage does not
control when, as here, the contracting parties have defined a term. See Cole v.
Combined Ins. Co. of America, 125 N.H. 395, 396 (1984). Here, the parties
defined the term “infrastructure” to mean “any water, electrical or similar
system or portion thereof”; thus, common usage does not control the meaning
of this term.
The pertinent term in our view is not “infrastructure,” which the parties
defined, but the phrase “similar system.” This phrase, as used in the August
4
2000 and September 2001 easement agreements, is ambiguous. To interpret
it, we must “consider the parties’ intent by examining the contract as a whole,
the circumstances surrounding execution and the object intended by the
agreement, keeping in mind our goal of giving effect to the intention of the
parties.” N.A.P.P. Realty Trust v. CC Enterprises, 147 N.H. 137, 141 (2001).
However, because the trial court did not make factual findings on this issue,
we cannot determine what the parties intended the phrase to mean. We,
therefore, vacate this portion of the trial court’s order and remand for it to
determine, in the first instance, what the parties, as reasonable people,
mutually understood the phrase “similar system” to mean. See id. at 140-41.
II. Petition to Classify Green View Drive as Class V Public Highway
We next address the Residents’ assertion that the trial court erred when
it decided that there was no “occasion” to lay out Green View Drive as a public
road. Upon petition, a town will lay out roads when there is an “occasion” to
do so. Wolfeboro Neck Prop. Owners Assoc. v. Town of Wolfeboro, 146 N.H.
449, 451 (2001). “Occasion” for the lay out of public roads exists if the public
interest requires the town’s acceptance of the roads. Id. “Assessing occasion
involves an equitable balancing of competing interests.” Green Crow Corp. v.
Town of New Ipswich, 157 N.H. 344, 350 (2008). Specifically, a town’s board of
selectmen “must balance the public need for the roads against the burden the
roads would impose upon the town.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
If a town refuses to lay out a road, the trial court may be petitioned to do
so. Wolfeboro Neck Prop. Owners Assoc., 146 N.H. at 452; see RSA 231:38, I.
“The superior court conducts a de novo hearing to make an independent
determination of the occasion, or appropriateness, of laying out a road as
requested.” Wolfeboro Neck Prop. Owners Assoc., 146 N.H. at 452 (quotation
omitted). We will uphold the superior court’s determination as to whether an
“occasion” for laying out the road exists “if it is supported by some evidence,”
and is not legally erroneous. Id.
We have outlined a two-step process for a trial court to undertake when
assessing whether “occasion” for laying out a road exists. Green Crow Corp.,
157 N.H. at 350. First, the court must “balance the public interest in the
layout against the rights of the affected landowner.” Id. (quotation omitted). If
the rights of the affected landowner outweigh the public interest, there is no
occasion for laying out the road. Id. If, on the other hand, “the public interest
justifies . . . taking . . . the land without the landowner’s consent,” then the
court must engage in a second step, which is to balance the public interest in
the layout against the burden imposed upon the town. Id. (quotation omitted).
“If the balancing required by the second step favors the public interest,
occasion for the layout exists.” Id. (quotation omitted).
5
In assessing the “public interest,” the trial court may consider, among
other factors: (1) integration within an existing road system; (2) ease of existing
traffic flow; (3) improvement to convenience of travel; (4) facilitation of
transportation for school children; (5) improved accessibility to business
district and employment centers; (6) improved accessibility for fire, emergency
and police services; (7) whether it would benefit a significant portion or just a
small fraction of the town tax base or year-round residents; and (8) anticipated
frequency of road use. Id.
In assessing the “town burden,” trial courts may consider anticipated
construction and ongoing maintenance costs pertaining to the road itself, as
well as the impact on the town’s infrastructure due to municipal growth, such
as increased costs for school, fire, police and emergency systems. See id. at
350-51.
In this case, the trial court found that there was no occasion for laying
out Green View Drive as a public road in part because the rights affecting the
owner of a portion of Green View Drive – The Ledges – outweigh the public
interest in the layout. Alternatively, the trial court ruled that even if the public
interest justified taking the land without The Ledges’ consent, the minimal
public interest in laying out Green View Drive as a public road was outweighed
by the burden imposed on the town from doing so.
The court found that the public’s interest in laying out Green View Drive
as a public road was minimal because there are few houses on the road, it is
not frequently used, and improving it would not improve convenience of travel
or ease existing traffic flow since it is a dead-end road. The court found that
although school children live on Green View Drive, a nearby bus stop meets
their needs, and that because the Town previously declared Green View Drive
as an “emergency lane,” residents on the road had adequate access to
emergency services. See RSA 231:59-a (2009). Against this minimal public
benefit, the court weighed the burden on the Town from laying out Green View
Drive as a public road, which, the court found, included added expense from
repairing or reconstructing the road because the golf course’s water and
electrical lines run underneath it.
To challenge the trial court’s determination that no occasion exists for
laying out Green View Drive as a public road, the Residents first argue that
because the Town allegedly did not comply with RSA 674:41, I(d) (2008), they
purchased their homes without notice that the Town had limited responsibility
and liability for Green View Drive, and their lack of notice somehow creates a
“great public need” for Green View Drive to be public.
6
This argument fails for several reasons. First, the Residents have not
demonstrated that their need for notice equates to a public need for the road.
Second, although the Residents claim lack of notice, the trial court expressly
found that they had notice that Green View Drive was a private road, which
necessarily entails notice that the Town had limited responsibility and liability
for it. As the trial court observed:
From the beginning of Mr. Crowley’s plans to subdivide, he
represented to the [planning] board that what would become Green
View Drive would be a private road. . . . Mr. Crowley also
represented this intent through the plans recorded with the
Merrimack County Registry of Deeds. . . . Finally, many of the
deeds to property along Green View Drive refer to the road as a
private subdivision road. . . . Indeed, some of the residents admit
to knowing that the road was private when they bought it.
Third, the Residents’ argument mistakenly assumes that RSA 674:41, I(d)
governed permits to build on Green View Drive. Because Green View Drive was
a street on a subdivision plat, which the planning board approved, we agree
with the Town that RSA 674:41, I(b)(2) (2008) governed the building permits at
issue.
The Residents next contend that the trial court erred when it considered
Green View Drive’s status as an emergency lane. We disagree that this was
legal error. See Green Crow Corp., 157 N.H. at 350.
Relying upon Wolfeboro Neck Property Owners Association, 146 N.H. at
453, the Residents next assert that “[t]he burdens cited by the lower court were
created by the Town’s unreasonable actions,” and, thus, should not have been
weighed in the “occasion” analysis. Wolfeboro Neck Property Owners
Association is distinguishable from the instant case. In Wolfeboro Neck
Property Owners Association, we held that, to the extent that the trial court
relied upon any burden that was the result of the town’s negligent inspection of
the subdivision roads at issue, it erred. Wolfeboro Neck Prop. Owners Assoc.,
146 N.H. at 453. In that case, the plaintiffs alleged that even though the roads
at issue did not meet town standards, the town approved them. Id. at 450-51.
Thereafter, the plaintiffs, thinking that the roads met town standards,
petitioned the town to accept the roads as public roads. Id. at 450. Upon
inspection, the town discovered that the roads, in fact, did not meet town
standards and that fixing the deficiencies would cost approximately $295,000.
Id. at 450-51.
When assessing the “burden” upon the town from laying out the roads as
public, the trial court did not resolve whether the town had been negligent in
approving them and, thus, whether the burden from fixing their deficiencies
7
was a burden of the town’s own making. Id. at 451. We reversed the trial
court’s decision, holding that “when undertaking the equitable balancing
required to determine whether there is an ‘occasion’ under RSA 231:8 for the
laying out of public roads, the trial court . . . should not . . . consider[ ] any
‘burden’ the town may have had in laying out the roads caused by its own
unreasonable actions.” Id. at 453. We instructed the court, on remand, to
decide whether the town negligently inspected the roads and, if so, not to weigh
in the “occasion” analysis any burden on the town from its unreasonable action
in negligently inspecting the roads. Id.
In this case, by contrast, there is no claim that the Town was negligent
when it approved Mr. Crowley’s subdivision plan, which included his plan to
develop Green View Drive as a private road. We find no legal error in the trial
court’s equitable balancing of the benefit to the public from laying out Green
View Drive against the burden imposed upon the Town in doing so.
We have reviewed the Residents’ remaining arguments and hold that
they lack merit and warrant no extended consideration. See Vogel v. Vogel,
137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
III. Maintenance Obligations for Green View Drive
Lastly, we address the Residents’ contention that the trial court erred
when it decided that Ms. Crowley continues to be responsible for maintaining
Green View Drive and that she is entitled “to recover road maintenance costs
from Green View Drive residents as she has in the past.” They contend that
this issue was not properly before the trial court. In their motion to the trial
court, the Residents asserted that Ms. Crowley agreed that this issue should
not have been decided. The Town and The Ledges have not responded to this
argument in their joint appellate brief.
The record before us reveals that the issues before the court did not
include deciding which of the private parties – Ms. Crowley, The Ledges or the
Residents – were responsible for maintaining Green View Drive if it remained
private. While there was ample evidence that Green View Drive was intended
to be a private road, that the Crowleys had previously maintained it, and that
Green View residents had reimbursed the Crowleys for maintenance costs, the
record does not show that the parties litigated whether any of these obligations
were legally enforceable. Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s finding that
Ms. Crowley was responsible for maintaining Green View Drive and that she
could recover road maintenance costs from Green View Drive residents.
Affirmed in part; vacated in part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8