THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
Grafton
Nos. 2009-569
2009-691
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
BERNARD KINNE
Argued: June 23, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 27, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Bernard Kinne, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) denying his request for writ of habeas corpus.
We affirm.
The parties do not dispute the following facts. In February 1999, a
Grafton County grand jury indicted Kinne on a charge of conspiracy to commit
robbery. The indictment alleged that Kinne:
did commit the crime of Conspiracy to Commit Robbery, in that the
Defendant did purposefully committed [sic] the crime of Robbery
by agreeing with Jason Bridges and Rhiannon Richardson to
commit the crime of Robbery at Pares Market and as an overt act
in furtherance of the conspiracy, did gather masks and items of
clothing for use in said Robbery and did go to Pares Market with
Jason Bridges and Rhiannon Richardson[.]
The indictment further stated that this alleged conduct was “Contrary to RSA
629:3[;] Conspiracy to Commit Robbery[;] Class A FELONY.”
The indictment did not allege any of the additional facts required by
statute to elevate the charge from a class B to a class A felony. Nonetheless,
Kinne pleaded guilty to the class A felony charge in March 2000. At that time,
both Kinne and his counsel signed an acknowledgment and waiver of rights
form, in which Kinne agreed he was pleading guilty to a class A felony, for
which “the maximum penalty is 15 years and the minimum penalty is 7½
years.” The Grafton County Superior Court (Burling, J.) conducted a colloquy
and accepted the plea agreement, sentencing the defendant to three to ten
years in state prison, with two years of the minimum suspended, and five years
of probation upon release. The defendant asked, and the State agreed, to waive
the offer of proof at the plea and sentencing hearing. The court read the
indictment aloud, but did not advise Kinne of the elements of class A felony
robbery.
The defendant was subsequently paroled, but violated his parole. He
then filed a pro se “Motion to Vacate and Resentence Defendant” in Grafton
County in February 2009 while still serving the maximum sentence for the
original crime. Kinne argued that the indictment did not allege any of the
additional facts required by statute to elevate the charge to a class A felony. He
further claimed that at the time of sentencing he “had not been aware of what
the essential elements of the offense were,” and that “his plea should be
vacated because it was not entered into knowingly, voluntarily, and
intelligently.” Accordingly, he argued that he should have been sentenced for
only a class B felony.
The Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) treated the motion as a petition for writ
of habeas corpus because it was a collateral attack on the defendant’s plea and
sentence. The court ruled that the defendant had waived any challenge to the
sufficiency of the indictment by failing to raise the issue either during the
original superior court proceedings or on direct appeal. Although Kinne argued
that he only recently discovered the defect in the indictment, the court
determined that any alleged defect was evident on its face. Furthermore, the
court found that if the defendant had challenged the indictment prior to the
2
guilty plea, or even during a trial, the State could have re-indicted Kinne.
Accordingly, the court held that Kinne had waived his claim.
Kinne subsequently filed a motion to reconsider, and on the same day,
filed a petition for writ of habeas corpus in Coos County, where he was
incarcerated, raising the same issues. The Grafton County Superior Court
denied the motion to reconsider. The Coos County Superior Court (Bornstein,
J.) denied the petition for habeas corpus, ruling that the Grafton County
decision controlled the outcome. The defendant then appealed both decisions,
and we consolidated the two appeals.
On appeal, Kinne argues that his sentence constitutes a violation of his
due process rights because it is greater than the maximum penalty for a class
B felony. He asserts that the indictment was insufficient because it did not
allege any aggravating factors necessary to elevate the charge to a class A
felony. He contends that he can collaterally attack the sufficiency of the
indictment because he only recently learned of the defect. He also contends he
can collaterally challenge his guilty plea because it was invalid. Because we
hold that Kinne waived any challenge to the sufficiency of the indictment and
cannot meet the burden necessary to collaterally challenge his guilty plea, we
affirm.
“When court action results in the loss of a constitutionally protected
liberty interest, it may be collaterally attacked by way of petition for writ of
habeas corpus after the time for direct appeal has expired.” Sleeper v. Warden,
N.H. State Prison, 155 N.H. 160, 162 (2007) (quotation omitted). However,
habeas corpus is not a substitute for an appeal, and a procedural default may
preclude later collateral review. Avery v. Cunningham, Warden, 131 N.H. 138,
143 (1988). Additionally, the United States Supreme Court has recognized
procedural default as a bar to relief under federal writs of habeas corpus. See,
e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 86-87 (1977).
Kinne argues he could not have attacked the sufficiency of the
indictment on direct appeal because he was unaware of the defect until a “jail
house lawyer” brought it to his attention. He contends, relying upon
Humphrey v. Cunningham, Warden, 133 N.H. 727 (1990), and Crosby v.
Warden, N.H. State Prison, 152 N.H. 44 (2005), that procedural default does
not prevent a review of his claim.
We first addressed the application of the procedural default rule in Avery,
where we held that the petitioner was barred from raising the issue of his
competency by way of habeas corpus because he failed to raise the issue on
direct appeal. Avery, 131 N.H. at 142-43. We reaffirmed the common law rule
that habeas corpus is not a substitute for direct appeal, id. at 143, and also
sought to prevent the petitioner from using “a collateral proceeding alleging
3
ineffective assistance of counsel as a means of circumventing the court’s
procedural requirements.” Id. at 144. We later declined to apply the
procedural default rule in Humphrey, where the petitioner filed a petition for
writ of habeas corpus alleging ineffective assistance of counsel based upon his
counsel’s failure to file a motion to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial.
Humphrey, 133 N.H. at 729. In Humphrey, while the State argued that
Humphrey’s claim should have been denied because it could have been raised
on direct appeal, we held that a petitioner “may collaterally attack a proceeding
by filing a petition for writ of habeas corpus after the time for a direct appeal
has expired, if he can establish a harmful constitutional error.” Id. at 732.
Relying upon this language in Humphrey, Kinne argues that the defect in
his indictment constitutes harmful constitutional error of which he was
unaware during the timeframe for filing a direct appeal. However, we recently
reconciled our holding in Humphrey with the application of the procedural
default rule we announced in Avery. See State v. Pepin, 159 N.H. 310, 313
(2009) (rejecting the “broad language” of Avery). In Pepin, we determined that
our subsequent decisions had undercut the holding in Avery and concluded
that “claims of ineffective assistance of counsel based upon alleged trial errors
are not procedurally barred by the failure to raise those errors on direct
appeal.” Pepin, 159 N.H. at 313 (emphasis added).
Kinne does not claim ineffective assistance of counsel, and nothing in
Humphrey or Pepin abrogates the general rule that a petition for habeas corpus
is not a substitute for a direct appeal. In fact, we have suggested that
ineffectiveness claims are best brought in a collateral attack. See State v.
Veale, 154 N.H. 730, 736 (2007) (describing a preference for collaterally
reviewing a defendant’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim rather than
“prematurely” merging it with claims on direct appeal); see also United States v.
Brooks, 125 F.3d 484, 495 (7th Cir. 1997) (explaining that an ineffective
assistance of counsel claim brought for the first time on direct appeal is
unlikely to “find any factual support in the trial record and an adverse
determination on direct appeal will be res judicata in any subsequent collateral
attack” (quotation omitted)); Tarver v. State, 15 So. 3d 446, 459 (Miss. Ct. App.
2009) (“On direct appeal, the record is typically not sufficient to support a
claim of ineffective assistance of counsel; therefore, these claims are best
brought when seeking post-conviction relief.”) Accordingly, Humphrey is
inapplicable to the defendant’s claim.
Likewise, Crosby has no application to Kinne’s claim. In Crosby, the
petitioner pleaded guilty on September 9, 1992, to two counts of felonious
sexual assault, and on September 14, 1992, to a burglary charge. Crosby, 152
N.H. at 45. On the felonious sexual assault charges, he received concurrent
twelve-month sentences to the house of correction, and on the burglary charge,
he received a single twelve-month house of correction sentence. Id. However,
4
the record did not indicate whether the burglary sentence was consecutive to or
concurrent with the sexual assault sentences. Id. In 1996, the defendant
pleaded true to a probation violation and his sentencing agreement specified for
the first time that the burglary sentence was to run consecutively to the sexual
assault sentences. Id. In 2003, Crosby filed a petition for writ of habeas
corpus challenging the 1996 sentencing agreement for the first time. Id. While
the State contended that the defendant waived his right to challenge the
legality of the sentences by agreeing to them and failing to seek review for
seven years, we held “that a defendant’s failure to object to a sentence at the
time of its imposition does not bar the later filing of an extraordinary writ.” Id.
at 46.
While a petitioner can collaterally challenge an illegal sentence, see id.,
the parties do not dispute that a three to ten year sentence is permissible for a
class A felony. We agree with the trial court that the defendant challenges only
whether the indictment sufficiently charged a class A felony, as Kinne agreed to
and received a legal sentence for a class A felony. Therefore, Kinne does not
challenge the legality of his sentence and Crosby is inapplicable to his claim.
Kinne next argues he did not enter a valid plea because he was not
advised of the essential elements of a class A felony. Therefore, he contends,
his plea could not have been knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. See Boykin v.
Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 242 (1969); State v. Arsenault, 153 N.H. 413, 416
(2006). The State responds that Kinne cannot meet the initial burden required
to collaterally attack a guilty plea because he has not presented any evidence
that his plea was unintelligent or involuntary. He cannot meet this burden,
the State contends, because he was represented by counsel at the time of his
guilty plea and both Kinne and his counsel signed an acknowledgment of rights
form that plainly stated Kinne was pleading guilty to a class A felony.
As an initial matter, Kinne conflates the sufficiency of the indictment –
the charging document – with his understanding of the elements of the crime
to which he pleaded guilty. See State v. Thornton, 140 N.H. 532, 537 (1995).
In determining whether Kinne’s guilty plea was valid, we consider only whether
he understood the elements of class A felony robbery.
Kinne’s argument that his guilty plea was not knowingly, intelligently,
and voluntarily made implicates the due process rights guaranteed by the
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. Boykin, 395 U.S. at
243. We review constitutional questions of law de novo. Arsenault, 153 N.H.
at 415. Kinne did not unambiguously and specifically invoke a provision of the
New Hampshire Constitution in his brief; accordingly, we address only his
federal claim. Id.
5
A guilty plea is valid only if it is knowing, intelligent and voluntary. E.g.,
Thornton, 140 N.H. at 536. A plea is not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary
unless the defendant understands the essential elements of the crime to which
he pleads guilty. Id. at 537. Therefore, prior to pleading guilty, “[t]he
defendant must be informed of every essential element of the alleged offense
and the court must determine that the defendant understands the charges.”
Valencia v. United States, 923 F.2d 917, 921 (1st Cir. 1991). A guilty plea
cannot serve as “an intelligent admission of guilt” if the defendant did not have
adequate notice of the charges against him or did not understand the charge.
Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637, 645 n.13 (1976).
To mount a successful collateral challenge to a guilty plea, “the
defendant must describe the specific manner in which the waiver was in fact
involuntary or without understanding, and must at least go forward with
evidence sufficient to indicate that his specific claim presents a genuine issue
for adjudication.” Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 416 (quotation and brackets omitted).
If the defendant meets this burden, the burden of proof going forward depends
upon whether the trial court affirmatively inquired into the knowledge and
volition of the defendant’s plea. Id. If the face of the record indicates the trial
court made the proper inquiry, the defendant will bear the burden “to
demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the trial court was wrong
and that his plea was either involuntary or unknowing for the reason he
specifically claims.” Id. (quotation omitted). However, if the trial court did not
make the required inquiries, “the burden rests on the State to respond to the
defendant’s claim by demonstrating to a clear and convincing degree that the
plea was voluntary or knowing in the respect specifically challenged.” Id.
(quotation omitted).
Because Kinne brought a collateral attack, he bears the initial burden.
Kinne argues only that he was not advised of the elements of class A robbery,
and, therefore, his plea does not constitute an admission of guilt to that crime.
When accepting a guilty plea, a trial court has an obligation to make sure the
defendant understands the essential elements of the crime with which he is
charged. See Thornton, 140 N.H. at 537. However, the court may assume that
“defense counsel routinely explain the nature of the offense in sufficient detail
to give the accused notice of what he is being asked to admit.” Id. (quotation
omitted); see also State v. Allard, 116 N.H. 240, 242 (1976) (noting that the
court need not question defense counsel in detail to determine whether
counsel’s advice was correct). “Where a defendant is represented by competent
counsel, the court usually may rely on that counsel’s assurance that the
defendant has been properly informed of the nature and elements of the charge
to which he is pleading guilty.” Bradshaw v. Stumpf, 545 U.S. 175, 183 (2005).
Not only was the defendant represented by counsel, but both Kinne and
his trial counsel signed an acknowledgment of rights form that stated he was
6
pleading guilty to a class A felony. Kinne also acknowledged at his sentencing
hearing that his attorney had advised him of the charges against him, and his
attorney stated that he had gone over the acknowledgment of rights form with
Kinne and was satisfied that Kinne understood his rights and knowingly
relinquished them. Compare Thornton, 140 N.H. at 538 (finding plea to be
voluntary and intelligent where both defendant and his counsel signed an
acknowledgment of rights form), with Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 417 (finding that
defendant had met his initial burden to challenge a guilty plea where he was
unrepresented by counsel, he received information regarding the plea only from
the prosecutor, and no one described any elements of the offense to him), and
State v. Offen, 156 N.H. 435, 438 (2007) (finding that defendant met his initial
burden where he appeared pro se, had a limited education, and testified that
he did not understand an element of the crime). Kinne has never claimed that
his trial counsel did not explain the elements of class A felony robbery. See
Henderson, 426 U.S. at 647 (explaining it may be appropriate to presume that
defense counsel routinely explains the nature of the offense in sufficient detail
to the defendant, but declining to apply this presumption where the trial judge
found as a fact that an element was not explained to the defendant). Moreover,
Kinne declined the State’s offer of proof at his sentencing hearing. Unlike in
Arsenault, where the defendant provided specific facts describing why his plea
was involuntary or without understanding, Kinne has done nothing more than
claim he was not advised by the indictment or the court of the elements of
class A felony robbery. Therefore, the petitioner has not alleged sufficient facts
to meet his initial burden and trigger further review.
Finally, the State notes in its brief that even if a habeas petitioner fails to
raise a claim on direct review, a court may address it if it falls within a narrow
exception to the procedural default rule recognized by federal courts. Under
this exception, a habeas petitioner must “demonstrate either ‘cause’ and ‘actual
prejudice’ or that he is ‘actually innocent.’” See Bousley v. United States, 523
U.S. 614, 622 (1998) (citations omitted). Kinne, however, does not argue that
he fits within this exception. Therefore, we decline to address it.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7