THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-205
STATE EMPLOYEES' ASSOCIATION OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, INC.,
SEIU LOCAL 1984
v.
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Argued: November 17, 2010
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2011
Molan, Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (Glenn R. Milner on the
memorandum of law and orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Anne M. Edwards, associate
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for respondent State of New
Hampshire.
Hinckley, Allen & Snyder LLP, of Concord (Christopher H. M. Carter and
Suzan M. Lehmann on the brief), for the Community College System of New
Hampshire, as amicus curiae.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, the State of New Hampshire, appeals a
ruling of the Superior Court (Sullivan, J.) in favor of the petitioner, State
Employees’ Association of New Hampshire, Inc., SEIU Local 1984: (1) granting
the petitioner’s request for a writ of mandamus; (2) denying the respondent’s
motion to dismiss; and (3) granting the petitioner’s request for declaratory
judgment. We reverse.
The facts in this case are not disputed. Prior to 2007, New Hampshire’s
community colleges comprised the Department of Regional Community
Technical Colleges (DRCTC). This department was governed by RSA chapter
188-F, which stated, “[T]he department shall be a state agency.” RSA 188-F:2
(1999) (repealed 2007). The department was headed by a commissioner
appointed by the Governor and approved by the Executive Council. RSA 188-
F:5, I (1999) (repealed 2007).
In 2007, the legislature enacted Senate Bill 82, which eliminated DRCTC
and created the Community College System of New Hampshire (CCSNH) as a
body politic and corporate with limited legislative oversight. See Laws 2007,
ch. 361. The legislature mandated numerous changes, effective July 17, 2007,
see RSA 188-F:1 (Supp. 2010), including the delegation of “broad authority” to
a board of trustees to be the “policy-making and operational authority” of
CCSNH. See RSA 188-F:2, II (2008); RSA 188-F:3, II (Supp. 2010). The
trustees are entrusted with “the management and control of all the property
and affairs of the community college system.” RSA 188-F:6 (Supp. 2010). They
have the power to enter into contracts without the approval of the Governor
and Council, which is required for state agency contracts. See RSA 188-F:6, XI
(Supp. 2010); RSA 4:15 (2003); N.H. Retirement System v. Sununu, 126 N.H.
104 (1985). The legislature repealed references to DRCTC employees in the
state compensation statutes, see RSA 94:1-a (2001). It also mandated changes
that would deprive CCSNH of state benefits and services, such as defense and
indemnification, the use of financial and administrative services, and the
advice of the attorney general, to be effective in July 2009. Laws 2007, 361:35,
:40. That effective date was subsequently extended to 2011. Laws 2009,
148:1. Pending termination of these services, CCSNH will be required, unlike
state agencies, to pay the state for financial and administrative services. Laws
2009, 143:17.
In 2009, in response to budget cuts, the legislature passed House Bill 2,
which requires all state departments or establishments, as defined by RSA 9:1
(2003), to fill vacant positions by first making offers to laid-off state employees
who meet the minimum qualifications for the position. Laws 2009, ch. 144.
RSA 9:1 states that “the term ‘department’ or ‘establishment’ means any
executive department, commission, board, institution, bureau, office, or other
agency of the state government, by whatever name called, other than the
legislature and the state judicial branch, that uses, expends or receives any
2
state funds . . . .” The petitioner represents three laid-off state employees who
applied for jobs within CCSNH. Each met the minimum position qualifications,
but CCSNH did not accord them the rehiring preference mandated by House
Bill 2.
In its petition for a writ of mandamus, the petitioner requested an order
from the trial court requiring CCSNH to abide by the terms of House Bill 2.
The trial court found that CCSNH met the definition of a department or
establishment under RSA 9:1 and, thus, was governed by House Bill 2. On
appeal, the State argues that CCSNH is neither, but rather is a “body politic
and corporate.”
The facts in this case are undisputed, and the only question is the
correct interpretation of a statute. As the interpretation of a statute is a
question of law, we review the trial court’s decision de novo. Kenison v.
Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). We are the final arbiter of the intent of the
legislature as expressed in the words of the statute, and, where possible, we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. When the
language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to
modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will
neither consider what the legislature might have said nor add words that it did
not see fit to include. Id. When a statute’s language is plain and
unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indication of legislative
intent. Appeal of Parkland Med. Ctr., 158 N.H. 67, 72 (2008). When statutory
language is ambiguous, however, we will consider legislative history and
examine the statute’s overall objective. Favazza v. Braley, 160 N.H. 349, 351
(2010). We interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme
and not in isolation. State v. Lamy, 158 N.H. 511, 515 (2009).
In ruling that CCSNH falls within RSA 9:1’s definition of department or
establishment, the trial court found that CCSNH receives 36% of its funds from
state appropriations and meets the definition in Black’s Law Dictionary of an
“institution”: “an establishment, especially one of eleemosynary or public
character or one affecting a community . . . . It may be private in its character,
designed for profit to those composing the organization, or public and
charitable in its purposes, or educational (e.g. college or university).” Black’s
Law Dictionary 800 (6th ed. 1990). Consequently, the trial court concluded,
“there is no doubt that CCSNH is an institution that receives state funds[] and
appears to fall within the plain meaning of RSA 9:1.”
The trial court also relied upon the language of RSA 188-F:7, III (2008) to
support its conclusion. RSA 188-F:7, III provides that CCSNH employees who
transfer to other state positions shall retain and transfer all leave accruals and
seniority, and “service as an employee of the community college system of New
Hampshire shall be creditable service for purposes of” retirement, life
3
insurance, and medical benefits provided to state employees. The trial court
stated: “Because the legislature has clearly intended that CCSNH employees
be given equal benefits as other state employees, . . . CCSNH falls within the
definition of RSA 9:1, therefore making it subject to the rehiring provision of
[House Bill] 2.”
We begin our analysis with the language of RSA 9:1, which defines the
terms “department” or “establishment” as “any executive department,
commission, board, institution, bureau, office, or other agency of the state
government, by whatever name called, other than the legislature and the state
judicial branch, that uses, expends or receives any state funds . . . .” The State
argues that “executive” modifies each word of the phrase “department,
commission, board, institution, bureau, office, or other agency of the state
government,” such that each entity must be part of the executive branch of
government. The State also asserts that inclusion of the phrase “other than
the legislature and the state judicial branch” supports its interpretation. In
contrast, the petitioner argues that the trial court correctly ruled that
“executive” modifies only the word “department.” The petitioner asserts that
the State’s interpretation fails because RSA 9:1 expressly excludes from
coverage the legislature and the state judicial branch, an exclusion rendered
superfluous if the State’s argument is correct. In light of these two reasonable
interpretations, we find that the statute is ambiguous and, therefore, turn to
legislative history and related statutes for indications of legislative intent. See
Favazza, 160 N.H. at 351.
RSA chapter 9, entitled “Budget and Appropriations,” details the process
by which the Governor submits the state’s budget to the legislature.
“Departments” or “establishments,” as defined by RSA 9:1, must submit
expected requirements for their operating budgets and capital expenditures in
a detailed format, identifying requirements for administration, operation,
maintenance expenditures, costs for workers’ compensation and
unemployment compensation, and costs for land, construction, furnishings
and equipment. See RSA 9:3-a (2003); RSA 9:4 (2003).
Prior to 1979, RSA 9:1 read, in pertinent part: “[T]he term ‘department’
or ‘establishment’ means any executive or judicial department, commission,
board, institution, bureau, office, court, or other agency of the state
government, by whatever name called, other than the legislature, that uses,
expends or receives any state funds.” RSA 9:1 (1955) (emphasis added). When
the statute was changed to its current form in 1979, Representative John
Tucker, speaking for the Appropriations Committee, explained to the House:
“This bill eliminates the requirement that the judicial branch submit its budget
to the governor.” N.H.H.R. Jour. 621 (1979). Thus, it was understood that
prior to 1979, the word “judicial” modified all of the terms in the list that
followed; it would therefore be illogical to conclude that the word “executive”
4
modified only the first term in the list. It is logical to conclude that by
excluding, in addition to the legislature, all judicial branch entities, including
courts, from the definition of “department” or “establishment,” the legislature
left within the definition all executive branch entities.
Receipt of state funds is not dispositive of the issue of whether an entity
is a state agency within the meaning of RSA 9:1. The State maintains, and the
petitioner does not dispute, that the University System of New Hampshire
(USNH), a body corporate and politic, is an institution that receives state funds,
but does not follow the budgetary process governing RSA 9:1 entities. The
legislature “does not have approval power over the entire operating budget of
USNH, nor does it approve the line item budget.” University System of New
Hampshire v. United States Gypsum, 756 F. Supp. 640, 646 (D. N.H. 1991);
Laws 2009, ch. 143 (showing state appropriations for USNH for fiscal year
2010-2011). The petitioner also does not dispute that the Community
Development Finance Authority and the Business Finance Authority are bodies
corporate and politic created by the State, and that neither is considered a
department or establishment under RSA 9:1. See RSA 162-A:4 (2002); RSA
162-L:2 (2002).
We conclude that the modifier “executive” was intended to modify each
listed entity: “department, commission, board, institution, bureau, office, or
other agency of the state government.” Therefore, we agree with the State that
the more reasonable interpretation of the current law is that the “legislature
intended RSA 9:1 to apply only to state agencies and other entities within the
State’s executive branch.” The trial court erred in ruling that RSA 9:1 applies
to all institutions that receive state funds.
We turn now to the question of whether the legislature intended CCSNH
to be an executive branch entity. In doing so, we note that “the concept of a
legislatively created entity independent of the executive branch is not at all
novel.” N.H. Retirement System, 126 N.H. at 107. In N.H. Retirement System,
three factors led us to conclude that “the legislature intended the [New
Hampshire Retirement] System to be an independent entity rather than an
executive department or agency.” Id. at 108. These were: (1) the language of
RSA chapter 100-A, which established the System; (2) the fiduciary obligation
owed by its trustees to its beneficiaries; and (3) the administrative gloss on the
statute established by the System’s history of functioning independently. Here,
the second factor is inapplicable, and the petitioner disputes whether the
respondent properly preserved the administrative gloss argument below.
However, the language of RSA chapter 188-F and its legislative history provide
ample evidence of the legislature’s intent that CCSNH not be part of the
executive branch, that CCSNH not be subject to the budget procedure set out
in RSA chapter 9, and that CCSNH employees not be employees of the State.
5
RSA 188-F:25 (2008) governs the police standards and training council,
which was previously under the administration of the DRCTC. See RSA 188-
F:25 (1999) (repealed 2007) (“The police standards and training council is
transferred to the department of regional community-technical colleges and is
administratively attached to that department.”). When the legislature created
CCSNH in 2007, however, it retained the police standards and training council
as part of the executive branch. See N.H.S. Jour. 536 (2007) (comments of
Sen. Janeway). Accordingly, it specifically distinguished the council’s position
as an executive branch agency from CCSNH’s new status as a body corporate
and politic: “The police standards and training council is an executive branch
council and is not a body corporate and politic.” RSA 188-F:25 (2008).
The New Hampshire Senate Journal provides further evidence of the
legislature’s intent regarding the changes to RSA chapter 188-F. The following
exchange took place on the floor of the Senate on the subject of the level of
oversight that the legislature would have over CCSNH’s budget process:
Senator Gatsas: Senator, does this mean that the New Hampshire
Technical Colleges will now be like the University System where we
as a state don’t have the ability to look at line items in their
budget?
Senator D’Allesandro: When – thank you for the question, Senator
Gatsas. When this transition is complete, they will mirror the
functioning of the University System. That’s correct.
N.H.S. Jour. 537 (2007).
Additional amendments to RSA chapter 188-F were made in 2010 to
continue “the effort . . . to make the New Hampshire community college system
autonomous.” N.H.H.R. Jour. (May 5, 2010) (comments of Rep. Bergin,
speaking for the Finance Committee). “This bill . . . changes the format in
which CCS[NH]’s budget is presented, and includes clarifying language that the
CCS[NH] employees are not subject to the personnel provisions of the
department of administrative services.” N.H.H.R. Jour. (April 14, 2010)
(comments of Rep. Stiles, speaking for the Education Committee). The trustees
of CCSNH are authorized to “submit [CCSNH’s operating] budget in accordance
with RSA 9:4-e and at the same time as state agencies.” RSA 188-F:6, VI
(Supp. 2010). This subsequent history confirms both the legislature’s intent
that CCSNH participate in a budgetary process separate from that of RSA 9:1
agencies and its understanding that CCSNH is not a state agency. See
Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 512 (2004) (holding that
subsequent legislative history, while not controlling, may be considered).
Further, CCSNH has been given the authority to “[d]evelop and adopt personnel
policies and procedures” for its employees, as well as to determine the
6
compensation of its employees. RSA 188-F:6, XVI (Supp. 2010). As of 2010,
its employees are not considered classified employees of the state and are not
subject to the rules promulgated by the New Hampshire Department of
Personnel. RSA 21-I:49, X (Supp. 2010).
We disagree with the trial court’s conclusion that RSA chapter 188-F,
which addresses the benefits and retirement system participation of CCSNH
employees, demonstrates that the “legislature has clearly intended that CCSNH
be given equal benefits as other state employees.” Rather, RSA 188-F:7 was
intended to protect those employees who had been state employees from the
loss of expected benefits. The 2007 amendments provided that full-time
employees of the community college system, as of the effective date of the
amendments, are members of the New Hampshire Retirement System. See
RSA 188-F:7 (Supp. 2010); RSA 100-A:1, V (Supp. 2010); RSA 100-A:3, I
(Supp. 2010). Accordingly, the definition of “employer” in RSA 100-A:1, IV was
expanded to include “the community college system of New Hampshire.” The
legislature also provided that CCSNH employees would be able to transfer
accumulated benefits and seniority to state positions. If CCSNH were to
remain a state agency, these statutory changes would not have been necessary,
as CCSNH employees would unquestionably be eligible for state employee
benefits.
The Senate Journal demonstrates that the concern of legislators was to
ensure that DRCTC employees would not lose benefits and seniority
accumulated in state service. See N.H.S. Jour. 539 (2007) (comments of Sen.
Gatsas) (“I’ve gotten some calls from employees of the New Hampshire
Technical Colleges and their concern is, is that the Retirement System at the
state level gives them health insurance benefits for the rest of their lives.
They’re not clear, the ones that are close to retirement, that once they’re
transitioned out, if the Retirement System that they are put into gives them the
same benefit, and that’s a concern.”).
The practice of providing non-state employees with state employee
benefits is not unique. Employees of the Land and Community Heritage
Investment Program are not state employees, see RSA 227-M:6-a, I (Supp.
2010), but are permitted “to elect to receive such health, dental, life insurance,
deferred compensation, and retirement benefits as are afforded to classified
employees of the state.” RSA 227-M:6-a, II (Supp. 2010). Similarly, employees
of the Community Development Finance Authority are not state employees.
RSA 162-L:19 (Supp. 2009). However, when the legislature transferred certain
executive branch employees to the Authority, it permitted them “to continue to
receive such health, dental, life insurance, deferred compensation, and
retirement benefits as are afforded to classified employees of the state.” Id.
7
In addition to legislative history, we also examine the statute’s overall
objective in order to resolve any ambiguity in the statute. Favazza, 160 N.H. at
351. The legislature recognized that legislative oversight must be balanced
with academic freedom: “The general court also recognizes the need to protect
the institutions of the community college system of New Hampshire from
inappropriate external influence which might threaten the academic freedom of
faculty members or otherwise inhibit the pursuit of academic excellence.” RSA
188-F:3, II (2008). Accordingly, “the general court . . . delegated broad
authority to the board of trustees who shall be responsible for managing the
community college system of New Hampshire in a manner which promotes
academic excellence and serves the educational needs of the people of New
Hampshire.” Id. A mandated hiring preference rule would infringe upon the
academic freedom the legislature meant to confer upon CCSNH.
Accordingly, we hold that CCSNH is not a department or establishment
as defined by RSA 9:1 and, therefore, is not subject to the provisions of House
Bill 2.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8