THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Banking Department
No. 2010-864
APPEAL OF COUNTRYWIDE HOME LOANS, INC.
(New Hampshire Banking Department)
Argued: October 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2011
Sulloway & Hollis, PLLC, of Concord (Martin P. Honigberg on the brief
and orally), and Goodwin Procter LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Brook L.
Ames on the brief), for the petitioner.
Atwater Law, of Rye (Krista Atwater on the brief), and Mary Stewart Law,
PLLC, of Concord (Mary Frances Stewart on the brief and orally), for the
respondent.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Countrywide Home Loans, Inc.
(Countrywide), appeals an award by the Commissioner of the New Hampshire
Banking Department to the respondent, Rachel Nicholson (the borrower), based
upon claims under the Consumer Protection Act. See RSA ch. 358-A (2009 &
Supp. 2011). The borrower cross-appeals the amount of the award. We vacate
the award.
The record supports the following facts. In January 2005, the borrower
contacted Countrywide in order to obtain a mortgage to purchase property
located in Manchester. The borrower spoke with two Countrywide agents who
informed her that they would investigate and present her the “best [financing]
program.” At a hearing before the commissioner of the banking department,
the borrower testified that in February 2005, the agents orally approved her for
a 30-year fixed rate mortgage loan at 6% interest. She then submitted a loan
application seeking the amount of $202,730.00.
During this process, Countrywide sent the borrower several forms,
including a Lock-In Agreement, Notification of Underwriting Approval and
Closing Conditions, and a Truth in Lending Disclosure Statement. Each of
these documents specified the details of the 6% fixed rate mortgage loan that
the borrower had discussed with the agents. The Notification of Underwriting
Approval stated in bold:
NOTIFICATION OF UNDERWRITING APPROVAL IS LENDER’S
DETERMINATION OF YOUR ABILITY TO MEET THE FINANCIAL
OBLIGATIONS OF THE LOAN. IT IS NOT A COMMITMENT TO MAKE
A LOAN AT ANY PARTICULAR RATE OR TERMS OR FOR ANY
PARTICULAR PERIOD OF TIME, NOR DOES IT GUARANTEE THE
AVAILABILIY OF THE TYPE OF LOAN FOR WHICH UNDERWRITING
APPROVAL IS GIVEN. SUCH A COMMITMENT CAN BE OBTAINED
ONLY THROUGH EXECUTION OF LENDER’S LOCK-IN AGREEMENT.
(Emphasis added.) The borrower signed the Lock-In Agreement. Based upon
the emphasized language above, and her previous discussions with the agents,
she believed Countrywide had committed itself to the terms of her requested
loan. Closing was scheduled for April 27, 2005.
Thereafter, the borrower spoke with agents on a weekly basis regarding
the home purchase and the loan. The agents did not raise any problems with
the loan application until April 25, 2005, two days before the scheduled closing
date. On that day, despite the fact that there were no changes in the
borrower’s employment status or credit since the application had been filed,
the agents informed her that Countrywide would not be able to grant a fixed
interest loan for the amount she needed. They informed her that to purchase
the home, she would need to apply for two different loans.
The borrower testified that the agents told her that the change in the
loan terms was temporary and that the new loans would be modified within six
months to a fixed rate mortgage. They promised to follow up with her to
ensure she received the fixed rate loan. On the scheduled closing date, as
instructed by the agents, the borrower applied for two new loans: a first
mortgage loan in the amount of $157,500 with a fixed interest rate of 7.875%
for three years and interest adjusting periodically thereafter, and a second
mortgage loan in the amount of $52,500.00 with a fixed interest rate of 10.75%
2
and a balloon payment of the remaining principal after fifteen years. That
same day, Countrywide approved the loans and the borrower executed the
mortgage and the note for both loans.
In late 2005, the borrower made late payments on the second mortgage
and later missed payments on the first mortgage. On October 17, 2008, she
filed a consumer complaint with the banking department, alleging that
Countrywide misled her about the terms of the mortgage loans. The banking
department investigated the allegations and issued an April 7, 2009 letter to
the borrower, signed by a hearings examiner, in response to the complaint
stating: “It appears that [Countrywide has] sufficiently addressed your
complaint. The explanation is fair and reasonable and therefore, the
institution is within its rights.” The letter concluded: “At this time, the
Department is not considering taking enforcement action against this company
regarding the information in your complaint. Thank you for bringing this
matter to our attention.”
Approximately six months later, on October 26, 2009, the borrower
requested a hearing on the merits of her claims in front of the commissioner of
the banking department. The commissioner denied the request. The borrower
then filed a motion for rehearing, which the commissioner reviewed and
ultimately granted. Before the hearing, Countrywide moved to dismiss the
claim based upon lack of jurisdiction, as well as the borrower’s failure to timely
seek rehearing after receiving the April 7, 2009 letter. The commissioner
denied the motion.
After the hearing, the commissioner entered an order ruling that
Countrywide had committed “an unfair or deceptive act or practice under RSA
358-A.” The commissioner then ordered the following:
(1) Countrywide shall reimburse [the borrower] for: (a) all monies paid by
[the borrower] prior to and at closing, either to Countrywide or others . . .
(b) all monies paid to Countrywide or others after closing . . . and (c) all
reasonable legal fees expended by [the borrower] to secure this
restitution. (2) Countrywide shall discharge the first mortgage and void
the underlying mortgage note. (3) Countrywide shall payoff the
underlying second mortgage note and obtain discharge of the second
mortgage. (4) When [the above] are complied with, [the borrower] shall
execute a quitclaim deed to Countrywide for the subject property.
The borrower and Countrywide both sought a rehearing in accordance with
RSA 541:3 (2007). The commissioner denied both motions. The parties then
cross-appealed to this court.
3
On appeal, Countrywide argues that: (1) the commissioner did not have
jurisdiction to hear the borrower’s claims; (2) the commissioner erred in
granting the borrower’s untimely motion for rehearing; (3) the commissioner
improperly shifted the burden of proof; (4) the commissioner did not have the
authority to award attorney’s fees; and (5) the commissioner’s order requiring
deeding of the property to Countrywide is not consistent with restitution. In
her cross-appeal, the borrower argues that the commissioner erred by ordering
restitution that did not include damages provided under the Consumer
Protection Act, and by not awarding restitution for her financial loss.
We will overturn the commissioner’s order only for errors of law or if we
are satisfied by a clear preponderance of the evidence that the order is unjust
or unreasonable. See Appeal of Langenfeld, 160 N.H. 85, 89 (2010); RSA
541:13 (2007). The appealing party bears the burden of proof. Appeal of
Langenfeld, 160 N.H. at 89.
Pursuant to RSA 541:3 and RSA 384:1-a (2011), a party has thirty days
after any order or decision has been made by the banking department to file a
motion for rehearing. Countrywide argues that the April 7, 2009 letter
constitutes an “order or decision” denying the borrower’s consumer protection
complaint. RSA 541:3. Accordingly, Countrywide contends the commissioner
erred in granting the borrower’s motion for rehearing filed on December 23,
2009, more than eight months after the borrower received the letter. The
borrower argues that because the letter stated no action was being taken “at
this time,” it was not an “order or decision” denying her complaint, but rather
was merely an informal status letter. In making this argument, the borrower
primarily relies upon New Hampshire Bankers Assoc. v. Nelson. Nelson, 113
N.H. 127 (1973).
In Nelson, we considered whether a letter from the commissioner
constituted a “decision, order or ruling” that could be appealed to this court
pursuant to RSA 384:1-a (2006) and RSA chapter 541. Id. at 129-31. At issue
in Nelson was a complaint filed by the New Hampshire Banker’s Association
protesting certain actions of the New Hampshire Savings Bank. Id. at 127-28.
The Banker’s Association requested a hearing, and in response, the
commissioner sent a letter stating that he had “investigated the facts and law”
relevant to the plaintiff’s claim and denied a hearing as unnecessary. Id. at
128-30. The letter also stated that the bank’s allegedly unlawful actions did
not violate New Hampshire banking statutes. Id.
The Banker’s Association appealed to this court. Id. at 127-28. On
appeal, the commissioner argued that the letter was not reviewable because it
was “merely a gratuitous, informal response.” Id. at 129. We explained that a
letter is appealable when it “constitute[s] a final administrative disposition of
the issue,” and determined that “[t]he crux of the matter is the practical impact
4
of . . . the [action].” Id. We held that the letter, which “finally foreclosed any
further administrative proceeding on a motion for rehearing,” was an
appealable decision, order or ruling. See id. at 130-31.
Relying upon Nelson, the borrower argues that the letter is not an “order
or decision” within the meaning of RSA 541:3 because it concludes with the
phrase “at this time” and therefore does not constitute the agency’s final word
on the matter. However, the practical impact of the letter was to inform the
borrower that the banking department had determined Countrywide did not
violate the Consumer Protection Act, and that the department would not be
taking any further action against Countrywide “at this time.” In other words,
the banking department definitively denied the borrower’s complaint, absent a
motion for rehearing. We agree with Countrywide that in this case, the letter
constitutes an “order or decision” within the meaning of RSA 541:3. Because
the borrower did not file a motion for rehearing within thirty days of the letter,
any further action on her complaint was permanently foreclosed. See RSA
541:4 (2007); In re Petition of McHale, 120 N.H. 450, 451 (1980). The
commissioner should not have granted a hearing on the merits of the
borrower’s claims, and the award entered in her favor must be vacated.
Vacated.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
5