THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-496
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JACK T. WARD
Argued: October 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Jack T. Ward, was convicted on thirteen
counts of possessing child pornography. See RSA 649-A:3 (2007) (amended
2008). He appeals, arguing that the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) erred in
denying his motion to suppress on the grounds that the affidavit supporting
the application for a search warrant lacked probable cause to search his
residence and his computer. We affirm.
On September 12, 2007, Officer Gary Allen of the Pembroke Police
Department received a call from a pastor at a church in Pembroke. The pastor
told Allen that he had received a call from a parishioner named Allen Brown
and that Brown told him that he saw what appeared to be child pornography in
his neighbor’s garage.
After speaking with the pastor, Allen telephoned Brown. Brown
identified the defendant as his neighbor and told Allen that he and the
defendant had a verbal agreement that they could go into each other’s garage
to borrow tools. On September 10, he went into the defendant’s detached
garage to borrow a drill and noticed a stack of magazines on the floor. There
were several pieces of paper on top of the magazines that contained pictures of
a female juvenile performing sexual acts on adult men. It appeared to Brown
that the pictures were printed from a computer.
Allen asked Brown if he would come to the police station for an interview
and Brown agreed. Later that day, Detective Dawn Shea confirmed that the
residence identified by Brown was owned by the defendant and his wife.
On September 13, Allen and Shea met with Brown at the police station.
Brown reiterated the information he had provided Allen regarding his
relationship with the defendant. He explained that when he went to the
defendant’s garage on September 10, he saw a piece of paper on top of a pile of
magazines that appeared to be longer than standard size paper and printed
from a computer. He stated that one of the papers contained a photograph of a
nude girl between the ages of twelve and fourteen lying on a white sheet and
the other had a photograph of what appeared to be the same girl performing
oral sex on a nude adult male. The magazines appeared to be pornographic in
nature but Brown could not identify if they were adult or child pornography
magazines.
Brown also indicated that the defendant and his wife each have a laptop
computer, which they use on a daily basis. He stated that he had observed
them using their computers inside their house; however, he had never seen
any computer equipment in the garage. He indicated that at one time the
defendant had a desktop computer but that he did not know whether the
defendant still owned it. Brown further stated that the defendant spends a lot
of time in the garage but that he had never seen the defendant’s wife go into
the garage.
That same day, Allen applied for a warrant to search the defendant’s
motor vehicle, his residence, including the detached garage and a shed, and his
person. In the supporting affidavit, Allen described his conversations with
Brown. The attachment to the affidavit submitted in support of the search
warrant outlined the property for which Allen sought the search warrant,
which included “[a]ny and all computer equipment” as well as “[c]amera
equipment.”
2
A district court judge issued a warrant and members of the Pembroke
Police Department executed it on September 14, 2007. Prior to trial, the
defendant moved to suppress the evidence seized during the search. After a
hearing, the trial court granted the defendant’s motion to the extent that the
search warrant affidavit failed to establish probable cause to search the
defendant’s motor vehicle and his person, and to search for adult pornography.
However, the court found that the affidavit established probable cause to
search the defendant’s house and garage and, therefore, the court denied the
motion to suppress evidence derived from those searches.
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to suppress the evidence seized from his home and any computer in his
home because the affidavit submitted in support of the warrant application did
not establish probable cause to believe that evidence of child pornography
would be found in those areas as required by Part I, Article 19 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to the
United States Constitution. He argues that there was no information in the
affidavit linking the images Brown observed in the garage to the computers
Brown said he saw the defendant and his wife using nor was there any
information “suggesting [he] stored child pornography in his home or on any
computer in his home.” We first address the defendant’s claim under the State
Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231 (1983), and cite federal opinions
for guidance only. Ball, 124 N.H. at 232-33.
We review the trial court’s order de novo except with respect to any
controlling factual findings. State v. Dalling, 159 N.H. 183, 185 (2009).
Nevertheless, we afford much deference to a magistrate’s determination of
probable cause and will not invalidate warrants by reading the supporting
affidavit in a hypertechnical sense. Id. Rather, “we review the affidavit in a
common-sense manner, and determine close cases by the preference to be
accorded to warrants.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution requires that search
warrants be issued only upon a finding of probable cause. State v. Zwicker,
151 N.H. 179, 185 (2004). Probable cause exists if a person of ordinary
caution would justifiably believe that what is sought will be found through the
search and will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction. State v. Orde,
161 N.H. 260, 269 (2010). To establish probable cause, the affiant need only
present the magistrate with sufficient facts and circumstances to demonstrate
a substantial likelihood that the evidence or contraband sought will be found in
the place to be searched. Id. The affiant need not “establish with certainty, or
even beyond a reasonable doubt, that the search will lead to the desired
result.” State v. Fish, 142 N.H. 524, 528 (1997) (quotation omitted).
3
We utilize a totality-of-the-circumstances test to review the sufficiency of
an affidavit submitted in an application for a search warrant. Id.
Given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before the
magistrate, including the veracity and basis of knowledge of
persons supplying hearsay information, was there a fair probability
that contraband or evidence of a crime would be found in the
particular place described in the warrant?
State v. Silvestri, 136 N.H. 522, 525 (1992) (quotations omitted). While an
affidavit may establish probable cause without the observance of contraband at
the location to be searched, id. at 527, in order to establish probable cause to
search a residence, affidavits must establish a sufficient nexus between the
illicit objects and the place to be searched. Dalling, 159 N.H. at 186.
Relying upon Silvestri, the defendant argues that “[t]he mere fact that the
images found in the garage tended to establish that [he] illegally possessed
those images did not, without more, support a finding that there was a fair
probability that other such evidence was in his home.” Silvestri, however, is
distinguishable from the instant case. Silvestri dealt with a search of the
defendant’s residence for evidence of controlled drugs. Silvestri, 136 N.H. at
523-24. As in this case, the defendant argued on appeal that the evidence
obtained from the search should have been suppressed because the affidavit
submitted in support of the warrant application did not establish probable
cause to search his residence. Id. at 525. We agreed, finding that “[t]he only
fact alleged in the affidavit that possibly refer[red] to the defendant’s residence
[wa]s the telephone number dialed by the informant [to purchase marijuana]
and confirmed by” an investigating officer. Id. at 526. We found that, even
assuming the magistrate drew the inference that the telephone number was the
defendant’s home number, the informant did not state that it was his or her
belief that drugs were kept at the defendant’s residence or that he or she had
seen drugs at the defendant’s residence. Id. Nor did the informant “indicate
any other circumstances that would support the inference, by either the affiant
or the magistrate, that the defendant stored drugs in his residence.” Id. at
527. We declined the State’s invitation to adopt a per se rule that if a
magistrate finds that a person is a drug dealer, then a finding of probable
cause to search that person’s residence automatically follows, stating that “we
have consistently required some nexus between the defendant’s residence and
drug-dealing activities in order to establish probable cause to search the
residence.” Id.
In the instant case, unlike in Silvestri, while no child pornography was
seen on the defendant’s computer or in his residence, there were “other
circumstances that would support the inference,” id., that the defendant had
evidence of child pornography in these areas. With respect to his computer,
4
the affidavit described Brown’s first-hand observation of two pieces of paper in
the defendant’s garage depicting sexually explicit photographs of a nude girl
between the ages of twelve and fourteen years old. Brown described the papers
as being longer than a standard size piece of paper and as appearing to have
been printed off of a computer. He further indicated that he had observed the
defendant and his wife using their laptop computers on a daily basis and that
he knew the defendant had previously owned a desktop computer but that he
was unsure if the defendant still owned it.
As to the defendant’s residence, the affidavit averred that Brown had
never seen any computer equipment in the garage but that he had observed the
defendant using his laptop computer inside the house on a regular basis.
Based on the totality of these circumstances, we conclude that the affidavit
demonstrates a fair probability that evidence of child pornography would be
found in the defendant’s home or on his computer. “While no single piece of
evidence may be conclusive, if the pieces seem to fit neatly together, the
magistrate may find probable cause that evidence of a crime may be found at
the defendant’s home.” State v. Westover, 127 N.H. 130, 132-33 (1985)
(neighbor’s testimony regarding frequent visitors at the defendant’s residence
and police corroboration that the defendant’s phone number was linked to an
ongoing drug investigation by the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration
enough to establish probable cause to search defendant’s residence).
The defendant further argues that, “without additional information,” the
inference that child pornography suspects are likely to store images in safe and
secret places, such as their homes, “is not reasonable here.” He contends that
“[w]arrant applications often include expertise of law enforcement officials
about a particular type of crime and the customary practices of persons
suspected of being engaged in such criminal activity” and here, the affidavit
contained no such information. Certainly additional information regarding an
affiant’s training and experience could be helpful in establishing probable
cause. Here, however, neither the inference suggested by the defendant nor
additional information regarding the affiant’s training and experience were
required to establish probable cause. The magistrate was presented with
information indicating that what appeared to be a computer printout of child
pornography was observed in the defendant’s garage but no computer
equipment had ever been seen in the garage and the defendant had only been
seen using his computer in his home. When this information is viewed in a
common-sense manner, we find that it was reasonable for the magistrate to
infer that evidence of child pornography would be found on the defendant’s
computer or in his home. Cf. State v. Kirsch, 139 N.H. 647, 651 (1995) (finding
that “‘pedophile profile’ reciting the types of material collected by child
molesters and their proclivity for retaining it” was not required to establish
probable cause where a common-sense inference about the longevity of child
pornography retained by the sexual abuser could “reasonably be drawn from
5
the nature of the items themselves, such as the photographs taken of the
children”).
The defendant also maintains that because he shared his home with his
wife, “it was more likely that if [he] had additional child pornography he would
have stored it somewhere other than in his home, such as in the garage.”
Merely because the defendant could have stored additional child pornography
in the garage rather than in the home does not defeat probable cause in this
case. Our duty as the reviewing court “is simply to ensure that the magistrate
had a substantial basis for concluding that probable cause existed.” Illinois v.
Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238-39 (1983) (quotation, brackets and ellipsis omitted).
Here, we are convinced that this standard was met.
We are further not persuaded by the defendant’s argument that the
affidavit failed to establish probable cause for the search of his home and
computer because Brown “did not describe the physical attributes of the paper
[or provide other information] that would have tended to show that [it]
originated from a computer rather than, for example, a photo printer or a
copier.” While the affidavit did not completely refute the idea that the paper
originated from somewhere other than a computer, we have never required
“complete certainty . . . when determining whether probable cause to search
exists.” State v. Daniel, 142 N.H. 54, 59 (1997) (quotation omitted). Similarly,
we do not believe it is fatal to the warrant’s validity that the affidavit did not
contain information indicating “that [the defendant] or his wife had a printer.”
A common-sense inference that a printer would likely be found in the
defendant’s home may be reasonably drawn from the fact that the affidavit
contained information indicating both the defendant and his wife owned laptop
computers, which they used in the home on a daily basis.
Finally, the defendant argues that “to the extent the trial court inferred,
as the State suggested in its objection [to his motion to suppress], that the
images found in the garage originated from the internet or that [he] made them
using a digital camera, those inferences also lack foundation.” (Citation
omitted.) It is not clear from a review of the trial court’s order, however, that it
drew such an inference in rendering its decision. Moreover, we do not believe
that this inference was necessary to establish probable cause for the search of
the defendant’s home and his computer. As stated above, the affidavit
contained information indicating that what appeared to be a computer printout
of child pornography was observed in the defendant’s garage and the defendant
had only been seen using his computer in his home. The magistrate could
conclude that there was a substantial likelihood that the images originated
from somewhere in the defendant’s home and thus, that evidence or
contraband related to child pornography would be found there. We note that
the defendant has not raised an argument on appeal concerning the breadth of
the search warrant.
6
As the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection
than does our State Constitution under these circumstances, see Fish, 142
N.H. at 527-28; Gates, 462 U.S. at 238, we reach the same result under the
Federal Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7