THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-017
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ADAM MENTUS
Argued: September 15, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 14, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Adam Mentus, appeals his conviction of
manslaughter, see RSA 630:2 (2007), following a jury trial in Superior Court
(Lewis, J.). We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On June 26, 2008, the
defendant drove with his friend, Nathan Caron, to State Line Ammo in
Plaistow, where Caron bought a Lorcin L380 handgun. The two then returned
to Caron’s house, where Anthony Palla joined them.
Eventually, the defendant left Caron’s house and took the Lorcin to his
house to show his brother. In the meantime, Deirdre Budzyna and Christina
Sorrentino went to Caron’s house. Upon their arrival, Caron left to go
shopping, and, approximately ten minutes later, the defendant returned to
Caron’s house. Budzyna, Sorrentino, Palla and the defendant decided to go to
a sandpit in Hampstead to fire the Lorcin. Budzyna agreed to drive. Before
they left, the defendant put a full clip of ammunition in the Lorcin and took
additional ammunition from Caron’s room. The defendant put the Lorcin into
his left pocket. Budzyna got into the driver’s seat and the defendant sat behind
her.
Moments later, the defendant reached into his pocket and retrieved the
Lorcin. As he held the gun in his right hand, it fired. The bullet traveled
through the back of the driver’s seat and punctured Budzyna’s left lung.
Budzyna said “Adam,” slammed the car into park and got out. The defendant
helped her into Caron’s house, where she collapsed on the floor. The
defendant called 911. An ambulance arrived later and took her to the hospital,
where she died.
After the shooting, the police questioned the defendant. He told them
that after he sat down in the car, he wanted to put the gun under his seat, so
he took the gun out of his left pocket, transferred it to his right hand, and,
when he was bending down to place it on the floor, it fired. He also said that
“[his] finger hit the trigger,” that his finger was on the trigger or in the trigger
guard area, and that he did not know whether there was a round in the
chamber when the gun fired. At trial, he said that his finger was not in the
trigger guard area and that he did not put his finger on the trigger. However,
he also testified, “I might have hit the trigger. I might have hit the slide, but
. . . I did not pull that trigger.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court erred: (1) by
providing him with only $1,200 of the $3,000 he requested to hire a firearms
expert, see RSA 604-A:6 (Supp. 2005); and (2) by overruling his objection to the
State’s closing argument.
Prior to trial, pursuant to RSA 604-A:6, the defendant requested $3,000
from the court to hire Gregory Danas, a firearms expert, to examine the Lorcin.
The defendant argued that he needed an expert to support his theory that the
gun had fired without him pulling the trigger – that is, that it had misfired.
The court initially allocated $750 and, after reconsideration, increased its
allocation to $1,200. This amount was not sufficient to hire Danas. As a
result, the defendant hired Thomas McDermott, a lawyer involved in litigation
against gun manufacturers. The court ultimately ruled that McDermott was
not qualified to testify as an expert and thus no expert testified on the
2
defendant’s behalf. On appeal, the defendant argues that the court erred in
denying his request for $3,000.
To obtain funds for an expert, a defendant must demonstrate to the trial
court that the expert is necessary to ensure effective preparation of his defense.
See State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666, 674 (2005). Necessity may be established
where the expert will advise or testify on a matter directly in issue, or where the
expert’s testimony is essential to a matter in issue or could be conclusive on
that issue. Id. “Regardless of whether a defendant has invoked equal
protection, fundamental fairness necessary for due process, or the right to
services to enable his counsel to assist him effectively, an indigent defendant’s
access to experts has been said to lie within the sound discretion of the court.”
State v. Wellington, 150 N.H. 782, 784 (2004). Therefore, we review the trial
court’s decision under our unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.
Sweeney, 151 N.H. at 675.
At the RSA 604-A:6 hearing, the judge said, “[T]hese are hard economic
times. I’m not going to just easily approve $3,000 for a firearms expert.”
Based upon this statement, the defendant argues the judge denied his “request
solely because of concerns about the source of funding.” The defendant argues
that this amounts to reversible error, for we have said that “the fact that RSA
604-A:6 funds are in limited supply is not an appropriate reason for denying
access and reliance upon it, without more, would constitute an [unsustainable
exercise of discretion].” State v. Stow, 136 N.H. 598, 605 (1993); see State v.
Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of
discretion standard).
The judge here, though, did rely on more – specifically, he considered
whether $3,000 was actually necessary to cover the cost of a firearms expert.
At the hearing, he asked the defendant why the amount was necessary, saying
“$3,000 to look at a gun? I need some explanation.” He also said that he
would supplement the $750 he initially approved if the defendant could get the
“firearms expert to give . . . some detailed information as to what he can really
do for [$3,000].” Thus, the judge was open to approving more funds if the
defendant demonstrated that additional funds were needed; indeed, the judge
ultimately approved $1,200. Therefore, the judge did not rely solely on the
limited supply of State funds in reaching his decision.
Accordingly, to succeed on appeal the defendant “must demonstrate by
clear and convincing evidence that his request to the court included as
complete a showing of necessity for the desired services as could be expected of
him, and that the denial of funds substantially prejudiced him at trial.”
Wellington, 150 N.H. at 784. For three reasons we hold that the defendant has
not shown that he was substantially prejudiced.
3
First, even without Danas, the defendant’s misfire theory was
substantially explored at trial. Cf. People v. Seavey, 762 N.Y.S.2d 435, 437
(App. Div. 2003) (holding that trial court’s denial of funds for psychiatric expert
did not prejudice defendant given that defendant’s treating psychiatrist testified
at trial). The State’s expert witness thoroughly examined the gun, and found
the safety and trigger pull in good working condition. In his research, he did
find a safety warning that said the Lorcin L380 “may create an extremely
dangerous condition and a potential for serious injury by firing when dropped.”
To test the gun for this condition, he struck it with a two-pound rubber mallet
from several directions, the same method used in the study which initially
discovered the potential defect. However, this experiment did not cause the
gun to misfire. All of this information was provided to the jury and, therefore,
even though the State’s witness concluded that this particular gun was not
susceptible to misfiring, the jury was informed that this model of gun was
capable of misfiring.
Second, the defendant’s own versions of the shooting were not consistent
with how this particular gun could have misfired. Cf. Hall v. State, 566 S.E.2d
374, 378 (Ga. Ct. App. 2002) (“[The defendant] was not prejudiced by the
court’s denial of his motion to [obtain funds for] an expert in interviewing
children, where he admitted the underlying facts as represented by the
children.”). He never said that he dropped the gun, except after it fired. At all
times he maintained that the gun was in his hand when it fired. He answered
in the negative when asked if there were hard objects around him that could
have bumped into the gun. He did say that he might have told someone the
gun banged into something, but only “because he was trying to put different
scenarios [together] because [he] still didn’t know what happened.” Given that
the gun did not misfire even after being hammered with a mallet, the
defendant’s description of the event did not provide a plausible basis for his
theory.
Third, even if the defendant had been able to prove that the gun had
misfired, it does not necessarily follow that he would have prevailed on his
defense. See Green v. State, 881 P.2d 751, 752 (Okla. Crim. App. 1994).
Manslaughter is defined as recklessly causing the death of another. RSA
630:2, I(b) (2007). A person is reckless if “he is aware of and consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk,” and the risk is “of such a
nature and degree that, considering the circumstances known to him, its
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the conduct that a law-abiding
person would observe in the situation.” RSA 626:2, II(c) (2007). The
defendant’s reckless act must also have been the proximate cause of the death,
which is “the cause without which the event would not have occurred, and the
predominating cause, a substantial factor from which the event follows as a
natural, direct and immediate consequence.” State v. Lamprey, 149 N.H. 364,
367 (2003) (quotation omitted).
4
At trial, the defendant argued that he could not be found guilty of
reckless manslaughter because the gun had misfired. Our case law does not
ineluctably lead to this result. As we said in Lamprey, “if one were to pick up a
loaded handgun, ensure that the safety is engaged, aim at a bystander and pull
the trigger, it does not follow that a mechanical failure of the safety should
exculpate the defendant if he kills the bystander.” Id. at 369. This observation
is based on the general rule that “[o]ften the risk of a particular kind of
contributing coincidental intervening cause is the very risk that made the
conduct reckless in the first place.” Id. Therefore, unsafely handling a gun is
reckless because it creates a risk that if it misfires, the bullet will kill someone.
Here, there was ample evidence that the defendant unsafely handled the
gun. Based on his admitted knowledge of hunter safety rules, he testified that
a gun should always be pointed in a safe direction, that it should be unloaded
when transported in a car, and that at all times it should be treated as if it
were loaded. Yet, he admitted that he did not follow these rules. He did not
unload the gun prior to entering the car, did not determine if there was a round
in the chamber, and did not even check to see if the safety was on, and, while
handling the gun, he had it pointed at the back of the seat in which Budzyna
was sitting. Based on the defendant’s mishandling of the gun, a reasonable
jury could have found the defendant guilty of reckless manslaughter even if he
had proved that the gun had misfired. Accordingly, the trial court’s refusal to
provide the defendant the full amount of requested funds did not substantially
prejudice him.
As for the second issue, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in
overruling his objection to the State’s closing argument. “A prosecutor . . . has
great latitude in closing argument to both summarize and discuss the evidence
presented to the jury and to urge the jury to draw inferences of guilt from the
evidence.” State v. Sylvia, 136 N.H. 428, 431 (1992) (quotation omitted).
Moreover, “[a]s the trial court is in the best position to gauge any prejudicial
effect the prosecutor’s closing remarks may have had on the jury, we review its
decision . . . under an unsustainable exercise of discretion standard.” State v.
Sanchez, 152 N.H. 625, 628 (2005). “To show that the trial court’s decision is
not sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that it was clearly untenable
or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Here, the court overruled the defendant’s objection to the following part
of the State’s closing argument:
There’s always a risk. The way we handle guns that are even
unloaded. Once its loaded, there’s a risk, and you can’t let it
bump into something. And while it may [misfire] when you drop it
on the ground, what does that mean? . . . That means you
5
shouldn’t drop it on the ground. If you’ve got that gun and it’s
loaded, [it] better be in your holster with a triple safety. And when
you pull it out, you better not drop it on the ground or you’re
responsible for that.
The defendant interprets this statement to mean that a person is reckless per
se if he drops a gun and it misfires. He argues that this is a misstatement of
law and, therefore, the judge should have sustained his objection.
We do not agree. The prosecutor here was simply imploring the jury to
find the defendant guilty of reckless manslaughter because he had mishandled
the gun, an argument that the defendant was free to counter. Therefore, this
statement was permissible, for a prosecutor may “urge the jury to draw
inferences of guilt from the evidence.” Sylvia, 136 N.H. at 431 (quotation
omitted). We accordingly hold that the trial judge’s overruling of the
defendant’s objection was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6