THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2010-737
DAVID FISCHER
v.
SUPERINTENDENT, STRAFFORD COUNTY HOUSE OF CORRECTIONS
Argued: February 9, 2012
Opinion Issued: April 20, 2012
David Fischer, by brief, pro se, and Christopher M. Johnson, chief
appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the petitioner.
Soldati Law Offices, P.A., of Portsmouth (Lincoln T. Soldati on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, David Fischer, appeals orders of the Superior
Court (Brown and Wageling, JJ.) on his motions for pretrial bail, claiming that
the court delegated authority to Strafford County Community Corrections
(SCCC), which is managed by the respondent, Superintendent, Strafford County
House of Corrections, and part of the executive branch, in violation of the
separation of powers doctrine. We affirm.
The following facts are either undisputed or supported in the record. On
February 19, 2010, the petitioner was arrested on charges of second degree
assault, a class B felony, see RSA 631:2 (Supp. 2011), and six related
misdemeanors. Bail was set by the Dover District Court (Cappiello, J.) at
$75,000 cash, subject to certain conditions, including, if the petitioner posted
bail, supervision by SCCC with a sobrietor, GPS monitoring, and a mental health
referral. Bail was continued by the Court (Weaver, J.) on March 5, 2010.
The petitioner filed a motion in superior court for an amendment of bail,
arguing that $75,000 cash bail was excessive and that he was entitled to
personal recognizance (PR) bail, pursuant to RSA 597:2 (Supp. 2011). He
proposed that he would reside with his mother in Rochester.
Following a hearing on May 3, the Court (Brown, J.) ordered that bail
would “remain as is” at $75,000 cash with the stated conditions, and scheduled
a further hearing. Judge Brown issued an amended order on May 6, lowering the
cash bail to $50,000 and setting conditions, if bail was posted, including that the
petitioner: (1) “live at: his mother’s house on house arrest to leave for mental
health counseling only”; (2) refrain from using drugs and alcohol and “[s]ubmit to
random drug [and] alcohol tests”; and (3) be “supervised [and] electronically
monitored by SCCC [with] GPS, Sobrietor [and] Mental Health Refera[l].”
On June 1, Judge Brown again ruled that bail would remain as is and
ordered a further hearing at a time the defendant’s therapist would be available
to testify. At that subsequent hearing, on June 15, Judge Brown ruled as follows
from the bench:
What we’re going to do, Mr. Fischer, is that it’s going to stay at
50,000 cash to convert to personal recognizance upon verification of
residence, which I don’t think is going to be a problem because it’s
your mother’s residence, and confirmation of an existing and
ongoing mental health and medical appointments.
So you’ll be released on a GPS[,] Sobrietor, administrative
home confinement, basically house arrest. You’ll be able to leave the
residence for mental health, medical, consult with counsel, and
meeting with [SCCC]. But other than those – unless counsel sees
any other exceptions, I’ll listen to that, but those are the only
exceptions, and no contact with the victim.
The written order of same date stated that bail was set at $50,000 cash “[t]o
convert to PR if found accep[table] by SCCC – Whether Bail is Posted or
Converted all conditions apply.” (Capitalization omitted.) Those conditions
included supervision by SCCC “upon verification of address,” refraining from
drugs and alcohol, and submission to random drug and alcohol testing.
2
For reasons the parties disputed, but which are unnecessary to recount
here, placement of the petitioner with his mother became infeasible. The
petitioner moved to amend his bail conditions, proposing to live at a certain
residence in Massachusetts. The State objected and the motion was denied
without a hearing on July 7, 2010. On August 25, the petitioner moved for a bail
hearing, this time proposing to reside in Rochester. The State again objected and
the matter was heard by Judge Wageling on September 1.
At the hearing, the petitioner alleged that SCCC was being unreasonable
in repeatedly finding his proposed residences inappropriate. His counsel
argued that SCCC “doesn’t have the authority to decide bail conditions, and
this Court can order that he be monitored by [SCCC] with the conditions set by
Judge Brown.” Judge Wageling denied the motion, stating, in part, that she
would intervene if SCCC were shown to be violating its own policies. She
stated further, “Otherwise, I’m going to leave it to [SCCC’s] discretion to apply
their rules. It’s the separation of powers doctrine, as far as I’m concerned.”
At least one additional pre-trial motion by the petitioner to amend bail
was denied, and, although the record does not indicate the entire disposition at
trial, it appears that the petitioner was convicted on at least one felony charge.
A post-verdict bail hearing was held before Judge Brown on December 9, 2010.
The court declined to modify bail, stating from the bench:
I am not going to exercise my discretion and order [SCCC] to do
anything. I have a bail order that’s been in place since June 15th,
2010, and that remains in place as is.
I’m just not going to order [SCCC] to do something it is not
inclined to do. I have the power, and I have the discretion to do
that, but I’m not going to in this case. The bail remains as is.
This appeal followed. We accepted a single question for review:
“Whether the court’s delegation to SCCC of the ultimate authority to determine
whether the petitioner is released on personal recognizance bail is an
unconstitutional delegation of judicial authority.”
As a preliminary matter, the petitioner asks us to rule that the issue he
presents is not moot for two reasons. First, because Judge Brown considered
the pre-trial bail order still in effect post-conviction, resolution of the issue
“could affect whether [the petitioner] obtains release on bail pending appeal.”
Second, he contends that the question of SCCC’s power to determine
conditions of release on bail is likely to recur, but evade appellate review given
that SCCC may not reach a decision about pre-trial detention in any particular
case “until shortly before trial, at which point the value to the defendant of pre-
trial release has been almost entirely lost.”
3
“[T]he question of mootness is not subject to rigid rules, but is regarded
as one of convenience and discretion.” Batchelder v. Town of Plymouth Zoning
Bd. of Adjustment, 160 N.H. 253, 255-56 (2010) (quotation omitted). Because
this case presents an issue “capable of repetition, yet evading review,” State v.
Gagne, 129 N.H. 93, 98 (1986) (quotation omitted), we conclude that it is not
moot and will decide it on the merits.
The petitioner argues that the trial court’s delegation to SCCC of the
authority to determine whether to release him on personal recognizance bail
violated the principle of separation of powers. The separation of powers
doctrine is embodied in Part I, Article 37 of our State Constitution, which
provides:
In the government of this state, the three essential powers thereof,
to wit, the legislative, executive, and judicial, ought to be kept as
separate from, and independent of, each other, as the nature of a
free government will admit, or as is consistent with that chain of
connection that binds the whole fabric of the constitution in one
indissoluble bond of union and amity.
“Separation of powers is an integral part of our governmental system of checks
and balances: each branch of government acts as a check on the other,
protecting the sovereignty and freedom of those governed by preventing the
tyranny of any one branch of the government being supreme.” Opinion of the
Justices (Prior Sexual Assault Evidence), 141 N.H. 562, 568 (1997). Thus,
under the Separation of Powers Clause, “each branch is prohibited . . . from
encroaching upon the powers and functions of another branch.” Duquette v.
Warden, N.H. State Prison, 154 N.H. 737, 746-47 (2007). Nevertheless, Part I,
Article 37 does “not provide for impenetrable barriers between the branches . . .
and the doctrine is violated only when one branch usurps an essential power of
another.” Id. at 747 (citation omitted). In addition, “we have always recognized
that the doctrine does not require an absolute division of powers, but a
cooperative accommodation among the three branches of government.”
Opinion of the Justices (Prior Sexual Assault Evidence), 141 N.H. at 569. “In
the connection between the departments some overlapping is permissible, and
there is a region of authority, alternative and concurrent, the boundaries of
which are fixed by no final rule.” Opinion of the Justices, 87 N.H. 492, 493
(1935).
The petitioner’s argument rests upon the premise that “[t]he power to
determine the conditions on a defendant’s right to pre-trial release belongs to
the judiciary.” He recognizes that some overlapping of authority is permissible,
conceding that “the legislative branch has a role in defining the general
conditions in which bail is available, and . . . the executive branch has a role in
4
supervising persons released on bail,” but maintains that “the courts have the
power in individual cases to set the terms of bail.” He asserts, therefore, that
while SCCC may make recommendations to the court regarding bail conditions,
it cannot exercise the power to set bail conditions, either ultimately, or even in
the first instance subject to review by a court. He concludes that, “because
the superior court . . . effectively cede[d] to SCCC the power to decide whether
[his] cash bail would convert to PR bail, this Court must find a violation of the
principle of the separation of powers.”
The respondent does not challenge the petitioner’s premise, but rather
disputes that the court delegated any authority to SCCC. He argues that the
petitioner “has taken a few words in the Court’s bail order out of context in an
attempt to manufacture a constitutional issue of separation of powers.” He
asserts that “[n]either the express statements of the Court’s intent as stated in
the bail hearings nor the actual manner in which the SCCC[] [program]
operates support finding a violation of the separation of powers doctrine.”
Our first task, then, is to determine the import of the court’s orders.
The interpretation of a court order is a question of law,
which we review de novo. In construing a court order, we look to
the plain meaning of the words used in the document. We
construe subsidiary clauses so as not to conflict with the primary
purpose of the trial court’s decree. As a general matter, a court
decree or judgment is to be construed with reference to the issues
it was meant to decide.
Appeal of Langenfeld, 160 N.H. 85, 89 (2010) (citations omitted). Our task is
complicated by the number of times the issue of bail came before the court.
The petitioner himself states that “the court, the State, and SCCC described
SCCC’s role in different ways at different times.” The actual bail order,
however, that remained in place from June 15, 2010, through the court’s last
hearing on the matter on December 9, 2010, set bail at $50,000 cash with
conditions, “to convert to PR if found accep[table] by SCCC.” (Capitalization
omitted.) The issue is therefore whether the phrase “if found acceptable by
SCCC” ceded to SCCC any authority that violates the separation of powers
doctrine.
To support its contention that the court in effect ceded to SCCC the
authority to determine conditions of release, the petitioner argues that the
court apparently believed that SCCC possessed that power in any event. The
petitioner argues that “the court, at times, indicated that principles of
separation of powers might preclude the court from overriding SCCC’s
intentions as to the conditions of release.” The petitioner cites, for instance, a
portion of the record in which the court stated:
5
[The bail order] says that [the petitioner’s] bail is going to be set at
$50,000 cash only subject to the conditions listed below, to convert
to PR if found acceptable by [SCCC].
Now, similarly to the separation of power that exists with
regard to jails, I can’t order a jailer to release a defendant on good
time credit. It’s thoroughly at the discretion of the jailer whether
or not someone is going to get good time credit, for all intents and
purposes.”
We do not read this statement to mean that the court believed it lacked the
authority to order SCCC supervision on PR bail, but rather that it lacked the
authority to dictate how SCCC exercised discretion over a matter legitimately
within its discretion.
We note that the phrase “if found accep[table] by SCCC” is followed by
the language “[w]hether Bail is Posted or Converted all conditions apply.”
(Capitalization omitted.) As the court pointed out at the September 1 hearing,
“the bail order very clearly has an either or. Now, if [the petitioner] wishes to
post $50,000 cash, the Court order says that [SCCC] will supervise him.” The
court later explained:
He’s going to be monitored by [SCCC] anyhow. It’s simply that the
difference is that what the Court is doing is ordering [SCCC] to do
it. He’s being given, if you will, a gift, that is, his bail is going to
change from $50,000 cash to PR, if they find him acceptable.
. . . .
If he posts the 50 grand, he gets out, and the Court’s order
then is that he’s going to be supervised by [SCCC]. They are then
ordering [SCCC] to do it.
The foregoing makes clear that the court knew it had the power to order
supervision by SCCC. We consider any language in the court’s orders that
could be read to the contrary to be inadvertent and not indicative of the court’s
actual opinion on the matter, or of a delegation of any authority by the court to
SCCC.
The petitioner concedes, as noted previously, that “it would not violate
the Constitution for SCCC to make recommendations as to bail conditions,”
but contends that the power delegated to SCCC in this case went beyond
recommendation into impermissible decision-making on a condition of bail.
We disagree. Admittedly, the court’s June 15 order contemplated some
6
exercise of discretion by SCCC. The court noted that SCCC “ha[d] to decide
whether or not [it] has the means to [supervise the petitioner in the community]
based upon whatever the current circumstances are.” Such a decision,
however, is well within SCCC’s purview and invades no province of the
judiciary. If SCCC decided it had the means to adequately supervise the
petitioner, under the residential options he proposed, then bail was set – by the
court – at personal recognizance. On the other hand, if SCCC lacked
confidence in its ability to supervise the petitioner, the court ordered
supervision anyway but imposed an additional condition to ensure the
petitioner’s appearance and good behavior pending trial – namely, the posting
of $50,000 cash bail. We see little functional difference between SCCC
determining that it could not adequately supervise the petitioner in the
residential placements he proposed and SCCC recommending against pretrial
release. That the court decided the alternative consequences of SCCC’s
decision prior to SCCC making it does not make the ultimate decision any less
the court’s.
In sum, we conclude that the bail orders at issue here reflect “a
cooperative accommodation among” the judicial and executive branches and do
not violate the separation of powers doctrine. Opinion of the Justices (Prior
Sexual Assault Evidence), 141 N.H. at 569.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7