THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2010-879
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
THAVONE SOUKSAMRANE
Argued: October 11, 2012
Opinion Issued: December 21, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief,
and Brianna M. Sinon, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, orally, for the
defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, Thavone Souksamrane, appeals his
convictions for criminal threatening and felon in possession of a dangerous
weapon following a jury trial in Superior Court (O’Neill, J.). See RSA 631:4
(2007) (amended 2010); RSA 159:3 (2002). On appeal, he argues that the trial
court erred in permitting the State to question him about the veracity of other
witnesses. The State concedes, as it must, that the questioning in this case
was improper. We nevertheless affirm the convictions because of the
overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt.
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim and the
defendant lived in the same apartment building in Laconia. On March 17,
2010, the victim was gardening in the back yard when the defendant invited
him to his apartment to talk to him. Once they were inside, the defendant
locked the door and pulled out a gun, which was black with a silver streak, and
pointed it at the victim. He told the victim to take off his clothes so that the
defendant could make sure that he was not concealing any weapons. The
victim removed his sweatshirt and hat. Pointing the gun, the defendant then
told the victim to stay away from his family or he would kill him. The victim
attempted to run away, at which point the defendant tore off the victim’s tank
top. The victim escaped and ran to his own apartment, where, “all panicked,”
he told his mother that the defendant was trying to kill him.
The victim’s mother called the police. Although the defendant initially
refused to leave his apartment to speak with the police, he eventually stepped
out onto a landing, where he was handcuffed and detained.
Meanwhile, another officer interviewed the victim. He told the officer that
the defendant was referred to as “Taylor,” though the victim did not know his
real name. Upon inspection, the police determined that the mailbox for the
defendant’s apartment bore the name “Thavone Souksamrane.” The victim,
who was “visibly shaken as though something traumatic had happened to
him,” gave a detailed description of his encounter with the defendant.
The defendant agreed to allow the officers to walk through his apartment
to make sure that no one else was inside. When the police asked whether
there was a gun in the apartment, the defendant responded that there was, but
that it was not his. When the defendant refused to consent to a search of the
apartment, the police obtained a warrant. While executing the warrant, the
police discovered: two swords; a hat, sweatshirt, and tank top; and, in the
bedroom closet, a locked case. At that point, the defendant was arrested and
transported to the Laconia police station for processing. During an inventory
of his possessions, the police retrieved a key that opened the lock on the case,
revealing a black gun with a silver streak.
Based upon the name, date of birth, and social security number that the
defendant provided, the police ran a criminal record check. The record check
revealed that in 1995, the defendant pleaded guilty to assault by a prisoner, a
felony.
At trial, the defendant represented himself with the assistance of stand-
by counsel. His first witness was his wife. She testified that she bought the
gun without telling the defendant, that he did not know there was a gun in the
house, and that she had the key to the gun case. When asked whether she
2
was aware that her husband had been convicted of a felony, she answered that
she was.
The defendant then took the stand. For the first time, he declared that
his name was Jay Verabouth, and that the name that he had given to the
police was an alias. He then proceeded to offer an alternative version of what
happened in his apartment that day. He testified that he and his wife were at a
playground with their children. She became angry because he was drinking
beer, so he took her car keys away from her and put them in his pocket so she
would not drive away. He then walked back to his apartment and discovered
the victim in his bedroom, with the defendant’s wife’s underwear on his face.
The victim then grabbed a sword and attacked him, hitting him in the head.
When the defendant wrestled the sword away, the victim ran to the kitchen and
grabbed a knife. He attacked the defendant again, saying that he was going to
kill him, his wife, and their children and bury them in the back yard. The
defendant was able to wrestle the knife away and locked himself in the
bedroom. He told the victim that he was calling the police and that he had a
gun, although he did not. After he heard the victim leave, the defendant called
911. The defendant then noticed the victim’s hat and sweatshirt on the
bedroom floor and moved them and the tank top, which had been ripped when
they were wrestling, into the living room.
During cross-examination of the defendant, the prosecutor repeatedly
asked whether police officers and the defendant’s wife, who all offered
testimony contradicting the defendant, had “lied” to the jury. In State v. Lopez,
156 N.H. 416 (2007), we adopted a broad prohibition against questions
requiring a witness to comment on the credibility of other witnesses. Lopez,
156 N.H. at 424. We concluded that asking a defendant whether other
witnesses had lied to the jury is improper, because it “interferes with the jury’s
obligation to determine the credibility of witnesses, and is not probative in that
it requires a witness to testify to things outside of her or his knowledge.” Id. at
423. In addition, such questions “distort the government’s burden of proof,
create a ‘no win’ situation for the witness, and are argumentative.” Liggett v.
People, 135 P.3d 725, 729 (Colo. 2006).
Here, the prosecutor asked the defendant on fifteen occasions whether
police officers, and even his wife, had “lied” to the jury. As the State concedes,
this questioning was highly improper. Indeed, “the use of this tactic – asking
the defendant whether another witness is lying – is incompatible with the
duties of a prosecutor.” State v. Graves, 668 N.W.2d 860, 873 (Iowa 2003).
“Unfairly questioning the defendant simply to make the defendant look bad in
front of the jury regardless of the answer given is not consistent with the
prosecutor’s primary obligation to seek justice, not simply a conviction.” Id.
3
Moreover, “it is inconceivable that any prosecutor would be unaware of
the impropriety of such conduct.” People v. Montgomery, 481 N.Y.S.2d 532,
532 (App. Div. 1984). Accordingly, today we use this opportunity “to condemn,
as forcefully as possible, prosecutorial cross-examination that compels a
defendant to state that the police or other witnesses lied in their testimony.”
Id. We note that counsel will continue to have considerable latitude in cross-
examining witnesses in a manner designed to highlight testimonial
inconsistencies and to focus the jury on the witness’s credibility. Cf. State v.
Glidden, 122 N.H. 41, 47-48 (1982) (finding no error in cross-examination of
defendant as to whether he “disputed” testimony of various prosecution
witnesses because such questioning did not require the defendant “to comment
directly on the veracity, as opposed to the correctness, of another witness’s
testimony,” “brought the defendant’s credibility into sharp focus,” and allowed
the jury “to evaluate the demeanor and the consistency of [the defendant’s]
answers”).
We now examine whether the error calls for reversal. The defendant did
not object to the questions regarding the police officers’ testimony. When he
was asked whether his wife “lied” when she testified that he was a convicted
felon, however, the defendant did object. The trial court overruled his objection
and directed the defendant to respond to the question. The trial court’s ruling
is particularly troubling. The prosecutor had already posed numerous
questions about whether the police officers had lied in their testimony,
although the defendant did not object to these questions. When the defendant
finally did object, the trial court overruled his objection and directed him to
answer the question. At that point, the judge should have recognized the
improper nature of the prosecutor’s questions based upon Lopez and sustained
the objection. We direct trial court judges to do so in the future.
Whether reversal is warranted turns on the question of whether the error
was harmless. “To establish that an error was harmless, the State must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the error did not affect the verdict.” State v.
Peters, 162 N.H. 30, 36 (2011). “An error may be harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an
overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if the evidence that was
improperly admitted or excluded is merely cumulative or inconsequential in
relation to the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt.” Id.
Here, the evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming. At the
outset, the defendant destroyed his credibility through his own testimony. He
declared that Thavone Souksamrane was not his real name, even though it
appeared on his mailbox and was the name that he gave the police from his
initial encounter until he took the stand. He denied having given the police his
social security number, although an officer testified that he ran the criminal
record check based upon the name, date of birth, and social security number
4
given to him by the defendant. Although the defendant had told the police that
there was a gun in the house but it was not his, he testified that he did not
know about the gun. The key on the defendant’s key ring opened the lock on
the gun box, which contained a handgun matching the description given by the
victim. The defendant testified that he moved the victim’s clothes out of the
bedroom so that the police would find them, yet he did not give the police
consent to search the apartment when asked. Additionally, he offered no
explanation for how he escaped without any injury from the victim’s attack first
with a sword and then with a knife. In sum, we reject, as did the jury, the
defendant’s contention that his “account of what transpired between him and
[the victim] was plausible.”
We also conclude that asking the defendant whether his wife lied when
she testified that she was aware that the defendant was a convicted felon was
merely cumulative. The defendant’s credibility was seriously undermined by
his assertion that he was not Thavone Souksamrane and, therefore, not a
convicted felon. At trial, the State introduced a certified record that the
defendant had been convicted of assault by a prisoner in Merrimack County
Superior Court. In addition, two police officers testified that they entered data
into a computer using information given to them by the defendant and received
confirmation that he was a convicted felon. Accordingly, we conclude that the
error in admitting the improper cross-examination of the defendant was
harmless.
We turn next to the improper questioning regarding the police officers’
testimony. The defendant did not object when he was asked whether the police
officers lied in their testimony. Accordingly, we must determine whether this
questioning resulted in plain error. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
“To find plain error: (1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be
plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must
seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” State v. Pandalena, 161 N.H. 326, 329 (2010) (quotation
omitted). The State concedes that the first two prongs of the plain error
analysis are met. Although the defendant argues that “the facts and
circumstances of [his] case satisfy the third and fourth prongs of the plain
error rule,” we disagree.
“Generally, to satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected
substantial rights, the defendant must demonstrate that the error was
prejudicial, i.e., that it affected the outcome of the proceeding.” State v.
Charest, 164 N.H. ___, ___ (decided October 16, 2012). Having determined that
the improper questioning regarding the defendant’s wife’s testimony was
harmless based upon the overwhelming evidence of the defendant’s guilt, we
5
likewise conclude that the improper questioning regarding the police officers’
testimony did not affect substantial rights. See State v. Ortiz, 162 N.H. 585,
594 (2011). Accordingly, we affirm.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
6