THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2010-665
IN RE ANTHONY F.
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The juvenile, Anthony F., appeals an order by the Derry
District Court (Moore, J.) denying his motion to suppress evidence supporting a
delinquency petition against him. We reverse and remand.
The following facts are undisputed or are supported by the record. On
April 8, 2010, at approximately 9:00 a.m., a parking lot monitor at the
juvenile’s high school radioed one of the school’s assistant principals that a
student was walking away from the school. The monitor, along with both
assistant principals, caught up with the student, later identified as the
juvenile, as he was halfway across the lacrosse field, which was approximately
200 yards from the school building.
The juvenile initially refused to return to the school, stating that he did
not feel well; however, the parking lot monitor and the assistant principals
persuaded him to do so. The assistant principals escorted him back and
directed him to an empty lunchroom.
The assistant principals then twice informed the juvenile that he was
going to be searched. The juvenile asked why he had to be searched and they
explained that it is the school’s policy to search students who return to school
after leaving an assigned area. They testified that, on average, about twelve to
twenty students per year leave an assigned area and, upon return, such
students often have contraband such as alcohol, drugs and weapons in their
possession. One assistant principal asked the juvenile if he had “anything on
[him] that [he] shouldn’t have on school property.” The juvenile eventually
handed over a small bag of marijuana that he retrieved from inside his sock.
Subsequently, a delinquency petition was filed against the juvenile.
The juvenile moved to suppress the marijuana evidence, arguing that the
search was unconstitutional under the New Hampshire and Federal
Constitutions. The State countered that there was no search under the law,
but even if a search occurred, it was constitutionally valid.
The trial court denied the juvenile’s motion, finding that, while there was
a search, the search and the school policy were reasonable and the policy was
“evenly applied.” The court then entered a finding of true to possession of
marijuana based on the stipulated facts. This appeal followed.
On appeal, the juvenile argues that the search was unreasonable under
Part I, Article 19 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. The juvenile
argues that there was no “individualized suspicion” of any wrongdoing on his
part and, therefore, the search was not justified at its inception. The State
renews its arguments that there was no search, but, even if there was a search,
it was “constitutionally permissible.”
Our review of the trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress is de novo,
except as to any controlling facts determined by the trial court in the first
instance. State v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 676 (2005). We first address the
juvenile’s claim under the State Constitution, State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-
33 (1983), and cite federal opinions for guidance only. Id. at 232-33.
At the outset, we turn to whether there was a search when the assistant
principals twice told the juvenile that he was going to be searched and then
asked him if he had “anything on [him] that [he] shouldn’t have on school
property.” “Our State Constitution protects all people, their papers, their
possessions and their homes from unreasonable searches and seizures.” State
2
v. Mello, 162 N.H. 115, 119 (2011) (quotation omitted); see N.H. CONST. pt. I,
art. 19. We have recognized that an expectation of privacy plays a role in the
protection afforded under Part I, Article 19. Mello, 162 N.H. at 119. Thus,
without an invasion of the juvenile’s reasonable expectation of privacy, there
has been no violation of the juvenile’s rights under Part I, Article 19. See State
v. Robinson, 158 N.H. 792, 796 (2009).
Certain constitutional rights apply equally in the public school
setting as elsewhere. These include rights under part I, article 19
of the New Hampshire Constitution. Public school students have
legitimate privacy interests in a variety of personal items they bring
to school. These privacy interests are not waived when the student
merely passes through the schoolhouse door.
State v. Drake, 139 N.H. 662, 664 (1995) (citations omitted).
Here, these privacy interests are not disputed. Rather, the State argues
that “[b]ecause the school officials neither searched the juvenile’s belongings
nor commanded him to reveal anything, their conduct did not amount to a
search in the constitutional sense.” We are not persuaded that the lack of
physical intrusion or the lack of an explicit command rendered their conduct
not a search. The assistant principals twice informed the juvenile that he was
going to be searched and then immediately inquired into what he had on his
person. We see no meaningful distinction between twice telling the juvenile
that he was going to be searched and then asking if he had “anything on [him]
that [he] shouldn’t have” and “command[ing] him to reveal” what he had. The
assistant principals’ conduct in this case was akin to a command. Therefore,
we find that the assistant principals’ actions constituted a search. Cf. Sanders
v. State, 732 So. 2d 20, 21 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1999) (“When a suspect empties
his pockets in response to an officer’s directive that he do so, the legal effect is
the same as if the officer had himself searched the suspect’s pockets.”); State v.
B.A.S., 13 P.3d 244, 246 n.3 (Wash. Ct. App. 2000) (“A school official’s demand
that a student empty his or her pockets constitutes a search.”). But cf. State v.
Shaw, 736 So. 2d 951, 953 (La. Ct. App. 1999) (finding no illegal search
occurred where an officer requested that the defendant empty her pockets as
opposed to directing, ordering, instructing, or demanding).
We next address whether the search of the juvenile was reasonable. We
have held that
[t]he standard for searches by public school officials under the New
Hampshire Constitution is commensurate with that set forth in
[New Jersey v. T.L.O., 469 U.S. 325 (1985)]. In T.L.O., the United
States Supreme Court held that the legality of a search of a
student should depend simply on the reasonableness, under all
3
the circumstances, of the search. Determining the reasonableness
of any search involves a twofold inquiry: first, one must consider
whether the action was justified at its inception; second, one must
determine whether the search as actually conducted was
reasonably related in scope to the circumstances which justified
the interference in the first place. Under ordinary circumstances,
a search of a student by a teacher or other school official will be
justified at its inception when there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting that the search will turn up evidence that the student
has violated or is violating either the law or the rules of the school.
In re Juvenile 2006-406, 156 N.H. 233, 236-37 (2007) (quotations and citations
omitted). Here, both parties base their arguments solely on the first prong of
the test. Because neither party analyzes the second prong, we restrict our
analysis accordingly.
We have adopted a non-exhaustive list of factors to provide guidance to
the trial courts and school administrators for determining whether a search is
justified at its inception. As a starting point for analysis, the following set of
factors should be considered:
[1] the child's age, history and record in school; [2] the prevalence
and seriousness of the problem in the school to which the search
was directed; [3] the exigencies in making a search without delay
and further investigation; [4] the probative value and reliability of
the information used as a justification for the search; and [5] the
particular teacher or school official’s experience with the student.
See id. at 240 (quotation omitted).
The State argues that the search was “constitutionally permissible”
because it was justified at its inception. We disagree. Aside from the fact that
the juvenile was one month shy of his fifteenth birthday at the time of the
incident the record is devoid of any factual findings with respect to his history
and record in school, or the assistant principals’ prior experience with him.
The only information available about the prevalence of any drug problem in the
school is the testimony of one assistant principal that about twelve to twenty
students per year leave an assigned area and often they have alcohol, drugs or
weapons in their possession upon return. However, another assistant principal
testified that these searches were not a frequent occurrence during the past
three years.
The facts of this case do not support a finding of reasonable grounds for
suspecting that a search of this juvenile would turn up contraband. The
assistant principals searched the juvenile because it was school policy to
4
search all students who return to school after leaving an assigned area. The
record reveals, however, that the juvenile was leaving the school, not
returning. It was school officials who forced his return. While there was some
testimony indicating that previous searches of students who had left school
and returned had uncovered contraband, there was no evidence linking the
juvenile in this case to the alleged infraction for which they searched him;
namely, possession of drugs, weapons, or alcohol. See Com. v. Damian D.,
752 N.E.2d 679, 682-83 (Mass. 2001) (finding no reasonable grounds to
search the juvenile where the search was based solely on the juvenile’s truant
behavior, i.e., being out of school, missing class, and failing to bring his
mother to school to address the truancy); cf. In re Juvenile 2006-406, 156
N.H. at 238 (finding reasonable grounds to search the juvenile where it was
reported that the juvenile had a large “pot pipe” in his possession); Drake, 139
N.H. at 663, 667 (finding reasonable grounds to search the juvenile where the
school received an anonymous telephone call that the juvenile would be
bringing drugs into school, teachers had expressed concern that the juvenile
was using and distributing drugs, and a school administrator was informed
that the juvenile had been recently arrested for drug possession). Accordingly,
we find that the search of the juvenile was not justified at its inception and,
therefore, was unreasonable. See B.A.S., 13 P.3d at 246 (finding the search of
the juvenile was unreasonable where the sole basis for the search was the
school administrator’s belief that the juvenile “had violated the school’s closed
campus policy” and because the school had a policy that all students seen in
the areas of the parking lot without permission are subject to a search).
Finally, we agree with the juvenile that “the search may not be
upheld under the United States Supreme Court’s suspicionless school
search jurisprudence.” This line of cases is readily distinguishable from
this case in that the consequences to the student resulting from the
search in those cases did not include turning over the results to law
enforcement or lead to academic discipline. See Vernonia School Dist.
47J v. Acton, 515 U.S. 646, 658 (1995); see also Board of Ed. of
Independent School Dist. No. 92 of Pottawatomie Cty. v. Earls, 536 U.S.
822, 833 (2002). We note that the State does not argue to the contrary.
Because we reverse under the State Constitution, we need not
reach the federal issue. State v. Orde, 161 N.H. 260, 264 (2010).
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
5