THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2010-816
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
TIMOTHY PERRI
Argued: September 12, 2012
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2012
Opinion Modified: January 10, 2013
Opinion Modified: April 2, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief,
and Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, orally, for
the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Timothy Perri, appeals his convictions for
kidnapping, see RSA 633:1, I(d) (2007), aggravated felonious sexual assault,
see RSA 632-A:2, I(a) (2007), attempted aggravated felonious sexual assault,
see RSA 629:1 (2007); RSA 632-A:2, I(a), and criminal threatening, see RSA
631:4, I(a), II(a)(2) (2007). He argues that the Superior Court (Houran, J.) erred
in: (1) denying his motion to suppress eyewitness identification evidence; (2)
limiting his ability to cross-examine the victim; and (3) allowing the admission
of evidence of a pocket knife discovered on his person when apprehended by
the police. We affirm.
I
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order denying the
defendant’s motion to suppress. N.R., the victim, told police that she had been
walking home from work late on the evening of August 22, 2008, along Route
16 in North Conway when a man approached her and proposed to pay her for a
sexual act. She said the man told her he was from out of town and worked as
a painter in the area. She rebuffed him and walked alone for about a mile, but
the man approached her again near a scenic overlook and once more made a
sexual advance. After she rejected him, he punched her in the face, pulled her
into the woods, and raped her. She described her attacker as a white man in
his late twenties or early thirties, with a thin, muscular build, a narrow face,
and a goatee.
After receiving another report on September 18 of a sexual assault
occurring in the same area, the police issued a “be on the lookout” alert for the
man N.R. had described. The defendant was apprehended several days later
when State Trooper Craig McGinley saw him walking near the scenic overlook
and, after speaking with him, identified several characteristics that matched
the description given by N.R. The police assembled a photographic array
displaying the defendant and seven other men selected from the police
department’s computer system and, on September 25, presented it to N.R. at
her home. N.R. identified the defendant as the attacker.
On September 26, N.R. met at the police station with Elizabeth Kelley,
the program director of the Child Advocacy Center. During that interview, N.R.
expressed uncertainty as to her identification of the defendant. For example, in
response to Kelley’s question as to “how sure [she was] that it was the guy,”
N.R. responded, “I don’t, I don’t know.” According to a police lieutenant, the
police suspended their investigation as a result of N.R.’s uncertainty.
Trooper McGinley, however, continued investigating the incident and
assembled a file on the defendant, including photographs of him and
documents regarding his criminal background. On June 19, 2009, McGinley
visited N.R. at work and told her he believed that she had chosen the right
person in the photo array, and later testified he did so to reassure her that the
police cared about her case. He then gave N.R. the file and stepped away for
approximately five minutes while she looked at it. When he returned, he gave
N.R. his contact information and told her to contact him if she wanted to
pursue the matter further.
2
On June 28, N.R. sent McGinley a text message stating she would like to
“help put this guy away.” On July 22, N.R. met with Officer Jody Eichorn of
the Moultonborough Police Department for another interview. Officer Eichorn
asked N.R. if she had identified her attacker in the photo array on September
25, 2008, to which N.R. responded, “Yes.” N.R. then explained that the police
had caused her to “second-guess[]” herself after selecting the defendant’s
photograph when first presented with the photo array, stating that “they kept
harping at me” and repeatedly asked how sure she was. N.R. did not
remember discussing the photo array at the September 26, 2008 meeting with
Elizabeth Kelley. Eichorn then said, “so, at this point today you answered that
yes, you’re positive that that was him.” N.R. answered, “I’m, yeah.” The
defendant was arrested on July 24.
The State charged the defendant with aggravated felonious sexual
assault and kidnapping and a trial was held in April 2010. That trial ended in
a mistrial after a jury could not reach a verdict. Subsequently, the State added
charges of attempted aggravated felonious sexual assault and criminal
threatening. After a retrial, a jury found him guilty of all four charges.
II
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to suppress N.R.’s identification of him as her assailant. He asked the
trial court to suppress any testimony about N.R.’s September 25, 2008
identification of the defendant in the photo array, any testimony about the July
22, 2009 conversation with Officer Eichorn in which N.R. confirmed she had
correctly identified her assailant, and any in-court testimony positively
identifying the defendant as her assailant. He contends that the identification
procedures employed by the police were unnecessarily suggestive, in violation
of his rights under Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution and the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments of its federal counterpart.
We first address the defendant’s argument under the State Constitution,
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-32 (1983), and rely on federal law only to aid
in our analysis, id. at 233.
On appeal from a motion to suppress identification evidence, we will not
overturn the trial court’s ruling unless, after reviewing the record, we conclude
that it is contrary to the weight of the evidence. State v. Bell-Rogers, 159 N.H.
178, 181 (2009); State v. Fecteau, 133 N.H. 860, 867 (1991). In making this
determination, we ask whether the identification procedures used were so
unnecessarily suggestive and conducive to irreparable mistaken identification
that the defendant was denied due process of law. Fecteau, 133 N.H. at 867.
The defendant has the initial burden of proving that the identification
procedure was unnecessarily suggestive. State v. King, 156 N.H. 371, 374
3
(2007). Only if the defendant has met his burden must we then consider the
factors enumerated in Neil v. Biggers, 409 U.S. 188 (1972), to determine
whether the identification procedure was so suggestive as to render the
identification unreliable and, hence, inadmissible. King, 156 N.H. at 374. At
this stage of the inquiry, the State bears the burden. Id.
Under Biggers,
the factors to be considered in evaluating the likelihood of
misidentification include the opportunity of the witness to view the
criminal at the time of the crime, the witness’ degree of attention,
the accuracy of the witness’ prior description of the criminal, the
level of certainty demonstrated by the witness at the confrontation,
and the length of time between the crime and the confrontation.
Biggers, 409 U.S. at 199-200.
A
The September 25 photo array contained eight pictures generated
through a computer system using N.R.’s description of her attacker and the
appearance of the defendant. Lieutenant Joseph Faia and Sergeant Alan
Broyer took the photo array to N.R.’s home and told her they had a person of
interest in the case and asked her to look at some photographs. Faia told her
to pick the person who attacked her if his picture was in the array, but “[i]f that
person isn’t in the lineup, do not select anyone.” After placing the photographs
on the table, N.R. identified the photograph of the defendant as her attacker
without hesitation and initialed and dated the space below his image. Faia
asked her how sure she was that the man she selected was her attacker and
she rated her level of certainty a seven out of ten. The officers did not tell her
she had selected the person of interest.
The defendant argues that the photo array procedures were
unnecessarily suggestive because the officers “failed materially to follow New
Hampshire [Attorney General] protocols specifically designed to eliminate
possible suggestiveness in a photo array.” We disagree. That the police did not
follow every recommendation of the attorney general guidelines does not, in
and of itself, satisfy the defendant’s burden to show that the manner of
presenting the photographs was unnecessarily suggestive. As the trial court
recognized, the pertinent inquiry is “whether the police indicated the suspect’s
identity to the witness by means of the photographic display or by saying
something before or contemporaneously with the witness’ positive
identification,” notwithstanding that the police “did not provide [N.R.] with
most of the [Attorney General] Guidelines’ explanations.” See Bell-Rogers, 159
N.H. at 181 (“To determine whether the out-of-court identification procedure
4
was unnecessarily suggestive we ask whether the police have implicitly
conveyed their opinion of the criminal’s identity to the witness by means of the
photographic display.” (quotation omitted)).
Our review of the record, including the photo array itself, indicates no
suggestiveness in the photo array. Cf. Fecteau, 133 N.H. at 867. Although the
police told N.R. they had a person of interest, there is no evidence that they
told her that the defendant’s photograph depicted that person. As the trial
court found, there was no indication that the officers rushed N.R. to make a
decision or implied she should select a particular photograph. Nor did the
photo array display the images in a manner that highlighted the defendant’s
photograph, such as an absence of other images of men with goatees or
characteristics similar to the defendant’s. The defendant has provided nothing
that would satisfy his burden to show that “the police have implicitly conveyed
their opinion of the criminal’s identity to the witness.” Bell-Rogers, 159 N.H. at
181 (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s
decision as to the admissibility of the photo array was contrary to the weight of
the evidence.
Because the Federal Constitution is no more protective of the defendant’s
rights than the State Constitution under these circumstances, see, e.g., United
States v. Flenory, 619 F.2d 301, 304 (3d Cir. 1980), we reach the same
conclusion under the Federal Constitution.
B
The defendant next argues that N.R.’s identification of him during her
July 2009 meeting with Officer Eichorn and her subsequent in-court
identification of him were “irrevocably taint[ed]” as a result of Trooper
McGinley’s interactions with her in June 2009, and, accordingly, both
identifications should have been excluded from trial.
As noted, we employ a two-step analysis to determine the admissibility of
N.R.’s July 2009 out-of-court identification of the defendant. King, 156 N.H. at
374. If that identification is found inadmissible under this test, N.R.’s
subsequent in-court identification will also be inadmissible “unless it did not
result from the earlier confrontation but was independent thereof.” Id.
(quotation and ellipsis omitted).
The trial court determined, and the State does not argue otherwise on
appeal, that McGinley’s conduct when he visited N.R. at work and showed her
the defendant’s file was suggestive. The court noted that McGinley “explicitly
conveyed to her his opinion that the defendant was her attacker” and
subsequently allowed her to review a file containing photographs of the
defendant, a document entitled “State v. Timothy Perri / Sexual Assault,” and
5
writings about the defendant that evidenced a propensity to commit violence
against women. The court nevertheless did not exclude the later identification
because it concluded that the State had satisfied the Biggers test by clear and
convincing evidence.
We agree with the trial court that consideration of the five Biggers factors
supports a finding that N.R.’s identification of the defendant in July 2009 was
sufficiently reliable to warrant admission at trial. She had two opportunities to
view the defendant on the day of the assault, including in a well-lit area when
he first propositioned her for sex and later when he approached her, punched
her, and faced her as he raped her on the ground. That her degree of attention
was high is shown by her accurate description of his clothing and facial
characteristics, as well as by her observation that he held a folding pocket knife
against her neck and had an odor of cigarettes. She accurately described the
defendant before the June 2009 meeting with Trooper McGinley as being white,
thin, and muscular, having a narrow face and a dark goatee, and being a
smoker. While she did not exhibit complete certainty in her choice of the
defendant’s photograph when presented with the photo array, she did note that
the defendant’s face “really stood out . . . like right away when I saw it.” Under
the totality of the circumstances, N.R.’s out-of-court identification of the
defendant after meeting with Trooper McGinley bore sufficient indicia of
reliability to warrant admission at trial. Accordingly, the trial court’s decision
was not contrary to the weight of the evidence.
Because N.R.’s July 2009 out-of-court identification of the defendant was
admissible under Biggers, it follows that her in-court identification was also
admissible.
As is true with respect to the photo array, the Federal Constitution is no
more protective of the defendant’s rights than the State Constitution under
these circumstances. See, e.g., Biggers, 409 U.S. at 200-01 (identification
sufficiently reliable where victim faced attacker twice, provided detailed
description of his characteristics, and had “no doubt” defendant was the
attacker). Accordingly, we reach the same conclusion under the Federal
Constitution.
III
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in prohibiting him
from eliciting testimony from N.R. that would have demonstrated that a person
who helped prepare her for the second trial was the jury foreperson in the first
trial.
The facts relevant to this claim of error are as follows. After the first jury
trial ended in a mistrial, its jury foreperson, A.C., wrote a message to N.R. via
6
Facebook expressing feelings of support, telling her she believed in N.R. and
noting that others on the jury believed the defendant was guilty. A.C. also
provided details as to how the jurors voted and offered her contact information
should N.R. have “any questions.” The two women then began a
correspondence and eventually met in person to discuss ways in which N.R.
might improve her testimony to be more credible to the jury in the subsequent
trial. During one meeting that took place in the presence of a victim/witness
advocate, A.C. provided N.R. with “tips on how to improve [her] testimony,”
advising her to make clear she was certain of her identification of the defendant
at the September 25, 2008 photo array; to better explain why she told Child
Advocacy Center director Elizabeth Kelley “I don’t know” in response to a
question about her level of certainty; and to be more emotional and feel free to
cry.
In a motion argued outside the jury’s presence, the defendant sought
permission to elicit testimony relating to N.R.’s exchanges with A.C., asserting
that this information “goes to [N.R.’s] motivation to make her testimony better,
to potentially be more emotional” to convince the jury to believe her. The court
partially granted the defendant’s request, ruling that it was “fair game” for
defense counsel to make any “inquiries concerning whether someone who
observed her testimony . . . later contacted [N.R.] and made suggestions.”
However, the court prohibited defense counsel from referring to or inquiring
about the fact that there was a former trial at which another jury was unable to
render a decision. Thus, defense counsel was permitted to ask anything
“except those [questions] that are premised upon the existence of a prior trial
or prior fact finder as a jury and the findings of that jury.” Accordingly,
defense counsel was precluded from inquiring about A.C.’s status as a juror at
the prior trial. The defendant contends this was reversible error because it
“seriously undermined [his] ability to present a defense.” The State does not
contend that the excluded references were not relevant; rather, it argues that
the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion under the circumstances.
Relevant evidence “may be excluded if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or
misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 403.
Evidence is unfairly prejudicial if its primary purpose or effect is to
appeal to a jury’s sympathies, arouse its sense of horror, provoke its
instinct to punish, or trigger other mainsprings of human action that
may cause a jury to base its decision on something other than the
established propositions in the case.
State v. Cassavaugh, 161 N.H. 90, 98 (2010) (quotation omitted). We accord
the trial court considerable deference in determining whether to admit or
7
exclude evidence under Rule 403, and we will not disturb its decision absent
an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Miller, 155 N.H. 246, 252
(2007). To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must
demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to
the prejudice of his case. State v. Stowe, 162 N.H. 464, 470 (2011).
We disagree with the defendant that the trial court’s decision precluding
direct references to the former trial or the identity of A.C. as the foreperson of
the jury of that trial constituted an unsustainable exercise of discretion. At the
outset, we note that defense counsel was permitted to, and did, engage in a
thorough cross-examination of N.R. with respect to her exchanges with A.C.
Defense counsel elicited several pertinent facts bearing on N.R.’s credibility:
that she testified four months earlier under oath with a judge presiding; that
the same prosecutor, defense attorney, and defendant were present during her
prior testimony; that N.R. faced the same questions during her prior testimony
as she did at trial; and that A.C. observed her testimony at the former “hearing”
and contacted her thirty days later. Counsel also elicited many details about
N.R.’s exchanges with A.C., including that A.C. provided “tips on how to
improve [her] testimony,” such as being more emotional, giving more details,
clarifying her testimony about the September 26, 2008 interview with Elizabeth
Kelley, and crying during the testimony. All of these facts were pertinent to
N.R.’s credibility because they tended to suggest her in-court testimony was
influenced not by the truth or by genuine emotions, but by “coaching” provided
by a person who had observed her previous testimony first-hand and,
therefore, had an informed opinion about why that testimony fell short.
Because the court permitted defense counsel to explore these topics freely, we
need only determine whether the court erred in prohibiting any reference to the
fact that A.C. was a juror at a prior trial – not merely an observer at a hearing –
that ended in a deadlocked jury.
Knowledge of A.C.’s status as a juror at a prior trial could have helped
the jury assess the credibility of N.R.’s testimony in the subsequent trial
because A.C. was in a unique position, as a juror, to understand the
deficiencies in N.R.’s testimony at the prior trial and make recommendations to
enhance her testimony. A rational jury could have believed that N.R. would
give A.C.’s advice special consideration that she would not otherwise have
afforded a mere observer of the prior testimony. But permitting reference to
the prior “trial,” rather than a prior “hearing,” would have risked misleading
and confusing the jury because it may have led jurors to speculate as to the
prior trial’s outcome and the deliberations of the prior jury – both
impermissible considerations. See, e.g., Kinney v. People, 187 P.3d 548, 558
(Colo. 2008) (en banc) (finding reversible error where trial court failed to
instruct jury that defendant had been acquitted of charges in other trials, even
though trials referred to as “proceedings,” when it was evident from the record
that jury had speculated that there had been previous trials). In light of these
8
considerations, the trial court acted well within its discretion in concluding
that these risks substantially outweighed whatever marginal probative value
A.C.’s status as a juror and the outcome of the former trial would have
provided. Cf. United States v. Cook, 776 F. Supp. 755, 760 (S.D.N.Y. 1991)
(permitting counsel to refer to witness’s testimony at “a prior trial” but not “the
prior trial of this case” (quotations omitted)).
United States v. Giovanelli, 945 F.2d 479 (2d Cir. 1991), does not require
a contrary result. Although in that case the court held that the defendants
should have been permitted to refer to prior “trials” rather than “proceedings”
when cross-examining witnesses who had testified at the prior trials, id. at
488, it did so for reasons that do not apply to this case. For example, in
contrast to the court’s concern in Giovanelli that “it was at times impossible to
focus a witness’ attention on a specific prior inconsistent statement,”
Giovanelli, 945 F.2d at 488, here defense counsel directed N.R.’s memory to the
precise time and context of her prior testimony. The defendant does not
suggest that the prohibition on reference to a prior “trial” inhibited N.R.’s
ability to remember her statements at that trial. Also in contrast to Giovanelli,
in which the defense could not establish that the prior statements of the
witnesses had been made “in a setting as solemn and dignified as the current
trial,” Giovanelli, 945 F.2d at 488, here defense counsel established that the
prior hearing bore the same indicia of solemnity and dignity as the trial. Of
course, trial courts have an obligation to examine the facts of each case to
determine whether limiting a defendant’s proposed line of questioning would
unduly inhibit the opportunity to confront witnesses for potential bias or other
credibility issues – as the court found to be a concern in Giovanelli. There may
be circumstances in which prohibiting reference to a prior trial constitutes an
unsustainable exercise of discretion for reasons similar to those present in
Giovanelli or other compelling reasons. Here, however, the trial court struck a
sustainable balance.
To the extent that the defendant premises his argument upon a claim
that the trial court could have cured any dangers of allowing reference to A.C.’s
status as a juror or to the prior “trial” through timely jury instructions, that
claim is not preserved for our review. Cf. State v. Hynes, 159 N.H. 187, 205
(2009) (“As a general rule, we will not consider grounds of objections not
specified or called to the court’s attention at the trial. This requirement,
grounded in common sense and judicial economy, affords the trial court an
opportunity to correct an error it may have made and is particularly
appropriate where an alleged error involves a jury instruction.” (quotation
omitted)). Specifically, during the arguments on this issue, the defendant did
not propose such instructions to the trial court as a viable alternative to
excluding all references to the prior trial.
9
IV
Next, the defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his
motion to suppress evidence that he possessed a folding pocket knife when he
was detained. The State presented the detaining officer’s testimony describing
the pocket knife as evidence tending to corroborate N.R.’s statement that her
attacker held a folding pocket knife against her throat and threatened to kill
her during the assault. The defendant contends that the police lacked
“reasonable belief that [he was] armed and presently dangerous to the officer or
to others,” State v. Coons, 137 N.H. 365, 367 (1993) (quotation omitted), as is
required to justify the frisk search that led to the knife’s discovery. The State
defends the search on two grounds, contending first that the officers had
reasonable suspicion to believe the defendant was armed and dangerous, and
second that, even if the frisk was unlawful, the inevitable discovery doctrine
applied to preclude its exclusion at trial.
We first address the defendant’s argument under the State Constitution,
Ball, 124 N.H. at 231-32, and rely on federal law only to aid in our analysis, id.
at 233. In reviewing the trial court’s ruling, we accept its factual findings
unless they lack support in the record or are clearly erroneous. State v.
McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. 19, 22 (2004). “The application of the
appropriate legal standard to those facts, however, is a question of law, which
we review de novo.” State v. Roach, 141 N.H. 64, 66 (1996).
Once an officer is justified in making an investigatory stop, he may also
conduct a protective frisk if he reasonably believes the individual is armed and
presently dangerous. State v. Michelson, 160 N.H. 270, 272 (2010). The
purpose of a protective frisk is not to discover evidence of a crime, but to allow
the officer to pursue his investigation without fear of violence. Id. Therefore,
the frisk must be strictly confined to what is minimally necessary to discover
the presence of a weapon. Id.
Here, the police were justified in conducting a protective frisk of the
defendant. On September 19, Trooper McGinley received the “be on the
lookout” alert describing “multiple forcible rape[s]” in the area. The report
indicated that the Conway police were looking for a “white male, in his 30’s,
5’7” to 5’8” tall, slim build and unshaven face with goatee[, and] . . . smoker’s
breath,” who may be a painter and had been seen wearing a maroon hooded
sweatshirt. McGinley later learned that N.R.’s assault took place near the
scenic overlook in North Conway. He testified that, at around 8:40 p.m. on
September 21, he saw the defendant walking near the overlook and believed he
matched the description of the rape suspect. McGinley pulled behind the
defendant in his police cruiser and stopped him for questioning, during which
he observed that the defendant was wearing a hooded sweatshirt and dark
jeans with paint on them, was smoking a cigarette, and had a goatee. In
10
McGinley’s estimation, the defendant matched the person described in the
report “to a tee.” After backup police officers arrived on the scene, one of them,
according to his testimony, patted the defendant down and found the folding
pocket knife. Given that the defendant’s appearance closely corresponded to
the person described in the report of a violent rape occurring in the same area,
there was reasonable suspicion to believe the defendant would be armed and
dangerous when faced with imminent apprehension by the authorities. Cf.
United States v. Bullock, 510 F.3d 342, 347 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (“[C]ourts
routinely hold that protective frisks to ensure officer safety are permissible
when an officer has reasonable suspicion that the suspect committed a crime
involving or associated with carrying or using a weapon.”) (citing cases); United
States v. Barnett, 505 F.3d 637, 640 (7th Cir. 2007) (reasonable suspicion to
frisk where person was suspected of burglary, a crime “normally and
reasonably expected to involve a weapon”); Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 33 (1968)
(Harlan, J., concurring) (“the right to frisk must be immediate and automatic if
the reason for the stop is, as here, an articulable suspicion of a crime of
violence”).
Because the Federal Constitution is no more protective of the defendant’s
rights than the State Constitution under these circumstances, see Barnett, 505
F.3d at 640; Michelson, 160 N.H. at 273, we reach the same conclusion under
the Federal Constitution.
V
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court erred by admitting the
pocket knife evidence because it was irrelevant. All evidence must be relevant
to be admissible. N.H. R. Ev. 402. Relevant evidence is that which has “any
tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 401. Whether evidence is relevant is a
question for the trial court’s sound discretion, and we will not overturn its
determination absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v. Town,
163 N.H. 790, 795 (2012). To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion,
the defendant must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly untenable
or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. Id.
The defendant contends that the evidence had no probative value
because the State did not establish that the knife found on him when he was
detained was the same as, or even similar to, the knife used in the August 22,
2008 assault. However, contrary to the defendant’s assertion that there was
“no way to establish that the knife found on” him “was similar to” the knife
described by N.R., both Officer Walker and N.R. described their observations in
consistent terms: Walker testified that the knife on the defendant “was just a
folding pocketknife,” while N.R. testified that she saw the defendant pull a
pocket knife from his pocket, heard the sound of a knife clicking open, and felt
11
the blade on her throat. Moreover, the State need not marshal conclusive
evidence to connect the knife found on the defendant’s person to the crime
scene for the knife to be admissible in evidence. See People v. Farnam, 47 P.3d
988, 1025 (Cal. 2002). That many persons possess similar knives “may
diminish the strength of the evidence, but it does not make it irrelevant.” Id.
(quotation omitted). The fact that the defendant carried a pocket knife on his
person, near the scene of the crime, tended to make it more probable than
without such evidence that he committed the assault. Cf. State v. Giddens,
155 N.H. 175, 180 (2007) (statements made by defendant about methods for
committing rape were relevant because methods were similar to the events of
the alleged rape). Therefore, the trial court acted within its discretion in
admitting the evidence.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
12