THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2010-714
RAYMOND A. CLOUTIER & a.
v.
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE & a.
Argued: August 26, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 30, 2012
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Ovide M. Lamontagne
and Joshua M. Wyatt on the brief, and Mr. Lamontagne orally), for the
petitioners.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Anne M. Edwards, associate
attorney general, and Laura E.B. Lombardi, assistant attorney general, on the
brief, and Ms. Edwards orally), for the State.
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Charles G. Douglas, III and
David M. Howe on the brief, and Mr. Douglas orally), for the Board of Trustees
of the New Hampshire Judicial Retirement Plan.
David R. Connell, of Concord, Theodore E. Comstock, of Concord, and
Betsy B. Miller, of Concord, on the joint brief, for New Hampshire Local
Government Center, New Hampshire School Boards Association and New
Hampshire Association of Counties, as amici curiae.
HORTON, J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3. The State
appeals the Superior Court’s (Brown, J.) ruling that RSA chapter 100-C (Supp.
2011), the Judicial Retirement Plan, violates Part I, Article 23 of the New
Hampshire Constitution. The petitioner and intervenors cross-appeal the
court’s ruling that salary raises provided for by Laws 2003, 311:3 and Laws
2005, 177:96 should not be included in calculating benefits under the prior
retirement statutes. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The petitioner, Raymond A. Cloutier, is a retired probate court judge.
The six intervenors are retired supreme, superior, probate, and district court
judges. We refer to them collectively as the petitioners. In October 2008,
Cloutier submitted a written request to the Board of Trustees of the New
Hampshire Judicial Retirement Plan (board) asserting that his retirement
allowance was erroneously calculated pursuant to RSA chapter 100-C, and
that he was entitled to benefits under the retirement statutes that were in
effect when he was appointed to be a judge. The board denied his claim and
Cloutier filed a petition for writ of certiorari in the superior court. The parties
subsequently filed cross-motions for summary judgment.
In response to the trial court’s order, the parties filed a joint stipulation
containing a chart with projected lifetime retirement payouts for Cloutier. The
projected payouts included several separate calculations, comparing retirement
benefits under the plan enacted pursuant to RSA chapter 100-C and the
previous retirement statutes repealed by Laws 2003, 311:10. The parties
disputed certain assumptions underlying the calculations, but not the
mathematical calculations within the projections. As the stipulation provides,
The Parties stipulate that only the mathematical calculations . . .
are fair and accurate, and fully reserve the right to challenge the
propriety of the following assumptions as a matter of law, so that
the court may find that there are no genuine issues of material fact
in dispute and rule on the following questions of law . . . :
a. Whether the 10% raise given by Laws 2003, 311:3 should be
included in calculating and projecting retirement benefits under
the old plan;
2
b. Whether the 1.01% raise given by Laws 2005, 177:96 should be
included in calculating and projecting retirement benefits under
the old plan;
c. Whether future legislative salary increases are more
appropriately determined by the average of salary increases given
to sitting probate judges in the period since the new plan’s
inception (from January 1, 2005 forward), or, alternatively, the
average [of] all legislative salary increases given to sitting probate
court judges from 1991 to present;
d. Whether Laws 2003, chapter 311 and subsequent amendments
to RSA chapter 100-C constitute a “substantial impairment” of
Petitioner’s and Intervenors’ retirement benefits within the
meaning of Part I, Article 23 of the State Constitution.
Following a hearing, the trial court granted summary judgment for the
petitioners, concluding that the application of RSA chapter 100-C to judges
who accepted their positions before its enactment results in impairment of
contract rights in violation of the New Hampshire Constitution. The trial court,
however, rejected the petitioners’ assertion that the ten percent and one
percent salary increases authorized in 2003 and 2005 should be included in
calculating their benefits under the prior retirement statutes. This appeal
followed.
The State raises two issues on appeal: (1) whether the trial court erred
in ruling that RSA chapter 100-C violates Part I, Article 23 of the New
Hampshire Constitution; and (2) in the event the trial court’s ruling is upheld,
whether RSA chapter 100-C is unconstitutional only as applied to judges who
met the service and age requirements for retirement as of January 1, 2005.
The petitioners cross-appeal, arguing that the trial court erred in ruling that
the 2003 and 2005 salary raises are not properly included as “currently
effective annual salary” when calculating their retirement benefits.
Prior to the enactment of RSA chapter 100-C, a series of statutes
provided for retirement benefits to judges who retired after meeting specific
service and age requirements. See RSA 490:2 (1977) (repealed 2003) (supreme
court); RSA 491:2 (1977) (repealed 2003) (superior court); RSA 502-A:6-a
(1977) (repealed 2003) (district court); RSA 547:2-a (1997) (amended 2003)
(“Full-time probate judges . . . shall be entitled to the same disability and
retirement benefits as full-time justices of the district court”). When the
petitioners were appointed to be judges, the prior retirement statutes were in
effect.
3
Under the prior retirement statutes, as “additional compensation for
services rendered and to be rendered,” a judge who retired upon attaining the
age of seventy years having served as a judge for at least seven years, or upon
attaining the age of sixty-five years having served for at least ten years, was
entitled to receive for the rest of his or her life an annual amount equal to
seventy-five percent of “the currently effective annual salary of the office” from
which the judge was retired. RSA 502-A:6-a, III (repealed 2003); RSA 490:2, II
(repealed 2003); RSA 491:2, II (repealed 2003). The statutes provided that a
“sum sufficient to pay any and all benefits or compensation . . . is hereby
continually appropriated therefor” and that the “governor is authorized to draw
his warrant for the payment thereof out of any funds in the treasury not
otherwise appropriated.” RSA 490:2, VI (repealed 2003); RSA 491:2, VI
(repealed 2003); RSA 502-A:6-a, VI (repealed 2003).
In 2003, the prior retirement statutes were repealed and replaced with
RSA chapter 100-C. See Laws 2003, ch. 311. Implementation of the new
statute was delayed until the Internal Revenue Service made a favorable
determination as to the tax qualified status of the plan. See Laws 2003,
311:11. The parties have stipulated that RSA chapter 100-C took effect on
January 1, 2005. Between 2006 and 2009, the petitioners retired from full-
time service.
Under the new retirement statute, membership in the judicial retirement
plan is mandatory for any full-time supreme, superior, district or probate court
judge. RSA 100-C:3. Retirement benefits are established as follows:
I. Any member who has at least 15 years of creditable
service and is at least 60 years of age, or who has at least 10 years
of creditable service and is at least 65 years of age, or who has at
least 7 years of service and is 70 years of age may retire on a
service retirement allowance . . . .
II. A member who is at least 65 years of age with 10 years of
creditable service may retire on a service retirement allowance
equal to 75 percent of the member’s final year’s salary.
III. A member who is 70 years of age with 7 years of
creditable service may retire on a service retirement allowance
equal to 45 percent of the member’s final year’s salary. A member
who is 70 years of age shall be granted an additional 10 percent
over the 45 percent level for each year of creditable service the
member has over 7 years.
IV. A member who is at least 60 years of age with at least 15
years of service may retire on a service retirement allowance equal
4
to 70 percent of the member’s final year’s salary. A member who
has at least 15 years of service and is at least 60 years of age shall
be granted an additional percent over the 70 percent level for each
year of continued service over 15 years.
V. Under no circumstance shall any service retirement
allowance pursuant to this section exceed 75 percent of the
member’s final year’s salary.
VI. Any member attaining eligibility for 75 percent of the
member’s final year’s salary shall not be required to make
employee contributions to the plan pursuant to RSA 100-C:14.
RSA 100-C:5, I-VI.
The new retirement plan is self-funding, relying upon contributions from
the State and the judges. See RSA 100-C:13. Although the new retirement
statute limits benefits to seventy-five percent of the judge’s final year’s salary,
the board has the discretion to award cost-of-living adjustments to retired
judges up to an aggregate amount of $50,000 per year, and to award more
than that amount with the approval of the legislature. RSA 100-C:13, III(g);
RSA 100-C:17. The legislature may approve cost-of-living adjustments in
excess of $50,000 only if the plan’s annuity fund earns at a level greater than
the actuarial assumed rate of return approved by the board and the trust is at
least ninety percent funded for the calendar year. RSA 100-C:17.
The State argues that the trial court erred in finding a violation of Part I,
Article 23 of the State Constitution because the prior retirement statutes did
not create contractual rights and, even if they did, those rights have not been
substantially altered by RSA chapter 100-C. Because the parties rely only
upon the State Constitution, we need not engage in a separate federal analysis.
See Petition of Guardarramos-Cepeda, 154 N.H. 7, 9 (2006).
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we
consider the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences
properly drawn from them, in the light most favorable to the non-
moving party. If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary
judgment. We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo.
State v. N. of the Border Tobacco, 162 N.H. 206, 212 (2011) (citations omitted).
5
Whether or not a statute is constitutional is a question of law, which we
review de novo. Tuttle v. N.H. Med. Malpractice Joint Underwriting Assoc., 159
N.H. 627, 640 (2010).
The party challenging a statute’s constitutionality bears the
burden of proof. The constitutionality of an act passed by the
coordinate branch of the government is presumed. It will not be
declared to be invalid except upon inescapable grounds; and the
operation under it of another department of the state government
will not be interfered with until the matter has received full and
deliberate consideration.
Id. (quotations, citations and brackets omitted).
Part I, Article 23 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides:
“Retrospective laws are highly injurious, oppressive, and unjust. No such laws,
therefore, should be made, either for the decision of civil causes, or the
punishment of offenses.” Although this provision does not specifically
reference existing contracts, “we have held that its proscription duplicates the
protections found in the contract clause of the United States Constitution.”
State v. Fournier, 158 N.H. 214, 221 (2009) (quotation omitted). “We therefore
understand article I, section 10 [of the federal constitution] and part I, article
23 [of the State Constitution] to offer equivalent protections where a law
impairs a contract, or where a law abrogates an earlier statute that is itself a
contract.” Opinion of the Justices (Furlough), 135 N.H. 625, 630 (1992).
Accordingly, “every statute which takes away or impairs vested rights, acquired
under existing laws, . . . must be deemed retrospective” within the meaning of
Part I, Article 23. Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 641 (quotation omitted).
Contract Clause analysis in New Hampshire requires a
threshold inquiry as to whether the legislation operates as a
substantial impairment of a contractual relationship. This inquiry
has three components: whether there is a contractual
relationship, whether a change in law impairs that contractual
relationship, and whether the impairment is substantial. If the
legislation substantially impairs the contract, a balancing of the
police power and the rights protected by the contract clause[ ]
must be performed, and the law may pass constitutional muster
only if it is reasonable and necessary to serve an important public
purpose.
Id. (quotations, citations, ellipses and brackets omitted).
Whether a public retirement plan creates a contract between a public
employee and the State is a question of first impression in New Hampshire.
6
“The nature of pension rights of a public employee is a question which has
caused courts great difficulty.” Wagoner v. Gainer, 279 S.E.2d 636, 640 (W.
Va. 1981). “Development of the law on the question has been long and
tort[u]ous, reflecting the increasing pressure placed upon the judiciary by the
evolution of the now generally accepted theory that pensions are a part of the
compensation of an employee to which, under ordinary circumstances, he is as
much entitled as he is to the wages paid him for the work he has actually
performed.” Id. (quotation and ellipses omitted).
Regarding public employees, we have recognized that
[a]n employee’s compensation is not necessarily limited to his
salary, but will include any other benefits that are an integral part
of the employee’s contemplated compensation. These benefits may
include . . . retirement . . . benefits. Such benefits are a means by
which the State can attract qualified persons to enter and remain
in State employment, and an employee accepts an offer of
employment or continues in employment with the State in reliance
on the State’s representations that it will provide such benefits.
These benefits are an integral part of the contemplated
compensation and become vested at the time one becomes a
permanent State employee or continues in such employment.
Jeannont v. N.H. Personnel Comm’n, 118 N.H. 597, 601-02 (1978). We have
also held that RSA chapter 100-A, establishing the New Hampshire Retirement
System, “clearly entitles certain governmental employees to receive retirement
and other related benefits.” State Employees’ Ass’n of N.H. v. Belknap County,
122 N.H. 614, 621 (1982). “These benefits constitute a substantial part of an
employee’s compensation and become vested upon the commencement of
permanent employee status. Designed to attract competent individuals into
government service, the benefits are essentially created for the protection of the
employee and his family.” Id. (citations omitted); see also Gilman v. County of
Cheshire, 126 N.H. 445, 448-49 (1985) (right to receive sick leave benefits vests
when one becomes a governmental employee or continues in such
employment). One of the primary purposes of providing benefits to public
employees is “to induce competent persons to enter and remain in public
employment. Benefits would serve as little inducement if they could be
whisked away at the whim of the public employer.” Gilman, 126 N.H. at 449.
In support of the statement in Jeannont that “benefits are an integral
part of the contemplated compensation and become vested at the time one
becomes a permanent State employee or continues in such employment,”
Jeannont, 118 N.H. at 602, we cited Kern v. City of Long Beach, 179 P.2d 799
(Cal. 1947), and Bakenhus v. City of Seattle, 296 P.2d 536 (Wash. 1956). In
Kern, the Supreme Court of California reasoned that “public employment gives
7
rise to certain obligations which are protected by the contract clause of the
Constitution, including the right to the payment of salary which has been
earned. Since a pension right is an integral portion of contemplated
compensation, it cannot be destroyed, once it has vested, without impairing a
contractual obligation.” Kern, 179 P.2d at 802 (quotation and citation omitted).
In Bakenhus, the Supreme Court of Washington rejected as “insupportable”
the view that since the right to receive a pension does not arise until all the
conditions are fulfilled, the employee’s rights must depend upon the law as it
exists at that time. Bakenhus, 296 P.2d at 539. Rather, the court adopted the
“more enlightened” view that “the employee who accepts a job to which a
pension plan is applicable contracts for a substantial pension and is entitled to
receive the same when he has fulfilled the prescribed conditions.” Id. at 540.
Other state supreme courts that have been presented with this issue
have held that a judge’s pension rights are an integral element of compensation
and a vested contractual right accruing upon acceptance of employment. See,
e.g., Board of Tr. of Pub. Emp. Ret. F. v. Hill, 472 N.E.2d 204, 208-09 (Ind.
1985); Gainer, 279 S.E.2d at 643; Olson v. Cory, 636 P.2d 532, 535-36 (Cal.
1980); Miles v. Tenn. Consol. Retirement System, 548 S.W.2d 299, 304 (Tenn.
1976); Sylvestre v. State, 214 N.W.2d 658, 664-65 (Minn. 1973); Campbell v.
Michigan Judges Retirement Board, 143 N.W.2d 755, 757-58 (Mich. 1966). As
the Minnesota Supreme Court explained:
[A] judge gives up the right to continue in the only field of endeavor
in which he has been educated and is experienced in order to
accept a position, often for a much smaller financial reward,
anticipating that upon retirement the state will continue to pay
him part of his salary. Inflation affects retired judges the same as
it does anyone else; and a judge’s reliance upon the state’s offer to
pay, upon his retirement, a part of the salary allotted to his office
surely is one of the significant considerations that induces the
judge to remain in office during the required period of time and
until the age permitting retirement. Frequently, his retirement
compensation is the only resource he has to rely upon when he
has reached an age where it is too late to actively engage in any
other financial activity.
Sylvestre, 214 N.W.2d at 666.
In the case before us, the prior retirement statutes stated unequivocally
that judicial retirement pay was “additional compensation for services rendered
and to be rendered.” RSA 490:2 (repealed 2003); RSA 491:2 (repealed 2003);
RSA 502-A:6-a (repealed 2003). For the reasons set forth above, we agree with
the weight of authority that these statutes created an implied-in-fact contract
between the State and the judges who entered into employment when the
8
statutes were in effect, which vested when they were appointed to be judges
subject to attaining the age and service requirements. Because we hold that
there is a contractual relationship between the State and the petitioners, we
address whether RSA chapter 100-C impairs that contractual relationship and,
if so, whether the impairment is substantial.
The trial court found that because the prior retirement statutes allowed
for the calculation of retirement benefits based upon the most recent
adjustments in judicial salaries, and because the new statute bases benefits on
the amount the judge was being paid at the time of retirement, the new statute
“is clearly an impairment of the plaintiffs’ vested rights under the previous
statutory benefit.” We agree with the trial court that RSA chapter 100-C
impairs the obligations entered into under the prior retirement statutes. The
petitioners had the right to expect that upon retirement their pension would
reflect subsequent increases in pay granted to those in active service.
The trial court also found that the impairment is substantial. In doing
so, the court relied upon Tuttle and Opinion of the Justices (Furlough). We
disagree that these cases compel the conclusion reached by the trial court.
The court quoted language in Tuttle which states that “‘[w]here the right
abridged was one that induced the parties to contract in the first place, a court
can assume the impairment to be substantial.’” Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 649
(quoting Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 89 v. Prince George’s County, Md.,
645 F. Supp. 2d 492, 510 (D. Md. 2009)). We hesitate, however, to adopt this
language as the basis for finding substantial impairment in this case. Because
the parties’ reliance was not at issue in Tuttle, the quoted language is dicta.
See Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 650. In addition, the opinion from which the Tuttle
court quoted was subsequently reversed. See Fraternal Order of Police Lodge
No. 89 v. Prince George’s County, Md., 608 F.3d 183 (4th Cir. 2010).
The trial court also relied upon Opinion of the Justices (Furlough), 135
N.H. at 634, and, quoting Furlough, concluded that because the impairment
affects the “very heart of an employment contract: the promise of certain work
for certain income,” RSA chapter 100-C is a substantial impairment of the
contract between the petitioners and the State. In Opinion of the Justices
(Furlough), the terms of a collective bargaining agreement between the State
and certain public employees established the basic workweek as thirty-seven
and one-half hours per week. Furlough, 135 N.H. at 631. Proposed legislation
would have required employees to take a certain number of unpaid days of
leave. Id. at 628. In concluding that the legislation would constitute a
substantial impairment of the contract between the State and the employees,
we noted that “[t]he affected employees have surely relied on full paychecks to
pay for such essentials as food and housing. Many have undoubtedly
committed themselves to personal long-term obligations such as mortgages,
credit cards, car payments, and the like.” Id. at 634 (quotation omitted). It
9
was in this context that we concluded: “The bill under consideration here
impairs the very heart of an employment contract: the promise of certain work
for certain income. Its impact would likely wreak havoc on the finances of
many of the affected workers and can only be considered substantial.” Id. In
contrast, unlike an employment contract that guarantees definite hours of
work for a definite amount of compensation, there is no absolute certainty from
year to year whether any upward modifications to judicial salaries will be
legislatively authorized. In fact, the parties have stipulated that in eight of the
years between 1991 and 2010, there was no increase in judicial salaries.
In determining the issue of substantial impairment, we look again to the
cases favorably cited in Jeannont. In Kern, the court addressed the issue of
modifications by the government in a pension system prior to the time for
commencement of payments and concluded that “an employee may acquire a
vested contractual right to a pension but . . . this right is not rigidly fixed by
the specific terms of the legislation in effect during any particular period in
which he serves.” Kern, 179 P.2d at 803. The court reasoned that “[t]he
statutory language is subject to the implied qualification that the governing
body may make modifications and changes in the system. The employee does
not have a right to any fixed or definite benefits, but only to a substantial or
reasonable pension.” Id. Therefore, the court found no inconsistency in
holding that the employee “has a vested right to a pension but that the
amount, terms and conditions of the benefits may be altered.” Id.; see also
Betts v. Bd. of Admin. of Pub. Emp. Ret. System, 582 P.2d 614, 617 (Cal.
1978) (alterations of employees’ pension rights must bear some material
relation to the theory of a pension system and its successful operation, and
changes in a pension plan which result in disadvantage to the employees
should be accompanied by comparable new advantages).
In Bakenhus, the court held that “the employee who accepts a job to
which a pension plan is applicable contracts for a substantial pension and is
entitled to receive the same when he has fulfilled the prescribed conditions.”
Bakenhus, 296 P.2d at 540. The court reasoned that the employee’s pension
rights “may be modified prior to retirement, but only for the purpose of keeping
the pension system flexible and maintaining its integrity.” Id. According to the
court, “[t]his view, while it may not be flawless in a purely legalistic sense, gives
effect to the reasonable expectations of the employee and at the same time
allows the legislature the freedom necessary to improve the pension system
and adapt it to changing economic conditions.” Id.
Several other jurisdictions approve the view that, prior to retirement, a
plan may be changed only if there is a corresponding change of a beneficial
nature to the employee. See, e.g., Police Pension and Relief Board of Denver v.
Bills, 366 P.2d 581, 584 (Colo. 1961) (prior to eligibility to retire, there is
limited vesting of pension rights such that although the plan could be changed,
10
it could not be abolished nor could there be a substantial change of an adverse
nature without a corresponding change of a beneficial nature); In re Marriage of
Alarcon, 196 Cal. Rptr. 887, 892 (Ct. App. 1983) (while vested rights to pension
benefits may be modified before a retirement to keep a pension system flexible
and permit adjustments to accord with changing conditions, such
modifications must be reasonable and not destroy or impair a vested
contractual right to a pension); Gainer, 279 S.E.2d at 644 (changes in the
pension plan may be allowed if any disadvantages are counter-balanced by
advantages, i.e., substitute consideration); Sylvestre, 214 N.W.2d at 666
(taking away the right to receive compensation without any compensating
benefits constitutes an impairment of contract). Because we reject the
approach adopted by the trial court, we reverse and remand this issue for the
court to determine in the first instance whether the contractual impairment is
offset by any compensating benefits under RSA chapter 100-C.
The petitioners argue in their cross-appeal that the trial court incorrectly
excluded the ten percent and one percent salary increases authorized in 2003
and 2005 in calculating their benefits under the prior retirement statutes.
Laws 2003, 311:3 amended RSA 491-A:1 to increase the salary of each judicial
position by ten percent. This increase became effective on January 1, 2005,
the effective date of RSA chapter 100-C. The ten percent increase matched the
contribution of ten percent of earnable compensation that judges are required
to make to the new plan. See RSA 100-C:14. This salary increase was
expressly intended not to apply to judges who had already retired and were
receiving benefits under the prior retirement statutes. See Laws 2003, 311:6.
Because the judges’ contribution to the new plan was also based upon the ten
percent increase, in 2005 judicial salaries were increased by one percent to
correct for that effect. See Laws 2005, 177:96. The board determined that
because the 2005 pay raise was a technical correction of the 2003 raise, it also
had to exclude the one percent increase from the calculation of retirement
benefits under the prior retirement statutes.
The petitioners argue that these increases should be included in the base
calculation of retirement benefits payable under the prior statutes because: (1)
the prior retirement statutes calculate benefits as seventy-five percent of the
“currently effective salary” for sitting judges; (2) Laws 2003, chapter 311 did
not purport to exclude the salary increase from the calculation of the
petitioners’ benefits payable under the prior plan; and (3) excluding the ten
percent raise violates Part I, Article 23 of the State Constitution. The board
argues that chapter 311 “clearly and unambiguously” provides that the ten
percent increase is not included in determining retirement benefits pursuant to
the prior retirement statutes and that the salary increase was a one-time
adjustment to judicial salaries equal to contributions required by the new plan.
The board further argues that the ten percent increase was not “salary” under
the prior retirement statutes because its only purpose was to compensate for
11
the ten percent employee contribution the judges had to make upon the
effective date of the new plan.
We are persuaded by the board’s position that these salary adjustments
were authorized for the limited purpose of compensating judges for their ten
percent earnable compensation contribution required under the new retirement
plan. Therefore, these adjustments may not be characterized as “effective
annual salary” for purposes of calculating benefits under the prior retirement
statutes. Accordingly, we affirm the trial court on this issue.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
FITZGERALD, J., retired superior court justice, and CARROLL, J., circuit
court justice, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, concurred; MANIAS and
BEAN, JJ., retired superior court justices, specially assigned under RSA 490:3,
concurred in part and dissented in part.
MANIAS, J., retired superior court justice, specially assigned under RSA
490:3, concurring in part and dissenting in part. I agree with the majority that
the prior retirement statutes created a contract between the State and the
petitioners and that RSA chapter 100-C impairs that contract. I also agree that
the salary adjustments provided for by Laws 2003, 311:3 and Laws 2005,
177:96 should not be included in calculating benefits under the prior
retirement statutes. However, I disagree that the case should be remanded for
further findings by the trial court as to whether the impairment of the
petitioners’ contract rights is offset by any compensating benefits under the
new law. For the reasons that follow, I would affirm the trial court’s finding of
substantial impairment. I would also affirm the trial court’s finding that the
new statute is not reasonable and necessary to serve an important public
purpose, an issue which the majority does not reach.
The prior retirement statutes tied the petitioners’ retirement benefits
directly to salaries of sitting judges; namely, “3/4 of the currently effective
annual salary of the office from which [the judge] is retired . . . .” RSA 490:2, II
(1997) (repealed 2003); RSA 491:2, II (1997) (repealed 2003); RSA 502-A:6-a, III
(1997) (repealed 2003). RSA chapter 100-C cuts that link and instead fixes the
petitioners’ retirement benefits at “75 percent of the member’s final year’s
salary,” RSA 100-C:5, II, subject to discretionary increases by the Board of
Trustees of the New Hampshire Judicial Retirement Plan (board), RSA 100-
C:13, III(g); RSA 100-C:17. As demonstrated by the variety of projected payout
calculations in the parties’ joint stipulation, it is not possible precisely to
quantify the difference between the financial benefits to be expected under the
12
new and old retirement statutory schemes. However, it cannot be denied that
the new system allows for the possibility that the benefits paid to retired judges
will not keep pace with the salaries of sitting judges. That possibility did not
exist under the prior laws. Thus I agree that RSA chapter 100-C impairs the
State’s obligations entered into under the prior retirement statutes.
In seeking to distinguish this case from Opinion of the Justices
(Furlough), 135 N.H. 625 (1992), the majority notes that the old system did not
guarantee any specific increases to the retired judges (just as the new system
does not), and that, in eight of the years between 1991 and 2010, there was no
increase in judicial salaries. In my opinion, this misses the point. Under the
old system, the petitioners could count on automatic increases whenever
sitting judges received them. Under the new system, that is no longer true. No
longer can they trust in the fact that the legislature will inevitably, albeit not at
regular intervals, increase the salaries of sitting judges as dictated by the need
to attract qualified persons to the bench. Instead, they must rely solely on the
discretion of the board, which is subject to additional statutory preconditions
described in the majority opinion. As the petitioners put it, “retired judges’
COLA’s are, under the prior system, a function of the employment market
because the retired judges remain in 75% parity with sitting judges’ salaries.
COLAs under RSA chapter 100-C, on the other hand, are simply a function of
the Board’s discretion, driven largely, if not entirely, by the Plan’s recent and
forecast investment returns.” The trial court acknowledged this difference
between the two plans, finding that the new law “prohibits retired judges from
receiving the advantages of any raises or COLAs instituted for the benefit of the
judges presently sitting after their retirement.”
Thus, while I agree with the majority that the contract right impaired in
this case does not have the degree of definiteness as the right at issue in
Opinion of the Justices (Furlough), 135 N.H. at 634, I still think it clear that
RSA chapter 100-C’s provision for discretionary increases is neither fair nor
equivalent compensation for the impairment of the petitioners’ contract rights
under the former plan. See Sylvestre v. State, 214 N.W.2d 658, 666 (Minn.
1973) (“Surely, if there is a contract, taking away the right to receive
compensation based on the increased salary of judges without any
compensating benefits constitutes an impairment of the contract.”); Wagoner v.
Gainer, 279 S.E.2d 636, 644 (W. Va. 1981) (“other courts, in what we consider
the better view, will allow a change in the plan if any disadvantages are
counter-balanced by advantages, i.e., substitute consideration”).
In Tuttle v. New Hampshire Medical Malpractice Joint Underwriting
Association, 159 N.H. 627 (2010), this court recognized that “the determination
of whether a contract impairment is substantial may be influenced by whether
the contracting parties relied on the abridged contract right. Where the right
abridged was one that induced the parties to contract in the first place, a court
13
can assume the impairment to be substantial.” Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 649
(quotation omitted). In explaining its conclusion that the impairment to the
contract was substantial, the trial court cited the foregoing passage. In the
instant case, as in Tuttle, there is no dispute as to the meaning of the statutory
provisions underlying the petitioners’ Contract Clause claim. Also as in Tuttle,
the State did not contest the petitioners’ reliance upon the alleged contractual
right at issue. Rather, the State argued at length that the statute did not
create a contract and, in the alternative, that any contract that was created
was not substantially impaired.
I agree with the trial court that the right to a retirement benefit tethered
to the salary of currently sitting judges was an inducement upon which the
petitioners reasonably relied in accepting the offer of appointment to the office.
This conclusion is supported by the language of the statutes in effect when the
petitioners accepted employment. Those statutes provided that the retirement
benefit was “additional compensation for services rendered and to be
rendered.” RSA 502-A:6-a, III (1997) (repealed 2003) (emphasis added); RSA
490:2, II (1997) (repealed 2003) (emphasis added); RSA 491:2, II (1997)
(repealed 2003) (emphasis added). Retired judges continue to serve as judges
and referees after they retire. RSA 490:3, II (2010); RSA 493-A:1, II (2010);
RSA 493-A:1-a, I (2010); RSA 502-A:6-b (2010). That they have done so and
continue to do so as a matter of practice is not subject to legitimate dispute.
This distinguishes them from other public retirees and adds force to the
argument that, in accepting appointment as judges, they were induced by and
relied upon the statutory promise of retirement benefits specifically pegged to
the salaries of sitting justices.
Under these circumstances, I would hold that RSA chapter 100-C, by
cutting the link between the petitioners’ retirement benefits and the salaries of
sitting justices and subjecting them to the discretion of the board without
regard to the current salaries of sitting justices, substantially impairs the
contract established by the retirement statutes in effect when the petitioners
took office.
The majority opinion questions the trial court’s use of the inducement-
and-reliance passage from Tuttle on two grounds, neither of which I find
persuasive. As I read its opinion, the Tuttle majority did not conclude that
reliance itself was irrelevant to its conclusion; rather, it deemed that reliance
was established for purposes of the appeal. Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 649-50. Even
though the Tuttle majority did not provide an analytical framework for deciding
whether particular facts amount to reliance, its statement of the presumptive
significance of reliance clearly contributed to its resolution of the issue of
substantial impairment and thus is not mere dicta, as the majority maintains.
14
The majority also questions the soundness of Tuttle’s reliance-and-
inducement rule, given that the language was taken from a district court
opinion which was subsequently reversed by the Fourth Circuit. Fraternal
Order of Police Lodge No. 89 v. Prince George’s County, Md., 645 F. Supp. 2d
492 (D. Md. 2009), rev’d, 608 F.3d 183 (4th Cir. 2010). However, the appellate
court did not disagree with or even comment upon the district court’s
substantial impairment analysis; it reversed because it found no contract
impairment in the first place. Fraternal Order, 608 F.3d at 190-91. Moreover,
the Fraternal Order district court opinion is not the sole authority supporting
the importance of inducement and reliance in the context of a substantiality
analysis. See, e.g., Houlton Citizens’ Coalition v. Town of Houlton, 175 F.3d
178, 190 (1st Cir. 1999) (“In order to weigh the substantiality of a contractual
impairment, courts look long and hard at the reasonable expectations of the
parties.”); Sal Tinnerello & Sons, Inc. v. Town of Stonington, 141 F.3d 46, 53
(2d Cir.), cert. denied, 525 U.S. 923 (1998) (“[T]he primary consideration in
determining whether the impairment is substantial is the extent to which
reasonable expectations under the contract have been disrupted.”). Both of
these cases are cited in Tuttle. Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 669 (Dalianis and Duggan,
JJ., dissenting). Although the dissent disagreed with the majority’s view that
actual reliance was not at issue, it clearly shared the majority’s view that
reliance was a primary consideration in determining whether a contract
impairment was substantial.
Because I agree with the trial court’s finding of substantial impairment, I
must also address the question whether the impairment of the petitioners’
contract rights was reasonable and necessary to serve an important public
purpose.
“If the legislation substantially impairs the contract, a balancing of the
police power and the rights protected by the contract clause[] must be
performed, and the law may pass constitutional muster only if it is reasonable
and necessary to serve an important public purpose.” Tuttle, 159 N.H. at 641
(quotations, ellipses, and brackets omitted).
We generally defer to the judgment of the legislature in determining
whether a particular act is reasonable and necessary to serve an
important public purpose, but when the State attempts to abrogate
its own contractual responsibilities, complete deference to a
legislative assessment of reasonableness and necessity is not
appropriate because the State’s self-interest is at stake.
Application of stricter judicial review reflects the principle that
those who lawfully contract amongst themselves must have
reasonable assurances that their rights and obligations will not be
disturbed.
15
Lower Village Hydroelectric Assocs. v. City of Claremont, 147 N.H. 73, 78
(2001) (citations and quotations omitted). In this case, where the State was a
party to the contract that is substantially impaired by RSA chapter 100-C,
complete deference is not appropriate.
I agree with the trial court that the State’s justification for the contract
impairment here was insufficient. The State argued that the changes at issue
provided a long term fiscal solution to eradicate the unfunded liability created
by the previous retirement statutes and that the changes also allowed an
opportunity for benefits upon early retirement, which was not available
previously. While the proffered justification may be reasonable going forward,
there was no showing that it was reasonable and necessary for the legislature
to apply these changes retroactively to the determinate class of judges who had
accepted their appointments and served in reliance upon the provisions of the
prior retirement system. See Miles v. Tenn. Consol. Retirement System, 548
S.W.2d 299, 305 (Tenn. 1976) (legislature did not have power to modify
pension benefits “in the absence of a showing that a vital interest of the State
must be protected by an exercise of the police power”).
Accordingly, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s decision to remand
the case for further findings regarding substantiality of impairment. I would
affirm the decision below.
BEAN, J., retired superior court justice, specially assigned under RSA
490:3, joins the opinion of MANIAS, J.
16