THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-110
CONCORD GENERAL MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
JANE DOE & a.
Argued: September 16, 2010
Opinion Issued: October 27, 2010
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg orally), for the petitioner.
McDowell & Osburn, P.A., of Manchester (David S.V. Shirley and Jeffrey
B. Osburn on the brief, and Mr. Shirley orally), for respondent Jane Doe.
Mallory & Friedman, PLLC, of Concord (Christine Friedman on the
memorandum of law), for respondent Mount Washington Assurance
Corporation.
CONBOY, J. Respondent Jane Doe appeals an order of the Superior
Court (Mangones, J.) granting the petitioner, Concord General Mutual
Insurance Company (Concord General), summary judgment on its petition for a
declaratory ruling that it is not obligated to provide coverage for injuries Doe
suffered as a result of sexual assaults occurring inside an
uninsured/underinsured vehicle. We affirm.
The facts are undisputed. Doe became acquainted with Matthew
McGonagle while she was a student in the Gilford School System. McGonagle
was at various times Doe’s teacher and drama instructor. Between November
1999 and February 2000, McGonagle committed a series of sexual assaults on
Doe, who was then fourteen years old. While some of the assaults occurred on
school property, the majority occurred in McGonagle’s vehicle, either while he
was driving or while the vehicle was parked with the engine running. The
assaults, which included kissing, fondling above and below clothing, and
digital vaginal penetration, occurred while Doe was either sitting in the
passenger seat or sitting on McGonagle’s lap while he drove. As a result of the
assaults, Doe suffered physical discomfort as well as emotional trauma that
resulted in psychiatric and psychological injury.
At all relevant times, Doe was an insured under Concord General
automobile and umbrella policies; McGonagle’s vehicle, in which the assaults
occurred, was covered under a policy with Mount Washington Insurance
Corporation (Mt. Washington). After Mt. Washington denied that its policy with
McGonagle provided coverage for Doe’s alleged damages, Doe sought
uninsured/underinsured coverage from Concord General.
Concord General denied coverage and subsequently brought this
declaratory proceeding against Doe and Mt. Washington, seeking a declaratory
ruling that it was not obligated to provide coverage. Alternatively, Concord
General asserted that if it were obligated to provide coverage, Mt. Washington
would be obligated to provide coverage as well, thereby offsetting Concord
General’s obligation. All three parties moved for summary judgment. The trial
court granted Concord General’s motion, denied Doe’s motion, and determined
that Mt. Washington’s motion was moot. On appeal, Doe argues that the trial
court erred in determining that her injuries did not arise out of the use of
McGonagle’s vehicle.
“In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.” Big League Entm’t v.
Brox Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). “If our review of that evidence discloses
no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.”
Id. “We review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo.” Id.
Our review in this case requires the interpretation and application of the
petitioner’s insurance contract. See State Farm Mut. Ins. Co. v. Pitman, 148
2
N.H. 499, 501 (2002). The interpretation of insurance policy language is a
question of law for this court to decide. Godbout v. Lloyd’s Ins. Syndicates,
150 N.H. 103, 105 (2003). We construe the language as would a reasonable
person in the position of the insured based upon a more than casual reading of
the policy as a whole. Id. Policy terms are construed objectively; where the
terms are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its natural and
ordinary meaning. Id.
The Concord General policy provides that it “will pay compensatory
damages which an ‘insured’ is legally entitled to recover from the owner or
operator of . . . [a]n ‘uninsured motor vehicle’ . . . because of ‘bodily injury’
sustained by an ‘insured’ and caused by an accident . . . .” The policy further
states that “liability for these damages must arise out of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of the ‘uninsured motor vehicle.’” We have interpreted
this clause to mean that the injury must originate from, grow out of, or flow
from the use of the vehicle. Akerley v. Hartford Ins. Group, 136 N.H. 433, 439
(1992). “Generally, a causal connection must exist between the resulting harm
and [the] use of the vehicle in order to invoke coverage.” Id. “Although
proximate causation is not required, a tenuous connection with an automobile
is not sufficient to warrant coverage.” Id. Here, we must determine whether
Doe’s injuries arose out of McGonagle’s “use” of his vehicle. We have
interpreted “use” of an automobile to mean “use of the automobile in its
inherent nature as a vehicle.” Walsh v. Amica Mut. Ins. Co., 141 N.H. 374, 375
(1996).
In Akerley, where a police officer sought uninsured motorist coverage for
injuries he sustained while removing an uninsured motorist from the motorist’s
vehicle, we concluded that the officer’s insurer had no obligation to provide
coverage because the vehicle was merely the situs of the injury. Akerley, 136
N.H. at 440. After noting that the injury was caused “by the suspect resisting
arrest and not by the suspect using his vehicle,” we held that when a vehicle
acts as merely the situs of an injury, the causal connection between the injury
and the use of the vehicle is too tenuous to support coverage. Id.; see also Doe
v. State Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 878 F. Supp. 862, 865 (E.D. Va. 1995) (no
coverage for injuries sustained by a petitioner who was robbed, forced into a
vehicle, and subsequently driven to various locations where her assailant
stopped the car and assaulted her within the vehicle because vehicle was
merely the situs of the injury).
Doe argues that McGonagle’s vehicle was not merely the situs of her
injuries because, unlike in Akerley, the assaults occurred while McGonagle was
“using” the vehicle. However, it is not sufficient that the vehicle was in use;
rather, the injuries must originate from, grow out of, or flow from that use.
Akerley, 136 N.H. at 439. A useful example of such a causal nexus is found in
Wilson v. Progressive Insurance Co., 151 N.H. 782 (2005). In Wilson, a taxi
3
cab passenger sustained an injury when the driver closed the cab’s door on her
dog’s tail, causing the dog to bite her. In that case, we found that the insurer
was obligated to provide uninsured motorist coverage because “the injury was
the result of the taxi driver closing the car door, an act that is part of using an
automobile.” Wilson, 151 N.H. at 792.
Doe further argues that her injuries are causally connected to the use of
the vehicle because the vehicle was the one location where McGonagle was sure
to have unchaperoned access to her. This is essentially a “but for” causation
argument which posits that “but for” the vehicle, McGonagle would not have
had access to Doe. We agree with those jurisdictions that have rejected the
“but for” causation test for purposes of determining whether an injury arose
out of the use of a vehicle. See, e.g., Doe, 878 F. Supp. at 865 (“[T]he fact that
a criminal assault temporally followed closely on the heels of the use of a
vehicle as a vehicle, and perhaps would not have occurred but for that use,
presents an insufficient causal nexus between injury and vehicle use to trigger
insurance coverage under the policy language in issue.”); Commerce Ins. v.
Ultimate Livery Service, 897 N.E.2d 50, 62 (Mass. 2008) (The expression
“arising out of” does not refer to all circumstances in which the injury would
not have occurred but for the involvement of a vehicle.); Erie Ins. Co. Exchange
v. Jones, 448 S.E.2d 655, 658 (Va. 1994) (rejecting the “but for” test of
causation and endorsing the position that the “injury must be foreseeably
identifiable with the normal use of the vehicle” (quotation omitted)). The proper
inquiry is whether the injury originated from, grew out of, or flowed from the
use to which the vehicle was being put. Akerley, 136 N.H. at 439. Thus, the
allegation that McGonagle may not have had access to Doe absent the use of
his vehicle is insufficient to establish the necessary nexus between the use of
the vehicle and Doe’s injuries.
Finally, Doe cites several cases where the causal nexus between a
passenger’s injuries and the use of a common carrier was sufficient to support
coverage. See Huntington Cab Co. v. American Fidelity & Casualty Co., 155
F.2d 117 (4th Cir. 1946); Roe v. Lawn, 634 N.E.2d 117 (Mass. 1994). Doe
argues that the reasoning in those cases is applicable here because when
McGonagle voluntarily transported her in his private vehicle, he assumed a
duty of safe passage analogous to that assumed by common carriers. In
support of this argument, Doe cites cases in which we have recognized that one
may voluntarily assume a duty of care by implication. See Ward v. Inishmaan
Assocs. Ltd. P’ship, 156 N.H. 22, 25 (2007) (a landlord who undertakes to
provide security has a duty to act with reasonable care); Carignan v. N.H. Int’l
Speedway, 151 N.H. 409, 413 (2004) (a speedway that voluntarily undertakes
to direct traffic has a duty to act with reasonable care); Williams v. O’Brien,
140 N.H. 595, 599 (1995) (a motorist who signals another motorist to proceed
into an intersection may undertake a duty of care to other motorists where it is
foreseeable that the other motorists will not independently insure that the way
4
is clear); Walls v. Oxford Mgmt. Co., 137 N.H. 653, 659 (1993) (a landlord who
voluntarily undertakes to provide security will thereafter have a duty to act
with reasonable care); Corson v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 110 N.H. 210, 212
(1970) (a workers’ compensation insurer that voluntarily undertakes assistance
to the employer by providing additional inspections may be liable to an injured
employee for negligent inspection). None of these cases, however, supports the
proposition that an individual who voluntarily transports another impliedly
assumes the common carrier duty of safe passage as a matter of law, and we
decline to so hold here.
Considering the facts in the light most favorable to Doe, we cannot say
that her injuries originated from, grew out of, or flowed from McGonagle’s use
of his vehicle. While there is no dispute that at the time of several of the
assaults, McGonagle was driving, and thus “using” his vehicle, Doe’s injuries
resulted from the assaults, and not from use of the vehicle. Here, as in
Akerley, where the vehicle was merely the situs of the injuries, the causal
connection between the use of the vehicle and the injuries is too tenuous to
support coverage. See Akerley, 136 N.H. at 440.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS and DUGGAN, JJ., concurred.
5