THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
Nos. 2008-197
2009-181
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL BROWN
Argued: February 17, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R. Schulman on
the brief and orally), for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Michael Brown, was convicted of attempted
first degree murder, see RSA 629:1 (2007); RSA 630:1-a (2007), and witness
tampering, see RSA 641:5 (2007). He contends that the Superior Court
(Nadeau, J.) erred by denying his motion for a new trial based upon a claim of
ineffective assistance of counsel. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant, a middle-
aged man, began a relationship with the victim in either 2004 or 2005, when
she was fifteen years old. On her sixteenth birthday, he gave her a ring and
they discussed the possibility of marrying after the victim turned eighteen. In
August 2006, the victim sought to end the relationship. Frustrated that the
victim had not returned his telephone calls, the defendant confronted her at
her workplace on August 11, 2006. That evening, the defendant called the
victim to tell her that he was coming to her house to reclaim the ring. She met
him in the driveway, climbed into his truck, and they drove away. Once in the
truck, the defendant demanded that she return the ring. There ensued a
heated discussion about their relationship. The victim testified that the
defendant called her a “cheater” and told her how much he loved her. The
victim stated she then told the defendant she “hated him” and to leave her
alone.
At some point during this argument, the defendant parked in a
residential section of Manchester. The victim told the defendant again that she
hated him and asked him to leave her alone. In response, the victim testified
that the defendant put his hands around her neck and began to choke her.
She struggled and eventually kicked the truck’s horn with her foot. The
defendant then released her and drove away. In the struggle, the victim’s
necklace broke. The police recovered the broken necklace from the side of the
road where the victim stated the defendant parked.
Also, while the vehicle was stopped, the defendant grabbed the victim’s
mother’s cell phone, which she had in her possession, and snapped it into two
pieces. The police later recovered the broken phone from the defendant. The
victim’s mother’s boyfriend testified at trial that he had called the cell phone
that evening and heard a female voice state, “[Y]ou’re going to kill me, you’re
going to kill me.” A male voice then responded, “[Y]ou cheated on me . . . and
I’m going to kill you,” to which a female voice replied, “Mike, stop, Mike, stop.”
The victim testified that when the defendant drove away, she was pinned
between the seats in the vehicle. As they approached the highway, the
defendant released the victim and said, “I want you to see this coming at you,”
apparently insinuating her impending death. The defendant drove erratically,
swerving through traffic, and swiping a reflector pole. Police later found
damage to the truck consistent with hitting a reflector pole.
The defendant eventually stopped on a long, isolated dirt driveway in
Auburn. The victim told the defendant that “he was going to go to jail,” to
which the defendant replied, “[W]ell, then I guess there’s no reason not to kill
you” – a statement he subsequently denied. The defendant then began to
strangle her again. She testified that she could not breathe or speak and that
she almost slipped into unconsciousness, but that a “rush of adrenaline” gave
her the strength to fight by hitting, scratching, and slapping the defendant. At
that point, “he just stopped,” according to the victim. And “[a]s soon as he let
her go,” the victim vomited. The police found vomit in the back of the truck.
2
Once free, the victim grabbed an orange cord from the backseat, wrapped
it around the defendant’s neck, and pulled. She stopped strangling the
defendant when he started “convulsing almost.” The defendant then apologized
and asked the victim not to call the police. The victim agreed and stated she
would go along with whatever story he concocted, whereupon the defendant
drove her home. However, when she arrived home, she promptly called the
police. The police later arrested the defendant.
During a post-arrest interview, the defendant admitted that he had
choked the victim but stopped when he realized what he was doing.
Specifically, the defendant stated, “[A]t one point I -- I choked her. Did I choke
her to kill her? I was angry. . . . [W]hen I choked her, I realized what I was
doing and I felt like I couldn’t.” The following exchange also occurred:
[Detective]: So you tried to kill her, Mike.
[Defendant]: Tried to choke her, yeah. Did I try to kill her? No.
But I don’t -- I don’t -- I don’t believe that I could -- I -- I couldn’t kill her.
I couldn’t -- when I was in the military I couldn’t kill. That’s why I got
out.
[Detective]: That’s where the trying part comes in, Mike. You
tried, you couldn’t, you stopped. That’s - -
[Defendant]: I tried, I couldn’t, I stopped.
At other points during the interview, the defendant was less sure of his actions.
When the interviewing detective declared, “You just tried to kill her,” the
defendant answered, “Trust me, I know, and I feel like s--t, all right? I don’t
need you to keep pounding it into me.” The jury watched this interview at trial.
After the jury returned a verdict of guilty, the defendant moved for a new
trial. In his motion, he argued that his trial counsel was ineffective because
he: (1) failed to request a jury instruction on voluntary renunciation; (2) failed
to request a jury instruction on lesser included offenses; and (3) permitted the
jury to learn of a prior arrest and prosecution for rape. The trial court denied
the motion for a new trial and the defendant appealed.
On appeal, the defendant asserts that his counsel was constitutionally
ineffective under the State and Federal Constitutions. Part I, Article 15 of the
State Constitution and the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United
States Constitution “guarantee a criminal defendant reasonably competent
assistance of counsel.” State v. Sharkey, 155 N.H. 638, 640 (2007); see
Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 686 (1984). We first address the
defendant’s claims of ineffective assistance of counsel under the State
3
Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. State v. Ball, 124 N.H.
226, 231-33 (1983).
To prevail upon a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel, the defendant
must demonstrate, “first, that counsel’s representation was constitutionally
deficient and, second, that counsel’s deficient performance actually prejudiced
the outcome of the case.” State v. McGurk, 157 N.H. 765, 769 (2008)
(quotation omitted). A failure to establish either prong requires a finding that
counsel’s performance was not constitutionally defective. See State v. Kepple,
155 N.H. 267, 270 (2007).
To satisfy the first prong of the test, the performance prong, the
defendant “must show that counsel’s representation fell below an objective
standard of reasonableness.” State v. Whittaker, 158 N.H. 762, 768 (2009)
(quotation omitted); see Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U.S. 510, 521 (2003) (“[T]he
proper measure of attorney performance remains simply reasonableness under
prevailing professional norms.” (quotation omitted)); Strickland, 466 U.S. at
688. We judge the reasonableness of counsel’s conduct based upon the facts
and circumstances of that particular case, viewed at the time of that conduct.
Strickland, 466 U.S. at 690. As we have previously stated:
Judicial scrutiny of counsel’s performance must be highly
deferential. A fair assessment of attorney performance requires
that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of
hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s
challenged conduct, and to evaluate the conduct from counsel’s
perspective at the time. Because of the difficulties inherent in
making the evaluation, a court must indulge a strong presumption
that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable
professional assistance; that is, the defendant must overcome the
presumption that, under the circumstances, the challenged action
might be considered sound trial strategy.
Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 769 (quotations and citations omitted); see Strickland,
466 U.S. at 689. In other words, the defendant must “show that no competent
lawyer” would have failed to request a jury instruction on voluntary
renunciation or lesser included offenses or permitted the jury to hear of the
defendant’s prior prosecution for forcible rape. Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 769
(quotation omitted).
To satisfy the second prong, the prejudice prong, the defendant must
establish that “there is a reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s
unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding would have been different.”
Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768 (quotation omitted); see Strickland, 466 U.S. at
694. A reasonable probability is “a probability sufficient to undermine
confidence in the outcome.” Sharkey, 155 N.H. at 641. In making this
4
determination, we consider “the totality of the evidence presented at trial.”
Kepple, 155 N.H. at 270.
Both the performance and prejudice components of the ineffectiveness
inquiry are mixed questions of law and fact. Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768.
Therefore, we will not disturb the trial court’s factual findings unless they are
not supported by the evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law, and we
review the ultimate determination of whether each prong is met de novo. Id.
I
The defendant first maintains that his counsel was ineffective for failing
to request a jury instruction on voluntary renunciation. Voluntary
renunciation is an affirmative defense to an attempt crime, including attempted
first degree murder. See RSA 629:1, III (criminal attempt); RSA 630:1-a (first
degree murder). To establish this affirmative defense, a defendant must prove
by a preponderance of the evidence that he “voluntarily renounce[d] his
criminal purpose by abandoning his effort to commit the crime or otherwise
preventing its commission under circumstances manifesting a complete
withdrawal of his criminal purpose.” RSA 629:1, III(a); see also State v.
Jernigan, 133 N.H. 396, 398-400 (1990). Moreover, the renunciation cannot be
“substantially motivated by circumstances the defendant was not aware of at
the inception of his conduct which increase the probability of his detection or
which make more difficult the commission of the crime.” RSA 629:1, III(b).
“Renunciation is not complete if the purpose is to postpone the criminal
conduct until a more advantageous time or to transfer the criminal effort to
another but similar objective or victim.” Id.
The defendant asserts that he proved “beyond all doubt at trial” that he
abandoned his effort to commit the crime under circumstances manifesting a
complete withdrawal of his criminal purpose. He also maintains that there was
enough evidence that his abandonment “was not substantially motivated by (a)
an increased risk of detection or (b) circumstances that made the crime more
difficult” to have entitled him to a jury instruction on the issue “had his lawyer
requested one.” The defendant cites his interrogation statements, such as “All
I knew is -- all I remember is thinking to myself, what am I doing? And that’s
when I stopped” and the victim’s testimony in support of his argument.
The State disagrees that the defendant was entitled to a jury instruction
on voluntary renunciation. The State argues that “[i]t would be an absurd,
illogical, and unjust result to allow a renunciation defense where a defendant
has choked a victim in two different locations” and injured her. Therefore, the
State contends that trial counsel was not ineffective for failing to ask for a jury
instruction on voluntary renunciation. The State notes that Kansas, Montana,
Tennessee, and Wyoming have refused to permit a renunciation defense where
the defendant has injured or wounded the victim prior to his renunciation. See
5
State v. Mahoney, 870 P.2d 65, 72 (Mont. 1994); Ramirez v. State, 739 P.2d
1214, 1216-17 (Wyo. 1987); State v. Morfitt, 956 P.2d 719, 728 (Kan. Ct. App.
1998); State v. Jackson, 946 S.W.2d 329, 335 (Tenn. Crim. App. 1996) (Smith,
J., concurring).
For the purpose of this appeal, we will assume without deciding that the
affirmative defense of voluntary renunciation was available to the defendant.
Accordingly, we will focus our inquiry on whether trial counsel’s failure to ask
for a jury instruction on voluntary renunciation fell below an objective
standard of reasonableness based upon the facts of this case viewed at the
time of the conduct. See Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768. At the hearing on the
motion for new trial, trial counsel testified that he had considered a voluntary
renunciation defense but rejected it without speaking to his client. He stated
he did not pursue a voluntary renunciation defense because he believed that “it
was going to be easier” to challenge the State’s required proof of mens rea, that
the defendant had the specific intent to commit murder, than to try to win on
renunciation. Trial counsel explained:
Well, you walk a tightrope with the jury [with a voluntary
renunciation defense]. You have to say, well, here’s what he was
intending to do, but then he withdrew from it before he actually did
it. And to say that he intended to commit murder and then
changed his mind in midstream I think was a dangerous road to go
down where you’re looking at the simple attempt. It became all or
nothing.
Even assuming that trial counsel could have requested a voluntary
renunciation instruction here, his failure to do so did not fall below an objective
standard of reasonableness. See Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768. Trial counsel
made a strategic decision to challenge the attempted murder charge by arguing
that the defendant did not possess the requisite mens rea. He acknowledged
that the defendant assaulted the victim, but repeatedly argued that the State
could not prove that the defendant had the intent to murder the victim. He
fully pursued this strategy through his opening statement, cross-examination
of the victim, and closing argument. For example, in his opening statement,
trial counsel asked the jury, “[D]oes this rise to the level of someone actually
having a conscious object to commit homicide or was this just somebody who
was emotionally distraught, losing temporary control, and not causing any
medical damage?” Later, he argued,
[I]t was an assault and only an assault. He grabbed her and he
stopped because he knew that he couldn’t do it, didn’t want to do
it. [H]e was out of character for that brief period of time, . . . but it
was not his specific intent to commit murder, because if it was, he
probably would have done it and could have done it.
6
This was a tactical decision that fell within the wide range of reasonable
professional assistance.
The defendant contends that it was unreasonable for trial counsel to not
advance both a mens rea and voluntary renunciation defense. We, like other
courts, are reluctant to deem trial counsel’s performance deficient for pursuing
one viable defense over another viable defense. See, e.g., Pina v. Maloney, 565
F.3d 48, 56 (1st Cir. 2009) (“Under these circumstances, counsel’s decision to
pursue a defense of misidentification, rather than an alibi defense, can only be
viewed as a reasonable, tactical decision.”).
Accordingly, trial counsel’s representation was reasonably competent and
did not violate the defendant’s rights under the State Constitution.
II
The defendant next asserts that trial counsel was ineffective because he
did not request jury instructions on the offenses of attempted first degree
assault, second degree assault, and simple assault, and reckless conduct,
which he contends are lesser included offenses. At the hearing on the
defendant’s motion for new trial, trial counsel testified that he wanted a lesser
included instruction for attempted second degree assault or less but that the
trial court then would have also given an attempted first degree assault
instruction, which he did not want. He worried that his client was not “a
sympathetic figure” and that the jury would view the defendant’s “relationship
with [the victim] as unhealthy, disturbing, if not illegal,” and, therefore, “the
jury, if they had any doubts at all, would leap at the opportunity to convict on
attempted first degree assault or a first degree assault. And that would leave
[the defendant], basically, in the same position he’d be if he was convicted of
attempted murder.” He noted that attempted first degree assault carries a
possible sentence of seven and a half to fifteen years. See RSA 631:1 (2007);
RSA 629:1. Trial counsel testified that he discussed this strategy with the
defendant, who agreed with it. In sum, trial counsel, with the defendant’s
approval, pursued, as the State argues, “an all-or-nothing approach” that
eliminated the possibility of a compromise verdict.
Assuming without deciding that the potential alternative offenses are
lesser included offenses, we agree that trial counsel’s decision not to request
jury instructions for attempted first degree, second degree, and simple assault
as well as reckless conduct was a reasonable strategic decision. Trial counsel
consulted with his client and they chose to pursue an all-or-nothing strategy,
eliminating the possibility of a compromise verdict. See ABA Standards for
Criminal Justice: Prosecution Function and Defense Function § 4-5.2 cmt. at
202 (3d ed. 1993) (“It is also important in a jury trial for defense counsel to
consult fully with the accused about any lesser included offenses the trial court
may be willing to submit to the jury.”); see also United States v. Weaver, 882
7
F.2d 1128, 1140 (7th Cir. 1987) (no ineffective assistance of counsel where
defendant concurred in trial counsel’s tactical decision after being fully
informed of the reasonable options before him), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 968
(1989). Under this strategy, trial counsel could concede that the defendant
was guilty of a lesser-included offense, but could argue that he was not guilty
of the charged offense, attempted first degree murder. This was important in
this case, in particular, because the defendant had admitted to having choked
the victim. Trial counsel also feared that the jury would not consider his client
a “sympathetic person” or his relationship with the victim as wholesome, and,
therefore, might be inspired to convict him of attempted first degree assault if
they did not find him guilty of attempted first degree murder.
Under these circumstances, an “all-or-nothing strategy” was intentionally
chosen and not unreasonable. Indeed, courts have rejected the argument that
trial counsel’s failure to request lesser included offense instructions constituted
deficient performance when it was a strategically made decision. See, e.g.,
Tinsley v. Million, 399 F.3d 796, 808 (6th Cir.) (holding counsel’s failure to
request jury instruction on lesser included offense of manslaughter was
permissible exercise of trial strategy during murder trial, where defendant's
primary line of defense was that he did not shoot victim), cert. denied, 546 U.S.
1044 (2005); Bashor v. Risley, 730 F.2d 1228, 1240-41 (9th Cir.), cert. denied,
469 U.S. 838 (1984); Autrey v. State, 700 N.E.2d 1140, 1142 (Ind. 1998)
(concluding counsel not ineffective for pursuing an “all or nothing” trial
strategy); Simeon v. State, 90 P.3d 181, 184-85 (Alaska Ct. App. 2004).
Therefore, we hold that trial counsel’s performance did not fall below an
objective standard of reasonableness.
III
Third, the defendant contends that trial counsel was ineffective because
he did not ask for the redaction of two portions of the defendant’s recorded
statement. During these segments, the jury heard the defendant discuss a
prior arrest and prosecution for forcible rape, a charge of which he was
acquitted. During this conversation, the interviewing officer also commented
that “[r]ape seems to encircle you.” According to the defendant, these
discussions constituted impermissible character or propensity evidence that
resulted in prejudice and undermined his defense strategy that the victim was
lying about important facts, such as whether he ever threatened to kill her.
The State counters that trial counsel’s failure to object to the admission
of this evidence reflected trial strategy. Trial counsel wanted to show that the
police “browbeat” the defendant causing him to become “emotionally
distraught” – a strategic choice counsel regretted in hindsight. The State also
argues that even if trial counsel’s performance was constitutionally deficient,
“[h]e cannot show that counsel’s deficient performance caused prejudice.”
8
We address first whether counsel’s alleged error prejudiced the
defendant’s case. “In determining whether the defendant has established
actual prejudice, we examine the totality of the evidence before the jury.” State
v. Paulsen, 143 N.H. 447, 456 (1999). If the defendant is unable to
demonstrate such prejudice, we need not decide whether counsel’s
performance fell below the standard of reasonable competence. State v. Breed,
159 N.H. 61, 71 (2009); see Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697 (“If it is easier to
dispose of an ineffectiveness claim on the ground of lack of sufficient prejudice,
which we expect will often be so, that course should be followed.”).
A review of the record reveals that trial counsel’s failure to ask for a
redaction of the defendant’s statement could not have caused actual prejudice.
See Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768; see also Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693 (noting
that “[i]t is not enough for the defendant to show that the errors had some
conceivable effect on the outcome of the proceeding”; there is a “general
requirement that the defendant affirmatively prove prejudice”). At trial, the
jury heard the victim testify that the defendant choked her twice and that he
threatened to kill her. The jury also listened to the defendant’s confession, the
testimony of investigating officers, and the testimony of the victim’s mother’s
boyfriend, who called the victim’s cell phone and heard a woman pleading for
her life while a male voice threatened, “I’m going to kill you.” Physical
evidence, such as the broken cell phone, damage to the side of the truck, the
victim’s broken necklace, vomit in the back of the truck, and marks on the
victim’s neck, further corroborated her story. Therefore, even if trial counsel
had successfully redacted the disputed portions of the defendant’s videotaped
interview, the defendant has not demonstrated that “the result of the
proceeding would have been different.” See id. at 694.
Because the standard for determining whether a defendant has received
ineffective assistance of counsel is the same under both the State and Federal
Constitutions, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we
do under the State Constitution. Whittaker, 158 N.H. at 768.
Affirmed.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, DUGGAN and CONBOY, JJ.,
concurred.
9