THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Henniker Family Division
No. 2010-169
IN RE JACK L.
Argued: January 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Laura E. B. Lombardi, assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the petitioner,
New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families.
Courteous Law, PLLC, of Henniker (Deb Bess Urbaitis on the brief and
orally), for respondent father.
Prevett & Prevett, LLP, of Amherst (Todd H. Prevett on the brief and
orally), for respondent mother.
LYNN, J. The respondents, mother and father, appeal an order of the
Henniker Family Division (Scheffy, J.) terminating their parental rights over
their son, Jack L., on the grounds of abandonment. See RSA 170-C:5, I (2002);
RSA 170-C:15 (2002). We affirm.
I
The record supports the following. Jack L. was born in February 1999 to
the respondents. In January 2004, based on certain aspects of the mother’s
treatment of the child, the Coos County Probate Court granted, with the
consent of the parents, a guardianship over the child to his paternal
grandmother.
Three years later, the division for children, youth and families (DCYF)
filed a petition against the grandmother in the Hillsborough District Court,
pursuant to RSA chapter 169-C (2002 & Supp. 2010), alleging that she had
neglected Jack L., based on an inability to provide proper supervision for, or
maintain the safety of, Jack L. and his sister in the home. In connection with
this proceeding, the court appointed a guardian ad litem (GAL) for Jack L. At a
preliminary hearing in July 2007, both parents were present. Stating that “the
children’s natural parents . . . are at risk of losing their parental rights as a
result of this petition,” the District Court (Barry, J.) also appointed counsel to
represent them individually. In August, psychological evaluations of both
parents were conducted. In September, both parents left New Hampshire and
moved to the State of Washington.
Following an adjudicatory hearing scheduled for August 8, see RSA 169-
C:18 (2002), a dispositional hearing was held on November 14, 2007. By that
time, the case had been transferred to the Henniker Family Division. The
Henniker Family Division found that the grandmother had neglected Jack L.
and awarded legal custody of the child to DCYF. Although the parents had
been sent notice of the dispositional hearing, they remained out of state and
did not attend.
In March 2008, a three-month review hearing was held. Again, the
parents were sent notice of the review hearing, but did not attend. By that
time, the parents had moved from Washington, but had not provided DCYF
with a new address. In April, the father contacted DCYF, as he “was in the
area” and wanted to see his daughter and Jack L. DCYF informed the father
that he would need to see the children’s therapist before any such visit could
occur. The father met with his daughter’s therapist once, and had one
unauthorized contact with Jack L.
In June 2008, a six-month review hearing was held; DCYF still had no
address or telephone number for either of the parents. In August, a DCYF
child protection service worker (CPSW) learned from the grandmother that the
parents were living in Arkansas. Subsequent to the nine-month review
hearing, from which the parents were again absent, the family division ordered
the parents to appear for the next review hearing. In October, the grandmother
gave the CPSW a specific address for the father in Searcy, Arkansas. Finally,
2
in December, an investigator at the attorney general’s office called the CPSW
and told her that the father and grandmother had met with him, and that the
father was living in the area. There was not, however, a specific address or
telephone number provided for locating the father.
On December 18, 2008, DCYF filed termination of parental rights (TPR)
petitions against both parents on the grounds that they had abandoned Jack
L. The parents unsuccessfully moved to dismiss the petitions, arguing, among
other things, that their rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (ADA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. (2006), were violated because
guardians were not provided for them in the underlying neglect proceedings.
Subsequent to a hearing, at which both parents appeared with counsel, their
parental rights were terminated on February 10, 2010. This appeal followed.
II
Parental rights are “natural, essential, and inherent” within the meaning
of Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution. In re Adam R., 159 N.H.
788, 792 (2010) (quotation omitted). Nevertheless, the fundamental rights of
parents are not unassailable, and terminations of parental rights will be upheld
if applicable due process requirements have been met. Id. The dominant
consideration in termination proceedings under RSA chapter 170-C (2002 &
Supp. 2010) is the welfare of the child, which prevails over the interests of the
parents. Adam R., 159 N.H. at 792. Before a court may order the termination
of parental rights, the petitioning party must prove a statutory ground for
termination beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.; see In re Zachary G., 159 N.H.
146, 153 (2009) (family division); RSA 170-C:5; see also RSA 490-D:14 (2010)
(statutory references to probate courts include the judicial branch family
division). If a statutory ground is established, the court must then consider
whether termination is in the child’s best interest. Adam R., 159 N.H. at 792.
The assessment of a child’s best interest is not an evidentiary fact, however,
and need not be established “beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
The trial court, as the trier of fact, is in the best position to assess and
weigh the evidence before it. Id. It has the benefit of observing the parties and
their witnesses. Id. We will not disturb the family division’s finding unless it is
unsupported by the evidence or plainly erroneous as a matter of law. Zachary
G., 159 N.H. at 153; see Adam R., 159 N.H. at 792.
Although the parents have filed co-appeals and individual briefs, their
allegations of family division error are virtually identical. Specifically, they
argue that the family division erred “as a matter of law” in: (1) “den[ying] [their]
Motion to Dismiss based on the failure of [DCYF] to appoint a Guardian for
[them] under the [ADA] in the underlying Abuse/Neglect matter”; and (2)
3
“reject[ing their] argument that [their] relationship with [the grandmother]
constituted an agency and that said agency precluded a finding of
abandonment under [RSA 170-C:5, I], where [the grandmother] inquired about
[Jack L.’s] welfare on [their] behalf . . . .” We address each of the parents’
arguments in turn below.
III
The parents first contend that the family division should have dismissed
the TPR petition based on the fact that they were not provided with GALs or
guardians in the original neglect proceedings against the grandmother. We
note that at various points in their filings and arguments before this court, the
parents appear to have used the terms “guardian” and “guardian ad litem”
interchangeably. In the absence of any suggestion to the contrary by either
parent, we assume that, however characterized, what the parents claim was
required was the appointment for each of them of a suitable person (besides
appointed counsel) to represent his or her interests in the neglect proceedings.
Neither parent suggests that he or she required the appointment of a guardian
of the person for all purposes.
DCYF argues that the parents failed to preserve this issue, as they
neither raised it during the neglect proceedings, nor appealed the family
division’s finding of neglect. We agree that, insofar as the parents seek to
attack the neglect proceedings directly, by predicating error on a failure to
provide GALs or guardians for them in that case, the issue is not preserved for
our appellate review. The record does not reflect that either the parents or
their attorneys ever requested the appointment of GALs or guardians to
represent them in the neglect case, or objected — on ADA grounds or otherwise
— to a failure to provide GALs or guardians. Nor did the parents appeal the
neglect case to the superior court pursuant to RSA 169-C:28, a prerequisite to
bringing the case before this court. As such, the issue is not preserved.
In contrast, insofar as the parents argue that the family division erred by
not allowing them, in effect, to collaterally attack a failure to provide GALs or
guardians for them in the neglect proceedings as a basis to dismiss the TPR
petitions, we find that this issue was preserved for appellate review. This
allegation of error arises from the family division’s June 10, 2009 denial of the
parents’ motions to dismiss the TPR petitions, not the November 2007 finding
of neglect against the grandmother. The record indicates that the parents’
arguments concerning a failure to provide GALs or guardians under the ADA in
the neglect case were raised by the mother in her March 4, 2009 motion to
dismiss the TPR petition and her supporting memorandum of law, and by the
father on the same date in his addendum to his motion to dismiss the TPR
petition. The record is also clear that the family division was aware of, and
considered, the parents’ ADA arguments when denying their motions to
4
dismiss. The parents’ appeal of the family division’s February 10, 2010 order
terminating their parental rights was timely filed on March 17, 2010. Thus,
this issue is properly before us.
Although the argument that the TPR proceeding should have been
dismissed because the parents were not provided with GALs or guardians in
the neglect proceeding is properly preserved, we find the argument lacking in
merit. The finding of neglect was made against the grandmother, not against
the parents, and, as already noted, the parents did not appeal the dispositional
order in the neglect case to superior court, as was their right. See RSA 169-
C:28, I (appeal may be taken to superior court by child, child’s authorized
representative, “or any party having an interest”). The parents do not argue
that had they been provided with GALs or guardians in the neglect proceeding,
the court would not have found neglect on the part of the grandmother. Nor do
they argue that had they been provided with GALs or guardians in the neglect
proceeding, the court would not have terminated their parental rights. Even if
we were to assume that DCYF or the court had a duty under the ADA to
provide for GALs or guardians for the parents in the underlying neglect case,
we fail to see a nexus between any such failure to do so and the termination of
their parental rights. Here, the parents contend that GALs or guardians
should have been appointed to assist them in complying with the court order in
the underlying neglect proceedings. However, with regard to the parents, that
order was limited to requiring them to comply with the recommendations set
forth in their individual psychological evaluations in the event they returned to
New Hampshire and desired to become involved in their son’s life. As the court
stated in denying the parents’ motions to dismiss: “Had [the parents] had
contact with the court or their attorneys, there might have been provisions
made for re-entry into their children’s lives.” But because neither parent ever
manifested in any meaningful way a desire to resume parental responsibilities
for Jack L., the condition precedent for compliance with this aspect of the
dispositional order in the neglect case was never satisfied, and thus in neither
parent’s case did a failure to follow the recommendations set forth in the
individual psychological evaluations form the basis for the TPR proceeding.
Rather, the TPR petitions alleged that both parents had abandoned Jack L.
In short, whether GALs or guardians should have been provided to the
parents in the neglect case is irrelevant to the TPR action. Therefore, we find
no error in the family division’s denial of the parents’ motions to dismiss the
TPR case on these grounds.
IV
The parents next contend that the family division erred in rejecting their
argument that their relationship with the grandmother constituted an “agency
relationship” that precluded a finding of abandonment under RSA 170-C:5, I,
5
because the grandmother inquired about Jack L.’s welfare on their behalf. The
parents acknowledge that they know of no authority that directly applies the
principles of agency law to TPR proceedings. The family division rejected the
argument, stating: “It is a novel theory but I cannot accept it as a reasonable
substitute for actual parenting or as a defense to the petitions.”
We need not decide whether an agency theory can ever be successfully
asserted as a defense to a TPR proceeding alleging abandonment. What is
clear, however, is that no such defense is available to the parents in this case
given the factual circumstances presented here.
The December 2008 TPR petitions alleged that both the father and the
mother had abandoned Jack L., in that neither parent had contact with the
child since August 25, 2007, a period well in excess of six months. See RSA
170-C:5, I (presumption of abandonment arises where parent has left child in
care and custody of another without communication from parent for a period of
six months). By November 2007, the family division had already made a
finding of neglect against the grandmother. The grandmother no longer had
legal custody of Jack L. and was not responsible for his care, as legal custody
had been awarded to DCYF. Instead of attempting to become responsible for
their child to whatever extent possible, the parents left the child, and the
grandmother, by moving out of state.
Moreover, the record contains ample evidence that, subsequent to their
relocation from New Hampshire, the mother made virtually no efforts, and the
father made no more than minimal efforts, to communicate or have contact
with Jack L. See id. (“If in the opinion of the court the evidence indicates that
such parent has made only minimal efforts to support or communicate with
the child, the court may declare the child to be abandoned.”). As the trial court
observed:
I am left to guess what the [parents’] intentions were but their
actions made it clear that [Jack L.] was not sufficiently a priority in
their lives that they did anything to provide for his emotional or
financial welfare. The fact that this went on for a period in excess
of six months satisfies the statutory requirements to form a
rebuttable presumption [of abandonment]; the fact that it went on
for the vast majority of [Jack L.’s] life sustains the presumption.
The [parents] chose not to take “the opportunity to rebut the
intention to abandon.”
We agree with the above assessment and reiterate what we stated in In re
Thomas M., 141 N.H. 55 (1996):
6
Parental responsibilities come in many forms, and some, we
presume, may be discharged by delegation. Others require the
active involvement of the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
Caring for a child’s emotional well-being falls under the latter
category. No doubt fulfillment of this obligation co-exists with
periodic substitute care while the adult is temporarily separated
from the child. But a parent, guardian, or custodian cannot
pretend to discharge this responsibility during an extended
absence without some contact with the children in his or her care.
Thomas M., 141 N.H. at 58-59 (citation, quotation, and brackets omitted); see
also In re Jessie E., 137 N.H. 336, 342-43 (1993) (a mere flicker of interest is
not sufficient to rebut the presumption of abandonment).
The parents have appealed only the family division’s finding of
abandonment under RSA 170-C:5, I. They have not appealed the family
division’s finding that termination of their parental rights was in the best
interest of Jack L. Therefore, we need not address the latter finding.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7