THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-152
NORTHERN SECURITY INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
MICHAEL CONNORS & a.
Argued: January 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 31, 2011
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Doreen F. Connor and Gary M.
Burt on the brief, and Mr. Burt orally), for the petitioner.
Kenna & Sharkey, P.A., of Manchester (Kevin E. Sharkey on the brief and
orally), for respondent Michael Connors.
Brennan, Caron, Lenehan & Iacopino, of Manchester (Gary S. Lenehan
and Jaye L. Rancourt on the brief, and Ms. Rancourt orally), for respondents
Estate of Jack F. Reid, Sr., Jay Klos, James Reid, Laurie Zic, and Catherine
Reid.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Northern Security Insurance Company
(Northern Security), appeals an order of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.),
denying its motion for summary judgment and granting the cross-motion for
summary judgment of respondent Michael Connors. The trial court ruled that
Northern Security has a duty to defend respondent Connors in a civil lawsuit
pending in Rockingham County Superior Court, Reid v. Brooks, No. 08-C-543.
We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. The civil suit that underlies this
case involves the 2005 murder of Jack F. Reid. The plaintiffs in that case, who
are also respondents in the instant action, are Reid’s estate and several
individual family members; the defendants are John Brooks (Brooks), Robin
Knight, Michael Benton, Joseph Vrooman, Jesse Brooks, and Michael Connors.
The writ alleges that over a two-year period, Brooks, Knight, Benton, Vrooman,
and Jesse Brooks conspired to trap, torture, and kill Reid, reportedly because
Brooks believed Reid, a handy man for hire, stole personal property from him.
On June 27, 2005, Reid was lured to Michael Connors’ residence in Deerfield
for a non-existent job. Once Reid arrived, Brooks, Knight, Vrooman, and
Benton killed him by striking him in the head and chest with a blunt object.
The writ identifies four causes of action against Connors: civil
conspiracy, wrongful death, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and
negligent infliction of emotional distress. The writ alleges the following facts
regarding Connors: (1) “Defendant Brooks spoke with Defendant Michael
Connors and informed him that he would be sending him a package and that if
anyone asked, Defendant Connors was instructed by Defendant Brooks to tell
them [sic] that the package contained steak knives”; (2) “In furtherance of the
conspiracy, Defendant Brooks forwarded a package containing a stun gun,
hand cuffs, and/or pepper spray via [F]ederal [E]xpress to 145 North Road,
Deerfield, New Hampshire, Defendant Connors’s residence at that time”; (3)
“Defendant Brooks requested from Defendant Connors that he, and other
herein named defendants, be allowed to use Defendant Connors’
property . . . .”
The trial court found that as to Connors the writ does not contain
“evidence of either subjective or objective intent to do harm to Reid.” It noted
that the plaintiffs agree that Connors was not on the property the day of the
murder. The trial court also noted that the plaintiffs do not allege that
Connors knew the contents of the package he received from Brooks, that he
agreed to let Brooks use his property, or that Connors was aware of the plot to
harm Reid. Connors argued to the trial court that he was never indicted by the
State for conspiracy to commit murder, that in three criminal trials he testified
that he had no knowledge of the murder plan, and that he denied Brooks’s
request to use his property.
At all relevant times, Connors was covered by a homeowner’s insurance
policy issued by Northern Security. Section II of the policy provides defense
2
and indemnity to an insured “[i]f a claim is made or a suit is brought against
an ‘insured’ for damages because of ‘bodily injury’ or ‘property damage’ caused
by an ‘occurrence’ to which this coverage applies.” An “occurrence” is defined
elsewhere in the policy as: “[a]n accident . . . which results, during the policy
period in: a) ‘bodily injury’; or b) ‘property damage.’”
A provision entitled “Section II-Exclusion” provides that the policy does
not cover bodily injury or property damage that is expected or intended by the
insured (intentional acts exclusion), or that arises out of sexual molestation,
corporal punishment, or physical or mental abuse (physical abuse exclusion).
Connors’s policy also includes a “Homeowners Coverage Enhancement
Amendment” (enhancement amendment), which expands the definition of
“bodily injury” to include “personal injury.” “Personal injury” is defined as:
injury arising out of one or more of the following offenses:
1. False arrest, detention or imprisonment, or malicious
prosecution;
2. Libel, slander or defamation of character, or
3. Invasion of privacy, wrongful eviction or wrongful entry.
The enhancement amendment also contains the following sentence: “Section II
Exclusions do not apply to personal injury.” As stated in Northern Security’s
brief, “Northern denied coverage because the conduct attributed to Connors
does not constitute an ‘occurrence,’ and the acts are excluded by the policy’s
physical abuse exclusion.”
Following the filing of cross-motions for summary judgment, the trial
court ruled in favor of Connors, concluding that Northern Security has an
obligation to defend Connors on two claims. While the trial court recognized
that “[t]he parties generally agree that intentional acts are not covered by the
policy,” it found that (1) negligent infliction of emotional distress and
conspiracy to commit false imprisonment were acts covered by Connors’s
policy, and (2) the covered alleged acts were not inextricably intertwined with
any non-covered alleged acts.
On appeal, Northern Security argues that: (1) the personal injury
endorsement for false imprisonment claims is not triggered by a claim for civil
conspiracy to commit false imprisonment; (2) the alleged conduct does not
meet the policy’s definition of an “accident” or “occurrence,” as the elements of
civil conspiracy require non-covered intentional conduct; (3) any claim of false
imprisonment is inextricably intertwined with an overall intentional plan to
murder Reid, thus precluding coverage; and (4) the damages sought by the
estate and family members constitute damages for Reid’s wrongful death.
3
Connors and the other respondents disagree and argue that the
enhancement amendment creates an ambiguity because it purports to cover
claims of false imprisonment, an intentional tort, while the underlying policy
precludes coverage for intentional acts. They argue that because ambiguities
must be construed in favor of coverage, we should uphold the trial court’s
finding of coverage.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Big League Entm’t v. Brox
Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). If our review of that evidence discloses no
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
Resolution of this dispute requires us to interpret the insurance policy.
Interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of law. Philbrick v. Liberty
Mut. Fire Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 389, 390 (2007). We construe the language of an
insurance policy as would a reasonable person in the position of the insured
based upon a more than casual reading of the policy as a whole. Id. Where
the terms of the policy are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its
natural and ordinary meaning. Id. at 391. However, if the policy is reasonably
susceptible to more than one interpretation and one interpretation favors
coverage, the policy will be construed in favor of the insured and against the
insurer. Id. Absent a statutory provision or public policy to the contrary, an
insurance company is free to limit its liability through an exclusion written in
clear and unambiguous policy language. Id. For exclusionary language to be
considered clear and unambiguous, two parties cannot reasonably disagree
about its meaning. Id. Pursuant to RSA 491:22-a (2010), the burden of
proving lack of insurance coverage is on the insurer.
An insurer’s obligation to defend its insured is determined by whether
“the cause of action against the insured alleges sufficient facts in the pleadings
to bring it within the express terms of the policy.” State Farm Ins. Co. v.
Bruns, 156 N.H. 708, 710 (2008). In considering whether a duty to defend
exists based on the sufficiency of the pleadings, we consider the reasonable
expectations of the insured as to its rights under the policy. Id. An insurer’s
obligation is not merely to defend in cases of perfect declarations, but also in
cases where, by any reasonable intendment of the pleadings, liability of the
insured can be inferred, and neither ambiguity nor inconsistency in the
underlying writ can justify escape of the insurer from its obligation to defend.
Id. In cases of doubt as to whether the writ against the insured alleges a
liability of the insurer under the policy, the doubt must be resolved in the
insured’s favor. Id.
4
Northern Security concedes that the policy with the enhancement
amendment covers false imprisonment claims. Its counsel agreed at oral
argument that coverage is provided for the offenses enumerated in the
amendment, regardless of whether the injuries arising out of those offenses
were expected or intended; the amendment specifically states that “Section II
Exclusions do not apply to personal injury.” Therefore, the provision that
excludes expected or intended bodily injury from coverage does not apply to
false imprisonment claims.
Northern Security argues, however, that “the personal injury
endorsement for false imprisonment claims was not properly triggered” because
no cause of action for false imprisonment is alleged as to Connors. Northern
Security argues that because Connors did not personally commit false
imprisonment, there is no coverage for his alleged role in a civil conspiracy to
commit false imprisonment. We disagree. We consider the reasonable
expectations of the insured in determining whether a duty to defend exists.
Bruns, 156 N.H. at 710. We conclude that an insured would reasonably expect
that if there is coverage for false imprisonment, there is also coverage for
conspiracy to commit false imprisonment. See Capano Management Co. v.
Transcontinental Ins. Co., 78 F. Supp. 2d 320, 331-32 (D. Del. 1999) (“Because
there is a duty to defend the underlying wrong . . . there is a corresponding
duty to defend the civil conspiracy claim.”).
Northern Security also argues that “[t]he intentional nature of the
conspiracy tort means that it cannot, because of its very essence, be an
accident.” This argument is unavailing because, as discussed above, the policy
does not apply the intentional acts exclusion to the personal injury offenses
listed in the enhancement amendment. Moreover, the cases cited by the
petitioner for the proposition that a conspiracy does not constitute an
occurrence are all distinguishable. See State Farm Fire and Cas. Co. v.
Weaver, 585 F. Supp. 2d 722, 729 (D. S.C. 2008); Fibreboard v. Hartford Acc.
and Indem., 20 Cal. Rptr. 2d 376, 387 (Ct. App. 1993); Fire Ins. Exchange v.
Bentley, 953 P.2d 1297, 1301 (Colo. Ct. App. 1998); West Virginia Fire & Cas.
Co. v. Stanley, 602 S.E.2d 483, 495 (W.Va. 2004). In these cases, either the
claims were governed by an intentional acts exclusion provision, see State
Farm Fire and Cas. Co., 585 F. Supp. 2d at 729; Fire Ins. Exchange, 953 P.2d
at 1301; West Virginia Fire & Cas. Co., 602 S.E.2d at 495, or the court
specifically ruled that the underlying offense was not covered by the policy, see
Fibreboard, 20 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 387. None involved a personal injury
endorsement that covered the underlying offense and limited the intentional
acts exclusion, as is the case here. Further, to the extent that in this case, the
policy’s definition of an occurrence as an “accident,” a term itself undefined,
creates an ambiguity when applied to claims arising out of the enumerated
personal injury offenses, we must construe that ambiguity in favor of coverage.
Philbrick, 156 N.H. at 391.
5
Northern Security further argues that coverage is excluded because the
alleged conspiracy to falsely imprison Reid and the claim for negligent infliction
of emotional distress are inextricably linked to Reid’s murder, for which there is
no coverage. In Bruns, we stated the rule that:
[w]here the facts reveal that potentially covered acts are
inextricably intertwined with and dependent upon the commission
of uncovered acts, an insurer will not be required to defend. If,
however, there is a genuine dispute as to the interconnectedness of
the claims, or where it is clear that the covered and uncovered
claims may be separated, a duty to defend may exist and summary
judgment must be denied.
Bruns, 156 N.H. at 716. Here, the trial court concluded that there was at least
a dispute as to whether the covered claims and the uncovered claims were
inextricably intertwined. We note that the parties do not argue that the
interconnectedness of the claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress
should be analyzed separately from the civil conspiracy count.
In Bruns, the writ against the insured alleged counts for, among other
things, sexual assault, false imprisonment and invasion of privacy. Id. at 709.
We held that the false imprisonment and invasion of privacy counts were
inextricably linked to the sexual assaults. Id. at 718. The plaintiff in that case
alleged that the false imprisonment was the result of the insured’s “grooming”
of the victim and “prior conduct,” but we noted that the only prior conduct
alleged was sexual abuse. Id. at 717-18. The invasion of privacy count
allegedly included “psychological and emotional imprisonment and
brainwashing” of the minor plaintiff, which we interpreted as a reference to the
alleged sexual assaults and grooming. Id. at 717. Under these circumstances,
we held that “any false imprisonment . . . is the result of the sexual abuse,”
and the claims as alleged were “inextricably intertwined with and dependent
upon the uncovered sexual assault claims.” Id. at 717-18.
Citing Auto-Owners Insurance Co. v. Todd, 547 N.W.2d 696 (Minn.
1996), we established in Bruns that a court must look to the overall intentional
plan of the insured to determine coverage. Bruns, 156 N.H. at 715. In Todd,
the insured had sexually assaulted the victim three times over the course of
several hours and had kept the victim in bed with him between the assaults
and after the final assault. Todd, 547 N.W.2d at 697. The Minnesota Supreme
Court rejected the suggestion that the false imprisonment claim was based on
acts of the insured which could be isolated from the assaults. Id. at 699.
Instead, it held that the analysis should turn on the overall intentional plan of
the insured, which the parties agreed was to perpetrate a sexual assault. Id.
6
The Eleventh Circuit, in contrast, determined that the facts of a false
imprisonment claim were separable from a sexual assault in First Specialty
Insurance v. 633 Partners, Ltd., 300 Fed. Appx. 777 (11th Cir. 2008). In that
case, the victim was approached by a security guard employed by the insured
in a building owned by the insured. The security guard “detained [the victim]
in a building hallway, forced her to enter an empty, locked stairwell, dragged
her down a flight of stairs, and then tried to rape and sexually assault her
three separate times.” First Specialty Ins., 300 Fed. Appx. at 784. “These
events took place over a thirty-five to forty-minute time span.” Id. at 780. The
district court found that the covered count of false imprisonment was
inherently intertwined with an uncovered assault and battery count. Id. at
784. The court of appeals reversed, noting in particular that “the complaint
repeatedly discussed the assault as a separate event later in time than the
original false imprisonment,” and characterized the false imprisonment as “a
distinct, preceding incident that did not necessarily have to result in [the]
assault and battery.” Id. The court concluded, “Though temporal
displacement does not automatically imply narrative disjunction, it provides a
basis for differentiating between the two events, especially since the complaint
lacks any clear evidence of connectedness.” Id.
We believe this case requires a similar result. “[A] court must compare
the policy language with the facts pled in the underlying suit to see if the claim
falls within the express terms of the policy; the legal nomenclature the plaintiff
uses to frame the suit is relatively unimportant.” Bruns, 156 N.H. at 713.
Accordingly, we consider the facts as pled, and not the writ’s conclusory
allegation that Connors’s conduct was in furtherance of a conspiracy to falsely
imprison, terrorize, assault, batter, and cause the death of Reid. As stated
above, the facts pled in the writ concerning Connors are few: (1) that Brooks
told Connors he was sending him a package and instructed him, if anyone
asked, to say that it contained steak knives; (2) that Brooks sent Connors a
package, which contained a stun gun, handcuffs, and/or pepper spray; and (3)
that Brooks asked Connors if Brooks and the other defendants could use
Connors’s property.
These facts do not support a conclusion, as a matter of law, that
Connors’s actions were inextricably intertwined with the alleged murder
conspiracy. Connors’s overall intentional plan is unclear, and the writ lacks
any factual assertions connecting Connors’s conduct and the uncovered
wrongful death allegations.
“In cases of doubt as to whether the complaint against the insured
alleges a liability of the insurer under the policy, the doubt must be resolved in
the insured’s favor.” Id. at 710. As the Supreme Court of California explained,
if the interconnectedness of the insured’s conduct is disputed and if the
evidence does not permit the court to determine whether a claim is part of or
7
independent of uncovered acts, then factual issues exist precluding summary
judgment in the insurer’s favor. Horace Mann Ins. Co. v. Barbara B., 846 P.2d
792, 798 (Cal. 1993). “Indeed, the duty to defend is then established, absent
additional evidence bearing on this issue.” Id. In this case, we agree with the
trial court that there is a genuine dispute as to the interconnectedness of the
claims, and, therefore, Northern Security has the duty to defend the civil
conspiracy and negligent infliction of emotional distress counts.
In challenging the trial court’s order, Northern Security also argues that
the damages sought by the writ all arise out of Reid’s uncovered murder, citing
our decisions in Preferred National Insurance Co. v. Docusearch, 149 N.H. 759,
763 (2003), and Philbrick, 156 N.H. at 392, for the proposition that where the
alleged damages resulting from a claim arise entirely out of an act that would
not be covered, the claim is likewise excluded. They also assert that coverage
for the negligent infliction of emotional distress claim is barred by the physical
abuse exclusion. These arguments are apparently made for the first time on
appeal. Nothing in the record before us demonstrates that either argument
was made below. They are not mentioned in the trial court’s order. Northern
Security has neither cited the portion of the record in which these arguments
were raised nor provided us with a copy of its petition for summary judgment.
See Sup. Ct. R. 13, 16(b)(3); see also Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H.
248, 250 (2004) (holding that the failure of the moving party to demonstrate
where each question presented on appeal was raised below may be considered
by the court regardless of whether the opposing party objects on those
grounds). Therefore, we do not address either argument.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, J., concurred.
8