THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2010-439
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
COREY FURGAL
Argued: September 15, 2010
Opinion Issued: November 24, 2010
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Michael S. Lewis, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Corey Furgal, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Groff, J.) finding RSA 597:1-c (Supp. 2009) constitutional on
its face and denying the defendant’s request for bail. We affirm.
The following facts are relevant to the disposition of this case. In the
early morning hours of November 1, 2009, Christopher Vydfol was stabbed to
death in Merrimack. Several witnesses identified the defendant as the
assailant, and the grand jury subsequently indicted him on alternative counts
of second degree murder. The State requested that he be held without bail
while awaiting trial in accordance with RSA 597:1-c.
The defendant argued that the statute denied him due process because it
bars the court from considering any facts other than those related to the
strength of the State’s evidence of guilt and that, alternatively, if the statute is
constitutional, the State must demonstrate his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt
to deny bail pending trial. The trial court disagreed, ruling that the statute
“narrowly focuses on a particularly acute problem in which the Government
interests are overwhelming,” and that flight risk and dangerousness are
inherently considered in the “proof is evident” analysis. The trial court also
ruled that once the State sustained its burden under the statute, the burden
would shift to the defendant to rebut the State’s case, and that the court could
then consider the defendant’s risk of flight or dangerousness before holding
him without bail. Finally, the trial court ruled that the State must prove by
clear and convincing evidence that the defendant will be convicted of an offense
that carries a potential life sentence in order to deny bail under the statute and
found that the State had sustained its burden in this case. This appeal
followed.
In New Hampshire, the general rule regarding pretrial release is that “all
persons arrested for an offense shall be eligible to be released pending judicial
proceedings.” RSA 597:1 (2001). Except for certain categories of arrestees, the
release of a defendant pending trial is governed by RSA 597:2, I(a) and (b)
(Supp. 2009).
Under RSA 597:2, I(a) the court must release the defendant on personal
recognizance or upon execution of an unsecured appearance bond with
additional non-monetary conditions including that the defendant not commit a
crime during the period of his release and “such further condition or
combination of conditions that the court may require.” RSA 597:2, II (Supp.
2009) (provisions governing release under RSA 597:2, I(a)). To deny release
under RSA 597:2, I(a), the court must determine that “such release will not
reasonably assure the appearance of the person as required or will endanger
the safety of the person or of any other person or the community.” RSA 597:2,
II.
Only if the court makes that determination can it consider the
conditions, including monetary conditions, authorized by RSA 597:2, I(b) and
the provisions governing such release in RSA 597:2, III (Supp. 2009). The
latter section authorizes the court to consider monetary conditions including
“bail . . . with sufficient sureties or by deposit of moneys equal to the amount of
bail.” RSA 597:2, III(b)(2).
2
RSA 597:1-c, which is the subject of this appeal, is an exception to the
general rule that all persons are eligible to be released pending trial. It
provides that if a person has been charged with a crime punishable by life in
prison and the State can show that “the proof is evident or the presumption
great” that the defendant will be convicted, the defendant must be held without
bail pending trial. RSA 597:1-c. Unlike bail provisions in some states that give
the court discretion in denying bail, see, e.g., MICH. CONST. art. I, § 15 (“bail
may be denied . . . when the proof is evident or the presumption great”), RSA
597:1-c leaves the court with no discretion where the proof is evident or the
presumption great. In such cases, a person “shall not be allowed bail.”
(Emphasis added.)
On appeal, the defendant argues that RSA 597:1-c violates his due
process rights because it limits the court’s consideration of individual factors
such as flight risk or dangerousness. He further contends that the trial court
erred in finding that the statute shifts the burden to the defendant after the
State meets its initial burden. Finally, he argues that the State must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant will be convicted of an offense
that carries a potential life sentence, rather than by clear and convincing
evidence.
The defendant has mounted a facial challenge to RSA 597:1-c. “A facial
challenge to a legislative Act is, of course, the most difficult challenge to mount
successfully, since the challenger must establish that no set of circumstances
exists under which the Act would be valid.” United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S.
739, 745 (1987). To analyze his facial challenge, we first must determine how
the statute is to be construed and then whether that construction can
withstand a facial challenge.
“We review a trial court’s interpretation of a statute de novo.” State v.
Lamy, 158 N.H. 511, 515 (2009). “We are the final arbiters of the legislative
intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. “We
begin by examining the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used.” Id. (citations omitted). “We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include.” Id. “We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation. Our goal is to apply statutes in light of
the legislature’s intent in enacting them, and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” State v. Jennings, 159 N.H. 1, 3
(2009) (quotation and ellipses omitted). “[I]n reviewing a legislative act, we
presume it to be constitutional and will not declare it invalid except upon
inescapable grounds.” State v. Gubitosi, 157 N.H. 720, 727 (2008).
3
RSA 597:1-c provides that “[a]ny person arrested for an offense
punishable by up to life in prison, where the proof is evident or the
presumption great, shall not be allowed bail.” Since in this state defendants
are ordinarily entitled to bail prior to trial, it is the State that must bear the
burden under the statute. See Martinez v. Superior Court, In & For County of
Pima, 548 P.2d 1198, 1199 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1976). Furthermore, “the State is in
a position superior to that of the accused to produce evidence during a hearing
because it already will have presented evidence in the process of charging the
person. Otherwise, placing the burden on the accused is, in effect, forcing him
to prove a negative.” Simpson v. Owens, 85 P.3d 478, 487 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2004)
(quotations and brackets omitted).
The plain language of the statute thus requires the State to show first
that the person is charged with an offense punishable by up to life in prison
and then show that the proof is evident or the presumption great. Nothing in
the language of the statute permits the court to consider factors such as flight
risk or dangerousness, and we will not “add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include.” Lamy, 158 N.H. at 515. The “proof is evident” analysis
focuses solely upon the strength of the evidence against a defendant charged
with a crime punishable by life in prison. See Simpson, 85 P.3d at 494 (plain
language of bail statute using identical “proof is evident” phrase does not
require that a risk of flight or recidivism be considered before bail is denied and
the court will not rewrite the language of the provisions).
Additionally, contrary to the trial court’s order, the plain language of the
statute does not shift the burden of proof to the defendant once the State
establishes that the proof is evident or the presumption great. The plain
language of the statute provides that once the State meets its burden, the
defendant “shall not be allowed bail.” RSA 597:1-c.
We thus conclude that the plain language of RSA 597:1-c does not
permit the trial court to consider factors such as flight risk or dangerousness.
Accordingly, we turn to whether, as construed, the statute violates due
process. We begin our analysis with a brief review of bail in the Anglo-
American legal system.
Bail emerged in medieval England as an effort to “implement the promise
of the famous 39th chapter of Magna Carta that ‘no freeman shall be arrested,
or detained in prison unless by the law of the land.’” Foote, The Coming
Constitutional Crisis In Bail: I, 113 U. Pa. L. Rev. 959, 965-66 (1965) (ellipses
omitted). Subsequently, several significant developments in English law
established the framework for what would later become American bail
procedures. The Statute of Westminster of 1275 delineated which crimes
would be bailable and which crimes would not. D. Freed & P. Wald, Bail in the
United States: 1964 1 (1964). The Petition of Right of 1628 established that no
4
man could be imprisoned without being informed of the charges against him
and thus ensured that a determination would be made as to whether a
defendant had the right to release on bail. Foote, supra at 966-68. The
Petition was a response to several high profile cases involving defendants held
indefinitely without ever being informed of the charges against them. Id. at
966. The Habeas Corpus Act of 1679 provided a mechanism for defendants to
obtain release on bailable offenses when the King’s bench judges refused to
admit defendants to bail even when required by statute. Id. at 967. Finally,
the English Bill of Rights of 1689 provided protection against judicial abuse
through the excessive bail clause. Id. at 968.
While the development of bail procedures in England tended to favor the
granting of bail, an exception was made for those accused of crimes that
carried a severe sentence. Blackstone noted that once arrested, a prisoner
must:
either be committed to prison, or give bail: that is, put in securities
for his appearance, to answer the charge against him. This
commitment, therefore, being only for safe custody, wherever bail
will answer the same intention, it ought to be taken; as in most of
the inferior crimes; but in felonies, and other offences of a capital
nature, no bail can be a security equivalent to the actual custody
of the person. For what is there that a man may not be induced to
forfeit to save his own life? and what satisfaction or indemnity is it
to the public, to seize the effects of them who have bailed a
murderer, if the murderer himself be suffered to escape with
impunity?
. . . .
[W]here the imprisonment is only for safe custody before the
conviction, and not for punishment afterwards, in such cases bail
is ousted or taken away, wherever the offence is of a very
enormous nature: for then the public is entitled to demand nothing
less than the highest security that can be given, viz., the body of
the accused; in order to insure that justice shall be done upon
him, if guilty. Such persons, therefore, . . . have no other sureties
but the four walls of the prison.
W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 1001-02 (George Chase
4th ed., The Banks Law Publishing Co. 1914) (1765-69).
The influence of the English bail jurisprudence first appeared in the
American colonies as part of the Massachusetts Body of Liberties of 1641,
5
which would serve as the model for the development of the bail system in the
colonies. Liberty 18 provided that:
No mans person shall be restrained or imprisoned by any
Authority whatsoever, before the law hath sentenced him thereto,
If he can put in sufficient securitie, bayle or mainprise, for his
appearance, and good behaviour in the meane time, unlesse it be
in Crimes Capital, and Contempts in open Court, and in such
cases where some expresse act of Court doth allow it.
W. Witmore, A Bibliograhical Sketch of the Laws of the Massachusetts Colony
From 1630 to 1686 37 (1890).
The “Crimes Capital” exception eventually evolved into a statute that first
appeared in the Frame of Government of Pennsylvania in 1682, which
provided: “That all prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, unless for
capital offences, where the proof is evident, or the presumption great.” F.
Thorpe, 5 American Charters Constitutions and Organic Laws 3061 (1906).
Comparable language first appeared in New Hampshire in State v. McNab, 20
N.H. 160, 163-64 (1849), where we quoted approvingly the rule that “judges
will, in general, exercise [the power to bail] in favor of a prisoner in every case
not capital, and in capital cases where there is any circumstance to induce the
court to suppose he may be innocent, and in every case where the charge is not
alleged with sufficient certainty.” In 1867, the New Hampshire General
Statutes codified this rule, providing that “[a]ll prisoners arrested for crime
shall, before conviction, be bailable by sufficient sureties, except for capital
offences where the proof is evident or the presumption great.” GS 240, § 18
(1867). Approximately forty states now have constitutional bail provisions
containing similar language. See Note, What the Right Hand Gives: Prohibitive
Interpretations of the State Constitutional Right to Bail, 78 Fordham L. Rev.
267, 283-84 (2009).
It is against this historical backdrop that we turn to the defendant’s
argument that RSA 597:1-c violates both the New Hampshire and United
States Constitutions. We first address the defendant’s due process arguments
under the State Constitution, citing federal opinions for guidance only. See
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
“[T]he Due Process Clause protects individuals against two types of
government action. So-called ‘substantive due process’ prevents the
government from engaging in conduct that shocks the conscience, or interferes
with rights implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.” Salerno, 481 U.S. at 746
(quotations and citations omitted). “When government action depriving a
person of life, liberty, or property survives substantive due process scrutiny, it
6
must still be implemented in a fair manner. This requirement has traditionally
been referred to as ‘procedural’ due process.” Id. (citation omitted).
The defendant first argues that RSA 597:1-c violates substantive due
process rights because it does not permit the trial court to consider a
defendant’s risk of flight or dangerousness when deciding whether to deny bail.
The defendant relies upon Salerno, in which the defendants brought a facial
challenge to the Bail Reform Act of 1984, arguing that it violated both the Due
Process Clause and the Excessive Bail Clause of the Federal Constitution. Id.
at 746. The statute required the Government to show by clear and convincing
evidence that the defendant posed a substantial risk to the community if he
were released, and, based upon such a finding, allowed the court to deny bail.
Id. at 742. The Court held that the Government’s interest in community safety,
combined with the procedural protections provided in the statute, outweighed
the defendant’s liberty interest, and accordingly upheld the statute against the
defendant’s facial challenge. Id. at 748, 751-52.
The defendant asserts that Salerno stands for the proposition that in
order to pass constitutional muster, a statute that permits a defendant to be
held without bail is constitutional only if it expressly requires the court to
consider whether the individual defendant poses a danger to the community.
The defendant conflates sufficient conditions with necessary ones. We do not
read Salerno to hold that all statutory bail schemes must include an
individualized inquiry into a defendant’s dangerousness in order to pass
constitutional muster. Rather than setting a minimum threshold for all bail
inquiries, the Court in Salerno was confronted with one specific bail scheme
and decided only the narrow issue of whether that particular scheme could
survive constitutional scrutiny. The court did not hold that to be constitutional
a statute that permits detention without bail must require that the individual
defendant’s dangerousness be taken into account.
The defendant also contends that, to satisfy due process, a trial court
must consider the defendant’s individual flight risk before denying bail.
Historically, the purpose of bail was to ensure the defendant’s presence at trial
and to ensure that he would submit to punishment if convicted. See Ex parte
Milburn, 34 U.S. 704, 709 (1835) (“A recognisance of bail, in a criminal case, is
taken to secure the due attendance of the party accused, to answer the
indictment, and to submit to a trial, and the judgment of the Court thereon.”).
There is a clear relation between a defendant’s risk of flight and the amount of
bail necessary to ensure his presence at trial. See Application of Corbo, 149
A.2d 828, 834 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div.) (“where the probabilities of flight are
overwhelming, there should be no bail” (quotation omitted)), cert. denied, 149
A.2d 859 (N.J. 1959). However, the defendant does not cite and we have not
discovered any precedent that requires a court to consider the specific
circumstances of each defendant’s risk of flight before denying bail. To the
7
contrary, as explained above, from the beginning of the bail system, an
exception to the rule favoring bail was made for persons accused of serious
crimes that focused the inquiry solely on the evidence of the defendant’s guilt.
See, e.g., Whitmore, supra at 37. Given this long history of bail permitting
courts in a narrow category of cases to focus exclusively upon the evidence of
the defendant’s guilt, the individualized inquiry for which the defendant argues
cannot be said to be “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.” See, e.g.,
Thorpe, supra at 3061.
While a specific inquiry into the individual factors in each case is not
required by the constitution, we agree with the trial court that both risk of
flight and dangerousness are inherent in the “proof is evident” analysis.
Historically, persons charged with crimes carrying a severe sentence were
denied bail because the flight risk associated with such punishment allowed for
no set of conditions that could assure the defendant’s presence at trial. See
Blackstone, supra at 1001-02. The denial of bail in this state is limited to the
most serious offenses. The legislature has made a reasoned determination that
when “the proof is evident or the presumption great,” the risk to the
community becomes significantly compelling, thus justifying the denial of bail.
See Salerno, 481 U.S. at 748 (“We have repeatedly held that the Government’s
regulatory interest in community safety can, in appropriate circumstances,
outweigh an individual’s liberty interest.”).
Our conclusion that RSA 597:1-c passes constitutional muster is
buttressed by the fact that, as noted in Salerno, detention without bail is
strictly limited in duration. In Salerno, the Court made note that pretrial
detention was limited by “the stringent time limitations of the Speedy Trial
Act.” Id. at 747. In this state, pretrial detention is limited by the superior
court’s speedy trial policy. See Super. Ct. R. Appendix (Superior Court Speedy
Trial Policy) (“Where the defendant is incarcerated, every case pending without
disposition after 4 months from date of entry or indictment shall be scheduled
forthwith for a show cause hearing as to whether, under the principles of
Barker v. Wingo, the case should be dismissed for lack of a speedy trial.”
(citation omitted)). We note that while the federal Speedy Trial Act provides
statutorily enforceable rights, see 18 U.S.C. §§ 3161-3162 (2006), the superior
court speedy trial policy creates guidelines for the trial courts.
The defendant next contends that the trial court erred in determining the
standard of proof under RSA 597:1-c. The trial court ruled that the State must
show that the proof is evident or the presumption great by clear and convincing
evidence. The defendant argues that the statute requires that the State’s
burden must be “beyond a reasonable doubt,” and, alternatively, that if the
statute does not permit a flight or dangerousness inquiry, the Salerno decision
demands that the State be held to the reasonable doubt standard. The State
8
argues that the burden imposed by the statute has an independent meaning
that roughly equates with “clear proof.”
We begin by determining the standard of proof imposed by the statute.
In deciding the burden of proof required by the “proof is evident” standard,
courts in other states have reached a variety of conclusions ranging from “a fair
likelihood of conviction” to a standard that is more stringent than beyond a
reasonable doubt. See Simpson, 85 P.3d at 488. The standards can be divided
into three categories: (1) those requiring a variation of probable cause or fair
likelihood that the accused committed the crime; (2) those requiring a variation
of clear and convincing evidence that the accused committed the crime; and (3)
those requiring a variation of evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused committed the crime. See id. We adopt the second standard of proof
and require that the State show that the proof is evident or the presumption
great by clear and convincing evidence.
We reject the cases requiring mere probable cause because “if [the
statute] were to be read in such a manner, the guarantee would add nothing to
the accused’s rights, since a suspect may not be held without a showing of
probable cause in any instance.” Id. at 489 (quotation omitted). We likewise
reject the cases that require proof beyond a reasonable doubt. “The greatest
burden of proof should be put on the State to convict the accused.” Id. at 490.
“That degree of proof is reserved for trial and is not what the writers of our
[statute] had in mind in providing for bail.” Id. at 489 (quotation omitted).
Indeed, the bail statute replaced the common law rule from McNab, which
allowed for the denial of bail in capital cases only if there were no
“circumstances to induce the court to suppose [the accused] may be innocent.”
McNab, 20 N.H. at 163 (quotation omitted). The legislature was well familiar
with the beyond a reasonable doubt standard and could have used the
appropriate language had it intended for such a standard to be imposed. See
State v. Bartlett, 43 N.H. 224 (1861) (discussing use of the “beyond a
reasonable doubt” standard). “Not only is it highly improbable that the
[legislature] intended the bail hearing to determine the precise question to be
answered at the trial itself, but such duplication obviously wastes judicial
resources . . . .” Simpson, 85 P.3d at 489 (quotation omitted).
As the Arizona Court of Appeals in Simpson noted, “[t]he history of the
phrase alone suggests that it is unique and that it establishes its own standard
since there is no comparison for recourse.” Id. at 487. After examining other
state cases and the history of the phrase, the court concluded: “The State’s
burden is met if all of the evidence, fully considered by the court, makes it
plain and clear to the understanding, and satisfactory and apparent to the
well-guarded, dispassionate judgment of the court that the accused committed
one of the offenses enumerated in [the statute].” Id. at 491. While we are
generally persuaded by the Simpson court’s overall burden of proof analysis, to
9
adopt an independent standard like that used in Arizona would serve only to
create greater confusion among the trial courts in making bail determinations.
“The best way to avoid the arbitrary and unequal application of the law is to
use a definition of ‘proof is evident or the presumption great’ that is easy to
understand and apply.” Id. at 497 (Foreman, J., concurring). We conclude
that the clear and convincing evidence standard is the standard for
determining whether or not the State has shown that the proof is evident or the
presumption great. See 8 C.J.S. Bail § 28 (2005) (Proof is evident “means clear,
strong evidence, which leads to a dispassionate conclusion that the offense has
been committed as charged” while presumption great means “the
circumstances are such that the inference of guilt naturally to be drawn from
them is strong, clear, and convincing”); see also, e.g., Brill v. Gurich, 965 P.2d
404, 408 (Okla. Crim. App. 1998) (“the court must determine by clear and
convincing evidence if ‘the proof of guilt is evident, or the presumption thereof
is great’”); Application of Haynes, 619 P.2d 632, 636 (Or. 1980) (“While for this
purpose guilt need not be shown ‘beyond a reasonable doubt,’ as it must for
conviction, the evidence should at least be clear and convincing.”).
Alternatively, the defendant argues that if the court is not permitted to
make a flight or dangerousness inquiry, the decision in Salerno supports the
conclusion that RSA 597:1-c violates due process. The defendant contends
that the only way to remedy the defective statute would be to hold the State to
the reasonable doubt standard. As discussed above, we do not read Salerno to
hold that all statutory bail schemes must include an individualized inquiry into
a defendant’s dangerousness or flight risk in order to comport with due
process. Because we reject the defendant’s contention that RSA 597:1-c is
constitutionally defective, we see no reason to impose a greater burden than is
required by the statute.
Finally, we briefly address the issue of the procedural protections
required by the statute. The defendant states that courts in other jurisdictions
have reasoned that all or most of the federal Bail Reform Act’s procedural
protections cited in Salerno are minimum requirements of procedural due
process. See Simpson, 85 P.3d at 491 (“Courts that have incorporated the
Salerno analysis have adopted all or most of [the procedural protections
provided in the Bail Reform Act] as minimum requirements of procedural due
process.”). The defendant’s brief focuses his procedural argument upon the
standard of proof required and which party must bear the burden, and does
not directly address other procedural protections that would be required at a
bail hearing. Because this issue was not sufficiently briefed, we do not decide
the specific procedural protections required at a bail hearing under RSA 597:1-
c other than to say that at a minimum the defendant has a right to counsel at
such a hearing. See Rothgery v. Gillespie County, Tex., 128 S. Ct. 2578, 2592
(2008) (“[A] criminal defendant’s initial appearance before a judicial officer,
where he learns the charge against him and his liberty is subject to restriction,
10
marks the start of adversary judicial proceedings that trigger attachment of the
Sixth Amendment right to counsel.”); cf. Stapleford v. Perrin, 122 N.H. 1083,
1088 (1982) (finding that a significant liberty interest exists when commitment
may be the sanction, requiring due process protections including
representation by counsel).
Because the Federal Constitution does not provide any greater protection
than does the State Constitution with regard to the defendant’s due process
claims, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution. See In re
Shelby R., 148 N.H. 237, 239 (2002); cf. Salerno, 481 U.S. at 752.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
11