THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2010-688
THOMAS ETTINGER & a.
v.
TOWN OF MADISON PLANNING BOARD
Argued: October 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 8, 2011
Hastings Law Office, P.A., of Fryeburg, Maine (Peter J. Malia, Jr. on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Mitchell Municipal Group, P.A., of Laconia (Laura A. Spector on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. The defendant, Town of Madison Planning Board (the Board),
appeals, and the plaintiffs, Thomas and Margaret Ettinger, cross-appeal, the
decision of the Superior Court (Houran, J.), which: (1) held that a private
session by the Board on March 3, 2010, violated the Right-to-Know Law, RSA
91-A:2 (Supp. 2010); and (2) denied the plaintiffs’ request for attorney’s fees.
We affirm.
I
The trial court found the following facts. In June 2009, the Pomeroy
Limited Partnership (Pomeroy) received conditional approval from the Board to
convert the buildings on its property to a condominium ownership form and to
convey part of the property to the Nature Conservancy. In January 2010, the
plaintiffs, whose property abuts the Pomeroy property, requested a public
hearing to allow them to challenge the approval of the condominium plan. The
Board scheduled a public hearing for March 3, 2010, to consider whether to
grant final approval of the Pomeroy application. The plaintiffs’ attorney
appeared at that hearing.
At 7:00 p.m., the scheduled time of the hearing, the Board, joined by its
administrative assistant, went into a private session for thirty minutes. In that
session, they read and discussed emails from the Board’s attorney, a
memorandum summarizing legal advice relayed over the phone from the
Board’s attorney to the Board’s administrative assistant, and letters from the
plaintiffs’ attorney. The Board then reopened the hearing at 7:34 p.m. and,
after hearing the plaintiffs’ attorney on the matter, granted final approval to the
Pomeroy application.
The plaintiffs filed a petition in superior court, arguing that the private
session violated New Hampshire’s Right-to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A (2001 &
Supp. 2010), and seeking an award of attorney’s fees under RSA 91-A:8, I
(Supp. 2010). The superior court agreed that the private session violated the
Right-to-Know Law, but refused either to invalidate the Board’s approval of the
Pomeroy application or to award the plaintiffs attorney’s fees. This appeal
followed.
II
The Board argues that its members were permitted to read a letter from
counsel and discuss its contents in a private session under the “consultation
with legal counsel” exclusion from the definition of a “meeting” in the Right-to-
Know Law. See RSA 91-A:2, I(b). The Board’s view is that a consultation with
legal counsel encompasses discussions of the advice of its attorney even when
the attorney is not present at the discussion, or, in the alternative, that the
legislature intended nothing more than to “codify the common law attorney
client privilege as it applies to public bodies.” The meaning of the Right-to-
Know Law in this context is a question of first impression.
The interpretation of the Right-to-Know Law is to be decided ultimately
by this court. Murray v. N.H. Div. of State Police, 154 N.H. 579, 581 (2006).
We apply the ordinary rules of statutory construction to our review of the
Right-to-Know Law, and we accordingly first look to the plain meaning of the
words used. Union Leader Corp. v. City of Nashua, 141 N.H. 473, 475 (1996).
Words and phrases are construed according to the common and approved
usage of the language unless from the statute it appears that a different
meaning was intended. RSA 21:1, :2 (2000). We resolve questions regarding
2
the Right-to-Know Law with a view to best effectuate the statutory objective of
facilitating open access to the actions and decisions of public bodies. See
Union Leader Corp. v. N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. 540, 546 (1997). As
a result, we broadly construe provisions favoring disclosure and interpret the
exemptions restrictively. Goode v. N.H. Legislative Budget Assistant, 145 N.H.
451, 453 (2000). A public body bears the burden of proving that it may hold a
nonpublic assembly of its members. Cf. Hampton Police Assoc. v. Town of
Hampton, 162 N.H. 7, 14 (2011); Lambert v. Belknap County Convention, 157
N.H. 375, 379 (2008).
The Right-to-Know Law provides that “all meetings, whether held in
person, by means of telephone or electronic communication, or in any other
manner, shall be open to the public.” RSA 91-A:2, II (Supp. 2010). RSA 91-A:1
(2001) expresses the legislative policy of the statute: “Openness in the conduct
of public business is essential to a democratic society. The purpose of this
chapter is to ensure both the greatest possible public access to the actions,
discussions and records of all public bodies, and their accountability to the
people.” The statute defines a meeting as the convening of a quorum of the
membership of a public body “for the purpose of discussing or acting upon a
matter or matters over which the public body has supervision, control,
jurisdiction, or advisory power.” RSA 91-A:2, I (Supp. 2010). “Consultation
with legal counsel,” however, is excluded from that definition and is therefore
not subject to the various requirements for open meetings contained in RSA
91-A:2, II. RSA 91-A:2, I(b) (Supp. 2010).
With this statutory scheme in mind, we must determine whether the
Board’s private session qualifies as a “consultation with legal counsel” under
RSA 91-A:2, I(b). At the outset, we note that, although the Board members
merely read the memoranda and emails containing the advice of counsel
during the first twenty-five minutes of their private session, they also discussed
the contents of those documents at the end of the session. Since any part of
the private session found to violate the Right-to-Know Law would be grounds
for affirming the superior court’s decision, and since the statute defines a
meeting as convening a quorum “for the purpose of discussing or acting upon”
matters within a public body’s purview, RSA 91-A:2, I, we focus here only on
whether the Board’s brief discussion violated the Right-to-Know Law.
We agree with the trial court that the literal meaning of the “consultation
with legal counsel” exclusion does not encompass the discussion among the
board members and its administrative assistant that occurred here. A
“consultation” is “a council or conference (as between two or more persons)
usually to consider a special matter.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 490 (unabridged ed. 2002); accord Ballentine’s Law Dictionary 257
(3d ed. 1969) (“The deliberation of two or more persons on some matter; a
council or conference to consider a special case.”). Read together with the
3
phrase “with legal counsel,” a “consultation” does not encompass a situation in
which the public body convenes a quorum of its membership, as set out in RSA
91-A:2, I, only to discuss a legal memorandum prepared by, or at the direction
of, the public body’s attorney where that attorney is unavailable at the time of
the discussion. At the very least, that clause requires the ability to have a
contemporaneous exchange of words and ideas between the public body and its
attorney.
Anticipating the difficulties a literal construction of the statute poses for
its argument, the Board argues that a consultation with legal counsel is
coextensive with the common-law attorney-client privilege, and therefore allows
public bodies to enter nonpublic sessions to discuss the written advice of
counsel. We disagree.
As an initial matter, the attorney-client privilege is an evidentiary rule
allowing the attorney or client to withhold information shared in the course of
the attorney-client relationship. The classic articulation of the privilege is as
follows:
Where legal advice of any kind is sought from a professional legal
adviser in his capacity as such, the communications relating to
that purpose, made in confidence by the client, are at his instance
permanently protected from disclosure by himself or by the legal
adviser unless the protection is waived by the client or his legal
representatives.
Riddle Spring Realty Co. v. State, 107 N.H. 271, 273 (1966) (citing 8 J.
Wigmore, Evidence §§ 2292, 2327-2329, at 554, 634-41 (McNaughten rev.
1961)). New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 502 embodies that rule, providing
that “[a] client has a privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent any other
person from disclosing confidential communications made for the purpose of
facilitating the rendition of professional legal services to the client . . . .” N.H.
R. Ev. 502(b); accord N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 1.6(a) (prohibiting lawyers from
revealing information “relating to the representation of a client”).
By contrast, the Right-to-Know Law is a statute mandating that all
public bodies open their meetings to the public unless one of several specific,
enumerated exceptions or exclusions applies. We do not, in general, interpret
a statute to abrogate the common law absent a clear legislative expression of
intent to do so. See State v. Hermsdorf, 135 N.H. 360, 363 (1992). Here,
however, we discern no reason why the attorney-client evidentiary privilege and
the Right-to-Know Law cannot coexist. See 1A N. Singer & J.D. Singer,
Statutes and Statutory Construction § 23.10, at 481 (7th ed. 2009) (“The
presumption against implied repeals is overcome . . . by a showing that two
acts are irreconcilable, clearly repugnant as to vital matters to which they
4
relate, and so inconsistent that they cannot have concurrent operation.”); see
also State v. Wilton Railroad, 89 N.H. 59, 61-62 (1937) (requiring a “positive
repugnancy” between two provisions before repealing by implication). Whereas
the common law attorney-client privilege reflects a policy of encouraging clients
to consult with lawyers by enabling the free and open exchange of information
between the two, the Right-to-Know Law expresses a more specific policy
governing the disputed situation in this case – namely, a public body meeting
to discuss matters within its purview. Moreover, to the extent that the
attorney-client privilege helps prevent a public body’s adversary in litigation
from gaining an unfair advantage, the legislature has safeguarded that interest
by its enactment of RSA 91-A:3, II(e) (Supp. 2010), authorizing nonpublic
sessions to consider or negotiate “pending claims or litigation which has been
threatened in writing or filed against the body . . . , or against any member
thereof because of his membership in such body or agency . . . .” In any case,
the privilege is the client’s to waive, and RSA 91-A:2 operates “as a statutory
public waiver of any possible privilege of the public client . . . except in the
narrow circumstances stated in the statute.” District Atty. v. Bd. of Selectmen,
481 N.E.2d 1128, 1131 (Mass. 1985); accord Smith County Educ. Ass’n v.
Anderson, 676 S.W.2d 328, 333 (Tenn. 1984).
Our legislature’s decision to enumerate specific exceptions to the open-
meetings requirement compels our conclusion that these provisions provide the
only circumstances in which a public body may enter into a private session for
discussion. “[E]xceptions are not to be implied. . . . Where there is an express
exception, it comprises the only limitation on the operation of the statute and
no other exceptions will be implied.” 2A N. Singer & J.D. Shambie Singer,
Statutes and Statutory Construction § 47.11, at 328-30 (7th ed. 2007)
(footnotes omitted). Notably, RSA 91-A:3, II (Supp. 2010) allows public bodies
to consider or act upon “[o]nly” certain matters in nonpublic session. The
legislature contemplated the need for private discussions among the board
members when it enacted these ten exceptions to the open meetings mandate.
The terms “discussed” in RSA 91-A:3, II(c) and “consideration” in RSA 91-A:3,
II(d)-(j) stand in marked contrast to the narrower phrase “consultation with
legal counsel” in RSA 91-A:2, I(b). Whereas the former provisions allow
government bodies to consider and discuss the enumerated matters, the latter
provision permits a far narrower category – consultation with legal counsel.
When the legislature uses different language in the same statute, we assume
that the legislature intended something different. See State Employees Assoc.
of N.H. v. N.H. Div. of Personnel, 158 N.H. 338, 345 (2009). Had the legislature
intended the exclusion in RSA 91-A:2, I(b) to cover not just consultations with
legal counsel but also “consideration or discussion of the advice of counsel,”
the statute would have said as much. In this case, the Board met in a private
session not only to read the memorandum prepared at the direction of the
attorney, but also to “discuss” and “consider” the memorandum without
counsel present. In the absence of an applicable exception, the clear legislative
5
mandate of the Right-to-Know Law requires that they do so in the open. See
District Atty. v. Bd. of Selectmen, 481 N.E.2d at 1131.
Finally, we disagree with the Board’s contention that, because the
written communications from the Board’s counsel may be protected from
disclosure under RSA 91-A:5 (Supp. 2010), the meeting itself need not have
been open to the public. RSA 91-A:2 governs whether a meeting of a public
body must be held in the open; nothing in that provision requires public bodies
to share internal legal documents with the meeting’s public attendees. RSA
91-A:4 and RSA 91-A:5 concern the disclosure of public records. Indeed, as
the Board correctly observes, the public records disclosure law contains an
exemption, in RSA 91-A:5, IV, for any “confidential” information – further
evidence that the legislature did not intend the consultation with legal counsel
exclusion of RSA 91-A:2 to allow a public body to close a meeting whenever its
discussion turns to advice received from its attorney who is neither physically
present nor present telephonically and is therefore unable to participate in the
discussion.
III
In their cross-appeal, the plaintiffs argue that they are entitled to
attorney’s fees under RSA 91-A:8, I (Supp. 2010). That provision allows courts
to award attorney’s fees to a person who has been refused access to a public
proceeding after reasonably requesting such access if the lawsuit was
necessary in order to make the proceeding open to the public and the agency
knew or should have known that its conduct violated the Right-to-Know Law.
RSA 91-A:8, I. The plaintiffs contend that the Board should have known as “a
matter of common sense” that their private session violated RSA 91-A:2. We
agree with the superior court, however, that attorney’s fees are not warranted
here. As is evident from this decision, we have had no occasion, before today,
to answer the particular question presented by the Board’s actions: whether a
public body’s closed session to discuss the written advice of counsel who is
absent fits within the “consultation with legal counsel” exclusion of RSA 91-
A:2, I(b). See Goode, 145 N.H. at 455 (concluding that defendant neither knew
nor should have known that its conduct violated RSA chapter 91-A due, in
part, to the state of case law). We cannot say that, lacking guidance from this
court on the narrow issue before it, the Board should have known that its
nonpublic session violated the Right-to-Know Law.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6