THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Accountancy
No. 2010-101
APPEAL OF ROBERT DANIEL MAYS
(New Hampshire Board of Accountancy)
Argued: October 14, 2010
Opinion Issued: February 23, 2011
Robert Daniel Mays, by brief and orally, pro se.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elyse S. Alkalay, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the State.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Robert Daniel Mays, challenges a decision
of the New Hampshire Board of Accountancy (Board) denying his application
for a certified public accountant (CPA) certificate. The sole issue in this case is
whether the Board exceeded its authority when it promulgated a rule requiring
an applicant for initial certification as a CPA to secure experience in a licensed
public accounting firm that actually practices public accounting in order to
satisfy the experience requirement under RSA 309-B:5, IX (Supp. 2010). We
reverse and remand.
The facts are adduced from the certified record. In order to practice as a
CPA in this state, an individual must hold a CPA certificate. See RSA 309-B:14
(Supp. 2010). In August 2009, the petitioner applied for a CPA certificate to
practice public accounting in New Hampshire. See RSA 309-B:7 (Supp. 2010).
On his application, he identified as his public accounting experience services
that he performed from approximately April 2007 through January 2009 while
employed by a company in Virginia named BearingPoint, Inc. By majority vote,
the Board denied the petitioner’s application, determining that his experience
did not qualify as public accounting experience in accordance with RSA 309-
B:5, IX and New Hampshire Administrative Rule, Ac 302.03.
The petitioner requested that the Board stay its action and reconsider its
decision for a variety of reasons, including that his experience complied with
the definition of “public accounting experience” under Rule 101.15 and with
RSA 309-B:5, IX. He asserted that “the requirement that public accounting
experience must be based upon employment in a CPA firm under [Rule] 302.03
appears to be inconsistent with the definition of public accounting experience
under [Rule] 101.15.” The Board granted the petitioner’s request for a stay,
allowing him the opportunity to provide “proper and formal documentation
from the Virginia Board of Accountancy that [BearingPoint, Inc.] was a public
accounting firm in Virginia and was duly licensed to practice as such by the
Virginia Board of Accountancy.” The petitioner continued to maintain that his
experience complied with Rule 101.15 and RSA 309-B:5, IX, and attached
supporting documentation in a letter to the Board dated December 18, 2009.
By order dated January 19, 2010, the Board again denied the petitioner’s
application for a CPA certificate. It found that the petitioner’s documentation
established that he was employed by BearingPoint, Inc., a consulting firm
which is not registered as a public accounting firm in Virginia. Accordingly,
the Board ruled, in pertinent part, that because BearingPoint, Inc. was not
registered as a public accounting firm in Virginia, the petitioner lacked the
necessary public accounting experience; thus, his application did not comply
with RSA 309-B:5, IX or Rule 302.03(b)(1). The petitioner appealed, and we
accepted only the following issue for review: “Whether [Rule] 302.03 is
inconsistent with RSA 309-B:5, IX.”
This case is properly treated as a petition for a writ of certiorari because
RSA chapter 309-B does not provide for judicial review of the Board’s decision
under RSA chapter 541. See Petition of Hoyt, 143 N.H. 533, 534 (1999); RSA
541:2 (2007) (appeal from administrative proceedings can be made under RSA
chapter 541 only “[w]hen so authorized by law”). Thus, “[o]ur standard of
review is whether the board acted illegally with respect to jurisdiction,
authority or observance of the law, whereby it arrived at a conclusion which
cannot legally or reasonably be made, or abused its discretion or acted
arbitrarily, unreasonably, or capriciously.” Petition of Poulicakos, 160 N.H.
438, 441 (2010) (quotation omitted).
It is well settled that the legislature may delegate to administrative
agencies the power to promulgate rules necessary for the proper execution of
the laws. Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transportation, 152 N.H. 565, 571 (2005).
2
“The authority to promulgate rules and regulations is designed only to permit
the board to fill in the details to effectuate the purpose of the statute.” Appeal
of Anderson, 147 N.H. 181, 183 (2001) (quotation omitted). “Thus,
administrative rules may not add to, detract from, or modify the statute which
they are intended to implement.” Id.
The petitioner argues that the Board exceeded its rule-making authority
by promulgating Rule 302.03(b)(1). He contends that it modifies the experience
requirement set forth in RSA 309-B:5, IX. He argues that the statute permits
the experience requirement to be “satisfied under supervision of an individually
licensed CPA,” but the Rule requires that the experience be earned in a public
accounting firm. According to the petitioner, “[t]he statute is plain on its face
that the legislature’s intent was not to require employment within a specific
type of organization.”
The State argues that Rule 302.03(b)(1) is consistent with the Board’s
authority to make rules that it deems “necessary or appropriate for
implementing the provisions and purposes of this chapter,” RSA 309-B:4, VIII(i)
(2005), and to promulgate rules that specify the “experience qualifications
required for all licensees,” RSA 309-B:4, VIII(c) (2005). According to the State,
while RSA 309-B:5, IX dictates the amount of time a CPA applicant must spend
obtaining experience and the specific types of skills performed, the statute only
partly identifies where the applicant must obtain this public accounting
experience. It reasons that because RSA 309-B:5, IX requires an applicant to
have “public accounting experience,” it implicitly prescribes that the applicant
must earn such experience in a licensed public accounting firm. Thus, the
State contends, Rule 302.03(b)(1) merely states explicitly a requirement that is
implicit in the statute itself.
To discern whether Rule 302.03(b)(1) constitutes a proper exercise of
rule-making authority, we first look to the intended scope of the rule-making
power granted by the legislature to the Board, and the purpose of the
Accountancy Act of 1999. See Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transportation, 152 N.H.
at 571; see also Kimball v. N.H. Bd. Of Accountancy, 118 N.H. 567, 569 (1978).
In so doing, we review the plain language of the statute at issue, RSA 309-B:5,
IX, in the context of other statutes relevant to the Board’s statutorily prescribed
authority. See Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transportation, 152 N.H. at 571.
The stated purpose of the Accountancy Act of 1999, RSA chapter 309-B,
is:
to promote the reliability of information that is used for guidance
in financial transactions or for accounting for or assessing the
financial status or performance of commercial, non-commercial,
and governmental enterprises.
3
RSA 309-B:2 (2005). The Act as a whole regulates the practice of public
accounting and comprises a certification or licensing system for that
profession, including public accountants, CPAs and CPA firms. See, e.g., RSA
309-B:3, I, III-a, VIII, XII (Supp. 2010) (definitions of “Attest,” “Compilation,”
“License” and “Peer review”); RSA 309-B:7 (Supp. 2010) (issuance and renewal
of CPA certificates); RSA 309-B:8 (Supp. 2010) (CPA firm permits to practice,
attest experience and peer review); RSA 309-B:9 (2005) (public accountants
and firms of public accountants). For example, the Act sets forth required
qualifications for licensees, see, e.g., RSA 309-B:5-:8 (Supp. 2010), and lists
unlawful acts pertaining to the practice of public accounting, see RSA 309-
B:14.
The legislature charged the Board with the “responsibility for the
administration and enforcement of [RSA chapter 309-B],” RSA 309-B:4, I
(2005). Expressing its intent that the Board implement the statutory purposes
and directives set forth in the Act, the legislature also required the Board to
adopt rules pursuant to RSA chapter 541-A “governing [the Board’s]
administration, the enforcement of [RSA chapter 309-B] and the conduct of
licensees.” RSA 309-B:4, VIII (2005). The Act identifies numerous specific
areas in which the Board is to adopt rules, including “[r]ules specifying the
educational and experience qualifications required for all licensees,” RSA 309-
B:4, VIII(c) (emphasis added). The Board also is authorized to adopt “[s]uch
other rules as the board may deem necessary or appropriate for implementing
the provisions and purposes of this chapter.” RSA 309-B:4, VIII(i).
Concerning the qualifications required for licensees, RSA 309-B:5, I,
provides that “[t]he certificate of ‘certified public accountant’ shall be granted to
persons of good character who meet the education, experience, and
examination requirements of this section, who make application therefor
pursuant to RSA 309-B:7, and who pay the fees prescribed by the board.”
RSA 309-B:5 provides specific education, experience, and examination
requirements that applicants must meet. See RSA 309-B:5, III (education);
RSA 309-B:5, IV-VIII (examination); RSA 309-B:5, IX-X (experience). At issue
in this case is the experience requirement. The relevant section provides in
part:
The experience requirement shall consist of public
accounting experience in providing one or more kinds of services
involving the use of accounting or auditing skills, including the
issuance of reports on financial statements, or one or more kinds
of management advisory, financial advisory, or consulting services,
or the preparation of tax returns or the furnishing of advice on tax
matters, or the equivalent, all of which was under the direction of a
licensee in any state in practice as a certified public accountant or
4
as a public accountant, or in any state in employment as a staff
accountant by a certified public accountant or anyone practicing
public accounting, or a combination of either of such types of
experience and for the following periods of time . . . .
RSA 309-B:5, IX.
The authority of the Board to adopt rules “is designed only to permit the
[B]oard to fill in the details to effectuate the purpose of the statute.” Appeal of
Anderson, 147 N.H. at 183 (quotation omitted). To determine whether rules fill
in details and do not impermissibly add to the statutory requirements, we look
to the plain language of the statute considered as a whole. See Suburban
Realty, Inc. v. Albin, 131 N.H. 689, 692 (1989). In order for the Board to adopt
rules relating to the experience requirements of RSA 309-B:5, IX, the
legislature must have left room in the requirement for the Board to “fill in the
details.”
The experience requirement in RSA 309-B:5, IX can best be understood
as three separate substantive requirements: the type of service requirement;
the supervisory requirement; and the time requirement. The type of service
requirement provides that “[t]he experience requirement shall consist of public
accounting experience in providing one or more kinds of services involving the
use of accounting or auditing skills, including [certain specific services], or the
equivalent . . . .” RSA 309-B:5, IX (emphasis added). The statute lists several
examples of the kinds of services that qualify as public accounting experience.
In adopting such open-ended language in the type of service requirement, the
legislature left room for the Board to fill in the details with respect to this
requirement.
By contrast, the second requirement provides that any public accounting
experience must be under the supervision of a licensee. The requirement is
explicit as to who qualifies to supervise an applicant: “a licensee in any state in
practice as a certified public accountant or as a public accountant, or in any
state in employment as a staff accountant by a certified public accountant or
anyone practicing public accounting, or a combination of either of such types
of experience.” The legislature used precise language that provides for only
specific types of licensees who qualify to supervise an applicant. The language
of the supervisory requirement does not leave any room for the Board to “fill in
the details,” as to who may supervise an applicant. Thus, any such rules
would necessarily “add to, detract from, or modify” the requirement in violation
of the Board’s authority. See Appeal of Anderson, 147 N.H. at 183.
The Board’s experience rule at issue in this case provides: “Pursuant to
RSA 309-B:5, IX, each applicant submitting an application for initial
certification as a CPA shall [have earned experience] . . . [i]n a public
5
accounting firm that . . . [a]ctually practices public accounting; and . . . [i]s
licensed by the jurisdiction in which the firm is located . . . .” N.H. Admin.
Rules, Ac 302.03(b)(1)(a). There is no limitation under the statute that the
applicant must have earned experience in a public accounting firm that
actually practices public accounting and is licensed in the firm’s jurisdiction.
Yet the plain language of the rule imposes this additional requirement on all
applicants for certification as a CPA. Whether this rule is viewed as an attempt
to “fill in the details” to the supervisory requirement by limiting what the
statute expressly permits, or as implementing a new substantive requirement,
the result is the same. Because the Board may not “add to, detract from, or
modify the statute which [the rule is] intended to implement,” Appeal of
Anderson, 147 N.H. at 183, Rule 302.03(b)(1)(a) is necessarily invalid.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6