THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2010-415
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JASON WILMOT
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Rosemary Wiant, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, Jason Wilmot, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Lynn, C.J.), on two counts of first-
degree assault for recklessly causing serious bodily injury to a person under
thirteen years of age. See RSA 631:1, I(d) (2007). He argues that the trial court
erred in not setting aside the jury’s verdict because the evidence could not have
supported a conclusion by the jury that his statements to police were voluntary
and without those statements the evidence was insufficient to support the
jury’s verdict. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim was between
two and three months old when his ribs and skull were fractured and he was
shaken, which caused his brain to bleed. When the baby suffered these
injuries, the defendant lived with the baby and the baby’s mother.
On December 27, 2007, the defendant was alone with the baby in the
morning. When the baby’s mother next saw him, he was “all white and crying,
gasping for air.” The baby’s mother took him to the hospital where he stayed
overnight, with the diagnosis of a cold.
Twelve days later, after being alone with the baby in the afternoon, the
defendant told the baby’s mother that he was “doing that limp thing again
. . . . But he’s fine. He’s breathing.” The baby slept until later that evening.
When the baby’s mother and a visiting guest heard the baby crying, both
offered to check on him, but the defendant refused. The defendant turned off
the baby monitor, went to the baby’s room alone and was gone for fifteen
minutes.
At some point, the baby “cried a cry” his mother had “never heard.” The
mother asked the defendant if “everything [was] okay,” and the defendant said,
“yes, everything’s fine.” The baby was, in fact, “very pale,” “very limp,” gasping
for air and nonresponsive. He also had a bruise under his eye. The baby’s
mother brought him to the hospital again, and this time, doctors concluded
that he was seriously injured.
The next day, as part of their investigation into the baby’s injuries, police
detectives videotaped two interviews with the defendant. In the first interview,
the defendant told the detectives that, on the day before the interview, he had
“picked [the baby] up too hard in the ribs.” He then checked the baby for
bruises and, finding none, decided that the baby was fine. The defendant said
that he “felt horrible” about mishandling the baby, but did not tell the baby’s
mother immediately because he feared that she would leave him.
The detectives encouraged the defendant to reveal more about the
incident, telling him, “If we can see there’s a problem but there’s some
solutions to fix the problem, that’s much better than getting people in trouble
and breaking up a family.” They said, “Sometimes when we do this, these
thing[s] end very horribly. . . . [The baby] looks like he’s gonna be fine.” At one
point, the defendant told the detectives that, when picking the baby up, he
“might have shooken [sic] him a little bit,” but throughout the interview, he
maintained that he had only shaken the baby on the day of the second hospital
visit. The interview lasted less than three hours, and when it ended, the police
brought the defendant to a friend’s home.
2
At approximately ten o’clock that night, the defendant drove to the police
station for a second interview, which lasted less than an hour. Before the
interview began, the defendant orally waived his Miranda rights and signed a
waiver form. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444-45 (1966). The
detectives then pressed the defendant to admit to other abusive episodes. One
said:
You are the only one that did this. We are 100 percent sure of
it now, 100 percent sure of it. Both times this baby is fine, things
are going good, all of a sudden out of the blue, he’s not breathing
right, he’s lethargic, his arms are going every which way, his eyes
are kicking out to the side. Who finds him that way both times?
You. . . . We’re trying to meet you halfway . . . . But . . . I’ll tell ya,
from this point on, I’m not buying it. You tell us what you did and
tell us the truth. . . . And nothing would make us happier than
when this is all said and done, and we find out the whole truth
from you, and we find out that this will never happen again, that’s
our greatest hope[ ], to put your family back together the way it
should be.
The defendant admitted that he had also shaken the baby on the
morning of the first hospital visit. He told police that the first event was “[n]ot
as hard” as the second, and that during the second episode he “shook [the
baby] once, but his head went . . . back, forward and then a little bit back.”
After the second interview, the defendant was arrested and charged with first
degree assault.
At trial, the court denied two motions for directed verdict, and the jury
found the defendant guilty of recklessly injuring the baby. The defendant then
moved to set aside the jury’s verdict, arguing that his statements to police were
involuntary. The trial court denied the motion. The defendant now appeals the
denial of his motions.
I. Voluntariness of the Defendant’s Statements to Police
Relying upon both the State and Federal Constitutions, the defendant
contends his statements to police were involuntary. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art.
15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV. We first consider his arguments under the
State Constitution, using federal cases only to aid in our analysis. State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231–33 (1983).
Under Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution, for a
defendant’s statement to be admissible at trial, the State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that it was voluntary. State v. Parker, 160 N.H. 203, 207-08
(2010). Normally, whether a statement is voluntary is a question of fact for the
3
trial court, which we will not reverse unless the manifest weight of the
evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the State, is to the contrary. See
id. Here, because the defendant never objected to the introduction of his
statements until after the jury verdict, the trial court had no occasion to make
a finding of voluntariness.
Nonetheless, the trial court instructed the jury that it should disregard
the defendant’s statements unless it found beyond a reasonable doubt that he
spoke voluntarily. The defendant contends that the jury should have
disregarded his statements to police because there was insufficient evidence of
their voluntariness and that, without the statements, the evidence was
insufficient to convict him.
The State argues that on review we should employ the same “manifest
weight of the evidence” standard as we would if the trial court had found the
statements to be voluntary. The defendant argues that we should review the
evidence of voluntariness as we would a sufficiency of the evidence challenge to
the jury’s verdict.
We assume without deciding that the sufficiency standard that the
defendant requests is the correct standard to apply. Under this standard, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence
and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State,
could have found his statements to be voluntary beyond a reasonable doubt.
See State v. Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 424 (2003).
“In determining whether a [statement] is voluntary, we look at whether
the actions of an individual are the product of an essentially free and
unconstrained choice or are the product of a will overborne by police tactics.”
State v. Rezk, 150 N.H. 483, 487 (2004) (quotation omitted). To make this
determination, we consider all of the surrounding circumstances, including the
characteristics of the accused and the details of the interrogation. Id. at 487-
88 (listing factors to consider when determining voluntariness).
The defendant argues that his statements were involuntary because of
the totality of the circumstances surrounding the two interviews. Specifically,
he argues that his statements were coerced because he was not given Miranda
warnings before his first interview, he was inexperienced with the police, he is
dyslexic, he was tired and hungry during the first interview, the police
employed tactics such as minimizing the baby’s injuries and the likely
consequences of the defendant’s admissions, and, during the first interview,
the police threatened to arrest him if he left.
Here, viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the
light most favorable to the State, we conclude that a rational juror could have
4
found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s statements were made
voluntarily. The defendant was not under arrest when he was interviewed and,
during each interview, specifically stated that he was participating freely and
voluntarily. He was also advised that he could end the interviews at any time.
Even so, he chose to continue. Although he argues that he was coerced during
the first interview, he drove himself to the second interview approximately
seven hours later. The videotaped interviews contain no evidence of threats,
violence or coercion of any kind. Moreover, neither interview was oppressive or
inordinately long; the first was less than three hours and the second less than
an hour. See State v. Chapman, 135 N.H. 390, 401 (1992) (two-and-a-half-
hour interview was not oppressive or inordinately long).
Although the defendant lacked experience with the police and his mother
testified that he was dyslexic, there was evidence that he received “very good”
grades and graduated from high school. The defendant’s lack of experience
and possible dyslexia did not compel a jury finding that his statements were
involuntary. Cf. State v. Bilodeau, 159 N.H. 759, 761, 763 (2010) (holding
mental illness does not render a confession involuntary as a matter of law).
Moreover, “[a]lthough the detectives admittedly used minimization
techniques and were ‘friendly’ to the defendant, the police are not prohibited
from misleading a suspect, and friendly police conduct does not alter the
voluntariness of a defendant’s statements.” State v. Hernandez, 162 N.H. ___,
___ (decided November 22, 2011). To the extent the defendant argues these
tactics “impliedly promised” him lenient treatment, we conclude that a juror
rationally could have viewed them as exhortations to be truthful and cooperate
that failed to render his statements involuntary. Compare Rezk, 150 N.H. at
489-90, with State v. Carroll, 138 N.H. 687, 692 (1994).
While the defendant claims that the police threatened to charge him with
resisting arrest if he left the first interview, the evidence was conflicting. The
defendant testified that he requested to leave and was so threatened; a
detective testified that the defendant made no such request and could have left
at any time. Based upon this conflicting evidence, a rational juror was not
compelled to find that a threat was made. See State v. Oakes, 161 N.H. 270,
276 (2010).
We are also not persuaded by the defendant’s assertion that the failure of
the police to administer Miranda warnings before his first interview rendered
his statements involuntary. The defendant does not argue that such warnings
were required, and “[t]he failure of the police to do something that was not
required cannot be grounds [for] render[ing] the defendant’s confession
involuntary.” State v. Hammond, 144 N.H. 401, 406 (1999).
5
In sum, viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the
light most favorable to the State, a rational juror could have concluded beyond
a reasonable doubt that the defendant’s statements were voluntary. Because
the State Constitution affords at least as much protection as the Federal
Constitution under these circumstances, see Hernandez, 162 N.H. at ___, we
reach the same result under the Federal Constitution.
II. Sufficiency of the Evidence
The defendant next argues that, even including his statements, the
evidence was insufficient because the State failed to exclude the rational
conclusion that the baby’s mother or some other caregiver injured the baby
and failed to prove that, if he did injure the baby, he did so recklessly. We
disagree.
To prevail, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing
all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
Evans, 150 N.H. at 424. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must
exclude all rational conclusions except guilt. Id. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the State
and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in isolation. Id.
We first address the defendant’s argument that the evidence against him
was insufficient because it failed to exclude the rational conclusion that
another caregiver injured the baby. Two factually similar cases, Evans, 150
N.H. at 424-26, and State v. Fandozzi, 159 N.H. 773, 782 (2010), are
instructive.
In Evans, the defendant was accused of killing a toddler and argued that
the circumstantial evidence was insufficient to convict him, in part, because,
when the toddler died, she was with a babysitter. The jury heard evidence
that: (1) the defendant physically abused the child so frequently that the
child’s mother had to fabricate stories to explain the child’s injuries; (2) medical
evidence contradicted the defendant’s explanation of the child’s most serious
injuries; (3) the child developed bruises and was rendered unconscious while in
the defendant’s care the night before she died; and (4) the child’s mother had
said the defendant killed the child. Id. at 425-26. By contrast, the only
evidence that the babysitter harmed the child was that she was in the sitter’s
care when she died and that her pajama bottoms had been removed. Id. at
426. We held that the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to the State,
was sufficient for a rational juror to exclude all conclusions other than the
defendant’s guilt. See id.
6
Similarly, in Fandozzi, 159 N.H. at 782, the defendant was accused of
breaking his infant son’s ribs and argued that because the medical timeline
included a period during which the infant was in Connecticut, the State failed
to prove that he inflicted the child’s injuries in New Hampshire. Fandozzi, 159
N.H. at 782. We held that testimony from the baby’s Connecticut caregivers
that he was not hurt while in their care permitted the jury to conclude beyond
a reasonable doubt that the defendant injured the baby in New Hampshire. Id.
In this case, as in Evans, a rational juror, viewing the evidence and
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant, not another
caretaker, injured the baby. See Evans, 150 N.H. at 424-26. On the two
occasions when the baby exhibited symptoms of abuse, he was with the
defendant immediately beforehand. When the baby was seriously injured, the
defendant said that the baby was fine and moments later produced him
bruised, pale, limp and nonresponsive. Later the defendant told police that he
did not immediately seek help for the baby because he feared there would be
repercussions for his behavior.
There was no evidence that any of the infant’s other caregivers
mistreated him, and, as in Fandozzi, the caregivers’ testimony provided
evidence to the contrary. Fandozzi, 159 N.H. at 782. The baby’s mother,
grandmother and babysitters all testified that he was not injured while in their
care. Drawing all inferences in the State’s favor, a rational juror could
conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant – who admitted to
mishandling the baby, was alone with him when the abuse occurred and
attempted to conceal the baby’s symptoms – caused the injuries.
Moreover, a rational juror could have concluded that the defendant’s
admissions were consistent with medical evidence about the baby’s injuries.
The defendant admitted to police that on the days of the hospital visits he
“picked [the baby] up too hard in the ribs” and shook him. A doctor testified
that the baby “was either squeezed or had pressure applied to his chest that
was completely out of the range of the way a reasonable caretaker would
handle a baby” and had been subjected to “violent shaking.” In addition, a
juror could have found that even the defendant’s more circumscribed
descriptions of abuse effectively corroborated the other circumstantial evidence
against him.
Viewing all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the State, there
was also sufficient evidence for a rational juror to find that the defendant acted
recklessly. To prove that the defendant injured the baby recklessly, the State
had to show beyond a reasonable doubt that he was “aware of and consciously
disregard[ed] a substantial and unjustifiable risk” that his actions would cause
serious bodily injury to the baby. RSA 626:2, II(c) (2007); RSA 631:1, I(d). The
7
jury is entitled to infer the requisite intent from the defendant’s conduct in
light of all the circumstances. State v. Tayag, 159 N.H. 21, 24 (2009).
The defendant acknowledged that he knew “kids[’] . . . bones are brittle”
and that he “felt horrible” about how he had handled the baby; a medical
expert testified that the baby’s injuries were inflicted by “violent shaking” and
squeezing “completely out of [a reasonable] range.” Based upon this evidence,
a rational juror could have found beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant was aware of and consciously disregarded the risk that violently
handling the baby could cause serious bodily injury.
The defendant also argues that the questionable voluntariness of his
statements rendered the jury’s verdict against the weight of the evidence. See
State v. Spinale, 156 N.H. 456, 465 (2007) (distinguishing between weight and
sufficiency of the evidence challenges). Because he never raised this issue at
trial or in his notice of appeal, we do not consider it. See Oakes, 161 N.H. at
284-85.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8