THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Professional Conduct Committee
No. LD-2009-006
MORSE’S CASE
Argued: March 31, 2010
Opinion Issued: July 20, 2010
Landya B. McCafferty, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the
professional conduct committee.
Lynn D. Morse, pro se, filed no brief.
DUGGAN, J. On September 14, 2009, the Supreme Court Professional
Conduct Committee (PCC) filed a petition recommending that the respondent,
Lynn D. Morse, be suspended from the practice of law for two years. We order
that the respondent be disbarred.
I. Facts
Morse has stipulated to, and we accept, the following facts. See Conner’s
Case, 158 N.H. 299, 300 (2009); Sup. Ct. R. 37A(III)(c)(5). Morse, an attorney
licensed in New Hampshire since 1972, represented Bertha McInnes in a
guardianship action. On September 12, 1998, McInnes died. Her estate was
valued at $461,500. In her will, McInnes named her niece, Ruth Ann Mize, as
executrix. Mize resides in California.
On September 22, 1998, Morse filed an appearance on behalf of Mize and
a petition for estate administration in the Rockingham County Probate Court.
The court approved both the petition and a bond in the amount of $350,000.
On November 25, 1998, the court ordered Morse to file an estate inventory by
February 21, 1999, and an accounting by November 24, 1999. The court
required Morse to file a yearly accounting until he completed a final accounting
for the estate.
A. The Inventory
Morse failed to file the inventory by the court’s deadline. He filed four
petitions to extend the deadline, alleging each time that he could not complete
the inventory “until the final account in the Guardianship of Bertha McInnes
. . . has been completed and [Mize] receives the guardianship Estate.” The
court granted these petitions. Finally, in September 1999, approximately seven
months after the first deadline, Morse filed the inventory.
B. The First Accounting
Morse also failed to file the first accounting by November 24, 1999. On
February 23, 2000, the court placed the case in default, assessed a $25.00
default fee, and warned Mize that the court would issue a citation if she failed
to file the accounting within thirty days. Morse filed two petitions to extend the
deadline, claiming that “[t]his is a complex Estate with a number of personal
property assets that have been sold or transferred” and that he needed
“additional time to complete” the first accounting. The court granted these
petitions. Finally, on June 23, 2000, approximately seven months after the
deadline, Morse filed the first accounting and a petition to make interim
distributions to the three residuary legatees.
C. The Second Accounting
The second accounting was due on November 24, 2000. Morse failed to
meet this deadline, and, over a period of more than two years, filed twelve
petitions to extend the deadline. At various times, Morse claimed that: (1) the
estate was “complex . . . with a number of assets” so he needed additional time
to complete tax returns for the estate; (2) “[t]he Estate has recently learned that
it owns certain shares of Avaya, Inc., common stock” that must be sold before
the final accounting; and (3) “[t]here is one antique item in the possession of
Skinner, Inc. which is awaiting sale at auction.” Morse also claimed that he
had prepared the second accounting for Mize’s signature.
The court granted most of the petitions. The court cited Mize for her
failure to timely file the second accounting, but did not issue a finding of
contempt on the condition that she file the accounting no later than May 1,
2
2002. On November 25, 2002, the court granted Morse’s eleventh petition to
extend the deadline but prohibited any further extensions. By order dated
February 10, 2003, the court notified Mize that Morse had failed to file the
second accounting, and scheduled a hearing for April 7, 2003, requiring Mize
to personally appear and explain why she had failed to file the second
accounting. The court later continued the hearing to April 21, 2003. Four
days later, the court issued an order stating that, based upon Morse’s
“assurance that he will file a final account no later than May 23, 2003, no
finding is entered nor sanction is presently imposed. . . . No further
postponements shall issue.”
Mize wrote a letter to the court, dated May 21, 2003, stating, in relevant
part:
Morse assured me that he would handle the details to settle the Estate.
It has been 5 long years of numerous phone calls and letters trying to
settle these matters. [Morse] never returns my calls, making it necessary
for me to make numerous calls until he is in and available. . . . It seems
to me that 5 years is much too long for an Estate to be settled.
When I received your order . . . I was embarrassed and angry. The three
recipients of the bulk of the Estate are in the later years of their lives, 84,
90, and 91. They have looked to me to see that my aunt’s will would be
carried out. . . .
I called [Morse] as soon as I got your notice. He assured me that he
would have everything wrapped up by the deadline you have set. He also
told me that he would be sending me papers that I needed to sign. On
Monday of this week, I called his office to see why I hadn’t received
anything. He said he hadn’t gotten it finished and promised to overnight
the papers to me, to arrive at my home on Wednesday, May 21st. The
papers never arrived.
It is my understanding that he is to meet with you on Friday, May 23rd. I
am sending you this letter, overnight, in the hopes that you will receive
this before you meet with [Morse].
Please advise me what I need to do to finish this long process and make
the final payments to those entitled.
Mize also wrote an undated letter to Morse, which stated, in relevant
part:
3
[B]oth my husband and I have tried repeatedly over the past four months
to reach you by phone, to no avail. We have left messages asking that
you return our calls and while all of the numbers that you can reach us
at have answering services if we are busy or away, we have had no
response to any of our messages.
When I spoke with you last, you told me that you would be filing the final
taxes on the McInnes Estate the following Monday. . . .
I realize there have been some circumstances that have slowed down the
process of settling this Estate, including your losing your receptionist.
However, I have made you aware of my concern that one uncle who was
to receive an inheritance from this Estate has already passed away and
the three women remaining who benefit from this Estate, are of advanced
age. . . .
By this letter and a copy being sent to the Rockingham Probate Court, I
am requesting that I be completely informed of the status of this file
immediately. If the taxes have not been filed, please explain why they
haven’t. If they have been filed, when were they filed and has the State
approved the filing? What, if anything, is preventing the final closure of
this Estate? . . .
I am expecting to hear from you immediately, upon receipt of this letter.
Morse failed to file the accounting by May 23, 2003, and, on June 12,
2003, the court ordered Mize to personally appear at a hearing to “show cause
why he/she should not be held in contempt of court and punished accordingly
for the failure and neglect to comply with” the court’s order.
Morse sent a proposed second accounting to Mize. He sent a copy to the
court on June 23, 2003, and expressed his belief that Mize would send the
signed original to the court. Morse paid a $50.00 citation fee, and anticipated
that, based upon his submissions, the court would not hold a hearing, and left
on a vacation. However, contrary to Morse’s expectations, Mize appeared at the
June 23 hearing. The court issued an order the day after the hearing, which
stated, in relevant part:
Mize reported that her non-compliance with the April 25, 2003 order . . .
is the result of her attorney’s failure to discharge his duties to her. She
has attempted to contact him to secure answers to questions that she
would like to have clarified before she executes documentation that he
has prepared and forwarded to her. The questions she detailed to the
court seemed reasonable. The court does not apprehend why her
attorney has not reasonably responded. . . . [Morse previously] took
4
responsibility for the delayed administration and gave assurance that he
would be able to readily comply with the May 23, 2003 deadline for a
final account.
The court ordered Mize to submit a final account no later than July 31, 2003.
Mize terminated Morse and hired Attorney Charles F. Tucker to represent the
estate. On July 18, Attorney Tucker filed a motion to accept interim
accounting and for an extension of time to finalize the estate, enclosing the
second accounting prepared by Morse; both requests were granted by the
court. Shortly thereafter, Mize retained Attorney Andrea L. Sennott, of
Robinson, Boesch, Sennott & Aeschliman, P.A., to represent the estate.
D. Tax Returns
In the proposed second accounting that Morse submitted to the court, he
indicated that he had filed all federal and state income tax returns for the last
year of McInnes’s life and for her estate. Morse also informed Mize that he had
filed tax returns and that the estate could expect to receive a significant tax
refund. In a letter to the court, Morse stated that the Estate was “awaiting
refunds from the Internal Revenue Service.” As an addendum to this account,
Morse attached his legal bill for the first account; a time entry in the bill, dated
April 15, 1999, stated “Prepare 1998 Fm 1040,” and indicated that he spent
1.5 hours on this return, at a rate of $120 per hour.
After Mize terminated him, Morse failed to disclose that he had not filed
the tax returns. In a letter to the estate’s legatees, Tucker’s paralegal wrote
that Morse “is still awaiting tax refunds from the Internal Revenue Service and
from the State of New Hampshire, which he estimates may be in excess of
$15,000.00.” Morse submitted a legal bill to the estate for the second
accounting in which he stated that he prepared state and federal taxes for the
estate. However, the estate file from Morse contained no executed tax returns.
Attorney Sennott filed a final accounting for the estate on October 30,
2003. Attorney William S. Boesch, also of Robinson, Boesch, Sennott &
Aeschliman, contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and was informed
that no tax returns had been filed for McInnes or the estate. After receiving the
necessary tax returns from Attorney Boesch, the IRS declined to issue a $579
refund for McInnes’s personal tax return because it was filed too late. The IRS
assessed the estate penalties and late interest for tax years 1999, 2000, and
2001. Attorney Boesch finally resolved the outstanding tax issues with the IRS
in August 2004.
5
D. The File Transfer
After June 23, 2003, Morse agreed to transfer the file for the estate to
Mize’s new attorney. On October 3, after making repeated requests, and
receiving assurances from Morse that he would transfer the file, Sennott’s
paralegal sent an email to Mize in which she stated, in part:
It is with much regret that I have to inform you that . . . [Morse] still
hasn’t gotten the file to us. I’ve tried daily. I’ve made appointments with
him to pick it up and he calls and cancels at the last minute because
he’s out of paper, the copier isn’t working, or one excuse after another.
Three days later, Morse transferred the file.
In a letter to Morse dated September 5, 2003, the New Hampshire
Department of Revenue Administration (DRA) asked for additional information
to process a tax return it had received for the McInnes estate. Subsequently,
Morse received another letter from the DRA informing him that, because he
had failed to send the requested documentation, it made an audit adjustment
based on its file. Although the letter stated that Morse had until November 17
to voice his disagreement with the adjustment, Morse failed to respond or to
notify successor counsel of the letter.
The estate was closed in March 2004, and, as a result of Morse’s failure
to adequately close out the estate, it incurred approximately $8,000 in legal
fees to successor counsel, in addition to fees paid to Morse.
II. Procedural History
Mize filed a complaint against Morse with the Attorney Discipline Office.
Disciplinary counsel filed charges against Morse, alleging that he failed to
complete the estate administration and provide a copy of the estate file to
successor counsel in a timely fashion, and made false assertions to the court
with respect to the estate’s tax returns. A Hearing Panel was appointed on May
15, 2008. Although Morse initially claimed that he had prepared the returns
for Mize’s signature and that he “retained copies for [his] file,” at the hearing
before the Panel, he disclosed for the first time a set of unfiled tax returns for
the estate that contained handwritten entries. He explained at the hearing that
he would have filed the tax returns had Mize not terminated him. At the
hearing, disciplinary counsel argued that the Hearing Panel should disbar
Morse.
The Hearing Panel recommended that Morse be suspended for two years
from the practice of law, with conditions for reinstatement. It concluded that
he violated the following New Hampshire Rules of Professional Conduct: 1.1
6
(Competence); 1.3 (Diligence);1.16(d) (Return of the File); 3.3 (1) (Candor to the
Tribunal); and 8.4(c) (Dishonesty). The Hearing Panel determined that the
violations of Rules 3.3(1) and 8.4(c) were the most serious. The Hearing Panel
concluded that “suspension was the baseline sanction in this case,” relying
upon Section 6.12 of the ABA Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions (1992)
(hereafter Standards).
The Hearing Panel found the following aggravating factors: (1) a prior
disciplinary offense, which “bore marked similarities to the violations in this
case,” and for which Morse was disciplined while representing the estate in this
case; (2) that Morse submitted false evidence and statements, and committed
other deceptive practices during the disciplinary process; (3) that he refused to
acknowledge the wrongful nature of his conduct; (4) that Mize and the legatees
were vulnerable because they were “elderly and/or infirm and in need of the
assets from the estate”; (5) that Morse had substantial experience in the
practice of law; and (6) that he was indifferent to making restitution. The
Hearing Panel determined that the following were mitigating factors: (1) that
Morse lacked a selfish motive; (2) that he had a good reputation “in his
community and by people who have worked for him;” and (3) that he showed
“remorse and regret for his professional failings.”
Disciplinary counsel requested oral argument before the PCC on the
sanction, and argued that Morse should be disbarred. The PCC, however,
recommended a two-year suspension from the practice of law with conditions
for reinstatement. The PCC determined that Morse “violated duties to his
client, the court and his profession[,] . . . misrepresented the status of his
client’s case to the client and the court, and did not cooperate promptly with
subsequent counsel.” The PCC found that while Morse was grossly negligent,
“there is no evidence that he acted with any intent to do harm to anyone or
with any intent to benefit himself.” Although the PCC concluded that Morse
caused emotional and financial injuries to his client, it determined that those
injuries “did not rise to the level of ‘serious’ injury as described in the
[Standards].” Accordingly, relying upon section 6.12 of the Standards, the PCC
determined that the baseline sanction for Morse was suspension. After
considering the aggravating and mitigating factors relied upon by the Hearing
Panel, the PCC “found an insufficient basis for elevating the sanction to
disbarment” because: (1) Morse did not act with a selfish motive; (2) there was
no “pattern of misconduct”; (3) Morse has a positive reputation in the
community and has practiced law for over thirty years; and (4) after
considering “other cases in which similar circumstances were presented . . .
[the PCC] found no basis for inconsistently imposing . . . disbarment.”
Disciplinary counsel moved to reconsider, arguing that the PCC
“misapprehended . . . critical legal principles” and that, in light of those
7
principles, disbarment was the appropriate sanction. The PCC granted that
motion, but voted to reaffirm its previous decision.
III. Analysis
We retain the ultimate authority to determine the sanction for a violation
of the rules governing attorney conduct. Conner’s Case, 158 N.H. at 303.
When determining whether to impose the ultimate sanction of disbarment, we
focus not on punishing the offender, but on protecting the public, maintaining
public confidence in the bar, preserving the integrity of the legal profession,
and preventing similar conduct in the future. Id. We consider the case on its
own facts and circumstances in deciding the sanction. Id. The sanction we
impose must take into account the severity of the misconduct. Coffey’s Case,
152 N.H. 503, 513 (2005).
We look to the Standards for guidance. See Douglas’ Case, 156 N.H.
613, 621 (2007). Under the Standards, we consider the following factors when
imposing sanctions: (a) the duty violated; (b) the lawyer’s mental state; (c) the
potential or actual injury caused by the lawyer’s misconduct; and (d) the
existence of aggravating or mitigating factors. Conner’s Case, 158 N.H. at 303;
Standards, supra § 3.0. We first categorize the respondent’s misconduct and
identify the baseline sanction. Conner’s Case, 158 N.H. at 303. After
determining the sanction, we then consider the effect of any aggravating or
mitigating factors on the ultimate sanction. Id. Where there are multiple
misconduct charges, “the sanction imposed should at least be consistent with
the sanction for the most serious instance of misconduct among a number of
violations; it might well be and generally should be greater than the sanction
for the most serious misconduct.” Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. 285, 306 (2009)
(quotation omitted).
We first review the duties that Morse violated. According to the PCC, the
misrepresentations to the court and to Mize with respect to the tax returns
were the most serious violations. We agree.
Next, we consider Morse’s mental state at the time of his violations,
which may be one of intent, knowledge, or negligence. Grew’s Case, 156 N.H.
361, 366 (2007). The volitional nature of the acts, and not the external
pressures that could potentially have hindered his judgment, is relevant.
Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. at 307. The PCC concluded that Morse acted with
gross negligence. We disagree.
The Standards define negligence as “the failure of a lawyer to heed a
substantial risk that circumstances exist or that a result will follow, which
failure is a deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable lawyer would
exercise in the situation.” Standards, supra at 9. By contrast, “[i]ntent is the
8
conscious objective or purpose to accomplish a particular result,” and
“[k]nowledge is the conscious awareness of the nature or attendant
circumstances of the conduct but without the conscious objective or purpose to
accomplish a particular result.” Standards, supra at 9 (quotation omitted).
Here, Morse admitted that, when he submitted the second accounting to the
court and to Mize, he knew that he had not filed the tax returns. Although, as
the PCC concluded, Morse may not have acted with an intent to harm anyone
or to benefit himself, we conclude that he acted intentionally when he made
these false statements. See Conner’s Case, 158 N.H. at 304.
We next consider the actual or potential injury flowing from Morse’s
conduct. The Standards define injury as “harm to a client, the public, the legal
system, or the profession which results from a lawyer’s misconduct.” Id. “The
level of injury can range from ‘serious’ injury to ‘little or no’ injury.” Standards,
supra at 9. Although the PCC acknowledged that Morse’s actions caused
emotional and financial injuries to his client, it determined that those injuries
“did not rise to the level of ‘serious’ injury as described in the Standards.” We
disagree. At a minimum, Morse’s misconduct caused substantial harm to
Mize, the estate, and its legatees. The estate paid approximately $8,000 in
legal fees to successor counsel, in addition to fees paid to Morse for his
incomplete work with respect to the tax returns. The IRS declined to issue a
$579 refund because the tax return for the last year of McInnes’s life was filed
more than three years late, and assessed penalties and interest for tax years
1999, 2000, and 2001. The estate paid $1,849.68 for Mize to appear in person
on June 23, 2003, because of Morse’s failure to file the second accounting on
time. In fact, Mize made “several trips to the east coast[ ] specifically for this
matter” and stated that she suffered emotional stress as a result of Morse’s
misconduct. Because both Mize and the legatees were elderly, the length of
time it took to close the estate was particularly harmful. Finally, Morse’s lies to
the tribunal and to Mize caused great harm to the court, his client, and to the
profession; as we have stated, “no single transgression reflects more negatively
on the legal profession than a lie.” Young’s Case, 154 N.H. 359, 369 (2006).
For these reasons, we conclude that Morse’s actions caused serious injury.
Sections 6.11 and 6.12 of the Standards provide that:
Disbarment is generally appropriate when a lawyer, with the intent to
deceive the court, makes a false statement, submits a false document, or
improperly withholds material information, and causes serious or
potentially serious injury to a party, or causes a significant or potentially
significant adverse effect on the legal proceeding.
Suspension is generally appropriate when a lawyer knows that false
statements or documents are being submitted to the court or that
material information is improperly being withheld, and takes no remedial
9
action, and causes injury or potential injury to a party to the legal
proceeding, or causes an adverse or potentially adverse effect on the legal
proceeding.
Morse caused serious injury to Mize, the estate, and its legatees. See Conner’s
Case, 158 N.H. at 304. He lied to his client and to the tribunal. As officers of
the court, attorneys are prohibited from making false statements of material
fact to a tribunal. See N.H. R. Prof. Conduct 3.3(a)(1). “The confidence of
judges to rely with certainty upon the word of attorneys forms the very bedrock
of our judicial system.” Kalil’s Case, 146 N.H. 466, 467 (2001) (quotation
omitted). We conclude that the baseline sanction is disbarment.
Finally, we consider the aggravating and mitigating factors. The PCC
found the following aggravating factors: (1) Morse’s prior, similar disciplinary
offense; (2) his submission of false evidence and statements and deceptive
practices during the disciplinary process; (3) his refusal to acknowledge the
wrongful nature of his conduct; (4) the vulnerability of Mize and the legatees;
(5) Morse’s substantial legal experience; and (6) his indifference to making
restitution. See Standards, supra § 9.22 (a), (e)-(j). We agree that these
aggravating factors apply. As mitigating factors, the PCC found that Morse: (1)
lacked a selfish motive; (2) had a good reputation in the community and among
his employees; and (3) showed remorse and regret. See Standards, supra
§ 9.32 (b), (g), (l). We also agree that these mitigating factors apply.
However, we conclude that Morse’s deliberate lies require no less a
sanction than disbarment. See Young’s Case, 154 N.H. at 369 (stating that
“attorney misconduct involving dishonesty justifies disbarment”). “The
privilege of practicing law does not come without the concomitant
responsibilities of truth, candor and honesty. Lawyering involves a public trust
and requires an unswerving allegiance to honesty and integrity.” Bosse’s Case,
155 N.H. 128, 131 (2007) (citation and quotation omitted). Having considered
both the aggravating and mitigating factors, we conclude that the sanction of
suspension would be “insufficient to protect the public and preserve the
integrity of the legal profession.” Wyatt’s Case, 159 N.H. at 309. Moreover,
disbarment has been imposed for similar misconduct. See, e.g., Basbanes’
Case, 141 N.H. 1, 8 (1996).
Based upon the above, we find that disbarment is the appropriate
sanction, and order the respondent to reimburse the attorney discipline system
for all expenses incurred in the investigation and enforcement of discipline in
this case. Sup. Ct. R. 37 (19).
So ordered.
BRODERICK, C.J., and DALIANIS, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
10