THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-564
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
KRISTIN RUGGIERO
Argued: September 21, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sisti Law Offices, of Chichester (Mark L. Sisti on the brief and orally), for
the defendant.
CONBOY, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (McHugh, J.), the
defendant, Kristin Ruggiero, was convicted of twelve counts of falsifying
physical evidence, RSA 641:6, II (2007), and one count of false report, RSA
641:4, I (2007). On appeal, she argues that the trial court erred: (1) in refusing
to exclude certain audio/video recordings as violative of New Hamphire’s
wiretap statute; (2) in allowing into evidence, without proper authentication,
certain e-mail messages she purportedly sent; and (3) in denying her motion to
dismiss for insufficient evidence. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant married
Jeffrey Ruggiero (Jeffrey) in August 2001. In 2007, divorce proceedings
commenced. In November 2007, the defendant obtained a new job with Pet
DRx, and she and her boyfriend, Brendan Bisbee (Brendan), relocated to San
Jose, California. In 2007, Jeffrey, a member of the United States Coast Guard,
was stationed in Charleston, South Carolina. While in South Carolina, Jeffrey
met Jean Backus (Jean).
Shortly before the divorce action commenced, the defendant filed a
domestic violence petition against Jeffrey. The Brentwood Family Division
(LeFrancois, J.) issued a restraining order against Jeffrey, prohibiting him from
engaging in any contact with the defendant. After the restraining order issued,
Jeffrey initiated no further contact with the defendant.
The defendant, however, contacted Jeffrey and Jean in South Carolina
through text messages, telephone calls and e-mails. Jeffrey also received
anonymous text messages from “811.com,” as well as telephone calls from
“843-298-1057” (the “1057 phone”), a prepaid T-Mobile cellular telephone.
Although Jeffrey and Jean did not recognize the 1057 number, they recognized
the caller’s voice as the defendant’s. On several occasions, Jean used a video
camera to capture the image of the 1057 number on Jeffrey’s cell phone screen
and to record the defendant’s voice. Later investigation of the 1057 number
revealed that the person who activated the telephone did not supply an
address, but did provide the name “Jeffrey” and Jeffrey’s birth date during
activation. As a result of the defendant’s repeated contact, Jeffrey changed his
cell phone number several times, but he continued to receive communications
from the defendant.
In December 2007, Jeffrey was charged with certain offenses relating to
violation of the restraining order. After a district court trial in April 2008, he
was found guilty, but sentencing was delayed pending completion of a pre-
sentence investigation report. The defendant was upset that Jeffrey was not
jailed immediately after his conviction, and claimed she was “terrified” that he
might kill her. Eventually, Jeffrey was sentenced to a term in jail.
On May 4, 2008, within a thirty-minute period, twelve text messages
were sent from the 1057 phone to “617-833-9495,” the defendant’s Verizon
Wireless cell phone number. Shortly after receiving the last text message, the
defendant called the police from her parents’ home in East Kingston and
reported that Jeffrey had violated the restraining order against him. East
Kingston Police Officer Iannuccillo was dispatched.
After Officer Iannuccillo arrived at the house, the defendant gave him a
handwritten log of the text messages she claimed Jeffrey sent her from the
1057 phone. Officer Iannuccillo called the 1057 number, but received a
2
computer-generated voicemail message. Because the defendant expressed fear
that Jeffrey might be in New Hampshire, the officer tried to locate him, but was
unsuccessful. The next day, after further investigation by Police Chief
Simpson, Jeffrey was located in South Carolina. He denied violating the
restraining order. After additional investigation, Chief Simpson obtained an
arrest warrant for Jeffrey.
Following the May 4 incident, the defendant sent several e-mails to a
number of people including her divorce attorney, Attorney Linda Theroux,
Kingston prosecutor, Attorney Heather Newell, Assistant Attorney General Lucy
Carrillo, and various Coast Guard officials. The e-mails reiterated her
allegations about the May 4 text messages and sought assistance in pursuing
her case against Jeffrey.
In July 2008, Jean sent Chief Simpson three packages containing “a CD
video disk, some e-mails, police reports and . . . pictures.” Jeffrey and Jean
also authorized Chief Simpson to access their online cell phone accounts.
Chief Simpson recognized the 1057 number in the video recordings from Jean
as the same number from which the defendant allegedly received the twelve
May 4 text messages. After further investigation, including searches of cell
phone tower locations, additional records for the 1057 phone, and the
defendant’s travel records, a warrant was issued for the defendant’s arrest in
September 2008. The warrant against Jeffrey was rescinded, and his April
2008 conviction was later vacated.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved, in limine, to exclude the videotaped
recordings Jean provided to Chief Simpson. The trial court denied the motion.
During her trial, the defendant also objected to the admission of certain e-mail
messages, arguing that the State failed to properly authenticate them. Finally,
at the close of the State’s evidence, and again at the close of all of the evidence,
the defendant moved to dismiss the charges, contesting the sufficiency of the
evidence. The trial court denied her motions. This appeal followed.
I. The Audio/Video Recordings
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred when it admitted the
audio/video recordings of the 1057 number evidencing the telephone calls she
allegedly made to Jeffrey. Relying on State v. Lynch, 969 P.2d 920 (Mont.
1998), the defendant contends that the trial court should have conducted a
choice-of-law analysis to determine whether New Hampshire law or South
Carolina law governed the admissibility of the recordings. The defendant
asserts that had the trial court done so, it would have concluded that New
Hampshire law controls, and the recordings would have been inadmissible
under RSA 570-A:6 (2001) (prohibiting admission at trial of intercepted
telecommunication and oral communication, or evidence derived therefrom,
3
where disclosure of such information would violate the wiretap statute). The
defendant argues that the admissions violated her due process rights under
Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. The State
maintains, however, that the defendant’s choice-of-law argument is irrelevant
because the recording took place in South Carolina, where the interception was
legal. We note that the parties agree that the audio/video recorded phone calls
were lawfully intercepted in South Carolina. See Mays v. Mays, 229 S.E.2d
725, 726 (S.C. 1976).
The question presented is whether telephonic evidence that is legally
obtained in a sister state by a citizen thereof is admissible in a New Hampshire
court proceeding where such evidence would not be admissible if it had been
obtained in New Hampshire. This question is one of first impression in New
Hampshire, which we review de novo. See State v. Addison, 161 N.H. 300, 306
(2010) (“The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo.”); see also Lynch, 969 P.2d at 922 (“[This question] is purely one of law
over which our review is plenary.”).
Courts in other jurisdictions that have considered the issue have
generally employed two approaches – the exclusionary rule approach and the
conflicts-of-law approach. See State v. Schmidt, 712 N.W.2d 530, 535 (Minn.
2006) (discussing the conflicts-of-law approaches used by other states in
deciding evidentiary issues); People v. Capolongo, 647 N.E.2d 1286, 1293 (N.Y.
1995) (discussing the split in jurisdictions between the exclusionary rule
approach and the conflicts-of-law approach); see also 1 W. R. LaFave, Search
and Seizure, A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment § 1.5(c), at 183-86 (4th ed.
2004). Jurisdictions following the exclusionary rule approach “adhere to the
Federal view that the overriding purpose of the exclusionary rule is to deter
unlawful governmental conduct, and that one State’s laws have no deterrent
effect on conduct of governmental agents of another jurisdiction.” Capolongo,
647 N.E.2d at 1293. Alternatively, jurisdictions that conduct a conflicts-of-law
analysis typically weigh the interests of the forum state against those of the
sister state and assess which state has the greater interest in the process by
which the evidence was obtained. See State v. Lucas, 372 N.W.2d 731, 736-37
(Minn. 1985).
Under the circumstances of this case, we need not decide whether to
adopt the conflicts-of-law approach followed in Lynch, because even if we
assume the New Hampshire wiretap statute governs the admissibility of this
evidence, under the plain language of the statute, there was no violation.
RSA chapter 570-A (Wiretapping and Eavesdropping) provides in
pertinent part:
4
Whenever any telecommunication or oral communication has been
intercepted, no part of the contents of such communication and no
evidence derived therefrom may be received in evidence in any trial
. . . if the disclosure of that information would be in violation of
this chapter.
RSA 570-A:6 (emphasis added). When, as here, “the language of a statute is
plain and unambiguous, we need not look beyond the statute itself for further
indications of legislative intent.” State v. Hill, 146 N.H. 568, 575 (2001)
(quotation omitted). Based on the plain language of the statute, evidence is
excluded from trial only if its disclosure would violate New Hampshire’s wiretap
statute.
Pursuant to section 2 of RSA chapter 570-A, “[a] person is guilty of a
class B felony if, except as otherwise specifically provided in [the] chapter or
without the consent of all parties to the communication,” the person either
“[willfully] discloses . . . the contents of any telecommunication or oral
communication, knowing or having reason to know that the information was
obtained through the interception of a telecommunication or oral
communication in violation of this paragraph,” or “[w]illfully uses, or endeavors
to use, the contents of any telecommunication or oral communication, knowing
or having reason to know that the information was obtained through the
interception of a telecommunication or oral communication in violation of this
paragraph.” RSA 570-A:2, I(c)-(d) (2001) (emphasis added).
Here, the interceptions did not violate RSA chapter 570-A. See J. Carr &
P. L. Bellia, 2 Law of Electronic Surveillance § 7:48, at 268 (2011) (“As a
general rule, restrictions in one state’s consent surveillance statute will not be
given extraterritorial effect.”). None of the interceptions occurred in New
Hampshire. See State v. Luv Pharmacy, Inc., 118 N.H. 398, 407 (1978)
(quotation omitted) (“[T]he criminal law of a state or nation has no operation or
effect beyond its geographical or territorial limits.”). At the time the defendant
made the phone calls, she was a California resident. Moreover, none of the
calls to Jeffrey originated in New Hampshire. Finally, the calls were legally
intercepted in South Carolina, not New Hampshire. See J. Carr & P. L. Bellia,
supra § 7:48, at 269 (“[W]hether a resident of a prohibitory state places or
receives the call, it may be recorded lawfully by the other speaker if that
speaker’s state permits such recording,” and the recording “may be introduced
into judicial proceedings in the prohibitory state.”). Because disclosure of the
recordings did not violate RSA chapter 570-A, the exclusionary rule of RSA
570-A:6 is inapplicable.
5
II. Authentication of E-mails
Next, the defendant contends that the trial court erred by admitting four
e-mail messages attributed to the defendant. At the close of all of the evidence,
defense counsel argued:
that under Rule 901, [all of the e-mail messages admitted as full
exhibits] should have been authenticated by either obtaining the
[e-mails] directly off [the defendant’s] computer, by obtaining them
from the server through which the [e-mails] were sent, or through
other means of proper authentication to include, in fact, evidence
that [the defendant] spoke about in e-mails and the subject matter
in the [e-mails], or that someone witnessed [her] sending [e-mails].
The State maintained, however, that the e-mails were properly authenticated
by testimony regarding their appearance, contents, and substance. The trial
court ruled it would “adhere to [its] previous ruling and allow those exhibits.”
The defendant now argues that the admission of these four e-mails requires
reversal.
We will assume, without deciding, that the defendant has preserved this
issue for our review. “We generally review the trial court’s rulings on
evidentiary matters with considerable deference, and will not reverse the trial
court’s ruling on authentication absent an unsustainable exercise of its
discretion.” State v. Knapp, 150 N.H. 36, 37 (2003) (citation omitted). To show
an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the defendant must demonstrate that
the trial court’s ruling was clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice
of her case. N. Country Envtl. Servs. v. Town of Bethlehem, 146 N.H. 348, 355
(2001).
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 901(a) provides that “[t]he requirement
of authentication or identification as a condition precedent to admissibility is
satisfied by evidence sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question
is what its proponent claims.” The proof necessary to authenticate e-mail
messages is an issue of first impression in New Hampshire. We note, however,
that the federal rule of evidence is identical to our State rule, compare N.H. R.
Ev. 901 with Fed. R. Evid. 901, and we therefore look to federal cases for
guidance. See State v. Ross, 141 N.H. 397, 400 (1996).
“The bar for authentication of evidence is not particularly high.” United
States v. Gagliardi, 506 F.3d 140, 151 (2d Cir. 2007). “The proof necessary to
connect an evidentiary exhibit to a defendant may be made by circumstantial
evidence.” State v. Reid, 135 N.H. 376, 383 (1992) (quotation omitted). “The
proponent need not rule out all possibilities inconsistent with authenticity, or
to prove beyond any doubt that the evidence is what it purports to be.”
6
Gagliardi, 506 F.3d at 151 (quotation omitted). The State need only
demonstrate a rational basis from which to conclude that the exhibit did, in
fact, belong to the defendant. Reid, 135 N.H. at 383. Once the evidence is
admitted, “the rest is up to the jury.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Like other evidence, “[e]-mail messages may be authenticated by direct or
circumstantial evidence. An e-mail message’s distinctive characteristics,
including its contents, substance, internal patterns, or other distinctive
characteristics, taken in conjunction with circumstances may be sufficient for
authentication.” Lorraine v. Markel American Ins. Co., 241 F.R.D. 534, 554 (D.
Md. 2007) (quotations omitted); see also N.H. R. Ev. 901(b)(4) (examples of
authentication include, “[a]ppearance, contents, substance, internal patterns,
or other distinctive characteristics, taken in conjunction with circumstances”).
Moreover, “[t]he contents of the e-mail may help show authentication by
revealing details known only to the sender and the person receiving the
message.” Lorraine, 241 F.R.D. at 554 (quotation omitted). However,
“[b]ecause of the potential for unauthorized transmission of e-mail messages,
authentication requires testimony from a person with personal knowledge of
the transmission or receipt to ensure its trustworthiness.” Id. (quotation
omitted); see Gagliardi, 506 F.3d at 151.
Here, the State sufficiently authenticated the e-mails. Regarding State’s
Exhibit 22 (e-mail describing the May 4, 2008 incident), Assistant Attorney
General Carrillo testified that: (1) she was “CC’d” on the e-mail message; (2) the
message “was from [the defendant], and . . . [it] talked about some of the issues
that [Attorney Carrillo and the defendant] had talked about”; and (3) the
message came from “kvpoperations@gmail.com,” an e-mail address the
defendant had previously used to communicate with her. The defendant
testified that “kvpoperations@gmail.com” was one of her many e-mail
addresses.
In addition, Attorney Newell testified about the contents of the e-mail.
She explained that the reference in the e-mail to the text messages being from
Jeffrey’s personal cell phone number rather than an 811.com number was
because they “had dealt with that issue in the past, that text messages had
seemed to have come from an 811.com.” She testified that State’s Exhibit 22
was basically “follow up to what [the defendant] reported on May 4” to the East
Kingston police.
Similarly, Attorney Carrillo testified that she received State’s Exhibit 21
(e-mail regarding “BM1 Eppright”) from the defendant’s
“kvpoperations@gmail.com” e-mail address. Attorney Carrillo “remember[ed]
the substance” of the e-mail message, “that . . . a friend of Jeffrey . . . was
going to, quote, ‘screw [the defendant] over.’” Attorney Carrillo also identified
the various recipients of the e-mail, noting that these were “the type of people
7
that would get CC’d on a lot of these [e-mails] from [the defendant].”
Additionally, Attorney Newell confirmed that she received State’s Exhibit 21
and testified as to its contents.
Next, Attorney Carrillo testified that although she was not familiar with
the top portion of State’s Exhibit 19 (e-mail regarding alleged additional
restraining order violations by Jeffrey), which contained an e-mail to Attorney
Newell that Attorney Carrillo was not copied on, she did recognize the bottom
half of the e-mail. She testified that the e-mail was sent from
“kvpoperations@gmail.com” to her business e-mail address, as well as to the e-
mail addresses of Attorneys Newell and Theroux. In addition, Attorney Carrillo
described the content of the message, and testified that the e-mail discussed
the report the defendant recently made to the East Kingston police regarding e-
mail messages she received. Further, Attorney Newell testified that she
recalled answering the defendant’s inquiry in the e-mail about “getting a case
number for the [May 4] report that she made.”
Finally, Attorney Theroux testified that she found in her client files an e-
mail resembling State’s Exhibit 20. She testified that although the format of
the printed exhibit was different from the format that was in her electronic
files, the content was the same. The e-mail was sent to her business e-mail
address by “K. MacDonald Ruggiero,” whom she understood was the
defendant. Attorney Theroux testified that she did not have reason to believe
that someone other than the defendant sent the e-mail. Further, Attorney
Newell testified that she recalled responding to this e-mail. Moreover, the
defendant admitted to sending the e-mail.
III. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Finally, the defendant contends the trial court erred in denying her
motion to dismiss at the close of all the evidence because the State failed to
prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that she sent the subject text messages to
herself. Specifically, the defendant maintains that the State failed to establish
“the heart of [its] case” -- that she “used the T-Mobile ‘1057’ phone to send her
‘9495’ [Verizon Wireless cell] phone text messages that she then falsely
reported came from Mr. Ruggiero.”
In response, the State argues that the defendant “mischaracterizes” the
burden it had at trial. The State contends that with respect to the twelve
counts of falsifying physical evidence and the single count of false report, “[i]t
only had to prove that, when [the defendant] presented the messages to Officer
Iannuccillo, and told him that they came from Jeff, she knew this to be false.”
The twelve counts of falsifying physical evidence each alleged that the
defendant “purposely, believing that an investigation was about to be instituted
8
regarding violations of a protective order, presented a text message . . . which
she alleged was sent by Jeffrey Ruggiero, which she knew to be false, with the
purpose to deceive a public servant who was engaged in said investigation.”
The charge of false report to law enforcement alleged that “on or about May 4,
2008 . . . [the defendant] knowingly gave false information to Officer Mark
Iannuccillo . . . with the purpose of inducing the officer to believe that Jeffrey
Ruggiero had committed an offense . . . when in fact she knew that was not
true . . . .” Thus, contrary to the defendant’s assertions, the State was not
required to prove that she sent the text messages. Rather, the State had to
establish, beyond a reasonable doubt, that when the defendant presented the
text messages to Officer Iannuccillo and told him that Jeffrey sent them to her
in violation of the restraining order, she knew that she was giving him false
information with a purpose to deceive him.
Our review of a trial court’s denial of a defendant’s motion to dismiss
based upon insufficiency of the evidence is guided by our well-established
standard:
To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Under this standard, however,
we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation.
State v. Marshall, 162 N.H. ___, ___ (decided November 3, 2011) (quotation
omitted).
The record in this case establishes that there was abundant evidence
from which a rational juror could have found that the defendant presented text
messages to Officer Iannuccillo which she claimed were from Jeffrey, but knew
to be false, and that she knowingly and falsely reported that Jeffrey had
violated a protective order by sending her the text messages. At trial, the State
presented evidence that the defendant initially denied making any allegations
to Officer Iannuccillo. During her testimony, however, the defendant admitted
to reporting the text messages to the police, but denied meeting with Officer
Iannuccillo or any other member of the East Kingston police department
regarding her allegations. Officer Iannuccillo testified that he was dispatched
to the defendant’s parents’ East Kingston home on May 4, 2008, to respond to
a possible violation of a restraining order. He further testified that the
defendant provided him a two-page handwritten document listing all of the text
messages she claimed Jeffrey had sent. His incident report, which included
9
the defendant’s handwritten attachment, as well as the police dispatch logs,
confirmed his testimony. “Evidence that a defendant intentionally made an
exculpatory statement that is later discovered to be false may constitute
circumstantial evidence of consciousness of guilt.” State v. Evans, 150 N.H.
416, 420 (2003).
Moreover, there was sufficient evidence to support a rational conclusion
by the jury that the defendant used the 1057 phone to leave messages to
herself, including the video recordings of the incoming calls from the 1057
number. Further, the State presented evidence that contradicted the
defendant’s claim that she could not have placed the March 20, 2008 telephone
call from Oakland, California at 5:38 p.m. on the 1057 phone because she had
not yet returned from her business trip to Tennessee. Flight records from
Southwest Airlines established that the defendant’s airplane arrived at the
Oakland airport at 5:20 p.m., and a parking receipt from the Oakland airport
indicated that the defendant left the airport garage at 7:21 p.m.
Based on the record before us, we conclude that there was sufficient
evidence upon which a rational jury could find the defendant guilty of each of
the charges beyond a reasonable doubt.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
10