THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2010-534
DAVID AUSTIN & a.
v.
LESTER C. SILVER & a.
Argued: June 15, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 15, 2011
Law Offices of Wm. Howard Dunn, of Claremont (Carl D. Hanson on the
brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Buckley and Zopf, of Claremont (Michael A. Fuerst on the brief and
orally), for the respondents.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, David, James and Carolyn Austin and Robert
Guinto, appeal an order of the Superior Court (Wageling, J.), following a bench
trial, denying their petition to quiet title and ruling that the respondents, Lester
C. and Sophie A. Silver, have a deeded right-of-way over the petitioners’ lot.
We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. The parties own land near Rocky
Bound Pond in Croydon. The petitioners’ lot, referred to as Lot 4, has frontage
on the pond. The respondents’ lot, referred to as the Silver Lot, is adjacent to
the petitioners’ lot and lacks frontage on the pond. The parties dispute
whether the respondents have a valid right-of-way to pass over the petitioners’
lot to access the pond. The trial court considered evidence extrinsic to the
deeds to decide this question because it determined that deeds in the parties’
chains of title were ambiguous as to whether the right-of-way was reserved for
the benefit of the respondents and their predecessors-in-title. Based upon the
deeds’ language and the extrinsic evidence, the court concluded that the
respondents have a deeded right-of-way over the petitioners’ lot for the purpose
of accessing the pond. This appeal followed.
In an action to quiet title, the burden is on each party to prove good title
as against all other parties whose rights may be affected by the court’s decree.
Hersh v. Plonski, 156 N.H. 511, 514 (2007). We will uphold the trial court’s
determination unless it is erroneous as a matter of law or unsupported by the
evidence. Id.
On appeal, the petitioners argue that the trial court erred when it
determined that certain deeds were ambiguous. They contend that based upon
the plain language of the deeds at issue, the respondents never obtained a
right-of-way to cross their land.
Resolving this issue requires that we interpret the relevant deeds. The
interpretation of deeds in a quiet title dispute is a question of law, ultimately to
be resolved by this court. See Flanagan v. Prudhomme, 138 N.H. 561, 565
(1994). We review the trial court’s deed interpretation de novo. Mansur v.
Muskopf, 159 N.H. 216, 221 (2009). Our determination of disputed deeds is
based upon the parties’ intentions gleaned from construing the language of the
deed from, as nearly as possible, the position of the parties at the time of the
conveyance and in light of surrounding circumstances. Flanagan, 138 N.H. at
565-66. We base our judgment on this question of law upon the trial court’s
findings of fact. Arcidi v. Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 701 (2004).
If the language of a deed is clear and unambiguous, we will interpret the
intended meaning from the deed itself without resort to extrinsic evidence. See
Flanagan, 138 N.H. at 566. If, however, the language of the deed is
ambiguous, extrinsic evidence of the parties’ intentions and the circumstances
surrounding the conveyance may be used to clarify its terms. Id. A deed is
patently ambiguous when its language fails to provide sufficient information to
describe the conveyance adequately without reference to extrinsic evidence. Id.
A latent ambiguity exists when the deed’s language is clear, but the conveyance
described can be applied to two different subjects or is rendered unclear by
reference to another document. Id.
The right-of-way at issue had its genesis in a 1950 deed from John A.
Heath to Donas J. Reney. Heath, at this time, owned both Lot 4 and the Silver
2
Lot, having purchased them from the original landowner, Clinton Barton. The
1950 deed from Heath to Reney conveyed a portion of Heath’s land, other than
Lot 4 and the Silver Lot, as well as:
[A] right of way fifteen (15) feet in width Northerly from and
adjacent to the Southerly side of Lot 4 . . . , the Southerly line of
said right of way to be the Southerly line of Lot 4, this right of way
to be for the passage of men, teams and vehicles over the bulldozed
private road to the shore of Rocky Bound Pond. This right of way
is therefore located on the Southerly side of Lot 4 rather than on
the Northerly side . . . . Said right of way shall be used in common
with the owners of the lot excepted and reserved from this deed so
that the owners of said lot at any time shall also have the right of
way from said lot to said shore.
A review of the metes and bounds description of the “lot excepted” by the
Heath-Reney deed indicates that the excepted lot was the Silver Lot.
The trial court ruled that because, when Heath made his conveyance of
land to Reney, he continued to own both Lot 4 and the Silver Lot, he could not
create a right-of-way over Lot 4 for the benefit of the Silver Lot. See Soukup v.
Brooks, 159 N.H. 9, 14-15 (2009). As the trial court recognized:
No man can have an easement in his own land. If the dominant
and servient tenements are the property of the same owner, the
exercise of the right, which in other cases would be the subject of
an easement, is, during the continuance of his ownership, one of
the ordinary rights of property only, which he may vary or
determine at pleasure, without in any way increasing or
diminishing those rights. The dominant and servient tenements
must, therefore, belong to different persons; immediately they
become the property of one person, the inferior right of easement is
merged in the higher title of ownership.
Stevens v. Dennett, 51 N.H. 324, 330 (1872); see Soukup, 159 N.H. at 14-15.
Because, as a result of the Heath-Reney deed, the dominant estate (the Silver
Lot) and the servient estate (Lot 4) remained in the common ownership of
Heath, this deed did not create a right-of-way over Lot 4 for the benefit of the
Silver Lot. Stevens, 51 N.H. at 330.
Lot 4 and the Silver Lot continued to have unity of ownership until 1961
when Clifford Silver, who had acquired the lots from Heath’s widow, conveyed
Lot 4 to Lawrence and Marjorie W. Wilsey. The Silver-Wilsey deed conveyed Lot
4 “[e]xcepting and reserving” to Reney and his heirs and assigns a right of way
described as follows:
3
[A] right of way fifteen (15) feet in width Northerly from and
adjacent to the Southerly side of Lot Four . . . , the Southerly line
of said right of way to be the Southerly line of Lot Four; this right
of way to be for the passage of men, teams and vehicles over the
bulldozed private road to the shore of Rockybound Pond. This
right of way is on the Southerly side of Lot Four rather than on the
northerly side . . . . Said right of way shall be used in common with
others legally entitled thereto.
Unlike the Heath-Reney deed, the Silver-Wilsey deed did not explicitly state
that the right-of-way was reserved for the benefit of the Silver Lot. Rather, the
Silver-Wilsey deed merely stated that the right-of-way over Lot 4 was to “be
used in common with others legally entitled thereto.”
Later deeds in the chain of title for Lot 4 referred to the right-of-way
similarly, if not identically. In 1979, the Wilseys conveyed Lot 4 to John E. and
Suzanne H. Stevens. The Wilsey-Stevens deed referred to the right-of-way
using the same language as the Silver-Wilsey deed. Like the Silver-Wilsey
deed, the Wilsey-Stevens deed described the right-of-way as being fifteen feet in
width northerly from and adjacent to the southern side of Lot 4, explained that
the purpose of the easement was to access the pond’s shore, and stated that
the right-of-way was reserved to Reney and his heirs and assigns and was to
“be used in common with others legally entitled thereto.”
In 1984, the Stevens conveyed Lot 4 to James and Rose Marie
Geschwinder, who conveyed it to petitioners Guinto and David Austin. Both
deeds used the same language as the prior deeds to describe the right-of-way
and explain its purpose and for whom it was reserved.
In 2004, Guinto and David Austin retained an undivided one-half
interest in Lot 4 and conveyed the remaining undivided one-half interest to
petitioners James C. and Carolyn Austin. The 2004 deed, like the other deeds
in the petitioners’ chain of title, described the right-of-way as being fifteen feet
wide, to the north of and adjacent to the southern side of Lot 4, for the purpose
of accessing the pond’s shore. Like the prior deeds in the petitioners’ chain of
title, the 2004 deed stated that the right-of-way is “[e]xcept[ed] and reserv[ed]”
to Reney and his heirs and assigns and “shall be used in common with others
legally entitled thereto.”
The record shows that Clifford Silver retained ownership of the Silver Lot
until 1965, when he conveyed it to Lester C. and Lillian Silver. Like the deeds
in Lot 4’s chain of title, the 1965 Silver-Silver deed “except[ed] and reserv[ed]”
for Reney and his heirs and assigns a right-of-way fifteen feet wide over Lot 4
“for the passage of men, teams and vehicles” to access “the shore of
4
Rockybound Pond” and to “be used in common with others legally entitled
thereto.”
The Silver Lot was conveyed to the respondents in 1998. The
respondents’ 1998 deed provided that, in addition to conveying the Silver Lot,
Lester C. and Lillian Silver conveyed to:
the grantees, their heirs and assigns a right of way fifteen (15) feet
in width Northerly from and adjacent to the Southerly side of Lot 4
. . . , the Southerly line of said right of way to be the Southerly line
of Lot 4; this right of way to be for the passage of men, teams and
vehicles over the bulldozed private road to the shore of
Rockybound Pond. This right of way is on the Southerly side of Lot
4 rather than on the northerly side . . . . Said right of way shall be
used in common with others legally entitled thereto.
This language did not refer to Reney, although it referred to the same right-of-
way that had previously been reserved for Reney’s use.
The petitioners contend that the deeds in the parties’ chains of title
unambiguously reserved the right-of-way over Lot 4 solely for Reney and his
heirs and assigns, and did not reserve the right-of-way for the benefit of the
Silver Lot. They argue that the phrase “others legally entitled thereto” does not
create an ambiguity as to whether the right-of-way was reserved for the benefit
of the Silver Lot and that, therefore, the trial court erred when it considered
extrinsic evidence to construe the deeds. The petitioners further assert that
the 1998 deed to the respondents “is the first in the Silver chain of title which
purportedly grants an interest in the 15-foot right of way for the benefit of the
Silver Lot.” They contend, however, that because in 1998, Lester C. and Lillian
Silver had no interest in the right-of-way themselves, they could not have
granted such an interest to the respondents. Accordingly, the petitioners
assert, the 1998 deed purporting to convey the right-of-way to the respondents
was ineffective.
We disagree with the petitioners that the deeds at issue were
unambiguous. As the trial court correctly ruled, the identity of the “others
legally entitled” to use of the Reney right-of-way over Lot 4 cannot be discerned
solely by referring to the language of the pertinent deeds. The deeds are, thus,
patently ambiguous. See Flanagan, 138 N.H. at 566. Accordingly, contrary to
the petitioners’ assertions, the trial court did not err when it looked to extrinsic
evidence to clarify the meaning of the phrase “others legally entitled.” See id.
Based upon its review of extrinsic evidence, the trial court found
“substantial evidence” that Clifford Silver purchased Lot 4 and the Silver Lot
“so that he could utilize the pond for fishing purposes.” The court also found
5
that when Clifford Silver conveyed Lot 4 to the Wilseys he included language in
the deed referencing the Reney right-of-way and stated that “others were legally
entitled” to it so as to create a right-of-way over Lot 4 for his own benefit. The
court found that when Clifford Silver conveyed Lot 4 to the Wilseys, he “did not
intend to deprive himself of the right to pass over Lot 4 to access the pond.” As
the petitioners do not challenge these factual findings on appeal, we assume
that the evidence supports them and that they are not legally erroneous. See
Hersh, 156 N.H. at 514.
Given these factual findings, which the petitioners have not disputed, we
reject their assertion that Lester C. and Lillian Silver lacked any interest in the
right-of-way. To the contrary, as the trial court found, Clifford Silver reserved
the right-of-way for his own benefit, as owner of the Silver Lot, when he
conveyed Lot 4 to the Wilseys. He then conveyed his interest in the right-of-
way to Lester C. and Lillian Silver, who later conveyed their interest to the
respondents.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we uphold the trial court’s
determination based upon the language of the pertinent deeds as well as its
factual findings regarding the circumstances surrounding the relevant
conveyances, that the respondents, as owners of the Silver Lot, have a deeded
right-of-way over Lot 4 for the purpose of accessing Rocky Bound Pond. In
light of our decision, we need not address the parties’ remaining arguments
regarding easement by implication and easement by prescription.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6