THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Personnel Appeals Board
No. 2011-895
APPEAL OF KAREN HILDRETH
(New Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board)
Argued: September 20, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2012
Kristin H. Sheppe and Michael C. Reynolds, of Concord, on the brief, and
Ms. Sheppe orally, for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Rosemary Wiant, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioner, Karen Hildreth, a former employee of the
department of health and human services, appeals the decision of the New
Hampshire Personnel Appeals Board (PAB) that she forfeited her right to
continue to appeal a disciplinary action after retiring from State service. We
reverse and remand.
The facts are not in dispute. On December 9, 2010, the petitioner
received a letter of warning for failure to meet a work standard, resulting in
withholding of her annual salary increment. On May 4, 2011, she received a
second letter of warning for failure to meet the work standard and failure to
take corrective action as directed. Pursuant to the personnel rules, she
initiated an appeal of both disciplinary actions through the informal four-step
settlement process. See N.H. Admin. Rules, Per 205.03, 205.07. After
proceeding through the first two steps, the petitioner retired from State service.
As a result of her retirement, she was notified at step III that the relief provided
by the informal settlement process was no longer available to her. The
petitioner appealed this decision to step IV. The director of personnel refused
to schedule a hearing, concluding that the petitioner was no longer entitled to
review of the disciplinary action.
The petitioner then appealed to the PAB. See N.H. Admin. Rules, Per
205.02(b) (explaining that informal settlement process does not preclude
appeal to PAB under RSA 21-I:58). The PAB concluded that “[b]y resigning and
voluntarily giving up her status as a permanent employee, [the petitioner] also
relinquished her right to appeal decisions of the appointing authority that
affected her status as an employee while she held her permanent position.”
The petitioner’s motion for rehearing was denied; this appeal followed.
Our review is governed by RSA 541:13 (2007). Accordingly, the PAB’s
findings of fact are deemed to be “prima facie lawful and reasonable.” Id. “Its
interpretations of statutes and administrative rules, however, are reviewed de
novo.” Appeal of Alexander, 163 N.H. 397, 401 (2012).
RSA 21-I:58, I (2012) grants authority to the PAB to hear appeals from
“[a]ny permanent employee who is affected by any application of the personnel
rules.” Our sole task on appeal is to determine whether the petitioner was a
“permanent employee” when she filed her appeal with the PAB. In arguing that
she was not, the State relies almost exclusively upon Appeal of Higgins–
Brodersen, 133 N.H. 576 (1990). In Higgins-Brodersen, two full-time
employees sought to appeal the denial of compensation for unused annual
leave that had accrued while they held part-time positions. Id. at 577. In
affirming the PAB’s denial of jurisdiction, we concluded that “for an employee
to have a right of appeal under RSA 21-I:58, the personnel rule in question
must have been applied to the employee while permanently employed.” Id. at
580. Because the two employees were part-time, and, therefore, were not
permanent employees when the personnel rule was applied to them, they could
not appeal the PAB’s action. Id. at 579-80. Here, the State does not dispute
that the petitioner was a permanent employee when she received the letters of
warning. Rather, the State asserts that “[b]y resigning, an employee
voluntarily, knowingly and intelligently gives up the status of ‘permanent
employee’ and any commensurate benefits.” We disagree. “[A]bsent an express
‘temporal qualifier,’ such as ‘current,’ . . . use of the word ‘employees’ does not
inherently exclude former . . . employees.” Duckworth v. Pratt & Whitney, Inc.,
152 F.3d 1, 6 (1st Cir. 1998) (citation omitted).
The State asserts that the petitioner’s remedy in this case is to submit a
letter of rebuttal for placement in her personnel file. See N.H. Admin. Rules,
2
Per 1501.03(a)(6). Such action, however, would not provide the relief that the
petitioner seeks. “When the court construes a statute, it is especially
appropriate to consider ‘the evil or mischief’ the statute was designed to
remedy.” Rix v. Kinderworks Corp., 136 N.H. 548, 550 (1992). Here, “it is
clear to us that the legislature intended to confer upon State employees a
specific right of appeal to the [PAB]” of personnel decisions “based upon
permanent status.” Appeal of Higgins-Brodersen, 133 N.H. at 580. A letter of
rebuttal placed in the personnel file alongside the contested letters of warning
is not a substitute for removal of the letters themselves. Moreover, the first
letter of warning precluded the petitioner from receiving the annual salary
increment to which she would have otherwise been entitled.
We conclude, therefore, that the petitioner is a “permanent employee” for
the purpose of appealing the disciplinary letters to the PAB under RSA 21-I:58
(2012). Accordingly, we reverse and remand.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
3