THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-302
RICHARD FELLOWS & a.
v.
ROBIN TENNANT COLBURN & a.
Argued: May 5, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 22, 2011
Seufert Law Office, P.A., of Franklin (Christopher J. Seufert and Lexie
Rojas on the brief, and Mr. Seufert orally), for the plaintiffs.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Daniel E. Will and
Jonathan M. Eck on the brief, and Mr. Will orally), for the defendants.
HICKS, J. The defendants, Robin Tennant Colburn and Ronald and
Richard Tennant, appeal an order of the Superior Court (Sullivan, J.) denying
their motion to dismiss this action by the plaintiffs, Richard and Cheryl Fellows
and Benjamin Bellerose, for negligence and violation of federal law for lack of
personal jurisdiction. We reverse.
The trial court’s order recites, or the record supports, the following facts.
On December 14, 1981, the defendants’ parents, Marvin and Thelma Tennant,
and their sister, Barbara Tennant, purchased a residential property at 538
North State Street in Concord (the Concord property). On August 28, 1991,
Marvin and Thelma executed the Tennant Family Trust (trust). They named
themselves as co-trustees and Richard and Ronald Tennant as successor
trustees. The beneficiaries included the defendants and Barbara. The trust
was prepared by a Florida attorney, executed in Florida and listed Marvin and
Thelma as residents of Florida.
In June 1992, Barbara quitclaimed her interest in the Concord property
to Marvin and Thelma. On April 6, 1994, Marvin and Thelma conveyed the
Concord property to the trust via warranty deed. The warranty deed was
executed in Florida and notarized by a Florida notary. Thereafter, the deed was
recorded in the Merrimack County Registry of Deeds.
On June 30, 1996, an order of abatement was issued to Marvin and
Thelma by the New Hampshire Division of Public Health Services (DPHS),
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, ordering them to abate lead
paint contamination at the Concord property. On May 22, 1998, DPHS sent a
letter threatening to fine them because they had not complied with the
abatement order. The letter further informed them that a sale of the property
would not negate the order and that failure to notify a buyer would be a
violation of state and federal law. On February 5, 2000, Marvin and Thelma,
as trustees of the trust, sold the Concord property to Jesus and Eileen Guzman
(the Guzmans), allegedly without notifying them of the lead paint abatement
orders.
On November 22, 2000, Marvin and Thelma executed a restatement of
trust agreement, amending and restating the trust. The restated trust was
executed in Florida and named Marvin and Thelma as trustees and Richard
Tennant and Robin as successor trustees. The beneficiaries included the
defendants and Barbara. Robin resides in Illinois. Richard Tennant is a
Florida resident, who spends six to seven months of the year in Florida and the
remainder of the year in Massachusetts, and Ronald resides in Colorado.
On August 6, 2003, the Guzmans sold the Concord property to the
plaintiffs. The Guzmans allegedly were unaware of the lead paint problem or
the abatement orders and, thus, did not inform the plaintiffs of such at the
time of sale.
Thelma passed away in June 2004. In July, Marvin resigned as trustee
of the trust, and Richard Tennant and Robin became successor trustees. In
April 2006, the final distribution was made from the trust to the defendants
and Barbara.
2
In September 2009, the plaintiffs sued the defendants and Barbara,
alleging a violation of federal law as well as negligence and/or intentional
misrepresentation by the trust and Marvin and Thelma, as trustees. The
plaintiffs claim that the defendants and Barbara, as successor trustees and
beneficiaries of the trust, are liable for the actions of the trust and Marvin and
Thelma, as former trustees. The defendants moved to dismiss, arguing that
the court lacked personal jurisdiction over them.
On February 5, 2010, the trial court held a hearing at which the parties
presented legal argument and offers of proof. Following the hearing, the court
found that it had jurisdiction over the trust; over Robin and Richard, as
successor trustees “in their fiduciary capacity as representatives of the Trust[;]”
and over all three defendants in their capacities as beneficiaries. Accordingly,
the trial court granted the defendants’ motion to the extent that the plaintiffs’
writ could be read to assert any claim against them in their individual
capacities and denied the motion in all other respects. This appeal followed.
The plaintiffs bear the burden of demonstrating facts sufficient to
establish personal jurisdiction. Lyme Timber Co. v. DSF Investors, 150 N.H.
557, 559 (2004). Where, as here, neither party requested an evidentiary
hearing on disputed jurisdictional facts, the plaintiffs had to make only a prima
facie showing of jurisdictional facts to defeat the defendants’ motion to dismiss.
Id. Under the prima facie standard, the inquiry is whether the plaintiffs have
“proffered evidence which, if credited, is sufficient to support findings of all
facts essential to personal jurisdiction.” State v. N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H.
275, 280 (2010) (quotation omitted). The plaintiffs “ordinarily cannot rest upon
the pleadings, but [are] obliged to adduce evidence of specific facts.” Id. at 281
(quotation omitted).
Where a prima facie evidence standard is employed, we review a trial
court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction de novo.
Lyme Timber Co., 150 N.H. at 559. “[O]ur role in a de novo review, is not as a
factfinder, but as a data collector. That is to say, the court must accept the
plaintiff[s’] (properly documented) proffers as true for the purpose of
determining the adequacy of the prima facie jurisdictional showing.” N.
Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 281 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “[T]he court
must construe the plaintiff[s’] evidentiary proffers in the light most congenial to
the plaintiff[s’] jurisdictional claim.” Id. (quotation omitted). Facts put forward
by the defendants may be considered only if they are uncontradicted by the
plaintiffs’ submissions. Id.
To decide whether it may exercise in personam jurisdiction over a non-
resident defendant, a court typically must engage in a two-part inquiry. Phelps
v. Kingston, 130 N.H. 166, 170 (1987). “First, the State’s long-arm statute
must authorize such jurisdiction. Second, the requirements of the federal Due
3
Process Clause must be satisfied.” Skillsoft Corp. v. Harcourt General, 146
N.H. 305, 307-08 (2001) (quotation omitted). Because we construe the State’s
long-arm statute as permitting the exercise of jurisdiction to the extent
permissible under the Federal Due Process Clause, our primary analysis
relates to due process. Vt. Wholesale Bldg. Prods. v. J.W. Jones Lumber Co.,
154 N.H. 625, 628 (2006).
“Pursuant to the Federal Due Process Clause, a court may exercise
personal jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant if the defendant has
minimum contacts with the forum, such that the maintenance of the suit does
not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Id.
(quotation omitted); see Internat. Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316
(1945).
The concept of minimum contacts . . . can be seen to perform two
related, but distinguishable, functions. It protects the defendant
against the burdens of litigating in a distant or inconvenient
forum. And it acts to ensure that the States, through their courts,
do not reach out beyond the limits imposed on them by their
status as coequal sovereigns in a federal system.
World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 291-92 (1980).
Personal jurisdiction “can be ‘general,’ where the defendant’s contacts
with the forum State are continuous and systematic, or ‘specific,’ where the
cause of action arises out of or relates to the defendant’s forum-based
contacts.” Staffing Network v. Pietropaolo, 145 N.H. 456, 458 (2000)
(quotations omitted). Here, the parties’ arguments focus upon whether New
Hampshire has specific jurisdiction over the defendants in their respective
capacities as successor trustees and/or beneficiaries. Therefore, we review for
specific personal jurisdiction only.
In determining whether the exercise of specific personal jurisdiction over
a defendant comports with due process, we examine whether: (1) the contacts
relate to the cause of action; (2) the defendant has purposefully availed itself of
the protection of New Hampshire’s laws; and (3) it would be fair and reasonable
to require the defendant to defend the suit in New Hampshire. Vt. Wholesale,
154 N.H. at 628. Each factor must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and
all three factors must be satisfied in order for the exercise of jurisdiction to be
constitutional. Lyme Timber Co., 150 N.H. at 560.
If the plaintiffs meet their burden as to the first two factors, we then
consider the third. Vt. Wholesale, 154 N.H. at 629. In examining this factor,
we look to the so-called “gestalt factors,” which are:
4
the burden on the defendant, the forum State’s interest in
adjudicating the dispute, the plaintiff’s interest in obtaining
convenient and effective relief, the interstate judicial system’s
interest in obtaining the most efficient resolution of controversies,
and the shared interest of the several States in furthering
fundamental substantive social policies.
Id. (quotation omitted).
The plaintiffs argue that we should focus on the trust’s contacts with
New Hampshire “in order to establish if the Defendant[s] in their capacity as
successor trustees and beneficiaries should have reasonably anticipated that
their voluntary acceptance of their roles would have subjected them to New
Hampshire’s jurisdiction.” They maintain that all three defendants knew the
trust owned and sold property in New Hampshire and, with this knowledge,
Robin and Richard Tennant assumed the role of successor trustee, and all
three defendants received trust assets as beneficiaries. Thus, the plaintiffs
argue that it was reasonably foreseeable that the defendants could be called
into court in New Hampshire and that by accepting distributions from the
trust, the defendants purposely availed themselves of the benefits and
protections of New Hampshire law. Finally, the plaintiffs contend that it would
be fair and reasonable to subject the defendants to suit in New Hampshire
because the injury, which concerns New Hampshire residents and property,
occurred here, making New Hampshire the most convenient forum.
The defendants maintain that they have never had any contacts with
New Hampshire related to this litigation; nor have they ever “purposefully and
deliberately engaged in specific activities in New Hampshire that resulted in
this litigation.” They contend that, given their respective contacts with New
Hampshire are so minimal and those contacts are unrelated to this litigation,
requiring them to defend this action in New Hampshire “would be particularly
burdensome and unfair.”
Under RSA 564-B:8-811 (2007), “[a] trustee shall take reasonable steps
to enforce claims of the trust and to defend claims against the trust.”
Nonetheless, “[a] nonresident trustee may not be called upon to defend in an
action involving the trust unless it has ‘minimal contacts’ with the state in
which the suit is brought.” 76 Am. Jur. 2d Trusts § 306 (2005); see First
American Bank of Va. v. Reilly, 563 N.E.2d 142, 144 (Ind. Ct. App. 1990)
(“Whether based upon the trustee’s affiliation with the state through property
ownership, or some other type of contact, all assertions of state-court
jurisdiction must be evaluated according to the standards set forth in
[International Shoe Co.] and its progeny.” (citation omitted)). Furthermore, we
are not aware of any authority, and the plaintiffs have not cited any, which
allows suit against the beneficiary of a trust absent such minimal contacts.
5
With this in mind, we turn to an analysis of whether the defendants have
sufficient contacts with New Hampshire such that the maintenance of the
present action against them as successor trustees and beneficiaries “does not
offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.” Internat. Shoe
Co., 326 U.S. at 316 (quotation omitted).
First, we must determine if the defendants’ contacts relate to the
litigation; that is, the cause of action must arise from the defendants’ contacts
with New Hampshire. Skillsoft Corp., 146 N.H. at 308. “[T]o be
constitutionally significant, forum-state contacts need not involve physical
presence.” Phillips Exeter Academy v. Howard Phillips Fund, 196 F.3d 284,
290 (1st Cir. 1999). “It is not the relationship itself, but the content of the
parties’ interactions that creates constitutionally significant contacts.” Id. As a
result, “[t]o satisfy the relatedness factor, there must be more than just an
attenuated connection between the contacts and the claim; the defendant[s’]
in-state conduct must form an important, or at least material, element of proof
in the plaintiff[s’] case.” N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 282 (quotation and
brackets omitted).
The suit in this case involves a claim for violation of federal law as well as
a claim for negligent and/or intentional misrepresentation. These claims stem
from the alleged failure of the trust, and Marvin and Thelma as trustees, to
notify the Guzmans of the lead paint problem and abatement orders upon sale
of the Concord property. It is this in-state conduct and not any conduct on the
part of the defendants that forms the basis of this case. Indeed, the plaintiffs
have not submitted any evidence to indicate that the successor trustees, Robin
and Richard, were involved in the sale in any way. Further, at oral argument,
the plaintiffs conceded there is no evidence that Robin and Richard ever knew
about the lead paint problem or the abatement orders.
Admittedly, Robin and Richard accepted appointment as successor
trustees of the trust. However, their agreement to act as successor trustees,
over four years after the sale of the Concord property, without a showing of any
prior involvement with the Concord property as it relates to this litigation or
any active administration of the trust in New Hampshire “simply does not
evince the kind of deliberate contact required of” them. First American Bank of
Va., 563 N.E.2d at 145 (footnote omitted) (trustee in declaratory judgment
action by beneficiary not subject to jurisdiction in state where it transacted no
business, had no offices, none of its agents appeared or acquiesced to
jurisdiction, no trust assets were ever held or administered and the trust
document was not created); cf. Johnson v. Witkowski, 573 N.E.2d 513, 523-24
(Mass. App. Ct. 1991) (trustee in action by beneficiary for breach of fiduciary
duties subject to jurisdiction in state where trust formed and most of the
beneficiaries resided and where trustee signed trust, managed and
administered trust and maintained numerous contacts with the plaintiff).
6
Similarly, the mere receipt by the defendants as trust beneficiaries of trust
assets, over six years after the sale of the Concord property, without further
contacts with this state or related to this litigation, does not serve to establish
the minimum contacts necessary for personal jurisdiction. See Skillsoft Corp.,
146 N.H. at 309 (“In order for us to find personal jurisdiction, we must look
only to the defendants’ contacts that relate to this litigation.”).
Nor do the contacts of the trust and Marvin and Thelma, as the initial
trustees, suffice to establish personal jurisdiction over the defendants. Cf.
Mosier v. Kinley, 142 N.H. 415, 422 (1997) (defendant’s status as a hospital
staff member did not require that we analyze the hospital’s own contacts with
the forum). “Each defendant’s contacts with the forum State must be assessed
individually.” Id. (quotation omitted). Here, any contacts the defendants had
with New Hampshire prior to their designation as successor trustees and
beneficiaries were unrelated to this litigation. Robin has not been to New
Hampshire since 1987 and never had any involvement with the Concord
property. Ronald has not been to New Hampshire in fifteen to twenty years
and only visited his parents three to four times at the Concord property.
Finally, Richard Tennant visited his parents at the Concord property every four
to six weeks until they permanently moved to Florida in approximately 1999.
He last visited New Hampshire in 2009 when he went to a baseball game in
Manchester. None of these contacts relate to, or form the basis of, the
plaintiffs’ claims. Cf. Skillsoft Corp., 146 N.H. at 309 (finding that the
“defendants’ letters [to the plaintiffs in New Hampshire] created the impetus to
file” the lawsuit and, thus, “clearly relate[d] to the litigation”).
With respect to the second part of our inquiry, we must consider whether
the defendants purposely availed themselves of the protection of New
Hampshire’s laws. See Vt. Wholesale, 154 N.H. at 628. “[T]he defendant’s in-
state contacts must represent a purposeful availment of the privilege of
conducting activities in the forum state, thereby invoking the benefits and
protection of that state’s laws and making the defendant’s involuntary presence
before the state’s courts foreseeable.” N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 283-84
(quotation omitted). Purposeful availment requires both foreseeability and
voluntariness. Id. at 284. “Voluntariness requires that [each of] the
defendant’s contacts with the forum state proximately result from actions by
the defendant himself.” Id. (quotation omitted). These “contacts must be
deliberate, and not based on the unilateral actions of another party.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “Foreseeability requires that the contacts also must be of
a nature that the defendant could reasonably anticipate being haled into court
there.” Id. (quotation omitted). This requirement ensures “the orderly
administration of the laws,” and, thus, “gives a degree of predictability to the
legal system that allows potential defendants to structure their primary
conduct with some minimum assurance as to where that conduct will and will
7
not render them liable to suit.” World-Wide Volkswagen Corp., 444 U.S. at 297
(quotation omitted).
In this case, it was Marvin and Thelma, as trustees, who sold the
Concord property to the Guzmans allegedly without informing them of the lead
paint problem and abatement orders. The defendants accepted their
appointments as successor trustees after this event. “[T]o make a prima facie
showing of purposeful availment, it is not enough to prove that a defendant
agreed to act as the trustee of a trust.” Phillips Exeter Academy, 196 F.3d at
292 (finding that purposeful availment inquiry is not satisfied by proof that a
defendant agreed to act as trustee of trust that benefited a resident of the
forum state). “Without evidence that the defendant actually reached out to the
plaintiff’s state of residence to create a relationship – say, by solicitation – the
mere fact that the defendant willingly entered into a tendered relationship does
not carry the day.” Id. (citation omitted); see Rose v. Firstar Bank, 819 A.2d
1247, 1255 (R.I. 2003) (nonresident trustee did not avail itself of the benefits of
forum state’s law “merely by agreeing to and continuing to serve as the trustee
for th[e] trust after one of the trust’s beneficiaries had moved her residence to”
the forum state).
Likewise, it is not enough that the defendants eventually received assets
from the trust as beneficiaries. “[F]inancial benefits accruing to the defendant
from a collateral relation to the forum State will not support jurisdiction if they
do not stem from a constitutionally cognizable contact with that State.” World-
Wide Volkswagen Corp., 444 U.S. at 299. The Concord property was sold on
February 5, 2000 and there is no evidence that any trust assets remained in
New Hampshire following the sale. The fact that the defendants may have
eventually received distributions from the trust resulting from the sale of the
property six years earlier “is far too attenuated a contact to justify” the exercise
of personal jurisdiction over them in New Hampshire. Id.
Significantly, the events giving rise to this litigation occurred over four
years before Robin and Richard accepted their appointments as successor
trustees and six years before the final distribution of assets. As such, we find
it was not foreseeable that the defendants “could reasonably anticipate being
haled into court” here. N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 284 (quotation
omitted). This is not a case in which the defendants became involved in the
trust after litigation commenced and, thus, it should have occurred to them
that they would be subject to jurisdiction in New Hampshire. Cf. Sullivan v.
Kodsi, 836 N.E.2d 125, 133 (Ill. App. Ct. 2005) (reasonably foreseeable that
successor trustee would be haled into court in forum state where litigation had
already commenced at time appointed as successor trustee).
The plaintiffs suggest that it was reasonably foreseeable that the
defendants could be haled into court in New Hampshire because they have
8
been named beneficiaries of the trust since its creation. However, “[a] trust can
be created without notice to or acceptance by the beneficiary.” 7 C.
DeGrandpre, New Hampshire Practice, Wills, Trusts and Gifts § 28.05, at 360
(4th ed. 2003). Here, there is no evidence that the beneficiaries were aware of
their beneficiary status prior to 2004 when Marvin resigned as trustee or prior
to 2006 when they received their final distributions. Accordingly, we conclude
that the defendants did not purposefully avail themselves of the protections of
New Hampshire law.
In light of the above, we need not conduct the third inquiry as to whether
it is fair and reasonable to require the defendants to defend this suit in New
Hampshire. See Vt. Wholesale, 154 N.H. at 629. Accordingly, for all of the
above reasons, we hold that the facts pled by the plaintiffs were insufficient to
justify the exercise of in personam jurisdiction over the defendants, as either
successor trustees or beneficiaries. To the extent the plaintiffs further argue
that the defendants are subject to quasi in rem jurisdiction, this argument also
fails for the same reasons as their in personam argument. See Altshuler
Genealogical Service v. Farris, 128 N.H. 98, 101 (1986) (“The traditional test for
in personam jurisdiction is also applied in determining the existence of quasi in
rem jurisdiction.”).
The plaintiffs next maintain that the trial court did not err in finding that
New Hampshire has jurisdiction over the beneficiaries to the extent that they
benefited from the trust property. Relying on the Restatement (Second) of
Trusts § 279 (1959), the plaintiffs argue that “[t]he beneficiaries can be
disgorged of the trust property that they received.” This argument, however, is
misplaced, as it equates potential liability with personal jurisdiction.
Restatement (Second) of Trusts § 279 provides:
If a creditor is entitled by a proceeding in equity to reach trust
property and apply it to the satisfaction of his claim, and the
trustee conveys the trust property to the beneficiary before the
claim has been paid, the creditor can by a proceeding in equity
hold the beneficiary personally liable for the claim to the extent of
the value of the trust property so conveyed, unless the beneficiary
is a bona fide purchaser or has so changed his position that it is
inequitable to hold him personally liable.
The existence of a proceeding in equity against a beneficiary to reach trust
property for purposes of satisfying a claim does not, in and of itself, establish
personal jurisdiction over a beneficiary. Whether a beneficiary can be held
liable to the extent of the value of trust assets received is a separate issue from
whether the court has personal jurisdiction over the beneficiary. See Mosier,
142 N.H. at 423-24 (stating that the issue of jurisdiction is separate from the
9
other issues in litigation and procedurally must be finally decided before those
issues are reached). We have already determined that the beneficiaries do not
have sufficient minimum contacts with New Hampshire to subject them to
jurisdiction here.
Finally, the plaintiffs argue that RSA 564-B:2-202 (2007) supports
jurisdiction over the defendants. The defendants disagree and argue that, to
the extent that this provision can be construed to require nonresident trustees
and/or beneficiaries to defend a suit in New Hampshire with no appreciable
contacts here, it violates the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
to the United States Constitution.
RSA 564-B:2-202 provides, in pertinent part:
(a) By accepting the trusteeship of a trust having its
principal place of administration in this state or by moving the
principal place of administration to this state, the trustee submits
personally to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state regarding
any matter involving the trust.
(b) With respect to their interests in the trust, the
beneficiaries of a trust having its principal place of administration
in this state are subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of this
state regarding any matter involving the trust. By accepting a
distribution from such a trust, the recipient submits personally to
the jurisdiction of the courts of this state regarding any matter
involving the trust.
Thus, under RSA 564-B:2-202, personal jurisdiction in New Hampshire over
trustees and/or beneficiaries of a trust may be predicated upon a finding that
the trust’s principal place of administration was New Hampshire.
As evidence that the trust’s principal place of administration was New
Hampshire, the plaintiffs point to the existence of the abatement order against
the trust and the fact that Marvin and Thelma visited New Hampshire to sign
for, and acknowledge, the abatement order. These acts alone, however, are not
sufficient to demonstrate that the trust was administered in New Hampshire.
See N. Atlantic Ref. Ltd., 160 N.H. at 280 (the plaintiffs bear the burden of
proffering “evidence which, if credited, is sufficient to support findings of all
facts essential to personal jurisdiction” (quotation omitted)). Aside from these
acts, the plaintiffs offer no more than conclusory statements that the trust’s
principal place of administration was New Hampshire. Accordingly, the
plaintiffs failed to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the trust’s
principal place of administration was New Hampshire. Thus, we need not
10
address whether RSA 564-B:2-202 offends due process in the context of this
case.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
11