THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2011-606
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LOGAN SCHULZ
Argued: June 13, 2012
Resubmitted: August 17, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 4, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
BASSETT, J. The defendant, Logan Schulz, appeals his convictions for
being an accomplice to possession of cocaine, see RSA 318-B:2 (2011); RSA
626:8 (2007), and an accomplice to possession of cocaine with intent to
distribute, see RSA 318-B:2, :26 (2011); RSA 626:8. He argues that the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) erred in denying his motion to suppress because
the search warrant for his home was unconstitutional both on its face and in
its execution. We reverse and remand.
I
The relevant facts are not disputed. On October 29, 2010, Officer
Brandon Alling of the Haverhill Police Department went to the home that the
defendant shared with his mother to serve her with a notice against trespass
and harassment. While lawfully inside the home, Officer Alling saw three long
guns near a staircase. Knowing that the defendant’s mother was a convicted
felon and, thus, prohibited from possessing firearms, see RSA 159:3 (2002),
Alling sought a warrant to search the home. In his affidavit to the magistrate,
he described the guns as follows:
One appeared to be a shotgun with a dark colored stock, possibly a
single shot. I did not observe a packing rod under the barrel indicating it
was a black powder rifle and it appeared to have a chamber. Another
appeared to be a .22 caliber with a wooden stock. The barrel on the rifle
appeared to be too large to be a pellet gun and was longer than any pellet
guns I recall ever seeing.
Based upon this information, the magistrate issued a warrant
authorizing the police to search the defendant’s home for “firearms.” On
October 31, three officers, including Alling, searched the defendant’s home
pursuant to the warrant. Early in the search, they learned that the three guns
near the staircase were, in fact, “BB” guns and were, therefore, not unlawful for
the defendant’s mother to possess. The officers then continued the search and
asked the defendant whether there were any additional guns in the house. The
defendant informed them that he had a muzzle loader rifle and took them to
his bedroom to show it to them. In the room, Officer Alling observed a lock box
large enough to contain a handgun but too small to contain a long gun, and
told the defendant to open it, noting that the officers could open it by force if
necessary. Both the defendant and his mother protested on the grounds that
the police had no reason to believe they had a handgun. The defendant’s
mother then became upset and admitted that the lock box contained cocaine
and money. Based upon this information, the police obtained a second
warrant to search the lock box and, upon execution of that warrant, found
cocaine and money inside.
The trial court denied the defendant’s motion to suppress after a hearing,
and, after a bench trial, convicted him of the two drug charges.
II
The defendant advances two reasons why the evidence against him
should have been suppressed under Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution
and the Fourth Amendment of its federal counterpart: first, he argues that the
initial warrant lacked probable cause to search for all “firearms” generally and,
2
accordingly, violated state and federal constitutional particularity
requirements; and second, he argues that even if the scope of the initial
warrant was proper, the police should have discontinued the search upon
discovering that what they thought were firearms were, in fact, BB guns. The
State argues that the initial warrant was supported by probable cause and was
properly executed. The State does not rely upon the second warrant as an
independent basis for denying the defendant’s motion to suppress. We first
address the defendant’s arguments under the State Constitution and rely on
federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33
(1983).
When reviewing a trial court’s ruling on a motion to suppress, we accept
the trial court’s factual findings unless they lack support in the record or are
clearly erroneous, and we review its legal conclusions de novo. State v.
Beauchemin, 161 N.H. 654, 656 (2011).
We assume, without deciding, that the search warrant was supported by
probable cause and satisfied the particularity requirement. We agree with the
defendant, however, that the manner in which the warrant was executed
offended constitutional standards.
The Fourth Amendment guarantees “[t]he right of the people to be secure
in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches
and seizures.” U.S. CONST. amend. IV. Similarly, Part I, Article 19 of our
State Constitution “protects all people, their papers, their possessions and
their homes from unreasonable searches and seizures.” State v. Mello, 162
N.H. 115, 119 (2011) (quotation omitted); see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 19. The
United States Supreme Court has established a two-step analysis for
evaluating challenges to searches pursuant to a warrant under the Federal
Constitution. Maryland v. Garrison, 480 U.S. 79, 84, 86 (1987). First, a
warrant must be sufficiently particular and must be supported by a finding of
probable cause. Groh v. Ramirez, 540 U.S. 551, 557 (2004); State v. Orde, 161
N.H. 260, 269 (2010). Probable cause exists if a person of ordinary caution
would justifiably believe that what is sought will be found through the search
and will aid in a particular apprehension or conviction. Orde, 161 N.H. at 269.
To establish probable cause, the affiant need only present the magistrate
sufficient facts and circumstances to demonstrate a substantial likelihood that
the evidence or contraband sought will be found in the place to be searched.
Id. Second, if the warrant satisfies the particularity and probable cause
requirements, the manner of its execution must in other respects be
reasonable. See Garrison, 480 U.S. at 84.
In Garrison, police officers executed a warrant to search a third floor
apartment at a certain address for controlled substances and related material.
Id. at 80 n.1. After discovering incriminating evidence against the defendant,
3
the police realized that there were, in fact, two apartments on the third floor
and that they had searched the wrong one. Id. at 80. The Supreme Court
upheld the warrant on the grounds that its validity is judged not in hindsight
but based upon the information made available to the issuing magistrate at the
time it is issued. Id. at 85-86. But the Court also observed that, “as the
officers recognized, they were required to discontinue the search of
respondent’s apartment as soon as they . . . were put on notice of the risk that
they might be in a unit erroneously included within the terms of the warrant.
The officers’ conduct and the limits of the search were based on the
information available as the search proceeded.” Id. at 87.
Garrison was a particular application of the general constitutional
principle that the police may not proceed with a search, absent some other
sufficient justification, when they know, or reasonably should know, that there
is no probable cause. See, e.g., Guzman v. City of Chicago, 565 F.3d 393, 397-
98 (7th Cir. 2009) (police should have called off search under warrant that
authorized search of single-family residence when they learned that house was
not a single-family structure); Liston v. County of Riverside, 120 F.3d 965, 978
(9th Cir. 1997) (officers not entitled to qualified immunity in action under 42
U.S.C. § 1983 after “the degree of certainty [that they had searched the wrong
house and detained the wrong person] reached such a level that a reasonable
officer would have realized these facts”); United States v. Ramirez, 112 F.3d
849, 852 (7th Cir. 1997) (“[O]nce [a] mistake is discovered, the government
cannot use the authority of the warrant . . . to conduct a search . . . that they
know is unsupported by probable cause.); Pray v. City of Sandusky, 49 F.3d
1154, 1159 (6th Cir. 1995) (noting “parties agreed that the officers were
obligated to retreat as soon as they knew or reasonably should have known
that there was a mistake”). These cases are grounded in a strong tradition
under both the State and Federal Constitutions of protecting citizens against
all unreasonable governmental intrusions into the home – even those searches
that were reasonable at their inception but, by virtue of information the police
acquired during the search, became unreasonable in their execution. Cf.
Silverman v. United States, 365 U.S. 505, 511 (1961) (“At the very core [of the
Fourth Amendment] stands the right of a man to retreat into his own home and
there be free from unreasonable governmental intrusion.”); State v. Santana,
133 N.H. 798, 803 (1991) (noting, in warrantless search case, that “when the
entry is made into an individual’s private dwelling, where there exists a strong
expectation of privacy and protection from government intrusion, the
requirement of a warrant is particularly stringent” (quotations omitted)).
Indeed, New Hampshire’s constitutional traditions have caused us to
adopt greater privacy protections than those provided by the Federal
Constitution in the related context of police officers relying in good faith upon a
later-invalidated warrant. See State v. Canelo, 139 N.H. 376, 387 (1995). We
held in Canelo that the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule is
4
“incompatible with and detrimental to our citizens’ strong right of privacy
inherent in part I, article 19 and the prohibition against the issuance of
warrants without probable cause.” Id.; cf. United States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897,
913 (1984) (adopting federal good faith exception). If it violates Part I, Article
19 for an officer to conduct a search under authority of a constitutionally
defective warrant even if the officer relies upon it in good faith, Canelo, 139
N.H. at 387, it follows that it also violates our constitution when an officer
proceeds with a search under a valid warrant after acquiring information that
wholly dispels the facts upon which the initial probable cause determination
was made.
United States v. Marin-Buitrago, 734 F.2d 889 (2d Cir. 1984), is
illustrative of the principle reflected in Garrison. In that case, agents of the
Drug Enforcement Administration obtained a warrant to search an apartment
for evidence of narcotics trafficking and bail jumping connected to Cesar
Correa. Marin-Buitrago, 734 F.2d at 891-92. Before executing the search, the
agents arrested a person they believed to be Correa, but who insisted his name
was “Marin” and who produced two identification documents to prove it. Id. at
892. In spite of this, the agents executed the warrant and found illegal
narcotics. Id. A fingerprint check later confirmed that Marin was not Correa.
Id. at 893. The defendants moved to suppress the evidence seized pursuant to
the warrant on the grounds that the agents had a constitutional duty to report
their mistaken belief that Marin was Correa to the magistrate. Id. at 890, 893.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals agreed with the defendants that probable
cause must exist both when the warrant issues and when it is executed,
stating: “[W]hen a definite and material change has occurred in the facts
underlying the magistrate’s determination of probable cause, it is the
magistrate, not the executing officers, who must determine whether probable
cause still exists.” Id. at 894. Nevertheless, the court upheld the subsequent
search because Marin’s denials that he was Correa and the identifications he
produced to corroborate those denials were not material to the determination of
probable cause. Id. at 895-96.
Similarly, in United States v. Bowling, 900 F.2d 926 (6th Cir. 1990),
agents of the United States Forest Service sought a warrant to search the
defendants’ trailer after having been told that the defendants owned two plots
of marijuana located near it. Bowling, 900 F.2d at 928. While the warrant was
being prepared, other officers went to the trailer and, after obtaining one
defendant’s consent, searched the trailer but found no incriminating evidence.
Id. at 929. Two hours later, after the defendants had departed, other federal
agents arrived with the warrant and began a second search. Id. Although they
were informed about the initial search shortly after beginning the second
search, the agents continued searching and found incriminating items
connecting the defendants to the marijuana plots. Id. The defendants sought
to suppress this evidence because the police had already performed a search
5
which turned up nothing, thus eliminating probable cause. Id. As in Marin-
Buitrago, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals agreed that probable cause must
exist both when the warrant issues and when it is executed, recognizing:
“[W]here an initial fruitless consent search dissipates the probable cause that
justified a warrant, new indicia of probable cause must exist to repeat a search
of the same premises pursuant to the warrant.” Id. at 932. As a consequence,
the court continued, “the officers should have refrained from the second search
until a neutral magistrate determined that probable cause continued to exist.”
Id. at 933. Nevertheless, the court did not suppress the evidence because it
found that a neutral magistrate would have found probable cause existed to
conduct the second search even had the magistrate known about the fruitless
consent search. Id. at 934.
In the context of wiretap warrants, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals
in Ramirez applied Garrison’s command to “judge the constitutionality of
[police] conduct in light of the information available to them at the time they
acted,” Garrison, 480 U.S. at 85. Ramirez, 112 F.3d at 851. The police in that
case had obtained a warrant to place a wiretap on a cellular phone used by
Hotchkiss but learned, at some point during the interception, that Hotchkiss
was not using the wiretapped phone. Id. The court cited Garrison for the
proposition that, after discovering the mistake, “the government cannot use the
authority of the warrant . . . to conduct a search . . . that they know is
unsupported by probable cause or is otherwise outside the scope of the statute
or the Constitution.” Id. at 852 (Posner, J.).
The need for probable cause to exist both at the time the warrant issues
and throughout its execution is equally apparent in other Fourth Amendment
applications, such as: (1) effectuating arrests, see, e.g., United States v. Ortiz-
Hernandez, 427 F.3d 567, 574 (9th Cir. 2005) (although the police may rely on
the totality of the facts available to them in establishing probable cause to
arrest, “[a] person may not be arrested, or must be released from arrest, if
previously established probable cause has dissipated”); BeVier v. Hucal, 806
F.2d 123, 128 (7th Cir. 1986) (“The continuation of even a lawful arrest violates
the Fourth Amendment when the police discover additional facts dissipating
their earlier probable cause.”); (2) interpreting Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 41(e)(2)(A)(i), which, in its current form, requires a warrant to
command that it be executed within fourteen days of issuance, see, e.g., United
States v. Lemmons, 527 F.2d 662, 664 (6th Cir. 1975) (upholding search in
part because “there [wa]s nothing in the record to indicate that the
circumstances related in the agent’s affidavit affording probable cause for the
issuance of the search warrant had changed before it was executed”); United
States v. Nepstead, 424 F.2d 269, 271 (9th Cir. 1970) (while the police should
be given “reasonable latitude” to determine when a warrant is to be executed,
“it is also necessary that search warrants be executed with some promptness in
order to lessen the possibility that the facts upon which probable cause was
6
initially based do not become dissipated”); and (3) conducting traffic stops, see,
e.g., State v. McKinnon-Andrews, 151 N.H. 19, 23, 24-25 (2004) (adopting
three-part test to determine when police officer’s questions during traffic stop
“turn[] a reasonable seizure into an unreasonable one”); State v. Hight, 146
N.H. 746, 748-49 (2001) (observing, in dicta, that expanding the scope of traffic
stop to include investigation of other criminal activity is constitutionally
permissible only if officer has “reasonable and articulable suspicion that other
criminal activity is afoot” (quotation omitted)). At bottom, these cases support
the general principle that the reasonableness of a search conducted pursuant
to a warrant is a distinct constitutional inquiry from the question of whether a
warrant is required in the first place. Cf. Garrison, 480 U.S. at 86-87.
Of course, unlike in Marin-Buitrago, in which the police learned of the
purported mistake before executing the warrant, the police in the instant case
and in Bowling had already begun the process of executing the warrant when
they learned of the mistake – here, that the guns were not firearms but BB
guns. But the same was also true of the officers in Garrison. See Garrison,
480 U.S. at 80. We recognize that, in many situations involving risky and
high-intensity searches, police officers will not have an opportunity to
reconsider with sober reflection the basis of probable cause each time a new
piece of information comes to light. Cf. id. at 87 (recognizing “the need to allow
some latitude for honest mistakes that are made by officers in the dangerous
and difficult process of making arrests and executing search warrants”).
Officers executing warrants cannot be expected to make the same decision in a
split second, under dangerous conditions, that a reviewing court makes after a
comprehensive review. Moreover, facts establishing probable cause are based
not upon certainties but upon inferential chains of reasoning, and new
information acquired during the execution of a warrant may be consistent with
the original finding of probable cause. See Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238,
246 (1983) (requiring only a “fair probability” of criminal activity to establish
probable cause). That is why the standard articulated here and in other cases
incorporates the perspective of a reasonable officer under the circumstances.
Cf. Marin-Buitrago, 734 F.2d at 895. This analysis necessarily involves
consideration of new facts acquired during the search both insofar as they are
inconsistent with probable cause as well as to the extent that there are
reasonable alternative explanations that confirm the original grounds of the
warrant. Cf. id. (“Facts omitted from a warrant affidavit are not material unless
they cast doubt on the existence of probable cause.”). Thus, a reviewing court
must consider not only whether such new information undermines the initial
probable cause determination, but also the circumstances under which the
police discovered the mistake, including the degree to which the police had
secured the area and no longer faced an ongoing threat.
The important principle embodied in Garrison and the other cases
discussed above is that police officers must discontinue a search under the
7
authority of a warrant when an unambiguous and material change has
occurred in the facts, eliminating probable cause. See Garrison, 480 U.S. at
84. To the extent that the police have encountered new information that casts
doubt upon the ongoing justification for the search, they would be well-advised
to refrain from continuing the search until a neutral magistrate determines
that probable cause continues to exist. Should they fail to do so, the remedy of
suppression will be warranted if a reviewing court finds that the magistrate
would not have issued the warrant had the magistrate known about the new
information. See Bowling, 900 F.2d at 933; cf. State v. Stearns, 130 N.H. 475,
484 (1988) (“If, when the disputed portions are stricken from the search
warrant application, enough information remains to support a finding of
probable cause, then the warrant will be upheld.”).
Applying this standard to the facts of this case, we conclude that the
police were required to discontinue their search after discovering that the guns
they had believed to be firearms were, in fact, BB guns. The State does not
contend that the BB guns are “firearms” or that they could otherwise be
considered deadly weapons. The warrant contained no other facts upon which
the police might have relied in continuing to believe that the search was
justified. Cf. id. at 933. As the trial court noted, “[t]he officers examined the
three long rifles that [O]fficer Alling noticed on his previous visit and realized
that they were BB guns.” That Alling was both the affiant and executing officer
makes it especially clear that the police were on notice of the mistake. As a
result, the officers’ continued search of the defendant’s home under authority
of the warrant was unreasonable under Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution.
Suppression is therefore the appropriate remedy under the
circumstances. Had the magistrate known that Officer Alling observed BB
guns, rather than firearms, and given that the affidavit did not provide any
information as to how the BB guns were “used, intended to be used, or
threatened to be used” so as to constitute a deadly weapon, RSA 625:11, V
(2007), no warrant would have been authorized because there would have been
no probable cause to believe the defendant’s mother was committing, or had
committed, the crime of being a felon in possession of a firearm or other deadly
weapon, see RSA 159:3 (2002).
It bears emphasizing that both the standard we have employed and the
conclusion that we reach are compelled under the well-established
constitutional precedents recited above. Even more so than in Garrison, where
the police were required to discontinue searching after they “were put on notice
of the risk that they might be” in the wrong apartment, Garrison, 480 U.S. at
87 (emphasis added), here the police were required to discontinue searching
when they learned that the three guns that formed the sole factual basis for the
warrant were not, in fact, firearms. In so concluding, we are not imposing a
8
new constitutional burden on the police; as was recognized in Garrison, police
officers have a duty to reassess probable cause based upon information
acquired after the warrant issues but before or during a search. The police
must, of course, have some latitude to conduct searches pursuant to warrants.
What the police cannot do, however, is treat the search warrant as an
authorization for a full-scale search irrespective of developments subsequent to
the warrant’s issuance. While it may be the rare case in which facts discovered
during the search clearly and unambiguously dispel probable cause, this is
such a case. Accordingly, the execution of the warrant violated Part I, Article
19 of the State Constitution.
Because the defendant prevails under our State Constitution, we need
not reach the federal issue. See Ball, 124 N.H. at 237.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9