THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Utilities Commission
No. 2011-892
APPEAL OF BRETTON WOODS TELEPHONE COMPANY, INC. & a.
(New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission)
Argued: September 12, 2012
Opinion Issued: November 28, 2012
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Harry N. Malone & a. on
the brief, and Mr. Malone orally), for the petitioners.
Carolyn Cole, of Lebanon, by brief and orally, for intervenor segTEL, Inc.
Murtha Cullina LLP, of Boston, Massachusetts (Olga L. Gordon and
Robert J. Munnelly, Jr. on the brief, and Mr. Munnelly orally), for intervenor
New England Cable and Telecommunications Association, Inc.
LYNN, J. The petitioners, Bretton Woods Telephone Company, Inc.,
Dixville Telephone Company, Dunbarton Telephone Company, Inc., and
Granite State Telephone, Inc., four exempt incumbent rural local exchange
carriers (RLECs), appeal an order of the New Hampshire Public Utilities
Commission (PUC) denying their motion to rescind or declare null and void
registrations of competitive local exchange carriers (CLECs) authorized by the
PUC to engage in business as telephone utilities in the service territories of
RLECs. We affirm.
This appeal follows our decision in Appeal of Union Telephone Co., 160
N.H. 309 (2010). In that case, we held that an incumbent RLEC is entitled to
prior notice and a hearing under RSA 374:26 (2009) before the PUC grants
authority to a CLEC to enter the service territory of the RLEC. Appeal of Union
Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 319. As a matter of statutory interpretation, we rejected
the argument that RSA 374:22-g (2009), enacted after RSA 374:26, supplanted
this requirement of prior notice and a hearing. Id. RSA 374:22-g provides:
I. To the extent consistent with federal law and notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, all telephone franchise areas
served by a telephone utility that provides local exchange service, subject
to the jurisdiction of the commission, shall be nonexclusive. The
commission, upon petition or on its own motion, shall have the authority
to authorize the providing of telecommunications services, including local
exchange services, and any other telecommunications services, by more
than one provider, in any service territory, when the commission finds
and determines that it is consistent with the public good unless
prohibited by federal law.
II. In determining the public good, the commission shall consider the
interests of competition with other factors including, but not limited to,
fairness; economic efficiency; universal service; carrier of last resort
obligations; the incumbent utility’s opportunity to realize a reasonable
return on its investment; and the recovery from competitive providers of
expenses incurred by the incumbent utility to benefit competitive
providers, taking into account the proportionate benefit or savings, if
any, derived by the incumbent as a result of incurring such expenses.
III. The commission shall adopt rules, pursuant to RSA 541-A, relative
to the enforcement of this section.
We reasoned that “the legislative intent underlying RSA 374:22-g . . . is to
require the PUC to conduct a searching inquiry before determining whether it
is consistent with the public good to allow more than one provider to provide
telecommunications services in a single area.” Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160
N.H. at 319. We noted, however, that § 253(a) of the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 U.S.C. § 253(a) (2006), may preempt the
requirement of notice and a hearing, and remanded this issue to “the PUC to
determine in the first instance whether federal law preempts this state
2
statutory requirement.”1 Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 323. On
remand, the parties settled before the PUC could resolve this issue.
The petitioners here then instituted the underlying proceeding and
requested that the PUC rescind or declare null and void the registrations of
CLECs authorized by the PUC to operate as telephone utilities in the service
territories of RLECs. Citing RSA 374:26 and RSA 374:22-g, among other
statutes, the petitioners alleged that the PUC, before issuing the registrations,
had failed to provide notice, hold hearings, and determine whether allowing
such competition would be consistent with the public good. In light of our
decision in Appeal of Union Tel. Co., the petitioners specifically argued that
federal law does not preempt these requirements.
To develop a factual record upon which to base its decision, the PUC
granted petitions to intervene of segTEL, Inc. (segTEL), a CLEC authorized by
the PUC to operate in service territories of RLECs, and New England Cable and
Telecommunications Association (NECTA), a regional trade association
representing private telecommunications providers. As part of the factual
record, the PUC accepted briefing, testimony, and data requests and responses
from the parties. Assuming no preemption, the parties and PUC staff
stipulated to a multi-step adjudicative process that they understood New
Hampshire law to require for “CLEC registration requests in a telephone utility
service territory.” According to the petitioners, the stipulation
describ[es] the procedures to be followed in proceedings related to CLEC
entry into RLEC territories should the [PUC] find RSA 374:26 and RSA
374:22-g not preempted . . . [and] provide[s] a baseline for the [PUC] to
determine whether these CLEC entry proceedings would be so unduly
burdensome so as to “prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting”
telecommunications services in violation of Section 253(a) [of the
Telecommunications Act].
The stipulation provides:
a. Except as provided in Puc Rules Part 431, regarding registration in
the service territory of a non-exempt [incumbent local exchange carrier],
the CLEC will request entry into a telephone utility service territory via
petition, application or other form of request.
b. Public notice, commonly in the form of a Commission Order of Notice,
will be published relative to the CLEC request and the nature of
1 “Under the Supremacy Clause of the Federal Constitution, state law is preempted where: (1)
Congress expresses an intent to displace state law; (2) Congress implicitly supplants state law by
granting exclusive regulatory power in a particular field to the federal government; or (3) state and
federal law actually conflict.” Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 321 (quotation omitted).
3
applicable Commission review. This Notice will be served on the affected
RLECs serving the service territories for which entry is requested.
c. The affected RLEC will be a mandatory party and other interested
parties can petition to intervene in the proceeding.
d. An initial Commission pre-hearing conference and technical session
will be held to decide interventions and determine a schedule for
procedural steps.
e. The RLEC and other parties will be afforded an opportunity to file
testimony (initial and, in certain cases, rebuttal) on any relevant factor
listed in RSA 374:22-g and other facts material to the CLEC request.
f. The parties will have the opportunity to propound discovery on
testimony and other evidence offered prior to a public evidentiary
hearing.
g. The parties will have the opportunity for a public evidentiary hearing
to review and address evidence submitted for possible inclusion in the
record.
h. The parties can file briefs and/or requests for findings of fact or
law.
i. The Commission will issue an Order pursuant to RSA 363:17-b.
j. Parties can petition for reconsideration or appeal of an adverse
Commission ruling pursuant to RSA 541:1, RSA 541:6 or other
applicable appeal statutes.
The PUC ultimately denied the petitioners’ request and ruled that
§ 253(a) of the Telecommunications Act preempts RSA 374:26 and RSA 374:22-
g, II. Section 253(a) preempts state and local laws, regulations, and
requirements that “prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of any
entity to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service.” 47
U.S.C. § 253(a) (2006). With respect to the notice and hearing requirement of
RSA 374:26, the PUC found that in enacting § 253(a), “Congress determined
that it is for the public good to allow more than one carrier to operate in any
territory,” and that “[b]ecause the public good determination has already been
made by Congress . . . no hearing is ‘due’.” The PUC also found preempted
each of the factors enumerated in RSA 374:22-g, II for determining whether
allowing a telecommunications provider to enter the service territory of another
provider would be consistent with the public good. Addressing specifically the
factors requiring consideration of the incumbent provider’s opportunity to earn
4
a reasonable return and ability to recover net expenses incurred because of
competition, the PUC concluded that the “threat of financial harm cannot serve
to deny entry to competitors.” With regard to the factor of fairness, the PUC
expressed concern that the state statute does not make clear how to evaluate
fairness, or “how to assess ‘fairness’ to subsequent competitors after one has
been granted authority to enter.” The PUC also found that it was not well-
positioned to address the factor of economic efficiency because “[t]he
marketplace will be the ultimate determinant whether a competitor is operating
in an economically efficient manner, and it is not for the Commission to make
that determination in the context of [a] competitor’s petition for entry.” Finally,
with regard to the factors of universal service and carrier of last resort
obligations, the PUC reasoned the Telecommunications Act does not allow the
states to prohibit competitive entry because of these factors.
The PUC next determined that RSA 374:26 and RSA 374:22-g, II are not
saved by § 253(b) of the Telecommunications Act, which allows states to
impose requirements on a competitively neutral basis that are consistent with
the Telecommunications Act’s universal service provisions and “necessary to
preserve and advance universal service, protect the public safety and welfare,
ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard
the rights of consumers.” 47 U.S.C. § 253(b) (2006). The PUC found that
§ 253(b) did not save RSA 374:26 because competitively neutral requirements
are necessarily of general applicability and cannot be imposed properly in an
adjudicative process on a case-by-case basis. The PUC also found that
§ 253(b) did not save RSA 374:22-g, II because the factors enumerated therein
are not “competitively neutral with respect to, and as between, all of the
participants and potential participants in the market,” but instead focus on
injury to the incumbent telecommunications provider. Additionally, the PUC
concluded that both statutes were inconsistent with the Telecommunications
Act’s universal service provisions and unnecessary “to preserve and advance
universal service, protect the public safety and welfare, ensure the continued
quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of
consumers.” 47 U.S.C. § 253(b).
Having found these statutes preempted, the PUC concluded that it would
“commence a rulemaking to address, in a competitively neutral manner,
whether additional or modified requirements are necessary to preserve and
advance universal service, protect the public safety and welfare, ensure the
continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of
consumers in the context of competitive entry.” After the PUC denied the
petitioners’ motion for rehearing, this appeal followed.
On appeal, the petitioners limit their argument to challenging the PUC’s
determination that § 253 of the Telecommunications Act preempts RSA 374:22-
5
g, II.2 First, the petitioners contend that RSA 374:22-g, II does not fall within
the proscription of § 253(a) because it does not “materially inhibit[] or limit[]
the ability of any competitor or potential competitor to compete in a fair and
balanced legal and regulatory environment.” Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160
N.H. at 321 (quotation omitted). Second, they contend that the PUC improperly
found all of the factors specified in RSA 374:22-g, II preempted. Third, the
petitioners allege the PUC failed to recognize that § 253(b) of the
Telecommunications Act permits the imposition of “competitively neutral
conditions on market entry in the interest of the public good.”3 Fourth, the
petitioners contend that the PUC’s order itself is unlawful and unreasonable
“for failing to impose requirements on a competitively neutral basis” and by
“establishing a regulatory scheme that is not competitively neutral among the
universe of players[,] . . . consign[ing] the RLECs to competing on an unlevel
playing field.”
A party seeking to set aside an order of the PUC has the burden of
demonstrating that the order is contrary to law or, by a clear preponderance of
the evidence, that the order is unjust or unreasonable. RSA 541:13 (2007); see
Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 313. Findings of fact by the PUC are
prima facie lawful and reasonable. RSA 541:13; see Appeal of Union Tel. Co.,
160 N.H. at 313. The statutory presumption and the corresponding obligation
of judicial deference carry particular significance where, as here, discretionary
choices of policy are at issue and the legislature has entrusted such policy
determinations to the informed judgment of the PUC and not to the preference
of reviewing courts. Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 314. Still, while we
give the PUC’s policy choices considerable deference, we review the PUC's
statutory interpretation de novo. Id.
To determine the preemptive reach of § 253 of the Telecommunications
Act, “we first examine its language and structure and interpret it in accordance
with federal policy taking into account whatever guidance, if any, state law may
offer.” State v. Buchanan, 155 N.H. 505, 506 (2007) (quotation omitted)
(interpreting federal firearms law). We also keep in mind two general
principles:
2 Because petitioners limit their preemption arguments to RSA 374:22-g, II, and refer to RSA
374:26 in passing only, we express no opinion on whether the PUC correctly found RSA 374:26
preempted. “We consider this argument to be insufficiently developed for appellate review.”
Kilnwood on Kanasatka Condo. Unit Assoc. v. Smith, 163 N.H. 751, 753 (2012).
3 The petitioners also assert that the PUC failed to recognize that § 253(f) of the
Telecommunications Act permits the imposition of certain entry requirements on a competitively
neutral basis. 47 U.S.C. § 253(f) (2006). In denying the petitioners’ motion for rehearing, the PUC
explained that § 253(f) does not apply to the petitioners because they are exempt providers of local
exchange services and § 253(f) applies only to non-exempt providers of local exchange services.
47 U.S.C. § 253(f)(1) (2006). On appeal, the petitioners have not challenged this reasoning, and,
therefore, have not demonstrated that the PUC erred in finding § 253(f) inapplicable to this case.
6
First, because the States are independent sovereigns in our federal
system, we have long presumed that Congress does not cavalierly pre-
empt state-law causes of action. In all preemption cases, and
particularly in those in which Congress has legislated in a field which the
States have traditionally occupied, we start with the assumption that the
historic police powers of the States were not to be superseded by the
Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.
Second, analysis of the scope of the statute’s preemption is guided by the
oft-repeated comment that the purpose of Congress is the ultimate
touchstone in every pre-emption case.
Pelkey v. Dan’s City Used Cars, 163 N.H. 483, 488 (2012) (quotations,
citations, ellipses, and brackets omitted); see also Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518
U.S. 470, 485 (1996). Ultimately, federal “preemption is a matter of law, which
we review de novo.” Carlisle v. Frisbie Memorial Hospital, 152 N.H. 762, 770
(2005).
Section 253 of the Telecommunications Act balances two competing
interests: (1) competitive access for telecommunications providers to state and
local telecommunications markets; and (2) limited state and local regulation of
telecommunications providers. Puerto Rico v. Municipality of Guayanilla, 450
F.3d 9, 15 (1st Cir. 2006). Subsections (a) and (b) of § 253 illustrate this
balance. Section 253(a) provides: “No State or local statute or regulation, or
other State or local legal requirement, may prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate
telecommunications service.” 47 U.S.C. § 253(a). Section 253(b) expressly
allows “a State to impose, on a competitively neutral basis . . . requirements
necessary to preserve and advance universal service, protect the public safety
and welfare, ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and
safeguard the rights of consumers.” 47 USC § 253(b).
Congress enacted § 253(a) to “end[] the States’ longstanding practice of
granting and maintaining local exchange monopolies.” AT&T Corp. v. Iowa
Utilities Bd., 525 U.S. 366, 405 (1999). According to courts and the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), § 253(a) preempts any state law that
“materially inhibits or limits the ability of any competitor or potential
competitor to compete in a fair and balanced legal and regulatory
environment.” Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 321 (quotation omitted).
A prohibition does not need to be complete or insurmountable to run afoul of
§ 253(a). Id.
Section 253 (b), by contrast, is a safe-harbor provision for limited state
regulation of telecommunications providers. Permissible state regulations
must be competitively neutral, consistent with the Telecommunication Act’s
7
universal service provisions, and “necessary to preserve and advance universal
service, protect the public safety and welfare, ensure the continued quality of
telecommunications services, and safeguard the rights of consumers.” 47
U.S.C. § 253(b); see In the Matter of Silver Star Telephone Company, Inc., 12
F.C.C.R. 15639, 15657 (1997). Additionally, a court must find that a state law
violates § 253(a) before engaging in analysis under § 253(b). See TracFone
Wireless v. Neb. Pub. Serv. Com’n, 778 N.W.2d 452, 463-64 (Neb. 2010). In
other words, § 253(b) is an affirmative defense to preemption under § 253(a).
Id. It does not impose an independent, substantive limitation on the ability of
states to regulate telecommunications providers. See id.; see also BellSouth
Telecommunications v. Town of Palm Beach, 252 F.3d 1169, 1187 (11th Cir.
2001). “Subsection (a) is the only portion of section 253 that broadly limits the
ability of states to regulate. All of the remaining subsections, including
subsection (b), carve out defined areas in which states may regulate or
continue to regulate, subject to certain conditions.” In the Matter of the Public
Utility Commission of Texas & a., 13 F.C.C.R. 3460, 3481 (1997).
Turning to the merits of the appeal, we affirm the PUC’s finding that
§ 253(a) of the Telecommunications Act preempts RSA 374:22-g, II. We reach
this conclusion because we assume, without deciding, that the stipulation of
the parties and PUC staff correctly interprets New Hampshire law, necessarily
including RSA 374:22-g, II, to require completion of a multi-step adjudicative
process before a CLEC may enter the service territory of an incumbent RLEC.
Based on the PUC’s factual finding that such an adjudicative process “would
take months and possibly a year or more to complete,” we are persuaded that
RSA 374:22-g, II “materially inhibits or limits the ability of any competitor or
potential competitor to compete in a fair and balanced legal and regulatory
environment.” Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 321 (quotation omitted);
see Re Sprint Communications Company L.P., No. 6055–NC–103, 2008 WL
2787762, at *8 (Wisc. Pub. Serv. Comm. May 9, 2008) (finding that § 253(a)
preempts state statute directing the Wisconsin Public Utilities Commission to
hold a hearing to determine whether “public convenience and necessity
require” it to allow a CLEC to enter into the service territory of an RLEC); see
also Lodi Tel. Co. v. Pub. Serv. Com’n., 55 N.W.2d 379, 383 (Wisc. 1952)
(interpreting the language “public convenience and necessity require” from
Wisconsin state statute to mean “is consistent with public necessity and
convenience”). Although RSA 374:22-g, II may not form a complete or
insurmountable prohibition to competition, “a prohibition does not need to be
complete or insurmountable to run afoul of section 253(a).” Id. (quotation
omitted); see Municipality of Guayanilla, 450 F.3d at 18.
We also accept the PUC’s finding that RSA 374:22-g, II is not
competitively neutral and, therefore, not saved by § 253(b). We agree with the
PUC that RSA 374:22-g, II impermissibly focuses on injury to the incumbent
telecommunications provider and is “not competitively neutral with respect to,
8
and as between, all of the participants and potential participants in the
market.” See RT Communications, Inc. v. F.C.C., 201 F.3d 1264, 1267-69
(10th Cir. 2000) (finding state law preempted because it protected incumbent
local exchange carriers from competition). RSA 374:22-g, II clearly favors an
incumbent RLEC by permitting the PUC to prohibit competition based upon
consideration of the incumbent’s “opportunity to realize a reasonable return on
its investment” and ability to recover net expenses incurred because of
competition. See In the Matter of AVR, L.P. d/b/a Hyperion of Tennessee, L.P.,
14 F.C.C.R. 11064, 11071 (1999) (“[A] state legal requirement would not as a
general matter be ‘competitively neutral’ if it favors incumbent LECs over new
entrants (or vice-versa).”).
Additionally, although the other factors listed in RSA 374:22-g, II do not,
on their face, protect incumbent telecommunications providers from
competition, we find significant the PUC’s determination that “[i]n order for the
Commission to impose requirements [on CLEC entry into service territories of
incumbent RLECs] on a competitively neutral basis . . . they would properly be
imposed by administrative rule and could not be imposed in an adjudicated
process on a case-by-case basis.” See Re Sprint Communications Company
L.P., 2008 WL 2787762, at *8 (finding that § 253(b) did not save state statute
directing the Wisconsin Public Utilities Commission to hold a hearing to
determine whether “public convenience and necessity require” it to allow a
CLEC to enter into the service territory of an RLEC). Accordingly, in light of the
stipulation of the parties and PUC staff that satisfaction of RSA 374:22-g, II
would require an extensive case-by-case adjudicative process, which we accept
for purposes of this appeal, we affirm the PUC’s determination that RSA
374:22-g, II is not competitively neutral. Given that § 253(b) does not
specifically address whether competitively neutral requirements may be
imposed through such an adjudicatory process, we accord substantial
deference to the PUC’s finding that they may not. Cf. Grand China v. United
Nat’l Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 429, 434 (2007); Appeal of Public Serv. Co. of N.H., 122
N.H. 1062, 1075 (1982) (the PUC has “expertise and knowledge of the
industries it regulates”).
As for the petitioners’ final contention, that by having found RSA 374:22-
g, II preempted, the “Commission’s order itself establishes a regulatory scheme
that is not competitively neutral, . . . consign[ing] RLECs to competing on an
uneven playing field,” we conclude that this argument is premature. The PUC
explained that it would “commence a rulemaking to address, in a competitively
neutral manner, whether additional or modified requirements are necessary to
preserve and advance universal service, protect the public safety and welfare,
ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard
the rights of consumers in the context of competitive entry.” Thus, because the
PUC has not yet adopted such administrative rules, we conclude that this
argument is not ripe for our review.
9
Finally, because the PUC has indicated that it may adopt administrative
rules to govern CLEC entry into the service territories of incumbent RLECs, we
note that the PUC erred when it concluded that, in enacting § 253(a),
“Congress determined that it is for the public good to allow more than one
carrier to operate in any territory,” and that the PUC is preempted “from
deciding not to allow a telephone utility to compete in the service area of
another telephone utility . . . .” Similarly, the PUC erred in reasoning that
§ 253(a) preempts “a statutorily required process that could have the effect of
prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate
telecommunications service.” (Emphasis added; quotation omitted.) By
inserting the word “could” before the statutory phrase “have the effect of
prohibiting,” the PUC erroneously expanded the statute’s preemptive reach. Cf.
Sprint Telephony PCS, L.P. v. County of San Diego, 543 F.3d 571, 578 (9th Cir.
2008) (en banc); Level 3 v. City of St. Louis, Mo., 477 F.3d 528, 532 (8th Cir.
2007). The word “may” in § 253(a) does not mean “might possibly.” Sprint
Telephony PCS, L.P., 543 F.3d at 578. Under a plain reading of § 253(a), a
plaintiff “must show actual or effective prohibition, rather than the mere
possibility of prohibition.” Level 3, 477 F.3d at 532.
The correct standard for preemption under § 253(a) of the
Telecommunications Act is whether a state law or regulation “materially
inhibits or limits the ability of any competitor or potential competitor to
compete in a fair and balanced legal and regulatory environment.” Appeal of
Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 321 (quotation omitted). Section 253(a),
particularly when considered together with § 253(b), does not evince Congress’s
determination that competition in a single service territory always is in the
public good. The PUC must still make this determination. RSA 374:22-g, I. In
this case, we have found the stipulated process for compliance with RSA
374:22-g, II too burdensome and, therefore, preempted. We express no opinion
on whether, through rulemaking or otherwise, the PUC may develop an
alternative, less burdensome process, that comports with both federal and
state law.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
10