THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2011-451
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
DAVID J. FISCHER
Argued: June 4, 2013
Opinion Issued: November 26, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, David J. Fischer, appeals his convictions,
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Brown, J.), on two counts of second
degree assault, both of which resulted in extended terms of imprisonment. See
RSA 631:2, I(c) (2007); RSA 651:6, II(a) (Supp. 2012). He argues that: (1) the
trial court erred in admitting testimony under the excited utterance hearsay
exception; (2) the evidence was insufficient to prove that his conduct
manifested extreme indifference to the value of human life; (3) the trial court
erred in instructing the jury on extreme indifference to the value of human life;
(4) the trial court violated his rights against double jeopardy by sentencing him
on both second degree assault convictions; (5) the trial court erred in imposing
extended terms of imprisonment; and (6) the trial court erred in failing to
instruct the jury that it must unanimously find a specific bodily injury. We
affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. At 10 p.m. on February
18, 2010, the victim, the defendant’s wife, returned to their home in Dover
from her shift as a nurse at York Hospital. She and the defendant argued. She
then removed her rings, threw them at him, and told him that she “couldn’t do
this any more.” In response, the defendant grabbed her by the throat, pushed
her head into the wall behind her with such force that it dented the wall, threw
her to the floor, and left the house. When the defendant returned, the victim
told him that she was not going to stay in the relationship and that she was
going to obtain a restraining order the next day. The defendant responded that
if she did, he would kill her.
The defendant turned off the lights in the kitchen and went upstairs.
When the victim went from the living room into the kitchen and turned the
lights back on, the defendant came downstairs, turned the lights off, and
lunged at her. He grabbed her from behind, put his hand over her mouth, and
brought her to the floor. Then he stepped on her head, preventing her from
getting up. He grabbed her by the hair and sweatshirt and dragged her into
the living room. The sweatshirt tightened around her neck so she could not
breathe or speak. The defendant then went back upstairs. The victim spent
the rest of the night on the couch, although she could not sleep.
In the morning, the defendant apologized and said that he wanted “to fix
things,” but the victim said that she could not stay with him. As she was
leaving the house for work, the defendant charged at the door, slamming it on
her finger. Rather than going to her department at York Hospital, the victim
went to the emergency room. The emergency room doctor determined that her
finger was fractured. Although she tried to work after leaving the emergency
room, she was sent home because of her injured finger.
The victim left the hospital and telephoned a co-worker, Pamela Damrill.
She also telephoned her mother’s partner, Kristin Busch. She told both what
had happened. She then called her brother, a Rochester police officer, who
accompanied her to obtain a restraining order. The victim also reported the
assaults to the Dover police. At the recommendation of the police, she went to
the Wentworth-Douglass Hospital emergency room to be examined.
At the hospital, the victim told the nurse that, during the previous night,
she had been assaulted by her husband, who pushed her to the floor, stepped
on her, and choked her. She also said that her husband slammed her finger in
the door. The nurse noted bruising on the victim’s back near her right
2
shoulder blade, tenderness on her cervical spine, tenderness on the back of her
head and front of her neck, and swelling, tenderness, and bruising on her left
index finger. In addition to her fractured finger, the victim was diagnosed with
muscle strain in her neck, cervical strain, and abrasions and contusions on
her neck, back, and head.
The defendant was indicted on three counts of second degree assault.
The first charge alleged that the defendant caused serious bodily injury to the
victim by slamming a door on her hand, causing her to suffer a fractured
finger. The other two charges, one concerning the assault in the living room
and the other concerning the assault in the kitchen, alleged that the defendant
recklessly caused bodily injury to the victim under “circumstances manifesting
an extreme indifference to the value of human life.”
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss all three
charges, arguing that the State had introduced insufficient evidence. The trial
court denied the motion. The jury returned a not guilty verdict regarding the
alleged assault that caused the victim’s broken finger, but found the defendant
guilty of the counts based upon the incidents in the living room and kitchen.
The defendant moved to set aside the verdicts, renewing his insufficiency claim.
The trial court denied the motion. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in admitting Kristin
Busch’s testimony under the excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule.
The admissibility of evidence is a matter left to the sound discretion of the trial
court. State v. McDonald, 163 N.H. 115, 121 (2011). We will not reverse the
trial court’s decision to admit evidence absent an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. Id. In determining whether a ruling is a proper exercise of judicial
discretion, we consider whether the record establishes an objective basis
sufficient to sustain the discretionary decision made. Id.
The excited utterance exception to the hearsay rule permits the
admission of hearsay statements “relating to a startling event or condition
made while the declarant was under the stress of excitement caused by the
event or condition.” N.H. R. Ev. 803(2). “To qualify as an excited utterance,
the statement must be a spontaneous verbal reaction to some startling or
shocking event, made at a time when the speaker was still in a state of nervous
excitement produced by that event and before she had time to contrive or
misrepresent.” State v. Pepin, 156 N.H. 269, 274 (2007) (quotation and
brackets omitted).
Busch testified that the victim telephoned her at around 8:45 a.m., after
the victim left work. The victim was tearful, and her voice was shaky. Busch
then gave a detailed narrative of her conversation with the victim, in which the
victim described the assaults and said that she “was scared.” When the
3
defendant objected to Busch’s testimony as inadmissible hearsay, the trial
court concluded that it was admissible as an excited utterance. Previously,
however, the trial court had ruled that Pamela Damrill’s testimony concerning
the victim’s telephone call to her, which was made shortly before the call to
Busch, was not an excited utterance because of the “intervening events”
between the assaults and the call – the victim’s drive to the emergency room for
treatment for her finger and her time at work. In light of the trial court’s
finding that these intervening events precluded admission of Damrill’s
testimony as an excited utterance, it erred in admitting Busch’s testimony
concerning the victim’s subsequent statements to her. See id. (noting excited
utterance exception is based upon spontaneity and impulsiveness of
statement).
The State argues that any error in admitting Busch’s testimony was
nevertheless harmless.
An error is harmless if we can say beyond a reasonable doubt that
it did not affect the verdict. The State bears the burden of proving
that an error is harmless. The evaluation of whether the State has
met its burden involves consideration of the alternative evidence
presented at trial and the character of the contested evidence. An
error may be harmless beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative
evidence of the defendant’s guilt is of an overwhelming nature,
quantity or weight, and if the contested evidence is merely
cumulative or inconsequential in relation to the strength of the
State’s evidence of guilt. In making this determination, we
consider the alternative evidence presented at trial as well as the
character of the inadmissible evidence itself.
State v. Rodriguez, 164 N.H. 800, 810-11 (2013) (quotation omitted).
Here, the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt was overwhelming.
The victim provided a graphic account of the assault in the living room. She
also described in detail the assault in the kitchen. The officer who interviewed
the victim at the Dover police station testified that she had a mark on the left
side of her neck and a bruise on the back of her shoulder. Photographs of the
victim’s injuries and the dent in the wall were admitted as exhibits at trial. The
nurse who examined the victim at the Wentworth-Douglass Hospital emergency
room testified that the victim told her that she had been assaulted by her
husband on the previous night, and that during the assault she was pushed to
the floor, stepped on, and choked. The nurse noted bruising on the victim’s
back near her shoulder blade, tenderness in her neck, tenderness on the back
of her head, and swelling, tenderness, and bruising on her finger – injuries that
the nurse testified were consistent with the victim’s description of the assaults.
4
In relation to this evidence, Busch’s testimony was inconsequential and
cumulative. See State v. Hernandez, 159 N.H. 394, 403 (2009). Our review of
the record establishes that Busch’s recitation of her conversation with the
victim was devoid of any evidence not disclosed by other witnesses. The
defendant argues, however, that “Busch’s testimony about [the victim’s]
statements prejudiced the defense by attributing to [the victim], on the day
after the events, a similar description of the details of the previous night,
thereby bolstering her credibility.” Busch’s testimony, however, was
substantially the same as testimony elicited from the nurse who treated the
victim at the Wentworth-Douglass Hospital. See State v. Fischer, 143 N.H.
311, 317 (1999) (concluding that any error in admitting victim’s prior
consistent statement was harmless where it was merely cumulative of
testimony of physician who examined victim shortly after attack). Here, the
nurse recounted the victim’s description of the assaults, testifying that the
victim’s injuries were consistent with her description of what had happened.
Consequently, the jury heard other testimony “bolstering the victim’s version of
the attack[s].” Id. Because the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt
was overwhelming and because the contested evidence was inconsequential
and cumulative, we conclude that the erroneous admission of Busch’s
testimony as an excited utterance was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
The defendant next argues that the State introduced insufficient evidence
to prove that his conduct manifested an extreme indifference to the value of
human life. To prevail, the defendant must establish that no rational trier of
fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light
most favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Dion, 164 N.H. 544, 548 (2013). Whether a defendant acted with
“extreme indifference” is a question of fact for the jury. State v. Edson, 153
N.H. 45, 47 (2005). “We have previously determined that an attacker acts with
‘extreme indifference’ when he inflicts any degree of bodily injury on a victim
and when the ‘circumstances’ of the attack demonstrate a blatant disregard for
the risk to the victim’s life.” State v. Fletcher, 129 N.H. 641, 644 (1987)
(quotation omitted). The injuries, however, need not themselves be life-
threatening. State v. Bailey, 127 N.H. 416, 423 (1985).
We conclude that, as to both assaults, there was sufficient evidence that
the defendant caused bodily injury to the victim under circumstances
manifesting an extreme indifference to the value of human life. The
circumstances of these assaults, as testified to at trial, support a finding that
the defendant’s conduct manifested extreme indifference to the value of human
life, particularly since the jury could have concluded that the course of the
defendant’s conduct, if continued, could have caused the victim’s death. See
Fletcher, 129 N.H. at 644. We therefore conclude that a rational juror, viewing
all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
5
The defendant next asserts that the trial court erred in its instructions
defining the element of extreme indifference to the value of human life. “When
reviewing jury instructions, we evaluate allegations of error by interpreting the
disputed instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror would have
understood them, and in light of all the evidence in the case.” State v. Furgal,
164 N.H. 430, 434 (2012) (quotation omitted). The scope and wording of jury
instructions are within the sound discretion of the trial court, and we review
the trial court’s decision for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. State v.
Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 70 (2011). “To show that the trial court’s decision is not
sustainable, the defendant must demonstrate that the trial court’s ruling was
clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
A person is guilty of second degree assault if he “[r]ecklessly causes
bodily injury to another under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference
to the value of human life.” RSA 631:2, I(c). Citing State v. Schultz, 141 N.H.
101, 105 (1996), a second degree murder case, the defendant proposed the
following jury instruction:
[P]roof of extreme indifference to the value of human life requires
more than a demonstration that Defendant had created and
disregarded a substantial risk of death. “Extreme indifference to
the value of human life” requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt
of a “blatant disregard” of a substantial and [un]justifiable risk of
death.
The State objected, asserting that the definition of “recklessly” given by the trial
court contained the “substantial and unjustifiable risk” language and,
therefore, that it did not need to be repeated in the definition of “extreme
indifference to the value of human life.” The trial court agreed, noting that it
was “sticking to the standard instructions throughout the entire instruction
format.”
The trial court instructed the jury that the State was required to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted recklessly – that he “was
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk,” that he “consciously disregarded
the risk,” and that his disregard of the risk “was a gross deviation from what
the law-abiding person would have done.” The court also explained that the
risk had to be “to the [victim’s] life.” Regarding “extreme indifference to the
value of human life,” the trial court defined the term as meaning that “the
[d]efendant’s acts demonstrate a blatant disregard for the risk to the [victim’s]
life. It’s not necessary the injury -- or a series of injuries themselves be life-
threatening.”
6
We find no error in the trial court’s instructions. Here, the jury
instructions mirrored the language that we have approved regarding the
requirements for second degree assault. See, e.g., Fletcher, 129 N.H. at 644
(stating that “attacker acts with ‘extreme indifference’ when he inflicts any
degree of bodily injury on a victim and when the ‘circumstances’ of the attack
demonstrate a blatant disregard for the risk to the victim’s life” (quotation
omitted)); Bailey, 127 N.H. at 424 (explaining “extreme indifference” requires
proof of “a blatant disregard” for the risk to human life (quotation omitted)).
We disagree with the defendant’s assertion that the jury instructions
failed to convey that “an essential aspect of the meaning of the extreme
indifference element” is “the requirement that the defendant must have created
and disregarded a substantial risk of death.” The court correctly instructed the
jury that to find guilt, it must find that the defendant “was aware of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk” and that the risk had to be “to the [victim’s]
life.”
Moreover, “[t]he trial court is not required to use the specific language
requested by the defendant. Rather, the purpose of the trial court’s charge is
to state and explain to the jury, in clear and intelligible language, the rules of
law applicable to the case.” Furgal, 164 N.H. at 434 (quotation omitted). The
jury instructions fairly covered the issues of law in the case, and, therefore, we
find no unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Etienne, 163 N.H. at 70; see
also Bailey, 127 N.H. at 424.
The defendant next argues that the trial court violated his right against
double jeopardy by sentencing him on both convictions for second degree
assault because each conviction was based upon an indictment alleging the
same bodily injury – “contusions and muscle strain to [the victim’s] head and
neck.” The State counters that the defendant’s sentences did not violate his
right against double jeopardy because each indictment required evidence of a
distinct series of assaults. Because the issue of double jeopardy presents a
question of constitutional law, our review is de novo. State v. McGurk, 157
N.H. 765, 773 (2008).
Part I, Article 16 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution protect a defendant
from being punished twice for the same offense. N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 16;
U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV. We first address the issue under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
For the purpose of double jeopardy analysis, two charged offenses cannot
be regarded as the same offense if they do not arise out of the “same act or
transaction.” See Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932);
7
State v. Matey, 153 N.H. 263, 270 (2006); see also State v. Hull, 149 N.H. 706,
717 (2003). Here, the defendant was charged with two separate incidents of
assault – the first took place in the living room and, sometime thereafter, the
second occurred in the kitchen. That each assault resulted in injuries to the
victim’s head and neck does not establish that they arose out of the same act
or transaction. We therefore conclude that the defendant was not subjected to
multiple punishments for the same offense and, consequently, that his right
against double jeopardy under the State Constitution was not infringed. The
Federal Constitution provides no greater protection than the State Constitution
in this area. See Blockburger, 284 U.S. at 304; McGurk, 157 N.H. at 774.
Accordingly, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in imposing
extended terms of imprisonment because RSA 651:6, II(a), which authorizes
extended terms of imprisonment in certain circumstances, does not apply.
Alternatively, he asserts that the statute is unconstitutionally vague. The State
contends that the extended terms were properly imposed because the
defendant had twice previously been imprisoned on sentences of a year or more
that arose from separate criminal episodes and that the extended term statute
is not unconstitutionally vague.
Prior to 2003, a trial judge was authorized to impose an extended term of
imprisonment if the judge found that the defendant had “twice previously been
imprisoned . . . on sentences in excess of one year.” RSA 651:6, I(c) (Supp.
2002) (emphasis added). In an effort to comply with the United States
Supreme Court’s opinion in Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the
legislature amended the statute to permit imposition of an extended term
where the defendant had “twice previously been convicted . . . on sentences in
excess of one year.” RSA 651:6, II(a) (emphasis added); see State v. Dansereau,
157 N.H. 596, 599-600 (2008). The change in the statute does not improve its
clarity; “[d]espite the change from ‘imprisoned’ to ‘convicted,’ as it stands today,
the statute still requires a trial court to find, before it imposes an extended
term of incarceration, that the defendant (1) was previously imprisoned twice,
resulting from (2) sentences in excess of one year.” State v. Matton, 163 N.H.
411, 414 (2012) (citation omitted).
The defendant contends that the statute requires either “two prior non-
continuous periods of imprisonment” or an “extension of one continuous period
of incarceration” that “arises out of an offense committed after the defendant’s
first sentencing.” Resolution of this issue requires that we interpret the
language of RSA 651:6, II(a). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the
final arbiters of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. Evans v. J Four Realty, 164 N.H. 570, 572
(2013). When examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and
8
ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from
the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have
said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We
construe the Criminal Code “according to the fair import of [its] terms and to
promote justice.” RSA 625:3 (2007); see State v. Martin, 164 N.H. 687, 689
(2013).
The wording of the statute, as we have interpreted it, does not support
the defendant’s contention. To “imprison” means “[t]o confine (a person) in
prison.” Black’s Law Dictionary 825 (9th ed. 2009). A “sentence” is “[t]he
judgment that a court formally pronounces after finding a criminal defendant
guilty; the punishment imposed on a criminal wrongdoer.” Id. at 1485. Here,
although the defendant’s prior convictions resulted in one uninterrupted period
of incarceration, he nevertheless was twice previously imprisoned on sentences
in excess of one year for purposes of the statute. See RSA 651:6, II(a).
In 1996, the defendant was charged with first degree assault and witness
tampering. While he was incarcerated, awaiting trial on those charges, he was
charged with two further acts of witness tampering. He was subsequently
convicted of both sets of charges. In November 1996, the defendant was
sentenced on the assault conviction to imprisonment of seven and one-half to
fifteen years, stand committed. On the accompanying witness-tampering
conviction, he was sentenced to imprisonment of three and one-half to seven
years, stand committed, with two and one-half years suspended, to run
consecutively to the sentence on the assault conviction. Thus, as to this set of
two convictions, which the trial court found to be the result of one criminal
episode, the defendant was “imprisoned on a sentence in excess of one year.”
In December 1997, the defendant was sentenced on each of the two
subsequent witness-tampering convictions to imprisonment of three and one-
half to seven years, stand committed, with two and one-half years suspended,
to be served concurrently with each other and with the sentences he was
already serving. Thus, as to this set of two convictions, he was also
“imprisoned on a sentence in excess of one year.” Contrary to the defendant’s
arguments, the statute’s requirements are met even though the second set of
sentences of imprisonment ran concurrently with the first set. We note that,
because the State does not contest the trial court’s characterization of each set
of two sentences as constituting one sentence of imprisonment for purposes of
sentence enhancement, we need not determine whether each of the four prison
sentences could have been properly “counted” in the enhanced-sentencing
calculus. We, therefore, conclude that the trial court did not err in its
determination that “the threshold two convictions [were] satisfied by the
sentence served from the consolidated assault and first witness tampering
when added to the second ‘conviction’ from the latter two witness tamperings.”
9
We likewise reject the defendant’s arguments, based upon Dansereau,
that we must apply the rule of lenity to resolve in his favor what he alleges to
be ambiguity in the statute and that, because the statute is unconstitutionally
vague, it should not have been applied. Although we applied the rule of lenity
in Dansereau, we did so because the defendant in that case had been twice
“convicted,” but had not been twice “imprisoned” because one of the underlying
convictions resulted in a suspended sentence. Dansereau, 157 N.H. at 597. In
that circumstance, we concluded that the statute was ambiguous and that
review of the legislative history did not resolve the ambiguity. Id. at 599-603.
We have subsequently held, however, that when a defendant has been twice
previously “imprisoned,” rather than merely “convicted,” the statutory
requirements for an extended term of imprisonment are satisfied. See State v.
Russo, 164 N.H. 585, 597 (2013); Matton, 163 N.H. at 414. Consequently, we
find unavailing the defendant’s argument that the statute is unconstitutionally
vague.
The defendant finally argues that the trial court committed plain error by
failing to instruct the jury that, in order to convict him, it had to unanimously
agree on a specific bodily injury caused by his conduct. Under the plain error
rule, we may consider errors not raised before the trial court. State v. Guay,
164 N.H. 696, 703 (2013). For us to find plain error: “(1) there must be an
error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights;
and (4) the error must seriously affect the fairness, integrity, or public
reputation of the judicial proceedings.” Id. at 704.
Relying upon State v. Greene, 137 N.H. 126 (1993), the defendant
maintains that the error in failing to so instruct the jury was plain. In Greene,
following a question from the jury during deliberations, the trial court
erroneously instructed the jury that it need not unanimously find any one of
the three acts of unprivileged physical contact alleged in the complaint.
Greene, 137 N.H. at 128, 131. In Greene, however, the defendant was charged
with misdemeanor simple assault on a police officer in that she “punch[ed]
[him] in the face with her fist and in the torso with her fist and did further kick
him about the body.” Id. at 127 (quotation omitted and emphases added). In
that case, the element of unprivileged contact was alleged to be three separate
blows. Id. at 129. Here, in contrast, the indictments charged the defendant
with recklessly causing “bodily injury” to the victim in that he caused
“contusions and muscle strain to [the victim’s] head and neck.” Thus, the jury
was required to find that the defendant recklessly caused “bodily injury” to the
victim. The defendant does not cite, nor could we find, a case in which a court
has held that a jury must be unanimous as to which alleged injury was caused
by an assault. We therefore conclude that any error in failing to instruct the
10
jury that it had to unanimously agree on a specific bodily injury caused by the
defendant’s conduct was not plain.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
11