THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-219
AXENICS, INC. F/K/A RENTEC CORPORATION
v.
TURNER CONSTRUCTION COMPANY & a.
Argued: September 12, 2012
Opinion Issued: March 13, 2013
David N. Cole, of Hanover, by brief and orally, for the plaintiff.
Pierce Atwood LLP, of Portsmouth (David A. Anderson and Mark B.
Rosen on the brief, and Mr. Anderson orally), for the defendants.
BASSETT, J. The defendants, Stryker Biotech, LLC (Biotech) and Stryker
Sales Corporation (Sales) (collectively Stryker), and Turner Construction
Company (Turner), appeal a ruling of the Superior Court (McNamara, J.)
finding them liable on a theory of unjust enrichment and awarding damages to
the plaintiff, Axenics, Inc. f/k/a RenTec Corporation (Axenics). Axenics cross-
appeals, challenging the amount of damages awarded and the trial court’s
failure to find the defendants liable on its breach of contract and New
Hampshire Consumer Protection Act (CPA) claims, see RSA ch. 358-A (2009 &
Supp. 2012). We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The trial court found, or the record establishes, the following facts. This
case arises out of the construction of a biotech facility (facility) in West
Lebanon. Biotech operates the facility, and Sales owns the property where it is
located. Turner was hired as the general contractor to build the facility.
Axenics provides “manufacturing, installation, and field services for ultrapure
gas and liquid distribution systems in the biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and
semiconductor industries.”
On April 15, 2004, Axenics entered into a subcontract with Turner to
furnish labor, materials, equipment, and services for the installation of
“process pipe” at the facility. The original subcontract price was $1,992,506.
Both parties agreed that the facility would be completed as quickly as possible.
The “mechanical completion” date for the facility, including the process pipe
installation, was December 2004. Ultimately, Axenics’ last day on the job was
June 2, 2005.
The subcontract contemplated the possibility of delays and hindrances
as well as changes to the scope of the work and its cost. The subcontract
provided that “all instructions given to [Axenics’] supervisory or management
personnel by Turner’s Superintendent, Engineer, or other duly authorized
representative shall be understood to be included as part of this Subcontract.”
If Axenics believed “work to be beyond the scope of” the subcontract, it was
required to inform Turner before proceeding. In the event that the parties
could not reach an agreement at that time, Turner could issue “an S.I.S.
(Superintendent’s Instructions to Subcontractors) for record purposes until
such an agreement [could] be reached.”
In the event that Turner directed additional work to be performed “and
the value of such work [was] to be determined other than by actual signed
tickets for material,” Axenics was to “submit a lump sum proposal
accompanied by an itemized breakdown of material, using established contract
unit rates where applicable.” The “lump sum proposal” had to be
“accompanied by accurate written estimates of the cost” and “be submitted to
Turner within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the directive.” If the
“[p]roposals for additional work” were not received within five calendar days,
Turner would “assign a fair and reasonable value for the additional work, and
the additional work w[ould] become part of [Axenics’] scope of work.”
Likewise, when Axenics initiated requests for changes to the work, it had
to “provide [a] written request for change and obtain Turner’s written
concurrence before proceeding with any Work believed not to be within the
scope of [the] subcontract.” The subcontract further provided that if Axenics
was “delayed, obstructed, hindered or interfered with in the commencement,
prosecution or completion of the” work, it was required to notify Turner in
writing about what caused the delay within forty-eight hours “of the
2
commencement thereof.” Axenics also had to demonstrate that it could not
have anticipated or avoided the delay and had “used all available means to
minimize the consequences thereof.” This notice was “an essential condition
precedent to [Axenics’] rights in connection with any such delays, obstructive
hindrances or interferences.”
In addition, in the subcontract, Axenics agreed:
that it shall not be entitled to nor claim any cost reimbursement,
compensation or damages for any delay, obstruction, hindrance or
interference to the Work except to the extent that Turner has
actually recovered corresponding cost reimbursement,
compensation or damages from the Owner under the Contract
Documents for such delay, obstruction, hindrance or interference,
and then only to the extent of the amount, if any, which Turner on
behalf of [Axenics], actually received from the Owner on account of
such delay, obstruction, hindrance or interference.
Notwithstanding any term or provision herein to the contrary,
[Axenics] expressly waives and releases all claims or rights to
recover lost profit (except for profit on work actually performed),
recovery of overhead (including home office overhead), and any
other indirect damages, costs or expenses in any way arising out of
or related to the [subcontract], including the breach thereof by
Turner, delays, charges, acceleration, loss of efficiency or
productivity disruptions and interferences with the performance of
the work.
Axenics’ “work [was] to be coordinated with the structural, architectural
and [mechanical, electrical, and plumbing] services prior to fabrication,” and
“[p]roject coordination procedures [were] outlined in [an] attached project
coordination plan.” The project coordination plan provided that: (1) Turner
was responsible for scheduling, facilitating, and controlling the “coordination
process”; (2) the engineer was responsible for supporting and reviewing “design
changes required due to field coordination issues”; and (3) Axenics was
responsible for producing, maintaining, and approving “coordination drawings”
as well as implementing “coordination[-]driven images.”
Several delays, which affected Axenics’ work, arose during construction
of the facility. Some of the delays caused the schedule to be compressed and
required Axenics personnel to work overtime to complete the work on time. In
addition, there were occasions when Turner requested changes to the process
piping, which Axenics believed to be a “change in scope.” When this occurred,
Axenics was instructed to continue working and that “SISs [would] follow.”
3
During construction, Turner met with Stryker weekly to review change
order requests. Change order requests, as well as applications for payment,
had to be approved by Stryker. Axenics submitted eight written change orders,
which upon approval by Turner and Stryker, increased the contract price to
$2,518,078. The change orders that increased the contract price contained the
following language:
Through acceptance of this Change Order, [Axenics]
acknowledges that it has reviewed the progress of the Work related
to this Project and the potential impact of the added work on the
progress of the project in the future. As a result, this Change
Order includes compensation to [Axenics] for any and all effects,
delays, inefficiencies or similar demands associated with this
Project and [Axenics] recognizes that there is no basis for any such
claim in the future.
Please note that all other terms and conditions of the
subcontract remain unchanged and that all costs to maintain our
original contract schedule with the inclusion of the adjusted scope
of work as set forth by this change order are included within the
lump sum change order amount stated herein.
Axenics later submitted a ninth change order, in the amount of
$435,929, which it characterized as a “Claim Settlement.” The defendants did
not pay this change order.
In late 2004, a dispute arose when Axenics notified Turner of additional
change orders related to delays and work that it believed to be outside the
scope of the contract. Turner initially responded to Axenics’ request with an
email “rejecting the claim.” However, during the next several months, Axenics
worked with Turner to obtain payment from Stryker for these change orders.
Stryker questioned some of the work for which Axenics sought payment and
requested that Axenics submit backup documentation for its requests. Turner
assisted Axenics in preparing a presentation for Stryker regarding the
requested funds, and Axenics made its presentation to Stryker in April 2005.
Before the presentation, Turner representatives provided Stryker with rebuttal
to some of Axenics’ requests for additional payment, but also told Stryker that
it agreed with several of them. Subsequently, Stryker refused to pay Axenics
the requested funds.
In November 2007, Axenics sued the defendants, asserting that Turner
had breached the subcontract when it failed to pay Axenics sums due. Axenics
also brought claims against Turner and Stryker for violation of the CPA and
unjust enrichment. It sought $1.7 million in damages for materials, labor,
equipment, and services as well as enhanced damages under the CPA and
4
attorney’s fees. In response, the defendants counterclaimed, alleging breach of
contract and violations of the CPA.
At the conclusion of the eighteen-day trial, in its post-trial memorandum
Axenics alleged that “Turner deviated from the . . . subcontract . . . in so
many material respects” that Turner had “abandoned the [s]ubcontract, and
[Axenics], rather than declaring breach, continued working.” According to
Axenics, this reflected the parties’ mutual agreement to abandon the
subcontract, making unjust enrichment “available to compensate [Axenics] for
the benefits it conferred on Turner and Stryker through its work at the” facility.
Axenics further alleged that Turner breached the subcontract by intentionally
delaying payments and failing to coordinate Axenics’ work with that of the
other subcontractors, which hindered and delayed Axenics’ performance of its
contractual duties.
The court issued a lengthy decision in which it found that neither party
had abandoned the subcontract and ruled against Axenics on its breach of
contract claim. However, the trial court ruled in favor of Axenics on its unjust
enrichment claim, concluded that the defendants were jointly liable, and
awarded Axenics $1,080,000 in restitution damages. With respect to Axenics’
CPA claim, the court ruled “that neither Stryker’s nor Turner’s actions” violated
the CPA. Finally, the court ruled against the defendants on all of their
counterclaims, including their request for attorney’s fees. This appeal and
cross-appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendants argue that the trial court erred in allowing
Axenics to recover “in unjust enrichment because a valid, express contract
governed the precise subject matter of Axenics’ unjust enrichment claim, and
that contract was neither abandoned nor breached.” They further contend that
the court erred in finding them “liable for unjust enrichment when they did not
receive a benefit that would be unconscionable to retain,” and “the record was
devoid of any evidence showing the value of any extra-contractual benefit [they]
purportedly received.” Finally, they argue that the court violated New
Hampshire Rule of Evidence 408 by failing to exclude evidence of an offer to
compromise.
Axenics cross-appeals, arguing that the trial court erred in failing to find
that the parties had abandoned the subcontract. In the alternative, Axenics
argues that the trial court should have found “that Turner breached the
[s]ubcontract.” Axenics also claims that, regardless of whether the subcontract
was abandoned or breached, the trial court erred by not awarding it “damages
measured by its costs plus reasonable profit, or $1.7 million.” In addition,
Axenics maintains that the trial court erred in failing to find that the
defendants violated the CPA. We first address the parties’ arguments regarding
5
abandonment and breach of contract and then turn to their arguments
regarding unjust enrichment, damages, and the CPA.
I. Contract Abandonment
Axenics argues that the trial court erred in failing to find that the
subcontract was abandoned because it was “referred to by all parties on a
‘guideline’ basis if at all and was never adhered to by any of the parties.”
“Generally, contract abandonment occurs when both parties depart from the
terms of the contract by mutual consent.” J.A. Jones Constr. v. Lehrer
McGovern Bovis, 89 P.3d 1009, 1019 (Nev. 2004); see Young v. Barry, 107 N.H.
294, 296 (1966). Abandonment “may be accomplished by express mutual
consent or by implied consent through the actions of the parties.” O’Brien &
Gere Technical v. Fru-Con/Fluor Daniel, 380 F.3d 447, 455 (8th Cir. 2004)
(quotation omitted) (applying Missouri law). “Where acts and conduct are
relied on to constitute an abandonment, they must be positive, unequivocal
and inconsistent with an intent to be further bound by the contract.” Fru-
Con/Fluor Daniel v. Corrigan Brothers, 154 S.W.3d 330, 335 (Mo. Ct. App.
2004); see also Harris v. IES Associates, Inc., 69 P.3d 297, 308 (Utah Ct. App.
2003) (“A contract may be [abandoned] by acts or conduct of the parties
inconsistent with the continued existence of the contract.” (quotation omitted));
17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts § 528 (2004) (“A contract will generally be treated
as abandoned when one party acts in a manner inconsistent with the existence
of the contract and the other party acquiesces in that behavior.”).
Abandonment of a construction contract may occur because of “the aggregation
of numerous changes to the contract over time.” Clarendon America v. General
Sec. Indem., 124 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 6 (Ct. App. 2011).
“Abandonment of a contract is a mixed question of law and fact; what
constitutes an abandonment is a matter of law, and whether there has been an
abandonment is a question of fact.” 17A Am. Jur. 2d Contracts § 529. But see
J.A. Jones Const., 89 P.3d at 1019 (“The issue of whether contract
abandonment has occurred generally presents a question of fact.”); Fru-
Con/Fluor Daniel, 154 S.W.3d at 335 (same). “We will not overturn the trial
court’s ruling on a mixed question unless it is clearly erroneous.” Hogan
Family Enters. v. Town of Rye, 157 N.H. 453, 456 (2008) (quotation omitted). If
the court misapplies the law to its factual findings, however, we will review the
matter de novo. See id.
In this case, there was no express agreement to abandon the contract.
Rather, in support of its abandonment theory, Axenics points to specific
instances where Axenics and Turner deviated from, or failed to follow,
provisions of the subcontract, and it argues that the parties’ conduct evinced
an intention to abandon the subcontract. We disagree. Although there were a
number of change orders that caused the work and its cost to differ from that
6
to which the parties originally agreed, the scope of the work – the installation of
process pipe – did not change. See Clarendon America, 124 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 6
(finding there was no “evidence that an excessive number of changes to the
scope of work resulted in abandonment”). In Fru-Con/Fluor Daniel, 154
S.W.3d at 335, the Missouri Appeals Court found that, despite a large number
of changes, the parties had not abandoned the construction contract because
the contract itself allowed such changes. Likewise, the subcontract in this case
contemplated that there might be changes to the work and its cost.
Importantly, the subcontract also provided for possible schedule adjustments,
delay, hindrances, and obstructions. Accordingly, the fact that there were
numerous change orders does not evidence the parties’ intent to abandon the
subcontract. Moreover, there is no evidence that either party failed to preserve
its rights under the contract. See Clarendon America, 124 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 6
(finding no contract abandonment, in part, when underlying parties expressly
retained rights under contract); EMF General Contracting Corp. v. Bisbee, 774
N.Y.S.2d 39, 43 (App. Div. 2004) (citing cases in which abandonment was
found when parties took steps inconsistent with enforcing their rights under
contract). Under these circumstances, we conclude that the trial court
correctly determined that the parties did not abandon the subcontract.
II. Breach of Contract
Axenics next argues that the trial court erred in failing to find that
Turner breached the subcontract. Axenics maintains that the trial court
conflated breach of contract with contract abandonment, “which led [it] to
erroneously conclude that because it found no abandonment there was no
breach, although the court’s specific findings detailed numerous breaches.”
Thus, Axenics asserts that “the court failed to consider the elements of breach
. . . and failed to consider whether Turner had breached the contract by any
means other than abandoning it.”
The defendants maintain that Axenics waived this issue by failing to
raise it in its notice of cross-appeal. See Progressive N. Ins. Co. v. Argonaut
Ins. Co., 161 N.H. 778, 784 (2011). Axenics’ notice of cross-appeal presented
the question: “Did the Superior Court err in determining that the parties had
not abandoned the subject Subcontract?” Supreme Court Rule 16(3)(b)
provides, in relevant part
While the statement of a question [in a brief] need not be worded
exactly as it was in the appeal document, the question presented
shall be the same as the question previously set forth in the appeal
document. The statement of a question presented will be deemed
to include every subsidiary question fairly comprised therein.
7
Because of the fashion in which the trial court addressed Axenics’ breach of
contract and abandonment claims, we conclude that Axenics’ abandonment
question fairly encompasses the issue of whether the trial court erred in
conflating abandonment with breach of contract. Cf. In re Juvenile 2003-187,
151 N.H. 14, 16 (2004) (concluding that, under facts and circumstances of
case, question of whether evidence of juvenile’s actus reus was sufficient was
“inextricably linked with, and fairly comprise[d] a subsidiary question to, the
ultimate issue of the sufficiency of the evidence as to the juvenile’s mens rea
with regard to that action”). Accordingly, we will address this argument.
We agree with Axenics that the trial court conflated breach of contract
and contract abandonment and, therefore, failed to rule specifically on Axenics’
breach of contract claim. In its order, the trial court characterized Axenics’
breach of contract claim as alleging “that Turner breached its contractual
agreement by abandoning the contract.” It then analyzed whether the parties
had abandoned the subcontract, finding that “neither Axenics nor Turner
expressed any intent to abandon the contract,” and concluding not only that
“the contract was not abandoned,” but that Turner had not breached the
subcontract.
Whether the parties abandoned the subcontract, and whether Turner
breached the subcontract, however, are two separate questions. As stated
above, “contract abandonment occurs when both parties depart from the terms
of the contract by mutual consent.” J.A. Jones Constr., 89 P.3d at 1019. On
the other hand, “[a] breach of contract occurs when there is a failure without
legal excuse to perform any promise which forms the whole or part of a
contract.” Lassonde v. Stanton, 157 N.H. 582, 588 (2008) (quotation and
brackets omitted). Here, because the trial court conflated contract
abandonment with contract breach, it failed to specifically address Axenics’
claim that Turner breached the subcontract. We, therefore, vacate the trial
court’s finding against Axenics on its breach of contract claim and remand for
the trial court to determine whether Turner breached the subcontract as
alleged by Axenics. See Barrows v. Boles, 141 N.H. 382, 388 (1996) (“Whether
conduct is a material breach is a question for the trier of fact to determine from
the facts and circumstances of the case.” (quotation and brackets omitted)). It
is within the trial court’s discretion as to whether it should hold an additional
hearing.
III. Unjust Enrichment
The defendants argue that the trial court erred in ruling that they were
unjustly enriched. “The propriety of affording equitable relief in a particular
case rests in the sound discretion of the trial court.” Clapp v. Goffstown Sch.
Dist., 159 N.H. 206, 210 (2009) (quotation omitted). Consequently, we review a
trial court’s equitable determination for an unsustainable exercise of
8
discretion. See id. To show an unsustainable exercise of discretion, the
defendants must demonstrate that the court’s ruling was clearly unreasonable
or untenable to the prejudice of their case. Id. Although the award of
equitable relief is within the sound discretion of the trial court, that “discretion
must be exercised, not in opposition to, but in accordance with, established
principles of law.” Id. (quotation omitted). We will first address the trial court’s
finding that Turner was unjustly enriched and, therefore, liable to Axenics.
A. Turner
The defendants maintain that the trial court erred in allowing recovery
against Turner under the theory of unjust enrichment “because the precise
subject matter of Axenics’ claim – the Extra Work purportedly performed in
completing the piping installation – was covered by the parties’ contract.”
Axenics counters that it was entitled to recover under a theory of unjust
enrichment because the extra work that it performed was outside the scope of
the subcontract.
Unjust enrichment is an equitable remedy that is available when an
individual receives “a benefit which would be unconscionable for him to retain.”
Id. (quotation omitted). It is not a boundless doctrine, but is, instead,
“narrower, more predictable, and more objectively determined than the
implications of the words unjust enrichment.” Id. (quotation omitted). One
general limitation is that unjust enrichment may not supplant the terms of an
agreement. Id. It is a well-established principle that the court cannot allow
recovery under a theory of unjust enrichment when there is a valid, express
contract covering the subject matter at hand. Id. at 210-11; see Singer Asset
Finance Co. v. Wyner, 156 N.H. 468, 476 (2007) (finding that, in absence of
valid and enforceable contract, trial court properly entered summary judgment
for plaintiff on unjust enrichment claim). This is so because “[r]estitution is
. . . subordinate to contract as an organizing principle of private relationships,
and the terms of an enforceable agreement normally displace any claim of
unjust enrichment within their reach.” Restatement (Third) of Restitution and
Unjust Enrichment § 2 comment c at 17 (2011). Nevertheless, unjust
enrichment may be available to contracting parties if the benefit received is
outside the scope of the contract. Clapp, 159 N.H. at 211.
We agree with the defendants that Axenics cannot recover against Turner
under an unjust enrichment theory. The gravamen of Axenics’ unjust
enrichment claim is that Turner’s failure to properly coordinate construction of
the facility caused Axenics personnel to work overtime and to incur additional
costs that it would not have had to incur in order to fulfill its obligations in a
timely manner. This subject matter – Turner’s responsibilities for coordinating
changes to the work and Axenics’ entitlement to payment for any resulting
extra work it performed or extra costs it incurred – was addressed in the
9
subcontract itself. Axenics does not argue that the ultimate contractual
objective – installing process piping – changed during the course of the
contract. Instead, it argues that to achieve that objective on time required
extra work and costs. As laid out above, the terms of the subcontract expressly
addressed the possibility of delays and hindrances as well as the process by
which Axenics would receive payment for any extra work that it performed
because of change orders. The subcontract also established a mechanism for
proceeding when Axenics believed the “work to be beyond the scope of” the
subcontract, and delineated Turner’s responsibilities for coordinating changes
to the work. Since the subcontract governed the subject of Axenics’ unjust
enrichment claim, and the subcontract was not abandoned by the parties, the
trial court erred in allowing Axenics to recover against Turner under a theory of
unjust enrichment. See id. at 211-12; ADP Marshall, Inc. v. Noresco, LLC, 710
F. Supp. 2d 197, 230 (D.R.I. 2010) (applying Rhode Island law and finding that
subcontractor could not recover against general contractor under theory of
unjust enrichment when majority of subcontractor’s claims were based upon
work that was within scope of parties’ agreement).
Axenics argues that the parties orally modified the change order process
set forth in the subcontract and that the extra work it performed pursuant to
the modifications necessarily fell outside the scope of the subcontract. It
asserts, therefore, that it is entitled to unjust enrichment damages. As
discussed above, we disagree that the extra work performed fell outside the
scope of the subcontract. Simply because the parties may have orally modified
the change order process does not render the work Axenics performed after
such modifications outside the scope of the subcontract itself.
Axenics further relies upon R.J. Berke & Co. v. J.P. Griffin, Inc., 116
N.H. 760 (1976), in arguing that it is entitled to recover against Turner on a
theory of unjust enrichment. In R.J. Berke, we held that quantum meruit is a
restitutionary remedy available to a party that materially breaches a contract,
and thus, has no contract remedies. R.J. Berke, 116 N.H. at 764. This holding
does not support Axenics’ argument. Here, Axenics does not argue that it
breached the subcontract, is therefore without contract remedies, and,
consequently, would be entitled to recover the value of the labor and materials
furnished under the breached subcontract. Rather, Axenics claims that “the
parties orally modified the change order procedure for Axenics’ extra work and
that the extra work fell outside the scope of the Subcontract.” Thus, R.J. Berke
is inapposite.
Axenics’ reliance upon Puritan Mills, Inc. v. Pickering Construction Co.,
262 S.E.2d 586 (Ga. Ct. App. 1979), is also misplaced. In Puritan Mills, the
defendant entered into a contract with the plaintiff to construct loading docks.
Puritan Mills, 262 S.E.2d at 587. Upon completion, the defendant sought
recovery against the plaintiff in quantum meruit for expenses incurred
10
resulting from a change order, which required the removal of rock. Id. The
Georgia Court of Appeals found that “[t]he contract between the parties clearly
set[ ] forth the work to be performed and none of the five items describing the
work or the drawings reflect[ed] the removal of rock as a part of the contract.”
Id. Accordingly, since the contract did not contemplate the removal of rock,
and there was no question that the plaintiff knowingly accepted the defendant’s
services in removing the rock, the court upheld the trial court’s monetary
award for the reasonable value of removal of rock. Id. at 587-88. Here,
however, the subcontract addressed the subject matter of Axenics’ unjust
enrichment claim. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s decision finding
Turner liable to Axenics on its theory of unjust enrichment.
B. Stryker
The defendants further argue that Axenics’ “unjust enrichment claim
[against Stryker] must fail as a matter of law because [Stryker] has paid for the
contractual benefit it received – the construction of [the facility] according to
[the] contract.” They maintain that any benefit received by Stryker was both
bargained and paid for and that Stryker, therefore, should not be required to
“make restitution.”
“The party seeking restitution must establish not only unjust
enrichment, but that the person sought to be charged had wrongfully secured a
benefit or passively received one which it would be unconscionable to retain
. . . .” Gen. Insulation Co. v. Eckman Constr., 159 N.H. 601, 611 (2010)
(quotation omitted)). When, as here, no express contractual relationship exists
between the parties, “a trial court may require an individual to make
restitution for unjust enrichment if he has received a benefit that would be
unconscionable to retain.” Pella Windows and Doors v. Faraci, 133 N.H. 585,
586 (1990) (quotation and brackets omitted).
“[T]he circumstances under which an unjust enrichment claim may be
brought by a subcontractor against an owner, absent privity, are . . . limited.”
Haz-Mat Response v. Certified Waste Serv., 910 P.2d 839, 847 (Kan. 1996).
There may be “special circumstances that would justify requiring the owner to
pay,” such as when the owner accepts “benefits rendered under such
circumstances as reasonably notify the owner that the one performing such
services expected to be compensated therefor by the owner.” Id. However,
[t]he general rule in this area is that a subcontractor who furnishes
material or labor pursuant to an agreement with, or upon the order
and credit of[,] a general contractor cannot recover against the
property owner upon the basis of an implied promise to pay arising
from the owner’s receipt and acceptance of the benefit of the
material and labor furnished.
11
Great Plains Equipment v. N.W. Pipeline, 979 P.2d 627, 641 (Idaho 1999)
(quotation omitted); see also A & V 425 LLC Contracting v. RFD 55th St., 830
N.Y.S.2d 637, 646 (Sup. Ct. 2007) (“It is a firmly established principle that a
property owner who contracts with a general contractor does not become liable
to a subcontractor on a quasi-contract theory unless it expressly consents to
pay for the subcontractor’s performance.” (quotation and brackets omitted)).
Consistent with this rule, other courts have found that “[w]here an owner
has fulfilled its financial obligation to a general contractor, a subcontractor
cannot rely on the owner to satisfy the relationship between the subcontractor
and the general.” DJ Painting v. Baraw Enterprises, 776 A.2d 413, 418 (Vt.
2001) (collecting cases). This is so, in part, because “[t]he point of hiring a
general contractor for a construction job is for the general to manage the job
and hire the subcontractors.” Id. at 419. “The owner pays the general
contractor, but if the general does not pay the subcontractors, the
subcontractors have the statutory lien mechanism to attach money as yet
unpaid to the general contractor.” Id.; see RSA 447:5 (Supp. 2012).
Here, there appears to be no dispute that Stryker has fulfilled its
financial obligation to Turner. Nor is there any indication that Stryker
accepted benefits under circumstances reasonably notifying it that Axenics
expected to be compensated directly by Stryker rather than by Turner. While
the trial court found that Stryker “thanked all of the subcontractors for staying
on schedule despite several problems that occurred,” the court’s reliance on
this finding to support its award against Stryker is misplaced. In our view,
Stryker’s expression of gratitude does not demonstrate that Stryker had
knowledge that it would be directly liable to Axenics for the cost of additional
work requested by Turner; to the contrary, this finding arguably supports the
conclusion that Stryker did not expect to pay additional sums directly to
subcontractors such as Axenics. Thus, there is no evidence that Stryker
accepted a benefit that would be unconscionable to retain. See Pella Windows
and Doors, 133 N.H. at 586; see also S & M Rotogravure Service, Inc. v. Baer,
252 N.W.2d 913, 916-18 (Wis. 1977) (reviewing cases involving actions for
money by subcontractors against property owners upon whose property
subcontractor had performed construction work pursuant to agreement with
general contractor and finding rationale to be that when “the defendant had
paid another for the benefits conferred, . . . it was not inequitable to permit the
defendant to retain the benefits without paying the plaintiff”). Indeed, as the
trial court itself found, what Stryker “received was a project completed on time
and in accordance with the contract specifications.” Accordingly, we hold that
the trial court erred in allowing Axenics to recover against Stryker under a
theory of unjust enrichment. We, therefore, reverse its decision with respect to
that issue.
12
In view of our rulings that the trial court erred in finding the defendants
liable under the theory of unjust enrichment, we need not address Axenics’
argument concerning the proper measure of damages under that theory.
IV. Damages – Admission of Internal Memoranda
The defendants argue that the trial court erred in admitting and
considering as evidence of damages a communication regarding an offer to
compromise in contravention of New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 408.
Because this issue may arise on remand, we address it. See George v. Al Hoyt
& Sons, Inc., 162 N.H. 123, 138 (2011).
At trial, Axenics sought to admit an internal email memorandum
composed by Turner, which listed possible contribution amounts from both
Turner and Stryker toward a potential settlement with Axenics. The
defendants objected on the ground that the memorandum constituted a
statement made in compromise negotiations and, thus, was inadmissible under
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 408. The trial court overruled the
defendants’ objection, finding that because the memorandum “was never
communicated to the . . . other side,” it was not a statement made in
compromise negotiations. In its final order, the court reaffirmed this ruling
and relied upon the memorandum in its determination of damages.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 408 provides, in relevant part:
[E]vidence of (1) furnishing or offering or promising to furnish, or
(2) accepting or offering or promising to accept, a valuable
consideration in compromising or attempting to compromise a
claim which was disputed as to either validity or amount, is not
admissible to prove liability for or invalidity of the claim or its
amount.
Evidence of conduct or statements made in compromise
negotiations is likewise not admissible.
The Rule “states the basic proposition that evidence of compromise offers[,]
compromise agreements, and conduct or statements made in compromise
negotiations is inadmissible on questions of liability and damages.” N.H. R. Ev.
408 Reporter’s Notes. “The Rule . . . reflects both doubt as to the probative
value of the fact of settlement and a policy to encourage settlements.” Id.
To the extent that Axenics argues that the internal memorandum did not
constitute a statement made to compromise the claim or during compromise
negotiations, we disagree. The language in the memorandum demonstrates
that the amounts listed were under consideration by the defendants as part of
13
a settlement package to be submitted to Axenics. Cf. Slattery v. Norwood
Realty, 145 N.H. 447, 450 (2000) (finding that statement was not offer to
compromise disputed claim but was admission of contractual obligations). The
trial court itself observed that the memorandum “suggests an ‘offer’ to settle
the case.”
We have not had occasion to address whether an internal memorandum,
evincing an offer to compromise, which has not been disclosed to the opposing
party, is protected under Rule 408. However, “[t]he [federal] circuits that have
addressed this issue have agreed that internal memoranda, although not
communicated to the opposing side, are encompassed within” the similar
Federal Rule of Evidence 408. Xcoal Energy & Resources, LP v. Smith, 635 F.
Supp. 2d 453, 454 (W.D. Va. 2009) (discussing cases from the Third, Fifth,
Seventh, Eighth, and Eleventh Circuits). Conversely, in Blue Circle Atlantic v.
Falcon Materials, 760 F. Supp. 516, 522 (D. Md. 1991), aff’d on other grounds,
960 F.2d 145 (4th Cir. 1992) (unpublished opinion), the United States District
Court for the District of Maryland ruled that Federal Rule of Evidence 408
“does not apply to internal memoranda unless communicated to the other side
in an attempt at settlement.”
We now join the federal circuits in concluding that the policy objectives
of Rule 408 weigh in favor of exclusion of internal memoranda prepared for the
purpose of compromise negotiations. “The spirit of the Rule, as recognized by
several circuits and as set forth in the commentary to the Rule, supports the
exclusion of certain work product, internal memos, and other materials created
specifically for the purpose of conciliation, even if not communicated to the
other party.” Xcoal Energy & Resources, LP, 635 F. Supp. 2d at 454 (quotation
omitted). Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred in admitting the
internal memorandum outlining the defendants’ possible contributions to a
settlement with Axenics. Since we have found the internal memorandum was
admitted in error, we further find that the trial court erred in relying upon it in
assessing damages.
V. CPA Claim
Finally, Axenics challenges the trial court’s conclusion that the
defendants did not violate the CPA. “The trial court’s findings of fact and
rulings of law will be upheld unless they lack evidentiary support or constitute
clear error of law.” George, 162 N.H. at 129 (quotation omitted).
Axenics argues that the trial court’s finding that the defendants’ conduct
did not violate the CPA was erroneous “as a matter of law because the court did
not make adequate findings” and “merely jumped to an unsupported
conclusion.” Axenics maintains that Turner instructed it to perform extra
work, which was necessary to complete the facility on time, and “then secretly
14
subvert[ed] Axenics’ legitimate efforts to be paid.” Specifically, Axenics asserts
that Turner assured Axenics that it would support Axenics’ claims for payment
from Stryker for the extra work performed and “then presented [a] rebuttal to
Stryker without disclosing to Axenics the existence of the rebuttal or that
Turner had given it to Stryker.” According to Axenics, these actions
constituted unfair or deceptive acts under the CPA. Axenics also argues that
“[g]iven [the defendants’] business sophistication and the length and breadth of
the steps each took to subvert, delay, and deny Axenics’ claims, the only
reasonable conclusion is that their [conduct] constitutes a willful or knowing
violation of the [CPA],” entitling Axenics to exemplary damages. We note that
the parties do not dispute on appeal that RSA chapter 358-A applies.
RSA 358-A:2 (2009) states that “[i]t shall be unlawful for any person to
use any unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice
in the conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” We have previously
recognized that, although this provision is broadly worded, not all conduct in
the course of trade or commerce falls within its scope. Id. “An ordinary breach
of contract claim, for example, is not a violation of the CPA.” Id. (quotation
omitted). In determining which commercial actions not specifically delineated
are covered by the CPA, we have employed the “rascality” test. Id. Under the
rascality test, “the objectionable conduct must attain a level of rascality that
would raise an eyebrow of someone inured to the rough and tumble of the
world of commerce.” Beckstead v. Nadeau, 155 N.H. 615, 619 (2007)
(quotation omitted).
Here, the trial court found that Turner’s conduct in attempting to rebut
certain claims by Axenics for payment for the extra work it performed “may
have been unjustified or inaccurate based on its own failure to coordinate, but
neither Turner’s nor Stryker’s behavior rose to the level of rascality required
under the” CPA. Although the court noted Axenics’ allegation that “Turner
never requested additional funds from Stryker” for the extra work performed by
Axenics, it ultimately found that was “not the case.” The court found that
“Turner merely requested back-up from Axenics [to support its claims for
payment] and provided Stryker with a rebuttal to some of Axenics’ claims.”
Indeed, the court found that Turner provided documentation to Stryker
concerning Axenics’ claims for payment, “stating that many of Axenics’ claims
had merit.” The trial court further found that:
Although Turner’s own documents suggest that it knew that
Axenics’ claim had value, Axenics did a poor job of documenting
why its claims exceeded the amount bid. Moreover, both the
documents introduced at trial and the public record of the
litigation establish[ed] a level of brinkmanship and hard
bargaining, by both sides, which is hardly commendable, but far
from uncommon.
15
These findings are sufficient to support the trial court’s ultimate conclusion
“that the parties’ conduct, in the context of the ‘rough and tumble’ construction
business, did not violate the CPA.”
Moreover, the record supports the trial court’s findings that Turner made
efforts to collect and organize back-up documents to support some of Axenics’
claims for payment, and that Turner supported the validity of some of Axenics’
claims for payment. In addition, trial testimony indicated that “there was no
secret” that Turner was going to review the back-up. Although Turner did not
inform Axenics that it was preparing a rebuttal to some of Axenics’ claims
because it believed it “had an obligation to Stryker to review the backup and
present it to them,” this conduct is not of the type proscribed by the CPA. Cf.
State v. Moran, 151 N.H. 450, 453-54 (2004) (defendant violated CPA by
inducing homeowners to enter into contract with him to install siding when he
did not intend to perform work, and he made misrepresentations to
homeowners in effort to avoid performing work or refunding deposit).
Axenics further contends that certain of the defendants’ litigation
strategies violated the CPA because they were “unfair” and were “designed to
further delay the adjudication of Axenics’ claim and make the litigation
prohibitively expensive.” Assuming, without deciding, that unfair litigation
tactics fall within the scope of the CPA, Axenics has failed to demonstrate that
the defendants’ litigation tactics in this case were so egregious as to satisfy the
rascality test. Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
finding that the defendants did not act “in a way that would raise an eyebrow
of someone inured to the rough and tumble of the world of commerce.” Boles,
141 N.H. at 391 (quotation omitted).
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; vacated in part; and
remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
16