THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham County Probate Court
No. 2011-218
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF RAYMOND B.
Argued: January 18, 2012
Opinion Issued: April 10, 2012
Gallagher, Callahan & Gartrell, P.C., of Concord (Jan P. Myskowski and
Marla B. Matthews on the brief, and Ms. Matthews orally), for the petitioners.
Ansell & Anderson, P.A., of Bedford (Ruth Tolf Ansell on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioners, Todd and Trent Bemis, appeal an order
of the Rockingham County Probate Court (Hurd, J.) dismissing their petition
for guardianship over the person and estate of their step-father, Dr. Raymond
B. We affirm.
These facts appear in the record. On June 14, 2010, Dr. B. was residing
in an assisted-living facility in Florida. That evening, he left the facility with his
son, John. The two travelled to New Hampshire and began living together.
Around January 18, 2011, more than seven months after Dr. B. left the
assisted-living facility, the petitioners filed a petition for guardianship over his
person and estate. The petition alleged that, before leaving Florida, Dr. B.
engaged in behavior that, for purposes of this appeal, we will assume was
evidence of his legal incapacity at that time. See RSA 464-A:2, XI (2004). The
petition, however, contained no allegations about the doctor’s behavior during
the seven months he had been living in New Hampshire. The petitioners had
no contact with Dr. B. after he left Florida. After filing their petition, the
petitioners requested that the trial court order a “Geriatric Psychiatric
Evaluation” of Dr. B.
Dr. B. objected to the request for an evaluation and moved to dismiss the
petition, arguing that it was “per se defective” because the guardianship statute
requires that all evidence of a proposed ward’s inability to care for himself
“must have occurred within 6 months prior to the filing of the petition and at
least one incidence of such behavior must have occurred within 20 days of the
filing of the petition.” Id. After a hearing, the trial court dismissed the petition
and denied the petitioners’ motion for a psychiatric evaluation. The petitioners
appeal both decisions.
Turning first to the motion to dismiss, we review the grant of a motion to
dismiss by determining whether the petitioners’ allegations are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit the relief sought. See Beane v.
Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010). We assume the truth of the
facts as alleged in the petitioners’ pleadings and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to the petitioners. See id. We will uphold
the granting of the motion to dismiss if the facts pleaded do not constitute a
basis for legal relief. Id.
Determining whether the petitioners alleged facts that would permit them
to obtain a guardianship requires interpretation of RSA chapter 464-A,
Guardians and Conservators. In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the
final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Despres v. Hampsey, 162 N.H. 398, 400 (2011). We
first examine statutory language, and, when possible, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. at 401. If the language of a statute
is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to modification. Id.
In this case, the relevant statutes make clear that a guardianship
petition must contain recent evidence of the proposed ward’s inability to care
for himself. Under RSA 464-A:4, III (2004):
A statement shall be filed with the petition for appointment of
the guardian of the person and estate . . . containing facts showing
the necessity for the appointment of a guardian . . . including
specific factual allegations . . . which are claimed to demonstrate
his or her inability to manage an estate, or to provide for personal
needs for health care, food, clothing, shelter, or safety.
2
RSA 464-A:2, XI further requires that “[a]ll evidence of inability must have
occurred within 6 months prior to the filing of the petition and at least one
incidence of such behavior must have occurred within 20 days of the filing of
the petition for guardianship.” Read together, these provisions mandate that
guardianship petitions allege at least one event evidencing incapacity that
occurred within twenty days of the petition’s filing. As a result, a petition that
fails to allege such an event lacks an element necessary to obtain a
guardianship, and must be dismissed.
This reading is consistent with the presumption of competence enjoyed
by proposed wards, see RSA 464-A:8, IV (2004), and the purposes of the
guardianship chapter, which include “encourag[ing] . . . maximum self-reliance
in the individual . . . and . . . impos[ing] protective orders only to the extent
necessitated by the individual’s functional limitations.” RSA 464-A:1 (2004).
When a guardianship petitioner comes before the probate court without recent
evidence of the proposed ward’s need for a guardian, the statutory time
requirements permit the ward to rest upon the presumption that, whatever his
past behavior, he is competent now.
In this case, the petitioners appear to concede that their petition lacks
allegations of behavior within the statutory time frame, but assert that the
policies underlying the guardianship scheme require that we disregard their
petition’s deficiency. They contend that the doctor’s current living arrangement
constitutes an unsanctioned guardianship that has prevented them from
obtaining evidence of his incapacity. Allowing this situation to continue, they
argue, frustrates the protection of civil rights that the legislature sought to
protect through guardianship proceedings.
This argument misapprehends the civil liberty protection referred to in
the guardianship chapter. The chapter’s purpose is “to promote and protect
the well-being of the proposed ward in involuntarily imposed protective
proceedings.” Id. It “provide[s] procedural and substantive safeguards for civil
liberties and property rights of a proposed ward or an individual already under
guardianship powers.” Id. These policies aim to protect proposed wards from
unjustified interference with civil liberties as a result of a guardianship
proceeding, not to protect them from private individuals generally.
Thus, the statute does not, as the petitioners argue, empower the
probate court to disregard statutory requirements when a petitioner alleges
that the proposed ward’s current living situation implicates civil liberties. To
the contrary, adherence to the statutory requirements for a petition avoids
infringement upon proposed wards’ rights by preventing petitioners from haling
them into court without recent evidence that a guardianship is necessary.
Thus, the statute requiring recent evidence of a ward’s inability to care for
himself furthers – rather than frustrates – the guardianship chapter’s policies,
3
and we, therefore, reject the petitioners’ argument. Because the petitioners
failed to allege evidence of inability that occurred within the statutory time
frame, the trial court properly dismissed their petition. See RSA 464-A:2, XI.
The petitioners next argue that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion when it denied their motion for a psychiatric evaluation of Dr. B.
They contend that not ordering an evaluation was error because: (1) the parties
agreed the doctor’s capacity was “diminished”; (2) the extent of his capacity was
determinative in the case; and (3) such an evaluation would be “non-invasive.”
Assuming without deciding that the trial court had discretion to order an
evaluation despite the inadequacy of the petitioners’ allegations, the court did
not unsustainably exercise its discretion by declining to do so. The trial court
could have reasonably concluded that the doctor’s interest in freedom from an
unwanted psychological examination outweighed the petitioners’ interests in
procuring evidence of his alleged incapacity.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4