THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-795
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WALTER HUTCHINSON, JR.
Argued: February 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 26, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan G. Morrell, senior assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Nadeau, J.), the
defendant, Walter Hutchinson, Jr., was convicted of first-degree murder for the
killing of Kimberly Ernest, and sentenced to life in prison without the
possibility of parole. See RSA 630:1-a (2007 & Supp. 2010). On appeal, he
argues that the trial court erred in denying his motion to dismiss for
insufficient evidence of causation of death. We affirm.
The facts of this case are well-documented in two prior opinions of this
court, and therefore we do not recite them in their entirety. See State v.
Hutchinson, 156 N.H. 790 (2008) (Hutchinson II); State v. Hutchinson, 137
N.H. 591 (1993) (Hutchinson I). By way of brief background, however, we note
the following undisputed facts. On October 8, 1991, a jury found the
defendant guilty of attempted murder for beating and strangling Ernest, his
twenty-one-year-old former girlfriend, causing her to sustain severe brain
damage. See Hutchinson I, 137 N.H. at 592. Ernest remained in a near
comatose state in the Rockingham County Nursing Home for approximately
fourteen years until her death on November 6, 2005. In the days leading up to
her death, Ernest exhibited signs of illness. On November 3, 2005, she had
chest congestion and a fever, and was wheezing and coughing. Nursing home
personnel administered Tylenol and Robitussin, as well as nebulizer treatment.
Two days later, Ernest’s temperature rose again and she sustained a three to
five minute seizure. She was again administered Robitussin and nebulizer
treatment, and was additionally treated with an extra dose of her seizure
medication, Dilantin, and placed on oxygen by way of nasal catheter. Despite
those measures, Ernest’s oxygen levels dropped and she sustained a second
seizure, which lasted approximately forty-five minutes. She was then
transported to the hospital, where x-rays indicated she had developed a
respiratory infection. At that point Ernest’s family chose to treat her only with
comfort measures. She died several hours later.
The State subsequently brought murder charges against the defendant.
The defendant sought to bar the charges on double jeopardy grounds and
appealed the trial court’s denial of his motion to dismiss. We affirmed the trial
court’s decision on interlocutory appeal. See Hutchinson II, 156 N.H. at 791.
Thereafter, the defendant was tried and convicted of first-degree murder for
Ernest’s death.
On appeal, the defendant asserts that the evidence was insufficient to
prove that he caused Ernest’s death. He does not contest that his actions
caused Ernest’s permanent brain injury, leaving her in a persistent, near-
vegetative state for the fourteen years prior to her death. Nor does he dispute
that Ernest’s brain injury, and consequent immobility, increased her risk of
developing certain illnesses. His sole argument is that the admitted risks to
Ernest’s health as a result of his actions do not establish the necessary
element of legal causation.
In a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the defendant must
prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666, 673 (2005).
Here, the defendant was convicted of first-degree murder, an element of
which is causation of death. See RSA 630:1-a, I (a person is guilty of murder
in the first degree if he purposely causes the death of another). “To establish
causation, the State needed to prove not only that the prohibited result would
2
not have occurred but for the conduct of the defendant, but also that the
defendant’s conduct was the legal (or proximate) cause of the prohibited
result.” State v. Lamprey, 149 N.H. 364, 366 (2003). In Lamprey, we
considered the propriety of jury instructions that described a legal cause of
death as a cause that is a “direct and substantial factor” bringing about death.
Id. at 367. We analyzed the instructions in light of our previous holding in
State v. Seymour, 140 N.H. 736, 746 (1996), that “a legal cause is the cause
without which the event would not have occurred, and the predominating
cause, a substantial factor from which the event follows as a natural, direct
and immediate consequence.” Lamprey, 149 N.H. at 367. We concluded that
the “direct and substantial factor” language, in combination with an
instruction that the prohibited result must be the “direct result” of the
defendant’s actions, was substantially the same as the “natural, direct and
immediate consequence” instruction given in Seymour. Id. at 367-68. Here,
the trial court instructed the jury on causation consistent with Lamprey and
Seymour, and the defendant does not challenge those instructions. Thus, the
issue before us is whether there was sufficient evidence that Ernest’s death
would not have occurred but for the defendant’s conduct, and, in keeping with
Lamprey and Seymour, whether there was sufficient evidence that Ernest’s
death was a natural and direct consequence of the defendant’s conduct.
Upon review, we conclude that the evidence in this case was sufficient to
support the jury’s finding that the defendant’s conduct caused Ernest’s death
beyond a reasonable doubt. At trial, the State introduced the defendant’s
testimony from his 1991 attempted murder trial. In that trial, the defendant
testified that he beat Ernest’s head into the floor until she lost consciousness,
and that after she regained consciousness and attempted to flee, he caught and
strangled her for at least four minutes and continued to strangle her even after
she collapsed. Dr. Albert Drukteinis, a forensic psychiatrist who evaluated the
defendant, testified that the defendant stated he choked Ernest for five to ten
minutes.
Dr. David Heller, the emergency room physician at Exeter Hospital who
first treated Ernest after the assault, testified that prior to the assault Ernest
had no history of seizures. He further testified that at the time of treatment he
believed “the chances of somebody [in Ernest’s condition] recovering under
these circumstances and having any kind of meaningful life [wa]s very, very
unlikely.”
Dr. John Robinson, a neurologist who treated Ernest at the Portsmouth
Regional Hospital, where she was hospitalized for two weeks following the
assault, testified that in the immediate aftermath of the assault Ernest “seized”
for approximately three to three and one half hours. He testified that Ernest
suffered from hypoxia, a decrease in oxygen due to strangulation, and that the
hypoxia caused uncontrolled seizures, which in turn caused additional
3
impairment of her breathing. Robinson further testified that this cycle causes
irreversible brain cell death.
Dr. Clinton Miller, a neurosurgeon who also treated Ernest following the
assault, testified that Ernest exhibited decerebration, i.e., the stiffening of the
limbs, and that this indicated a sign of serious brain injury. He testified that
Ernest suffered from “severe, hypoxic brain injury, possibly combined with
concussive closed head injury, most likely attributable to acute strangulation,”
and that uncontrolled seizures were the predictable consequence of hypoxic
brain injury. Miller further testified that when the brain is deprived of oxygen
for a period between three to five minutes, irreversible death occurs in the cells
of the brain. He went on to testify that persons with severe brain damage,
such as Ernest, typically have a shortened life expectancy and that:
The anticipated eventual cause of death in a patient who has
suffered a severe hypoxic or anoxic brain injury of any type . . . is
that [she] would succumb to . . . pneumonia, infection, heart
attack, urinary tract infection, blood clots forming in the legs
because [she is] immobile and then breaking off and traveling up to
the lungs so that the ability to get oxygen from the lungs into the
bloodstream is impaired.
. . . .
So these patients die from the lack of the ability of the brain to
supervise all of our everyday vegetative functions, the things that
you and I take for granted.
He further testified that the fact that Ernest lived for fourteen years after the
assault was, in his medical opinion, a testament to the extraordinary care
provided by the nursing home in which she resided.
Dr. James Whitlock, a neurologist and chief medical officer at the
Northeast Rehabilitation Hospital where Ernest was treated after her discharge
from the Portsmouth Regional Hospital, also testified that the most significant
risks to Ernest’s life were pneumonia, infections, seizures, and clots in the
lungs due to her immobility. He testified that the majority of people suffering
from brain damage similar to Ernest’s die within five years of sustaining the
initial injury.
Dr. Karl Singer, an attending physician at the Rockingham County
Nursing Home, testified that he prepared the death certificate for Ernest.
Singer testified that he provided medical attention to Ernest for nearly fourteen
years at the nursing home and that concerns for Ernest’s health included
preventing aspiration and maintaining control of her seizures. Singer testified
that while he indicated on the death certificate that Ernest died of natural
4
causes, he “did not think about” Ernest’s brain injury when preparing the
certificate. He further testified that he had been too limited in his assessment
of the cause of Ernest’s death when he filled out the death certificate and that
the certificate “didn’t really reflect the whole nature of [Ernest’s] problem over
the last 14 years of her life.” He stated that when filling out death certificates,
doctors “tend to focus on the last few minutes or hours and don’t really often
put things in context,” and that this was “a very common error.”
Dr. Jennie Duval, deputy chief medical examiner, testified that she
performed an autopsy of Ernest and determined the cause of Ernest’s death to
be complications resulting from the 1991 brain injury. Duval testified that
Ernest “essentially stopped breathing, but it was a complication that directly
related to the seizures she was having, and that directly related to the brain
injury she suffered on that day in 1991. And that was because of the
strangulation. So it all dates back to 14 years previously.”
Duval explained that Ernest’s medical records indicated that after the
assault, Ernest was found unresponsive and seizing. Although emergency
workers were initially able to stop the seizures, Ernest continued to have
partial seizures every one to two months throughout her fourteen years of long-
term care, which required the continuous administration of seizure medication.
Duval testified that during those seizures Ernest was at risk for developing
aspiration pneumonia, as a result of aspiration of saliva or gastric contents
into the lungs. Duval further testified that on the day before Ernest’s death
she started seizing again, that medical staff were not able to control the
seizures, and that x-rays revealed that she had aspiration contents and
pneumonia in the lungs.
Duval also testified to two additional health problems that contributed to
Ernest’s death, both of which she attributed to the severe brain damage Ernest
sustained fourteen years prior to her death. Duval explained that Ernest’s
autopsy revealed that she had a pulmonary embolism, a blood clot, in the main
artery that supplies blood to the lungs, which would have decreased the oxygen
that reaches the brain. She also had pulmonary edema – excess fluid retention
in the lungs. Duval testified that she believed these conditions were caused by
Ernest’s immobility and that they combined to cause seizures, aspiration of
infectious bacteria into her lungs, and, eventually, her death. Duval stated
that, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the cause of Ernest’s death
was homicide, death at the hands of another, and that “th[e] final underlying
cause that led to her death -- even though it was delayed 14 years, that final
underlying event was the attempted strangulation 14 years ago at the hands of
another person.”
The defendant takes the position that this evidence merely supports a
conclusion that Ernest’s heightened risk of developing illness could have
caused her death, and, therefore that the evidence is insufficient to establish
5
legal causation. We conclude otherwise. The State presented evidence of the
profound damage to Ernest’s brain and the resulting associated risks. The
State further presented evidence that Ernest died of precisely those conditions
for which she was at risk due to her brain injury. Moreover, Duval specifically
testified that Ernest died from complications which were directly related to her
strangulation, and thus the cause of Ernest’s death was homicide by
strangulation.
The defendant points to testimony by Miller that patients with severe
hypoxic brain injury tend to “succumb to one of the routine things that cause
the death of most of us,” and characterizes this testimony as an indication that
Ernest’s death was just as likely to have occurred without the brain injury.
According to the defendant, this testimony suggests that “while it is possible
that Ernest’s death might not have occurred but for strangulation, the evidence
just as aptly proved that her death from respiratory illness occurred as it would
have in the case of an otherwise healthy, mobile person with respiratory
illness.” We are not persuaded.
Miller’s statement was in answer to a question about the medical
complications of immobility, and directly related to his previous testimony
about the generally shortened lifespan of persons with severe brain injury.
Thus, his statement was an explanation of medical problems that occur in
immobile patients, and which cause the death of most people after age has
restricted mobility. Under these circumstances, we do not conclude that Dr.
Miller suggested that Ernest’s death would have occurred without the
strangulation which caused her immobility, or that the defendant’s assault was
not the natural and direct cause of her death.
Nor do we find merit in the defendant’s contention that because Ernest
lived for fourteen years with her injuries, as opposed to the five years generally
projected for patients who are similarly brain injured, she had outlived the risk
of death directly caused by the strangulation. As noted above, there was ample
evidence to show that Ernest died of the very complications for which persons
with severe brain injury and immobility are at risk. Moreover, the defendant
points to no evidence that Ernest’s heightened risk for those complications was
eliminated by her longer lifespan.
Finally, we note the defendant’s argument that in Commonwealth v.
Embry, 272 A.2d 178 (Pa. 1971), expert testimony given to “a reasonable
degree of medical certainty” was found insufficient to establish proof beyond a
reasonable doubt. See Embry, 272 A.2d at 179. The facts in Embry, however,
are distinguishable. Embry concerned a victim with a pre-existing heart
condition who died of a heart attack after a purse-snatching. The medical
examiner, and sole expert witness in the case, testified that while he was
convinced the victim had died of a heart attack, he was not convinced beyond a
reasonable doubt that the robbery produced the stress which, in turn, caused
6
the victim’s heart attack. Id. Thus, the issue in Embry was not whether the
expert testified based on the proper standard, but, rather, whether the expert’s
opinion in fact established causation. Id.; cf. Com. v. Alston, 410 A.2d 849,
851 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1979) (finding appellant’s argument that there was
insufficient evidence to prove cause of death beyond a reasonable doubt
“entirely specious,” where the question presented to the medical examiner was
“can you give an opinion with reasonable medical certainty as to the cause of
death,” and his response was “The cause of death was a stab wound of the
thorax”).
Our sufficiency of the evidence standard requires that we view each
evidentiary item in context and not in isolation. See State v. Evans, 150 N.H.
416, 424 (2003). Here, Ernest had no pre-existing medical condition, six
expert witnesses testified to Ernest’s brain damage, its cause, and the resultant
associated risks, including shortened life span due to immobility and infection,
and Duval testified that Ernest’s death was caused by the defendant’s 1991
assault on her. We conclude that this evidence, along with the other evidence
adduced by the State, was sufficient to permit a rational jury to conclude,
beyond a reasonable doubt, that Ernest’s death would not have occurred but
for the defendant’s conduct and that her death was a natural and direct
consequence of the defendant’s conduct.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7