THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-741
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSEPH MICHAUD
Argued: January 20, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 28, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (McHugh, J.), the
defendant, Joseph Michaud, was convicted of four counts of felonious sexual
assault. See RSA 632-A:3, III (2007) (amended 2010). On appeal, the
defendant argues that the trial court erred in denying his request for a lesser-
included offense instruction on simple assault. See RSA 631:2-a, I(a) (2007).
We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim, VM, was
under thirteen years of age at the time of the offenses. Her father, DM, and the
defendant have been friends since childhood. The defendant has a child the
same age as VM and the two children were friends. The first and second
incidents of felonious sexual assault occurred when VM spent a weekend at the
defendant’s house during November 2006. Each morning, while sitting in the
living room, the defendant placed his hands under VM’s shirt and rubbed her
breasts. The first time, VM thought the defendant was tickling her but then
realized the touching did not feel like tickling. After the second incident, VM
told her parents that she did not like how the defendant tickled her and that he
put his hands under her shirt.
The third incident occurred during another sleepover in June 2007, while
VM ate breakfast with the defendant in his living room. The defendant reached
under the side of VM’s shirt and rubbed her breasts. When VM’s mother
picked her up, VM told her mother that the defendant put his hands under her
shirt and “kind of tickled her.”
The final incident occurred in September 2008 when the defendant went
to VM’s house to pick up his children. VM was in the basement sitting at a
computer. The defendant came downstairs, stood behind VM, placed his arms
over her shoulders, his hands down her shirt, and rubbed her breasts. After
the defendant left, VM again told her mother about what had happened.
The defendant testified at trial. He denied touching VM on any of the
four occasions, except for giving her a “high five” at the time of the September
2008 incident. He admitted that he had tickled VM in the past and testified
that he told the police officer when questioned that he had tickled VM “a
thousand times.” However, he testified that he had “never touched [VM] in an
inappropriate manner.”
At the close of the trial, the court instructed the jury as to the elements
of the charged variant of felonious sexual assault. The defendant requested a
lesser-included offense instruction for simple assault, which the court denied.
This appeal followed.
The only issue on appeal is whether the trial court erred in denying the
defendant’s request for a lesser-included offense instruction for simple assault.
Whether simple assault is a lesser-included offense of the charged variant of
felonious sexual assault is a question of first impression for this court. The
defendant argues that all of the elements of simple assault are embraced within
the definition of the charged variant of felonious sexual assault and, thus,
simple assault is a lesser-included offense of felonious sexual assault. He
further argues that, given the testimony at trial about incidents of tickling, the
court was required to give the lesser-included offense instruction for simple
assault. We disagree.
2
An offense is lesser-included if a person must necessarily have
committed it in the process of committing the offense charged. State v. Mallar,
127 N.H. 816, 820 (1986). Whether a defendant is entitled to a lesser-included
offense instruction turns upon two distinct inquiries: first, the lesser offense
must be embraced within the legal definition of the greater offense. State v.
Thomas, 154 N.H. 189, 192 (2006). In other words, the lesser offense must not
include any elements that are different from the elements of the greater offense.
Mallar, 127 N.H. at 820. This inquiry entails a comparison of the statutory
elements of each offense without reference to the evidence. Id. Second, the
evidence adduced at trial must provide a rational basis for a finding of guilt on
the lesser offense rather than the greater offense. Thomas, 154 N.H. at 192.
The first part requires us to consider a legal question; namely, whether the
offense for which the instruction is sought is a lesser-included offense of the
charged offense. United States v. Arnt, 474 F.3d 1159, 1163 (9th Cir. 2007).
Therefore the first part is subject to de novo review. The second part is a
factual inquiry; namely, whether the record contains evidence that would
provide a rational basis for a conviction on the lesser offense rather than the
greater offense. Id. The trial judge is best suited to make this factual
determination and we, therefore, review the second part for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. See State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001). We
begin our analysis with the first part of the test to determine whether the lesser
offense is embraced within the legal definition of the greater offense. Because
we decide this case based upon the first part of this test, we need not address
the second part.
RSA 632-A:3, III provides that a person is guilty of felonious sexual
assault if such person “[e]ngages in sexual contact with a person other than his
legal spouse who is under thirteen years of age.” Thus, the elements of
felonious sexual assault are: (1) engaging in sexual contact; (2) with a person
who is not the legal spouse of the actor; and (3) who is under the age of
thirteen. RSA 632-A:3, III. For purposes of our analysis, we will refer to this
as felonious sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim under
thirteen. “‘Sexual contact’ means the intentional touching whether directly,
through clothing, or otherwise, of the victim’s or actor’s sexual or intimate
parts, including emissions, tongue, anus, breasts, and buttocks. Sexual
contact includes only that aforementioned conduct which can be reasonably
construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.” RSA
632-A:1, IV (Supp. 2010). Because RSA 632-A:1, IV requires an “intentional
touching,” the mens rea required for felonious sexual assault by means of
sexual contact with a victim under thirteen is purposely. See State v. Pond,
132 N.H. 472, 475 (1989) (finding that purposely is the mens rea for felonious
sexual assault).
RSA 631:2-a, I(a) provides that a person is guilty of simple assault if
such person “[p]urposely or knowingly causes bodily injury or unprivileged
physical contact to another . . . .” Thus, the elements of simple assault under
3
RSA 631:2-a, I(a), for the purposes of this case, are (1) purposely or knowingly
(2) causing unprivileged physical contact to another.
The defendant argues that the element of “unprivileged physical contact”
contained within the definition of simple assault is embraced within the
definition of felonious sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim
under the age of thirteen. “Unprivileged physical contact,” as it pertains to
simple assault, “includes all physical contact not justified by law or consent.”
State v. Burke, 153 N.H. 361, 364 (2006). The defendant argues that felonious
sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim under the age of
thirteen prohibits contact that is not justified by law or consent. The crux of
the defendant’s argument turns on the fact that children, although “assumed
to consent to ordinary contacts which are reasonably necessary to the common
current of life,” State v. Smith, 127 N.H. 433, 439 (1985), are generally unable
to consent to sexual contact due to immaturity, see, e.g., RSA 626:6, III (2007).
Thus, the defendant argues, “By proscribing contact outside what normally
occurs in daily living and by proscribing contact of a person unable to consent
to such contact, the felonious sexual assault statute embraces unprivileged
physical contact.”
We disagree. Not all of the elements of simple assault are contained
within the variant of felonious sexual assault of which the defendant was
convicted. Specifically, “unprivileged physical contact” is not an element of
felonious sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim under the
age of thirteen. The sexual contact that RSA 632-A:3, III proscribes is illegal
because the victim is under the age of thirteen. The contact is not proscribed
because it is unprivileged. In fact, nowhere in the section of the statute
defining felonious sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim
under the age of thirteen is there any mention of privilege. The State need not
prove the act was unprivileged but only that it was against a victim under the
age of thirteen. See RSA 632-A:3, III. Thus, simple assault is not embraced
within the charged variant of felonious sexual assault because the elements of
simple assault differ from the elements of felonious sexual assault by means of
sexual contact with a victim under the age of thirteen.
In support of his argument, the defendant cites Dukette v. Perrin, 564 F.
Supp. 1530, 1536 (D.N.H. 1983), in which the court ruled that simple assault,
under New Hampshire law, is a lesser-included offense of aggravated felonious
sexual assault by means of application of physical force. There is, however, an
important distinction between aggravated felonious sexual assault by means of
application of physical force, RSA 632-A:2, I(a) (Supp. 2010), and felonious
sexual assault by means of sexual contact with a victim under thirteen, RSA
632-A:3, III. The victim in Dukette was an adult and the charged variant of
aggravated felonious sexual assault included unprivileged physical contact, i.e.,
the absence of consent, as an element. See Dukette, 564 F. Supp. at 1533,
1534, 1536. Unlike in Dukette, felonious sexual assault by means of sexual
4
contact with a victim under the age of thirteen does not include unprivileged
physical contact as an element. RSA 632-A:3, III. Thus, simple assault,
although perhaps a lesser-included offense of aggravated felonious sexual
assault by means of application of physical force, is not a lesser-included
offense of felonious sexual assault under RSA 632-A:3, III.
The defendant also cites several cases from other jurisdictions. Those
cases are all distinguishable, because each involved a charged offense which
includes the element of lack of consent or unprivileged physical contact. See
United States v. Mays, 514 F. Supp. 2d 1298, 1300, 1301 (M.D. Fla. 2007)
(conviction for offense of abusive sexual contact required a finding by the jury
“[t]hat the sexual contact was without the victim’s permission”); Mungo v.
United States, 772 A.2d 240, 244-45, 246 (D.C. 2001) (conviction for offense of
misdemeanor sexual abuse required a finding “that the defendant knew or
should have known that he or she did not have the complainant’s permission
to engage in the sexual act or sexual conduct”); State v. Ogundiya, 2004 WL
315138, at *3 (Tenn. Crim. App. 2004) (conviction for offense of sexual battery
required a finding that “force or coercion [was] used to accomplish the act” or
that “[t]he sexual contact [was] accomplished without the consent of the
victim”).
The defendant further relies upon the reasoning of the Eleventh Circuit
Court of Appeals in United States v. Williams, 197 F.3d 1091 (11th Cir. 1999).
In Williams, the Eleventh Circuit found that assault, defined as battery and
including offensive touching as an element, is a lesser-included offense of
abusive sexual contact with a child under the age of twelve. United States v.
Williams, 197 F.3d 1091, 1096 (11th Cir. 1999). Like RSA 632-A:3, III, the
greater offense does not include lack of consent as an element. Id. However, in
its analysis the court did not address the significance of the element of lack of
consent. Rather, the court focused upon whether abusive sexual contact
included an element of intent to do bodily harm. Id. We decline to adopt the
Eleventh Circuit’s approach.
We agree, instead, with the reasoning of the Iowa Supreme Court in State
v. Constable, 505 N.W.2d 473 (Iowa 1993). The court held that simple assault
and assault with intent to commit sexual abuse were not lesser-included
offenses of sexual abuse in the second degree. Constable, 505 N.W.2d at 477.
The defendant in Constable offered an argument similar to that of the
defendant herein, urging that “any sex act with a child must necessarily be by
force and against the child’s will.” Id. at 475. The court disagreed, stating that
while assault may be a lesser included offense of sexual abuse in
the third degree when that violation involved commission of a sex
act by force or against the will of the other participant, assault [is]
not a lesser included offense when the victim [i]s a child and the
consent or will of the child [i]s irrelevant.
5
Id. at 476.
Accordingly, the trial court did not err in denying the defendant’s request
for an instruction on simple assault.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6