THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-719
RUSSELL FOREST MANAGEMENT, LLC
v.
TOWN OF HENNIKER
Argued: May 5, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 15, 2011
Lane & Bentley, P.C., of Keene (Howard B. Lane, Jr. on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (Barton L. Mayer on the brief and
orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The plaintiff, Russell Forest Management, LLC, appeals
the order of the Superior Court (McNamara, J.) upholding the decision of the
zoning board of adjustment (ZBA) of the defendant, Town of Henniker (Town),
that a public highway did not become a private road after it was discontinued
by a Town vote. We affirm.
The record reveals the following facts. Bowers Road in Henniker was
originally laid out as a public highway in 1797. At a Town meeting in 1895,
the Town voted to discontinue Bowers Road.
Timothy Hanson purchased a parcel of land (the property) in Henniker
in 2002. Bowers Road, which runs over a neighboring property, provides the
only access to the property. Because the neighboring property owners
disputed Hanson’s use of Bowers Road to access the property, Hanson
brought suit in superior court seeking clarification of his rights. The trial
court concluded that Hanson had a “right of way in [Bowers Road] to access
his property” and a “prescriptive easement over Bowers Road to access his
property.”
Hanson sold the property to Cersosimo Industries, Inc., in 2008. In
2009, Cersosimo sold the property to the plaintiff, which applied to the Town
for a building permit to construct a single-family home.
Following a public hearing on the plaintiff’s building permit application,
the board of selectmen rejected it based upon “the provisions of RSA 674:41,
III, as cited by our town counsel in previous correspondence.” See RSA
674:41, III (2008). The letter from Town counsel stated: “The discontinued
[highway] does not satisfy any of the enumerated criteria as set forth in [RSA
674:41, I(a)-(e)]. Rather, it is a private right-of-way accessing a Class VI
highway. [The plaintiff’s] property does not have frontage, but rather a right-
of-way.” See RSA 674:41, I (2008).
The plaintiff appealed to the ZBA, which upheld the selectmen’s
decision. In doing so, the ZBA stated that it “found no error in the
Selectmen’s decision because this lot has no road frontage and is accessible
only by private easement.” The superior court upheld the ZBA’s decision, and
this appeal followed.
Our review in zoning cases is limited. Harrington v. Town of Warner,
152 N.H. 74, 77 (2005). Factual findings of the ZBA are deemed prima facie
lawful and reasonable and will not be set aside by the superior court absent
errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by a balance of probabilities on
the evidence before it that the ZBA decision is unreasonable. Id.; see RSA
677:6 (2008). We will uphold the superior court’s decision unless the
evidence does not support it or it is legally erroneous. Harrington, 152 N.H.
at 77.
Pursuant to RSA 674:41, I, a building permit shall not be issued
“unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such building is
proposed to be placed” meets one of the requirements enumerated in
subparagraphs (a) – (e), one of which is that the street giving access to the lot
2
is a “private road,” provided that, as in this case, the local governing body
allows buildings to be built on such roads. RSA 674:41, I(d). The plaintiff
asserts only that the discontinued highway in this case is a “private road.”
Accordingly, we need not consider the other subparagraphs.
Grossman v. Town of Dunbarton, 118 N.H. 519 (1978), controls this
case. In Grossman, a town voted in 1876 to discontinue a portion of a public
highway. Id. at 520-21. The vote was recorded as:
Voted. That the Road leading from near William N. Fuller’s to
Benjamin Perley’s be discontinued as a Public Highway but that
the owners of land on said line of Road shall be entitled to the
same privileges and conveniences as heretofore and that said
Road shall be a Private way and so designated.
Id. (quotation omitted). We concluded, however, that the town’s vote did not
convert the discontinued highway into a private way. Id. at 522.
We observed that at the time the road in Grossman was discontinued,
towns had the authority to lay out public highways, private ways and private
ways subject to gates and bars; however, “[t]he alternatives a town had in
discontinuing a highway were not as extensive.” Id. The applicable statute in
1876 stated: “Highways in a town may be discontinued by vote of the town
. . . .” GS 65:1 (1867). There was no provision in GS chapter 65 for a town to
change the status of an open public highway to anything other than a totally
discontinued highway. Grossman, 118 N.H. at 521. Accordingly, we held
that the town’s attempt to convert the highway into anything other than “a
fully discontinued highway [was] ineffective, and the town’s vote totally
discontinued the highway.” Id.
The instant case is governed by GL 71:1 (1878), which was in effect in
1895 when the Town voted to discontinue Bowers Road. GL 71:1 is identical
to the statute in effect in Grossman, and, therefore, the Town was permitted
only to totally discontinue Bowers Road, a public highway. See id. The Town
could not have made Bowers Road a private road when it was discontinued,
and there is no evidence in the record of a later attempt to change its
discontinued status, see RSA 231:22 (2009) (owner with no access to land by
public highway may petition selectmen to layout, subject to bars and gates, a
highway where previously discontinued highway was located). Therefore, we
cannot conclude that Bowers Road is a private road.
Because the trial court’s determination that the plaintiff has an
easement over Bowers Road is not before us on appeal, we assume without
deciding that it is correct. However, an easement qualifies as a “street giving
access to a lot” only if it meets one of the criteria set forth in RSA 674:41, I(a)
3
– (e). See RSA 674:41, III. Because Bowers Road is not a private road, it does
not meet the requirements of RSA 674:41, I(d). The plaintiff does not argue
that any other provision of the statute applies; therefore, the ZBA lawfully
denied the building permit application. See RSA 674:41, I, III. Accordingly,
we affirm the trial court’s decision upholding the ZBA’s denial of the plaintiff’s
building permit application.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4