THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2011-236
HARBORSIDE ASSOCIATES, L.P.
v.
CITY OF PORTSMOUTH
Argued: February 15, 2012
Opinion Issued: March 23, 2012
Springer Law Office, PLLC, of Portsmouth (Jonathan S. Springer on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner, Harborside Associates, L.P.
Robert P. Sullivan and Susan W. Chamberlin, of Portsmouth, on the
brief, and Mr. Sullivan orally, for the respondent, City of Portsmouth.
Shaines & McEachern, P.A., of Portsmouth (Alec L. McEachern on the
brief and orally), for the intervener, Parade Residence Hotel, LLC.
LYNN, J. The intervener, Parade Residence Hotel, LLC (Parade), appeals
the order of the Superior Court (Lewis, J.) vacating and remanding the decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) of the City of Portsmouth (City) that
upheld the City Planning Board’s (Board) approval of Parade’s application to
amend its previously approved site plan. We affirm.
I
The record reflects the following relevant facts. Parade’s property abuts
the property of the plaintiff, Harborside Associates, L.P. (Harborside), the
operator of the Sheraton Portsmouth Hotel. On September 18, 2008, the Board
approved Parade’s application to construct a five-story building, consisting of a
hotel, a restaurant, and ground floor retail space. Parade began construction
in July of 2009.
On December 21, 2009, the City adopted a new zoning ordinance (the
2010 Ordinance), which became effective on January 1, 2010. Among other
changes, the new ordinance adopted parking requirements different from those
in effect in 2008 when the Parade project was first approved. On January 19,
2010, Parade submitted an application to the Board to amend its 2008 site
plan, seeking to replace the previously approved retail space with a 300-person
conference center. Harborside objected to the amendment, contending that
Parade was required to comply with the 2010 Ordinance because of the change
in plans. After a public hearing, the Board approved the application to amend
without requiring Parade to comply with the new ordinance. Harborside
appealed to the ZBA, which affirmed the Board’s ruling. The ZBA determined
that the amended site plan was exempt from the 2010 Ordinance under RSA
674:39 (2008). The ZBA subsequently denied Harborside’s motion for
rehearing.
Harborside appealed to the superior court pursuant to RSA 677:4 (2008).
The superior court vacated the ZBA’s decision, holding that by seeking to
replace the previously approved retail space with a conference center, Parade
presented a “major change” to its previously approved site plan, which did not
qualify for the exemption under RSA 674:39. Parade appeals.
II
Our review of the superior court’s decision is deferential. Derry Senior
Dev. v. Town of Derry, 157 N.H. 441, 447 (2008). We will uphold the decision
unless it is unsupported by the evidence or legally erroneous. Id. At the same
time, the superior court must treat the factual findings of the planning board
as prima facie lawful and reasonable, and cannot set aside its decision absent
unreasonableness or an identified error of law. Id.; see also RSA 677:6 (2008).
The construction of a zoning ordinance’s terms, however, is a question of law,
which we review de novo. Sutton v. Town of Gilford, 160 N.H. 43, 57 (2010).
Parade first argues that RSA 674:39 exempts its amended site plan from
the 2010 Zoning Ordinance. When Parade submitted its application to amend,
RSA 674:39 provided, in pertinent part:
2
I. Every subdivision plat approved by the planning board
and properly recorded in the registry of deeds and every site
plan approved by the planning board and properly recorded
in the registry of deeds . . . shall be exempt from all
subsequent changes in . . . zoning ordinances . . . for a
period of 4 years after the date of approval; provided that:
(a) Active and substantial development or building has
begun on the site . . . in accordance with the approved
subdivision plat within 12 months after the date of
approval, or in accordance with the terms of the approval
. . . .
RSA 674:39 (2008) (amended 2011).1
Parade argues that because RSA 674:39 does not address whether an
amendment to a site plan exempt under the statute is also exempt, the statute
is on this point ambiguous. To resolve the ambiguity, Parade urges us to apply
the doctrine of administrative gloss, and adopt the Board’s policy of applying
the RSA 674:39 exemption to amended site plans as long as the project is still
under active construction and has not received a certificate of occupancy.
As a rule of statutory construction, “[a]n ‘administrative gloss’ is placed
upon an ambiguous clause when those responsible for its implementation
interpret the clause in a consistent manner and apply it to similarly situated
applicants over a period of years without legislative interference.” DHB, Inc. v.
Town of Pembroke, 152 N.H. 314, 321 (2005). A lack of ambiguity in a statute
or ordinance, however, precludes application of the administrative gloss
doctrine. Anderson v. Motorsports Holdings, LLC, 155 N.H. 491, 502 (2007).
While it does not directly address whether a site plan amendment is
exempt from subsequently enacted zoning ordinances, RSA 674:39 does
provide that any development or building on the site must occur “in accordance
with the approved subdivision plat . . . or in accordance with the terms of the
approval.” RSA 674:39, I(a). Any development pursuant to a site plan
amendment that substantially changes the plan is, by definition, not “in
accordance with the terms” of the original approval and, therefore, clearly does
not fall within the protection of the exemption. In short, seeing no ambiguity in
RSA 674:39, we decline to apply the administrative gloss doctrine.
Next, Parade argues that the record does not support the superior court’s
conclusion that its amended site plan did not qualify for the RSA 674:39
1 The statute, amended in 2011, now provides a five-year exemption to approved site plans from
subsequent changes to zoning ordinances, provided that substantial development or building has
begun within 24 months after the date of a site plan’s approval.
3
exemption because it constituted a “major change.” Parade and the City argue
that because Parade’s proposed amendment affects only a small physical area
of the overall site plan, the superior court erred by concluding that it was a
“major” change. We disagree.
While we recognize that the terms of a site plan approval cannot sensibly
be treated as absolute, as this would deprive developers of any flexibility to
make even incidental changes, RSA 674:39 exempts from subsequent changes
to zoning ordinances only amendments to approved site plans that do not alter
the development to such an extent that it is no longer in accordance with the
terms of the original approval. Therefore, we hold that an amendment can no
longer be said to be “in accordance” with the terms of a previously-approved
site plan if it substantially changes that plan. Cf. Dovaro 12 Atlantic, LLC v.
Town of Hampton, 158 N.H. 222, 228 (2009) (holding that zoning ordinances
prohibiting nonconforming uses “will apply to any alteration of a building or
use for a purpose or in a manner which is substantially different from the use
to which it was put before alteration” (citations and quotations omitted)).
Whether an amendment constitutes a substantial change from the terms of the
site plan’s original approval necessarily turns upon the facts and
circumstances of the particular case.
In this case, we have no occasion to identify the precise degree of change
to a site plan that is substantial enough to require compliance with new zoning
ordinances passed after construction has begun; wherever that line may lie,
Parade’s proposed amendment crossed it. Where, as here, an amendment to
an approved site plan seeks to replace a previously approved use with a new,
previously unapproved use, the resulting change is substantial, and
inconsistent with the terms of the original approval. Cf. Chasse v. Town of
Candia, 132 N.H. 574, 579 (1989) (holding that RSA 674:39 provides no
exemption to a site plan that was “neither approved nor recorded”). Parade’s
original approved site plan, which was for a hotel, a restaurant, and retail
space, did not include the construction of a conference center. A conference
center, which is designed to host large meetings, seminars, and other events, is
qualitatively different from retail space, which is designed to provide a
commercial environment where customers may purchase goods and services.
This difference is reflected in the Table of Uses, Section 10.440 of the 2010
Ordinance, where conference centers, retail space, hotels, and restaurants
have different designated uses. With this substantial change to its previously-
approved site plan, we agree with the superior court that Parade’s amended
site plan is not entitled to the exemption under RSA 674:39.
Parade next argues that even if its amendment is not entitled to the RSA
674:39 exemption, the 2010 Ordinance, by its terms, does not apply to
Parade’s amended site plan. Parade directs our attention to Article 11, Section
10.1115.61 of the ordinance, which states: “The requirements [pertaining to
4
off-street parking in the district where the project is located] shall not apply to
any existing uses on a lot, but shall apply to any change or expansion of
existing uses that results in an increase in the number of off-street parking
spaces required for the lot . . . .” According to Parade, because it has not yet
received a certificate of occupancy for its site, the site has no “existing” uses
and thus the 2010 Ordinance does not apply to Parade’s proposed amendment
of such uses. We disagree.
In the “Definitions” section, Article 15 of the 2010 Ordinance, the term
“use” is defined as “Any purpose for which a lot . . . may be designated,
arranged, [or] intended . . . .” Such a “designated, arranged, intended” purpose
“exists” for Parade’s site plan as of the date it obtained the approval in 2008,
not as of the date it receives a certificate of occupancy. Indeed, if one accepts
Parade’s argument that the original approval did not constitute an “existing
use,” there would be no basis whatsoever for exempting any aspect of the
project (even those portions that were not to be changed) from the
requirements of the 2010 Ordinance. See Sutton, 160 N.H. at 57 (“[T]he words
used in a zoning ordinance will be given their ordinary meaning unless it
appears from their context that a different meaning was intended.” (citations
and quotations omitted)).
Finally, the City argues that the superior court “failed to show deference
to the ZBA’s finding that [Parade’s] amendment could reasonably be reviewed
under the ordinance in effect when the site plan application was approved.”
The ZBA’s decision, however, did not involve factual findings; the facts
regarding the change of use sought by Parade are not in dispute. Instead,
what is at issue is the ZBA’s legal conclusion that, based upon the undisputed
facts concerning the change of use proposed, the amended site plan did not
have to meet the requirements of the 2010 Ordinance. Nor can the doctrine of
administrative gloss be stretched so far as to cover this case, since the ZBA’s
decision flatly contradicts the unambiguous terms of a newly-enacted
ordinance concerning its applicability to the substantial change in use reflected
in the site plan amendment submitted after the ordinance took effect. See
Anderson, 155 N.H. at 502; cf. Appeal of Stanton, 147 N.H. 724, 728 (2002)
(“[A]n agency’s interpretation will not be given deference if it is contrary to the
express statutory language.”). The superior court, therefore, did not err by
overturning the ZBA’s erroneous legal ruling. See RSA 677:6 (2008) (superior
court may set aside ZBA decision for errors of law).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
5