THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-121
JEFFREY FROST & a.
v.
COMMISSIONER, NEW HAMPSHIRE BANKING DEPARTMENT & a.
Argued: November 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2012
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Alexander J. Walker and
Joshua M. Wyatt on the brief, and Mr. Walker orally), for the petitioners.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Danielle L. Pacik, assistant
attorney general, on the brief, and Lisa M. English, assistant attorney general,
orally), for the respondents.
CONBOY, J. The respondents, the Commissioner of the New Hampshire
Banking Department and the New Hampshire Banking Department
(collectively, the Department), appeal an order of the Superior Court
(McNamara, J.) permanently enjoining the Department from pursuing an
administrative proceeding against Jeffrey Frost on the ground that the
Department lacked subject matter jurisdiction. The petitioners, Frost,
Chretien/Tillinghast, LLC, and Frost Family, LLC, cross-appeal, arguing that
the trial court erred by denying their request for attorney’s fees. We affirm.
The statutory backdrop to this case is as follows. RSA chapter 397-A
(2006) (amended 2009, 2011) governs the licensing of nondepository first
mortgage bankers and brokers. In response to the Secure and Fair
Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (the SAFE Act), 12 U.S.C.
§ 5101, which enhanced consumer protection by requiring states to pass
legislation establishing minimum standards for licensing and registration of
state-licensed mortgage loan originators, the New Hampshire legislature
amended RSA chapter 397-A (Supp. 2009). Accordingly, effective April 1, 2009,
it became unlawful for any individual to transact business in New Hampshire
as a mortgage loan originator unless such individual obtains a license from the
Department. See RSA 397-A:3, I. In addition, effective July 31, 2009, the
statute authorizes license suspension and revocation, as well as penalties for
violation of the provisions of the chapter.
The following facts are drawn from the record. Frost is a member and
designated manager of Chretien/Tillinghast, LLC (Chretien), and a member of
Frost Family, LLC (Frost Family). Chretien and Frost Family (collectively, the
LLCs) are New Hampshire limited liability companies organized for the purpose
of real estate acquisition, holding, and development. The underlying dispute
arose as the result of two seller-financed real estate transactions, one
conducted by Frost Family and the other by Chretien.
In September 2008, Frost Family sold a condominium to Cheryl Cayer for
$137,000. In lieu of third-party financing, Cayer requested $32,000 in seller
financing from Frost Family. At closing, Cayer executed a promissory note to
Frost Family, secured by a mortgage, for the financed amount. Cayer paid the
remaining purchase price in cash. This transaction is the only mortgage loan
that Frost Family has ever made.
The second transaction involved a property owned by Chretien. In
September 2008, Robert Recio expressed interest in leasing one of Chretien’s
properties with an option to purchase. The parties agreed on a purchase price
of $475,000. After further discussions, Recio and William Secor signed a long-
term lease with Chretien. At the time of the lease execution, the parties also
executed an option to purchase the property, which, if exercised, obligated
Chretien to provide a first mortgage loan for $425,000 at 6.25% interest, which
was “fully due and payable on the third anniversary date of the real estate
closing and the transfer of title.”
In December 2008, Recio and Secor decided to exercise the option to
purchase the property. Recio rejected Chretien’s suggestions to look for long-
term financing, and instead opted to refinance after closing. In addition, Recio
represented to Chretien that he was expecting a large insurance settlement,
which would help pay down or satisfy the mortgage.
2
On March 13, 2009, Recio and Secor executed a promissory note secured
by a mortgage to Chretien. Under the terms of the note, Recio and Secor
promised to pay $425,000 at 6.25% interest, in monthly payments of $300,
plus interest, until March 2012, when the remaining balance was fully due
and payable. This transaction is the only mortgage loan Chretien has ever
made.
In late 2009, Frost, as manager of Chretien, initiated foreclosure
proceedings on the property Chretien sold to Recio and Secor. In response,
Recio filed for bankruptcy. In the bankruptcy court, Chretien sought and was
granted relief from the automatic stay based on fraudulent misrepresentations
by Recio that he had not previously filed for bankruptcy protection. Shortly
thereafter, Recio filed a complaint with the Consumer Protection Bureau of the
Attorney General’s Office alleging, among other things, that Frost and Chretien
fraudulently induced him to enter into the sale for an inflated price.
Subsequently, Frost was charged with four class A misdemeanors alleging
criminal violations of RSA chapter 397-A (prohibiting, among other things,
unlicensed mortgage banking). The complaint was also forwarded to the
Department. Upon receipt of Recio’s complaint, the Department initiated an
investigation, which disclosed the two seller-financed transactions by the LLCs.
In March 2009, after both instances of seller-financing, Frost submitted
a loan originator license application to the Department. On April 1, 2009,
Frost became a licensed mortgage loan originator, see RSA 397-A:1, XVII
(Supp. 2009) (amended 2011) (defining “Originator”), sponsored by Academy
Mortgage, a licensed mortgage banker, see RSA 397-A:1, XII (2006) (defining
“Mortgage banker”).
In 2010, the Department initiated administrative proceedings against
Frost through an “Order to Show Cause with Immediate Emergency
Suspension and Cease and Desist Order,” as well as a “Staff Petition.” In these
initiating documents, the Department alleged that although Frost disclosed on
his mortgage loan originator’s license application that “he was and still is self-
employed through” Frost Family, he failed to disclose that Frost Family was a
“financial services-related employment.” It alleged that “[i]n fact Frost Family
served as either the mortgage broker or mortgage banker for [the Cayer]
mortgage loan,” and that Frost Family was “servicing [the Cayer] mortgage loan
without a New Hampshire mortgage servicer registration.” See RSA 397-B:4, I
(Supp. 2009) (describing registration requirements for mortgage servicing
companies). The Department alleged further that “Frost failed to include [on
his application] . . . that he is also part owner of [Chretien],” which conducted a
mortgage loan transaction with Recio and Secor, and that Chretien “continues
to actively service this . . . residential mortgage loan” without a valid mortgage
servicer registration or a valid mortgage banker license. See id. Finally, the
Department alleged that “Frost, by continuing his employment with both [LLCs]
3
while employed by mortgage banker licensee, Academy Mortgage, as a licensed
Mortgage Loan Originator, work[ed] for more than one mortgage banker or
mortgage broker and mortgage servicer and [was] therefore in violation of RSA
397-A:1, XVII(a), RSA 397-A:3, III, and/or RSA 397-B:1, IV-c.”
At the time the administrative proceedings were initiated, the
Department notified Frost that he could request a hearing with the Department
under RSA chapter 541-A (2007). Frost did not file such a request. Instead,
the petitioners initiated a declaratory judgment proceeding in superior court,
which included a request for a temporary restraining order. The petitioners
contended that the respondents lacked subject matter jurisdiction to proceed
against Frost and violated the State Constitution’s prohibition against
retrospective laws by seeking to impose a $25,000 fine for each alleged
violation.
After a hearing, the trial court granted the preliminary injunction,
concluding that “[w]hile the [Department] may have jurisdiction over Frost
because he is now a loan originator, it [could] take no action against him based
on the September 2008 or the March 2009 transactions.” Further, the trial
court concluded that since the Department “may not impose any penalties on
Frost,” it did not need to consider the issue of the retrospective nature of the
sanctions.
Subsequently, the parties agreed to treat the preliminary injunction
order as a final order. See Super. Ct. R. 161(b)(2). Prior to entry of the final
order, however, the trial court allowed the petitioners to file a motion for
attorney’s fees. The petitioners filed such a motion, which the trial court
denied.
I. The Department’s Appeal
The Department first argues that the petitioners “should not have been
permitted to bypass the statutory administrative procedures by seeking a
preliminary and permanent injunction in the superior court.” The Department
maintains that under the doctrine of primary jurisdiction, the trial court should
have abstained from intervening and required the petitioners to exhaust their
administrative remedies.
Conversely, the petitioners maintain that the trial court properly exercised
its authority to grant both a preliminary and permanent injunction because the
Department lacks subject matter jurisdiction under RSA chapter 397-A to
regulate the LLCs. Specifically, they argue that because resolution of this issue
requires statutory interpretation, and the superior court has authority to issue
declaratory findings on issues of law, the trial court did not err.
4
The doctrine of primary jurisdiction “provides that a court will refrain from
exercising its concurrent jurisdiction to decide a question until it has first been
decided by the specialized administrative agency that also has jurisdiction to
decide it.” Wisniewski v. Gemmill, 123 N.H. 701, 706 (1983).
[The doctrine] is concerned with promoting proper relationships
between the courts and administrative agencies charged with
particular regulatory duties. It applies to claims that contain some
issue within the special competence of an administrative agency.
Thus, under the primary jurisdiction doctrine, courts, even though
they could decide, will in fact not decide a controversy involving a
question within the jurisdiction of an administrative tribunal until
after that tribunal has rendered its decision.
2 Am. Jur. 2d Administrative Law § 480, at 407 (2004). “Where[, however,] the
issue or issues . . . involve purely questions of law, the matter will not be referred
to an agency.” 73 C.J.S. Public Administrative Law and Procedure § 77, at 270
(2004). Because the decision to refrain from exercising its jurisdiction “rests in
the sound discretion of the trial judge,” Dolan v. Utica Mut. Ins. Co., 630 F.
Supp. 305, 308 (D. Mass 1986), we review the court’s decision under an
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard. See Baykeeper v. NL Industries,
Inc., 660 F.3d 686, 690 (3d Cir. 2011) (“We review a district court’s decision to
abstain on primary jurisdiction grounds . . . for abuse of discretion.”); GCB
Communications v. U.S. South Communications, 650 F.3d 1257, 1262 (9th
Cir. 2011) (“We review a district court's denial of a request to refer a case to an
agency under the primary jurisdiction doctrine for abuse of discretion.”); TON
Services, Inc. v. Qwest Corp., 493 F.3d 1225, 1239 (10th Cir. 2007) (“This
court applies an abuse of discretion standard to the district court’s decisions to
invoke the primary jurisdiction doctrine and to either stay or dismiss the action
without prejudice.”); see also State v. Lambert, 147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001).
In Wisniewski, the defendants diverted the flow of a river abutting the
plaintiffs’ property and theirs without prior authorization by the New Hampshire
Water Resources Board. Wisniewski, 123 N.H. at 704. Upon learning of the
defendants’ actions, the board ordered them to return the river to its original flow
and restore the affected area. Id. Later, however, the board voted to reconsider
its order and deferred further action on the issue until the defendants submitted
a permit application and detailed plans for the diversion of the river. Id. No plan
was ever submitted, but the board took no further action. Id.
The plaintiffs brought an action in superior court for damages caused by
the river’s diversion. Id. The defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiffs’ claim,
arguing the trial court lacked jurisdiction over the action because the board had
exclusive jurisdiction over matters involving state waters. Id. at 705. The
superior court granted the defendants’ motion, and the plaintiffs appealed. Id.
5
On appeal, we reversed, concluding that the legislature, in enacting RSA
chapter 483-A, did not intend “to vest exclusive jurisdiction over state waters in
the board and to eliminate the common law right of a property owner to bring an
action for a violation of its riparian rights when the board has not authorized the
filling or dredging in state waters.” Id. Moreover, we rejected the defendants’
alternative argument that the trial court’s order should have been affirmed under
the doctrine of primary jurisdiction. Id. at 706. We concluded that the doctrine
was “inapplicable . . . because RSA chapter 483-A granted the water resources
board no jurisdiction over disputes between private parties involving an
infringement of riparian rights when the filling and dredging was not given prior
authorization by the board.” Id.
Similarly, if RSA chapter 397-A does not grant the Department jurisdiction
over the two transactions at issue here, there is no need for the court to await the
outcome of the Department’s administrative proceedings centered on these
transactions. See 5 G. J. MacDonald, Wiebusch on New Hampshire Civil Practice
and Procedure, § 62.04, at 62-4, 62-5 (noting agencies’ powers “come solely and
directly from the statutes that create them or give them authority and from the
necessary implications of those statutes”). Because a determination of the
Department’s jurisdiction requires statutory analysis, the trial court could
properly resolve this legal issue. See 73 C.J.S., supra § 77, at 270 (noting no
referral to agency where agency lacks jurisdiction over the matter). While the
dissent apparently acknowledges that the doctrine of primary jurisdiction is
discretionary, it nevertheless maintains that in circumstances such as those
here, where agency action is pending, the trial court’s discretion is limited. We
do not agree that such limitation is warranted here. We conclude, therefore,
that the trial court’s decision not to refrain from exercising its jurisdiction did not
constitute an unsustainable exercise of that discretion.
We note that our decision here does not alter our law regarding
exhaustion of administrative remedies. Whenever a statute provides a
procedure for appeal or review of an administrative agency’s decision, that
procedure is exclusive and must be followed. See Nashua v. Public Utilities
Commission, 101 N.H. 503, 506-07 (1959); 2 Am. Jur. 2d. Administrative Law
§ 475, at 403 (2004) (“[W]here a statute requires exhaustion of administrative
remedies a court has no jurisdiction to review an interlocutory order and the
exhaustion requirement is not a matter for the court’s discretion.”). Thus, before
an agency decision may be reviewed, administrative remedies typically must be
exhausted. See Konefal v. Hollis/Brookline Coop. School Dist., 143 N.H. 256,
258 (1998) (requiring plaintiff to exhaust her administrative remedies before the
PELRB where her claims required resolution of disputed fact, and were therefore
exclusively within administrative discretion).
6
For example, RSA 397-A:7 provides that an applicant who is denied a
mortgage lending license by the banking commissioner may appeal the decision
in accordance with RSA chapter 541. See RSA 541:22 (2007) (“No proceeding
other than the appeal herein provided for shall be maintained in any court of this
state to set aside, enjoin the enforcement of, or otherwise review or impeach any
order of the [agency], except as otherwise specifically provided.”). Thus, under
this section, a petitioner must exhaust administrative remedies before seeking
judicial review. 5 G.J. MacDonald, supra § 62.28, at 62-28 (“When review under
RSA chapter 541 is authorized, it is the exclusive means of challenging an
agency’s decision.”).
By contrast, RSA 397-A:17 (mortgage license revocation and suspension)
does not set forth a similar review procedure. Rather, this section simply
outlines the procedural steps in the revocation or suspension process.
Accordingly, there is no exclusive review process that Frost was required to
exhaust.
Assuming, however, that RSA 397-A:17 implies exclusive administrative
review remedies, here, exhaustion is not required. “We have recognized that the
exhaustion of administrative remedies doctrine is flexible, and that exhaustion is
not required under certain circumstances.” Konefal, 143 N.H. at 258; see
Metzger v. Brentwood, 115 N.H. 287, 290 (1975). For example, in Pheasant Lane
Realty Trust v. City of Nashua, 143 N.H. 140 (1998), we explained that “[a] party
is not required to exhaust administrative remedies where the issue on appeal is a
question of law rather than a question of the exercise of administrative
discretion.” Pheasant Lane Realty Trust, 143 N.H. at 141-42 (quotation omitted);
see also Bedford Residents Group v. Town of Bedford, 130 N.H. 632, 639 (1988)
(where the issue is a question of law, such as the interpretation of a statute,
exhaustion is not necessarily required). Thus, here, where an issue of law is
dispositive, the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion to maintain
jurisdiction.
Next, the Department contends that the trial court erred in enjoining its
administrative proceedings against Frost. Specifically, the Department
challenges the trial court’s interpretation of RSA chapter 397-A. In reaching its
decision to exercise its equitable powers to grant temporary relief, the trial court
concluded that the petitioners demonstrated a likelihood of success on the
merits. The trial court reasoned that since none of the petitioners could “be said
to be in the business of making or brokering mortgage loans, by virtue of a single
isolated transaction,” RSA chapter 397-A was inapplicable. In addition, the trial
court found that without an injunction, the petitioners had no adequate remedy
at law and would suffer irreparable harm. We will uphold the issuance of an
injunction absent an error of law, an unsustainable exercise of discretion, or
clearly erroneous findings of fact. N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Mottolo, 155 N.H.
57, 63 (2007).
7
The Department argues that the trial court misinterpreted RSA chapter
397-A. The Department maintains that the chapter applies to all residential
mortgage transactions that are not specifically exempt under RSA 397-A:4
(exempting certain classes of persons from licensing requirements). It argues
that mortgage loans executed by the LLCs were not exempt “because those
companies were not . . . ‘natural person[s],’” so licensure was required. See RSA
397-A:4, II (exempting “[a]ny natural person making not more than 4 first
mortgage loans within any calendar year with the person’s own funds and for the
person’s own investment without an intent to resell such mortgage loans”).
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. Fog
Motorsports #3 v. Arctic Cat Sales, 159 N.H. 266, 267 (2009). We are the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute
considered as a whole. Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). When
examining the language of the statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary
meaning to the words used. Fog Motorsports #3, 159 N.H. at 268. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to
include. Id. We also interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory
scheme and not in isolation. Id.
RSA 397-A:2 provides in pertinent part that:
This chapter shall provide for the department’s regulation of persons
that engage in the business of making or brokering mortgage loans
secured by real property located in the state of New Hampshire,
which is or shall be occupied in whole or in part as a place of
residence by the borrower and which consists of not more than 4
living units.
RSA 397-A:2, I (emphasis added). Thus, by its plain and unambiguous language,
the statute grants the Department jurisdiction only over “persons that engage in
the business of making or brokering mortgage loans.” The qualification that a
person be a natural person relates not to this jurisdictional predicate, but rather
to the exemption set forth in RSA 397-A:4, II. Because our analysis focuses on
the scope of the Department’s subject matter jurisdiction under RSA chapter
397-A, we need not consider, as the dissent suggests, the exemptions delineated
in RSA 397-A:4. The question, then, is whether either of the LLCs was a person
“engage[d] in the business of making or brokering mortgage loans” by virtue of a
single isolated transaction, thereby subjecting Frost, as its agent, to the
Department’s administrative proceedings. We agree with the trial court’s
conclusion that the LLCs were not engaged in the business of making mortgage
loans.
8
The statute does not define the phrase “engage in the business.”
Generally, however, “business” is defined as “transactions, dealings, or
intercourse of any nature.” Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 302
(unabridged ed. 2002) (defining “business”); see also Black’s Law Dictionary 226
(9th ed. 2009) (defining “business” as “[a] commercial enterprise carried on for
profit; a particular occupation or employment habitually engaged in for livelihood
or gain” (emphasis added)). Thus, to “engage in the business” implies multiple
transactions or dealings, rather than a single incident.
Our case law supports the contention that a single mortgage lending
transaction does not constitute being “in the business” of making mortgage
loans. In Green Meadows Mobile Homes v. City of Concord, 156 N.H. 394, 397
(2007), we held that the petitioners were not “dealer[s]” because “while the
petitioners on occasion [sold] manufactured housing units, they [were] not in the
business of selling such units, but rather [were] in the business of owning and
managing manufactured housing parks.” Id. (quotations and brackets omitted).
Similarly, in Hughes v. DiSalvo, 143 N.H. 576, 578 (1999), we concluded that the
plaintiff, who rented and attempted to sell her real property through a lease and
sales agreement, did not violate the Consumer Protection Act because remedies
under the Act are not available when the subject transaction is strictly private in
nature, and not undertaken in the ordinary course of a trade or business. Thus
the plaintiff’s involvement in a single transaction was insufficient to constitute
engagement in trade or commerce. Id. at 578-79 (“The plaintiff was not a real
estate professional engaged in the business of renting or selling properties.”); cf.
Currier v. Tuck, 112 N.H. 10, 12 (1972) (“It has been held that an occasional
isolated act of loaning money as an accommodation to a customer or friend is not
engaging in the business of making loans under similar statutes.”).
Finally, the subsequent legislative history, while not controlling, supports
our construction. See Franklin v. Town of Newport, 151 N.H. 508, 512 (2004).
In response to the federal SAFE Act, the New Hampshire legislature initially
narrowed the exemptions for seller-financing to exclude from the licensing
requirements only “[a]ny individual who offers or negotiates terms of a residential
mortgage loan with or on behalf of an immediate family member of the
individual,” or “[a]n individual who offers or negotiates terms of a residential
mortgage loan secured by a dwelling that served as the individual’s residence.”
RSA 397-A:4, III-IV (Supp. 2009).
Subsequently, however, section four was again amended. Effective July 1,
2011, RSA 397-A:4 (Supp. 2011) was amended to provide as follows:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to . . . [a]n owner of
real property who in any 12 consecutive month period makes no
more than 3 mortgage loans to purchasers of the property for all or
9
part of the purchase price of the real estate against which the
mortgage is secured . . . .
RSA 397-A:4, VI; Laws 2011, 212:1. The purpose of the amendment was to
combat the “excessive enforcement of the SAFE Act,” see RSA 397-A (2009), and
to “restore common sense to New Hampshire law” after the July 2009
amendments “harshly eliminated any legal commerce in most private residential
lending.” N.H.H.R. Jour. 1579 (2011). With this amendment, the legislature has
made clear that the statute applies only to persons who make numerous loan
transactions per year.
We conclude, therefore, that in context, “engag[ing] in the business” of
mortgage lending requires more than a single isolated transaction. Because each
of the LLCs conducted only one mortgage lending transaction, neither “engage[d]
in the business of making or brokering mortgage loans,” RSA 397-A:2, I, and,
thus, Frost had no obligation to disclose the two transactions on his license
application. Moreover, neither of the LLCs was a mortgage banker or mortgage
broker, see RSA 397-A:1, XII-XIII, so Frost did not “work[ ] for more than one
mortgage banker or mortgage broker and mortgage servicer . . . .” Therefore,
although Frost became subject to the Department’s regulation when he became a
licensed mortgage loan originator, after the two seller-financed transactions by
the LLCs occurred, he is not subject to disciplinary action by the Department
based upon those transactions.
Given our holding herein, and the fact that penalties were not, in fact,
imposed on Frost, we need not address the Department’s argument that its
application of the suspension and penalty provisions set forth in RSA 397-A:14
and RSA 397-A:17 would not have violated Part I, Article 23 of the New
Hampshire Constitution. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 23 (“Retrospective laws are
highly injurious, oppressive, and unjust. No such laws, therefore, should be
made, either for the decision of civil causes, or the punishment of offenses.”).
We conclude, therefore, that the trial court sustainably exercised its
discretion by enjoining the Department from taking disciplinary action against
Frost with respect to the LLCs’ single mortgage lending transactions. Our
decision, however, does not otherwise limit the Department’s regulatory authority
over Frost as a mortgage loan originator.
II. The Petitioners’ Cross-Appeal
Finally, the petitioners challenge the trial court’s denial of attorney’s fees.
Specifically, they maintain that they are entitled to attorney’s fees because: (1)
the Department acted in bad faith; (2) the Department “intru[ded] upon the
protection against retrospective laws”; and (3) “they conferred a substantial
benefit on the public through this action.” We disagree.
10
We will not overturn the trial court’s decision concerning attorney’s fees
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Grenier v. Barclay Square
Commercial Condo. Owners’ Assoc., 150 N.H. 111, 115 (2003). To warrant
reversal, the discretion must have been exercised for reasons clearly untenable
or to an extent clearly unreasonable to the prejudice of the objecting party.
Arcidi v. Town of Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 704 (2004). In evaluating the trial court’s
ruling on this issue, we acknowledge the “tremendous deference” given a trial
court’s decision regarding attorney’s fees. Grenier, 150 N.H. at 116. If there is
some support in the record for the trial court’s determination, we will uphold it.
Arcidi, 150 N.H. at 704.
“A prevailing party may be awarded attorney’s fees when that recovery is
authorized by statute, an agreement between the parties, or an established
judicial exception to the general rule that precludes recovery of such fees.”
Tulley v. Sheldon, 159 N.H. 269, 272 (2009) (quotation omitted). “As to
judicially-created exceptions, attorney’s fees have been awarded in this State
based upon two separate theories: bad faith litigation and substantial benefit.”
Bedard v. Town of Alexandria, 159 N.H. 740, 744 (2010) (quotations and
ellipsis omitted). “Under the bad faith litigation theory, an award of attorney’s
fees is appropriate where one party has acted in bad faith, vexatiously,
wantonly, or for oppressive reasons, where the litigant’s conduct can be
characterized as unreasonably obdurate or obstinate, and where it should have
been unnecessary for the successful party to have brought the action.” Id.
(quotations omitted). “Under the substantial benefit theory[,] . . . attorney’s
fees may be awarded when a litigant’s actions confer a substantial benefit upon
the general public.” Id. (quotations omitted).
Here, the trial court found that the petitioners met none of the standards
warranting departure from the general rule. After review of the record, we
agree and conclude that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion.
First, the record supports the trial court’s finding that the Department did not
act in bad faith. The Department neither employed obstinate or unreasonable
litigation tactics, nor did it seek “burdensome discovery.”
Nevertheless, the petitioners contend that the trial court erred when it
failed to consider, in its bad faith analysis, the Department’s allegedly
“obstinate and unlawful” pre-lawsuit conduct. In particular, the petitioners
argue that litigation was “unnecessary” and was prompted only by their need to
protect themselves against the Department’s “unconstitutional investigatory
tactics” and the disputed staff petition. We disagree.
Despite the petitioners’ representations to the contrary, the trial court
did address their argument regarding the Department’s investigatory tactics.
The court ruled that “the theory that the State’s conduct in related criminal
11
proceedings and issuing search warrants and administrative actions would
authorize an award of attorney’s fees . . . [cannot] be sustained.” Further, it
rejected the petitioners’ argument that an award of fees was supported by
alleged flaws in the staff petition (i.e., naming Frost individually, creating
“illusory” charges by “duplicating” alleged misconduct, and threatening
unconstitutional retroactive penalties). The trial court noted that “[the
Department] took a legal position which involved complex statutes and their
application to a highly regulated industry.” Thus, we find no merit in the
petitioners’ claim that the trial court failed to address the Department’s pre-
lawsuit conduct.
Moreover, as the trial court noted, the complexity of the underlying suit
suggests that the petitioners were not forced to litigate a clearly defined right.
We agree that the rights at issue were not clearly defined, as is evidenced by
the fact that the petitioners filed an expert report to aid the trial court in
understanding the statutes involved in this case.
Finally, the trial court did not err in finding the substantial benefit
exception inapplicable. As the trial court noted, the exception is based on
promotion of the public benefit, not the petitioners’ own benefit. See Bedard,
159 N.H. at 746.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, J., concurred; LYNN, J., with whom
DUGGAN, J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, joined, dissented.
LYNN, J., dissenting. Because I conclude that, under the doctrine of
primary jurisdiction, the superior court erred in enjoining the ongoing
enforcement proceedings before the banking department, I would reverse.
Perhaps the best elucidation of the doctrine of primary jurisdiction is
that found in a prominent administrative law treatise:
The precise function of the doctrine of primary
jurisdiction is to guide a court in determining whether
the court should refrain from exercising its jurisdiction
until after an administrative agency has determined
some question or some aspect of some question arising
in the proceeding before the court. The doctrine of
primary jurisdiction does not necessarily allocate
power between courts and agencies, for it governs only
the question whether court or agency will initially
12
decide a particular issue, not the question of whether
court or agency will finally decide the issue.
3 K. Davis, Administrative Law Treatise § 19.01, at 3 (1958), quoted in Sears,
Roebuck & Co. v. Carpenters, 436 U.S. 180, 199 n. 29 (1978); see also
Pharmaceutical Research and Mfrs. of America v. Walsh, 538 U.S. 644, 673
(2003) (Breyer, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment)
(“[Primary jurisdiction] seeks to produce better informed and uniform legal
rulings by allowing courts to take advantage of an agency’s specialized
knowledge, expertise, and central position within a regulatory regime.”);
Konefal v. Hollis/Brookline Coop. School Dist., 143 N.H. 256, 258 (1998)
(“Primary jurisdiction in an agency requires judicial abstention until the final
administrative disposition of an issue, at which point the agency action may be
subject to judicial review.” (quotations omitted)). Because primary jurisdiction
is a prudential doctrine, rather than one based on the absence of judicial
power,1 there is no “fixed formula” for determining when the doctrine applies.
United States v. Western Pac. R. Co., 352 U.S. 59, 64 (1956). However, the
following factors are often cited as relevant considerations in making this
determination: (1) the extent to which the agency’s specialized expertise makes
it a preferable forum for resolving the issue in dispute; (2) the need for uniform
resolution of the issue; and (3) the potential that judicial resolution of the issue
will have an adverse impact on the agency’s performance of its regulatory
responsibilities. See II K. Davis & R. Pierce, Jr., Administrative Law Treatise
§ 14, at 272 (3d ed. 1994); see also Walsh, 538 U.S. at 673 (Breyer, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment) (“[The question], in a word,
[is] whether preliminary reference of issues to the agency will promote that
proper working relationship between court and agency that the primary
jurisdiction doctrine seeks to facilitate.”); cf. Konefal, 143 N.H. at 258 (“The
rule requiring administrative remedies to be exhausted prior to appealing to the
courts is based on the reasonable policies of encouraging the exercise of
administrative expertise, preserving agency autonomy and promoting judicial
efficiency.” (quotations omitted)).
While acknowledging the doctrine of primary jurisdiction, the majority
holds that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion in
declining to apply the doctrine because the issue addressed by the trial court
concerned the banking department’s subject matter jurisdiction and was
1 Although not grounded in an absence of judicial power, the primary jurisdiction doctrine does
implicate separation of powers concerns because it relates to the relationship between the
branches of government. See, e.g., Travelers Ins. Co. v. Detroit Edison Co., 631 N.W.2d 733, 741
(Mich. 2001) (noting that one of the justifications for the primary jurisdiction doctrine “relates to
respect for the separation of powers and the statutory purpose underlying the creation of the
administrative agency, the powers granted to it by the legislature, and the powers withheld[; t]his
justification includes the principle that courts are not to make adverse decisions that threaten the
regulatory authority and integrity of the agency”).
13
purely a question of law rather than of administrative discretion. I believe the
majority takes too narrow a view of the circumstances under which deference is
owed to an administrative agency, and that the cases it relies on to support its
position are distinguishable in important respects from this case. Accordingly,
I would find that the trial court’s decision to enjoin the ongoing banking
department proceedings did constitute an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
None of the cases relied on by the majority involved an effort to enjoin an
ongoing administrative enforcement proceeding, i.e., a proceeding examining
whether a licensee had violated a regulatory regime, a circumstance that
presents a particularly compelling reason for a court to stay its hand. See
Interfaith Community Organization v. PPG, 702 F. Supp. 2d 295, 310 (D.N.J.
2010); accord Dept. of Public Works v. L.G. Indus., 758 A.2d 950, 957 (D.C.
2000) (reversing grant of injunction against agency enforcement proceeding,
and admonishing that “the trial court must be especially careful before
resorting to that remedy where . . . the requested relief would enjoin agency
action pending the outcome of administrative review. In part the reason for
this restraint is the very one that underlies the primary jurisdiction doctrine,
which is that the court is acting – and risks disruption – in a field that is
normally confided to the agency’s expertise” (quotations, brackets, and citation
omitted)); Bar Harbor Banking & Trust Co. v. Alexander, 411 A.2d 74, 78 (Me.
1980) (lifting temporary restraining order that prevented Bureau of Consumer
Protection from holding hearing to determine whether bank had violated
statute regulating permissible finance charges, explaining that “[w]here the
administration of a particular statutory scheme has been entrusted to an
agency, the Court will postpone consideration of an action until the agency has
made a designated determination if such postponement will protect the
integrity of the statutory scheme” (quotation omitted)); Luskins Inc. v.
Consumer Protection, 657 A.2d 788, 793 (Md. 1995) (holding that primary
jurisdiction doctrine required dismissal of declaratory judgment action filed by
merchant subject to agency proceedings for misleading consumer advertising);
Zar v. S.D. Bd. of Examiners of Psychologists, 376 N.W.2d 54, 55 (S.D. 1985)
(reversing writ of prohibition preventing disciplinary proceedings against
licensee; trial court had reasoned that it should make initial decision as to
whether Board lacked jurisdiction to discipline licensee because of alleged
invalidity of administrative rules; supreme court disagreed, citing Myers v.
Bethlehem Corp., 303 U.S. 41, 58 (1938), for proposition that “[u]nder the
doctrine of separation of powers, an administrative agency, a branch of the
executive department, is empowered to determine its own jurisdiction” in the
first instance); cf. Smith v. N.H. Bd. of Psychologists, 138 N.H. 548, 554 (1994)
(reversing trial court’s entry of injunction that prevented Board of Examiners of
Psychologists from conducting disciplinary proceedings involving licensees).
Unlike the instant case, Wisniewski v. Gemmill, 123 N.H. 701 (1983), on
which the majority primarily relies, did not involve an action in which the
14
plaintiff sought an injunction against the regulatory agency itself; indeed, the
agency (the former water resources board) was not even a party to that case.
Instead, the lawsuit was a common law action for damages between private
parties in which the defendant sought dismissal based on the argument that,
because the suit concerned the alteration of the course of a public water body,
the board had exclusive jurisdiction. Id. at 705. Moreover, unlike this case,
where the banking department was actively pursuing administrative
proceedings against petitioner Frost and had extended him the opportunity for
a hearing at the time he sought judicial relief, in Wisniewski, the agency
proceedings had lain dormant for nine months before suit was filed. See id. at
704; cf. Coit Independence Joint Venture v. FSLIC, 489 U.S. 561, 586-87
(1989) (expressing concern that requiring exhaustion of administrative
remedies would relegate parties to a dispute resolution process the Court
described as a “black hole”). Furthermore, none of the parties before the court
in Wisniewski was a licensee of the water resources board, nor did the board
have the authority to award the type of relief, i.e., monetary damages, that the
plaintiff was seeking. See Wisniewski, 123 N.H. at 707. Here, by contrast,
Frost was a licensee of the banking department, and, as the majority
recognizes, the department therefore unquestionably had “regulatory authority”
over him. Thus, even accepting the majority’s construction of “engage in the
business” as used in RSA 397-A:2 (2006 & Supp. 2011), the department, at
worst, had a mistaken view of the scope of its regulatory authority. But no one
disputes that this was an issue Frost could have challenged, and the
department could have decided, at an administrative hearing, which would
have to have been conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative
Procedures Act governing adjudicative proceedings. See RSA 397-A:17, III
(2006); RSA 541-A:30, III (2007). Collectively, the foregoing considerations
demonstrate that this case presents a far more compelling argument for
invoking primary jurisdiction than did Wisniewski.
The other cases cited by the majority, Pheasant Lane Realty Trust v. City of
Nashua, 143 N.H. 140 (1998), Bedford Residents Group v. Town of Bedford, 130
N.H. 632 (1988), and Metzger v. Brentwood, 115 N.H. 287 (1975), also are
distinguishable. Not only did none of those cases involve agency enforcement
proceedings, but the land use and/or property tax statutes at issue in those
cases were also not nearly as complex – or the legal position of the governmental
body as arguable – as that presented here. It is a well-recognized principle of
administrative law that where the legislature has described an agency’s powers in
broad and ambiguous language, the agency generally is given the first
opportunity to rule upon the extent of its jurisdiction. Although we have not
gone so far as to adopt the federal rule, which requires courts to defer to an
agency’s reasonable construction of an agency-administered statute, see Chevron
U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 843-45, 866 (1984), we
have long taken the view that substantial deference is due to the interpretation
placed on a statute of doubtful meaning by the agency charged with its
15
implementation. See Grand China v. United Nat’l Ins. Co., 156 N.H. 429, 434
(2007); cf. Win-Tasch Corp. v. Town of Merrimack, 120 N.H. 6, 9-10 (1980). The
doctrine of primary jurisdiction complements our substantial deference policy by
ensuring that an agency is given the first opportunity to construe an ambiguous
statute. See Verizon New England v. Maine Public Utilities, 509 F.3d 1, 11-12
(1st Cir. 2007). As Professor Pierce explains:
The primary jurisdiction doctrine often compels a
court to refer an issue to an agency . . . when the issue
ultimately is determined not to be within the agency’s
statutory jurisdiction. The resulting situation – an
agency’s primary jurisdiction is often broader than its
statutory jurisdiction – seems strange at first glance.
It makes eminently good sense, however, upon
examination of the nature and frequent difficulty of
determining the scope of the agency’s statutory
jurisdiction.
II R. Pierce, Jr., Administrative Law Treatise § 14.2, at 1185 (5th ed. 2010).
Put another way, the primary jurisdiction doctrine comes into play when
conduct that is the subject of court litigation “is . . . at least arguably protected
or prohibited by a . . . regulatory statute” and when agency resolution of an
issue is likely to be of “material aid” to judicial resolution of the dispute. Ricci
v. Chicago Mercantile Exchange, 409 U.S. 289, 299-300, 302 (1973); see Clark
v. Time Warner Cable, 523 F.3d 1110, 1115-16 (9th Cir. 2008) (referring matter
to agency where issue was novel, agency regarded resolution of issue as
important to policies it was required to implement, and agency had issue under
active consideration); cf. Leedom v. Kyne, 358 U.S. 184, 188-89 (1958)
(declining to require exhaustion of administrative remedies when agency action
is plainly ultra vires).
At the times pertinent to this case, RSA chapter 397-A established a
comprehensive regulatory scheme for “persons that engage in the business of
making or brokering” certain mortgage loans. RSA 397-A:2, I (2006). If the
“engage in the business” language found in RSA 397-A:2, I, were the only
pertinent section regarding the scope of the statute, I would agree with the
majority that the statute does not reach the two isolated mortgage loan
transactions conducted by Frost Family and Chretien. However, this is not the
case. Instead, RSA 397-A:3, I (2006 & Supp. 2011) provides: “Any person not
exempt under RSA 397-A:4 that, in its own name or on behalf of other persons,
engages in the business of making or brokering mortgage loans secured by real
property located in this state shall be required to obtain a license from the
department.” (Emphasis added.) And, when these transactions occurred, RSA
397-A:4 (2006) provided, in relevant part, that RSA chapter 397-A was
inapplicable to:
16
II. Any natural person making not more than 4
first mortgage loans within any calendar year with the
person’s own funds and for the person’s own
investment without an intent to resell such mortgage
loans.
III. Any natural person who, as seller, receives one
or more first or second mortgages or deeds of trust on
real estate as security for a purchase money
obligation.
(Emphases added.)
Because neither Frost Family nor Chretien is a “natural person,” neither
was covered by these exemptions.2 More importantly, the existence of these
statutory exemptions results in an ambiguity as to the intended meaning of the
“engage in the business” term found in RSA 397-A:2, I, and :3. The effect of
the first exemption is to create a safe harbor for natural persons who make
fewer than five first mortgage loans within a calendar year. The effect of the
second is to exclude any natural person who provides a first or second
mortgage as part of seller-financing in connection with even one property he or
she sells to another. Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, it is not proper to
simply ignore these exemptions in construing the scope of the banking
department’s authority under RSA chapter 397-A. Indeed, failing to consider
the exemptions in determining what is meant by the term “engage in the
business” of making or brokering loans is inconsistent with a first principle of
statutory interpretation – that statutory provisions are not to be considered in
isolation but in the context of the entire statutory scheme. State v. Jennings,
159 N.H. 1, 3 (2009). By failing to consider the overall statutory scheme, the
majority offers no answer to what is the seminal question that must be
addressed in order to properly construe the statute: If the legislature intended
“engage in the business” to cover only non-natural persons who regularly or
habitually make or broker mortgage loans, why would it have found it
necessary to specifically exclude them in the above exemptions?3 See State v.
2 Nor do petitioners argue that any other provisions of RSA 397-A:4 in effect at the relevant times
exempt Frost Family or Chretien from the reach of RSA chapter 397-A.
3 Insofar as the RSA 397-A:4, II exemption is designed to establish a safe harbor for a course of
conduct that might otherwise constitute “engaging in the business,” it might be contended that
the exclusion of non-natural persons from this exemption was merely intended to disqualify
entities (non-natural persons) from the safe harbor, not to signify that entities did not have to
make or broker mortgages with some level of regularity in order to be engaged in the business.
The same argument cannot be made as to the RSA 397-A:4, III exemption. The fact that, with
respect to natural persons, the legislature found it necessary to include a specific exemption for a
person who makes even one seller-financing mortgage suggests that without the exemption such
person could be considered engaged in the business of making mortgages; and, of course, the
17
Pierce, 152 N.H. 790, 791 (2005) (“All words of a statute are to be given effect,
and the legislature is presumed not to use words that are superfluous or
redundant.”). Reading the statute as a whole, one plausible construction is
that the legislature intended non-natural persons, such as Frost Family and
Chretien, to be deemed “engaged in the business” of making or brokering
mortgages even if they engage in only a single transaction. And, of course, if
the statute is construed so as to require Frost Family and Chretien to have
been licensed, then there is a basis for the banking department’s investigation
into whether Frost (1) made misrepresentations in his application for licensure
as a loan originator, (2) serviced loans for non-licensed mortgage bankers, and
(3) simultaneously represented more than one mortgage banker. See RSA 397-
A:1, XVII, :3, III, :17 (2006 & Supp. 2011).4
To be clear, it is not my purpose to attempt a definitive construction of
RSA chapter 397-A. Given the statute’s ambiguity, it may be that ultimately I
too would come to the conclusion that the most sensible construction of RSA
397-A:2 and :3 would exclude Frost Family and Chretien from being “engaged
in the business” of making or brokering mortgage loans.5 To me, the critical
exemption does not apply to non-natural persons even if they make only one seller-financing
mortgage.
4 Both the petitioners and the trial court seemed to recognize that the meaning of the statute was
less than completely clear. This is demonstrated by the fact that the petitioners found it
necessary to provide the trial court with an expert report from a banking law attorney opining on
his interpretation of the scope of activity falling within the reach of the statute. The trial court
considered this report and found it “valuable and helpful.” It also is demonstrated by the trial
court’s denial of the petitioners’ request for attorney’s fees. Rejecting the petitioners’ claim that
the defendants acted in bad faith, the court found, “[the banking department] took a legal position
which involved complex statutes and their application to a highly regulated industry.”
5 I cannot agree with the majority that the legislative history of the 2011 amendment to RSA 397-
A:4 supports its construction of the 2005 version of the statute – the version that is controlling
with respect to the conduct at issue. On this point, I note initially that the very fact that the
majority deems it necessary to reference legislative history confirms my view that, prior to the
2011 amendment, the statute was ambiguous with respect to whether Frost Family and Chretien
were engaged in the business of making or brokering mortgages. See Appeal of Cote, 144 N.H.
126, 129 (1999) (“While legislative history may be helpful in the interpretation of an ambiguous
statute, it will not be consulted when the statutory language is plain.” (quotation omitted)). More
importantly, while the actions of Frost Family and Chretien would appear to have been exempt if
they had occurred after the 2011 amendment to RSA 397-A:4 had taken effect, that amendment
clearly did more than clarify pre-existing law. On the contrary, as its legislative history makes
clear, the amendment was intended to change existing law to expand the circumstances in which
seller-financing of real estate transactions would be allowed without the need for the seller to be
licensed. See Hearing on SB 28 before Senate Commerce Comm. (Jan. 25, 2011) (testimony of
Sen. Boutin) (“This de minimis exemption would allow a number of the transactions which cannot
be completed now while ensuring that the exemption will not undermine the current law.”
(emphasis added)); N.H.H.R. Jour. ___ (May 25, 2011) (remarks of Rep. Manuse) (“Current law
requires any person to get a mortgage loan originators license from the New Hampshire banking
department, even in harmless circumstances when licensing private citizens who intend to make
up to three loans is not practical.” (emphasis added)). The 2011 amendment is the first time the
legislature clearly created a safe harbor exemption that covers non-natural persons such as Frost
Family and Chretien.
18
point is that any such construction of the statute by either the trial court or
this court is premature at this time. Rather, in my view, where, as here, the
banking department had not obviously overstepped the bounds of its authority,
respect for the proper functioning of an agency of a coordinate branch of
government that has been given primary jurisdiction to regulate in the field
required the trial court to refrain from interfering with the ongoing
administrative proceedings.
In closing, I also must note my concern that today’s decision may pave
the way for future licensees to attempt to circumvent agency enforcement
proceedings any time imaginative counsel is able to fashion a plausible
argument that the agency has misinterpreted its regulatory authority.
Needless to say, such a development would not be consonant with sound
public policy.
For the reasons stated above, I respectfully dissent.
DUGGAN, J., retired, specially assigned under RSA 490:3, joins in the
dissent.
19