THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack County Probate Court
No. 2011-038
IN RE ATHENA D.
Submitted: May 12, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2011
Jennifer N. and Ralph N., by brief, pro se.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Rebecca L. Woodard, attorney, on
the memorandum of law), for the New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth
and Families.
Marcia L. and Terry L., pro se, filed no brief.
DUGGAN, J. The appellants, the maternal grandparents of Athena D.,
appeal orders of the Merrimack County Probate Court (Hampe, J.) dismissing
their petition for grandparent visitation, see RSA 461-A:13 (Supp. 2010), for
lack of subject matter jurisdiction; denying their motion to stay the adoption of
Athena while they pursue a petition for grandparent visitation in the family
division; and denying their request to order the adoptive parents to allow their
continued visitation and contact with the child. We affirm.
Athena D. was born in October 2003. She was removed from her
parents’ care shortly thereafter because of concern for her safety. Following a
brief placement in a foster home, she was placed with her maternal
grandparents when she was three months old. Athena’s parents’ parental
rights were terminated on January 26, 2006, and Athena has been in the legal
custody of the New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Families
(DCYF) since that time.
DCYF’s initial plan was for the grandparents to adopt Athena; however,
for various reasons, including Athena’s behavioral problems and their own age,
they were reluctant to proceed with the adoption. When the grandparents
finally indicated that they would not adopt Athena, DCYF included them in the
selection process for an adoptive family. Athena was placed with the H. family,
a family chosen by the grandparents, despite DCYF’s concerns about the
selection. After Athena was transitioned to the H. family with the participation
of the grandparents, her behavior deteriorated and the H. family ultimately had
her removed from their home.
When Athena was removed from the H. family’s home, the grandparents
did not indicate to DCYF that they wanted her returned to them for eventual
adoption, but instead offered to provide respite care while a new adoptive
family could be found. DCYF determined that such a temporary placement
would be harmful to Athena and declined. Athena was then placed into a
respite care home.
DCYF moved quickly to place Athena with another adoptive family and
chose the L. family before the grandparents were fully aware that the process
was underway. When the grandparents were made aware that the L. family
had been chosen, they immediately raised objections, and eventually sought to
adopt Athena.
Athena transitioned well into the L. family and her behavior improved
significantly. Athena’s counselor testified that Marcia L. exhibited the “most
natural attachment she ha[d] ever observed” and that Athena told her that she
wanted to be adopted by the L. family.
The L. family and the grandparents filed competing petitions for the
adoption of Athena with the probate court. After a hearing on the petitions
held over sixteen days, the court found that it was in the best interest of
Athena to grant the L. family’s petition for adoption and to deny the
grandparents’ petition. The court found that the grandparents changed their
minds about adopting Athena only because of their opposition to the L. family.
The court found that the L. family was an “exceptional family” and noted that
the guardian ad litem strongly supported their petition. The grandparents
2
appealed the probate court’s order and we affirmed. See In re Athena D., No.
2010-500 (N.H. October 22, 2010).
The grandparents subsequently filed a petition for grandparent visitation
under RSA 461-A:13. The probate court dismissed the petition for lack of
jurisdiction, noting that it should be filed in the family division. The probate
court order also expressed doubt as to whether relief under RSA 461-A:13
could be granted after the adoption was finalized. The grandparents then
moved to stay the adoption until the petition for visitation could be filed in the
family division. The probate court denied the motion, finding that it was in
Athena’s best interest to have her adoption finalized as soon as possible. The
grandparents moved to reconsider and sought approval of an interlocutory
transfer to this court to resolve the issue. The grandparents also moved to
require the L. family to grant them visitation with Athena. The probate court
denied both motions.
On appeal, the grandparents argue that they have a right to seek
visitation under RSA 461-A:13, that the probate court erred by “not resolving
this issue prior to granting the adoption of Athena,” that the probate court
“fail[ed] to give sufficient review to post hearing documents that indicated bad
faith on the part of the [L.] family to support an enduring relationship between
Athena and her grandparents and other close family relatives,” and that “the
adoption of Athena . . . [should] be void until resolution of these substantive
issues concerning her best interest.”
“The probate court is not a court of general jurisdiction. Its powers are
limited to those conferred upon it by statute.” Petition of CIGNA Healthcare,
146 N.H. 683, 688 (2001) (quotation omitted). Thus, determining the
jurisdiction of the probate court requires us to engage in statutory
interpretation. The interpretation of a statute is a matter of law, which we
review de novo. Zorn v. Demetri, 158 N.H. 437, 438 (2009). In matters of
statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as
expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id. We first look
to the language of the statute itself, and, if possible, construe that language
according to its plain and ordinary meaning. Id. We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. We
construe all parts of a statute together to effectuate its overall purpose and
avoid an absurd or unjust result. Id. Moreover, we do not consider words and
phrases in isolation, but rather within the context of the statute as a whole. Id.
at 438-39.
RSA 461-A:13, which governs grandparent visitation rights, requires the
petition for visitation to be entered
3
in the court which has jurisdiction over the divorce, legal
separation, or a proceeding brought under this chapter. In the
case of death of a parent, stepparent adoption, or unwed parents
. . . the petition shall be entered in the court having jurisdiction to
hear divorce cases from the town or city where the child resides.
RSA 461-A:13, III.
RSA 461-A:13, I, contemplates grandparent visitation rights when a
child’s nuclear family is absent due to “divorce, death, relinquishment or
termination of parental rights, or other cause.” See In the Matter of Dufton &
Shepard, 158 N.H. 784, 788 (2009). Here, Athena’s nuclear family is absent as
the result of termination of parental rights. While RSA 461-A:13, III does not
specifically address cases involving the termination of parental rights, in
construing all parts of the statute together in order to effectuate the overall
purpose, we conclude that petitions for grandparent visitation in the case of the
termination of parental rights are to be treated in the same manner as in the
case of the death of a parent, stepparent adoption, or unwed parents.
The grandparents contend that the termination of parental rights is a
“proceeding brought under this chapter,” RSA 461-A:13, III, and since the
probate court had jurisdiction over that proceeding, the petition for
grandparent visitation was properly filed in the probate court. However, “under
this chapter” refers to RSA chapter 461-A, and because the termination of
parental rights is not a proceeding that could be brought under RSA chapter
461-A, this argument fails. Instead, the petition for grandparent visitation
must be entered “in the court having jurisdiction to hear divorce cases from the
town or city where the child resides.” RSA 461-A:13, III.
Moreover, RSA 547:3 (Supp. 2010) defines the jurisdiction of the probate
courts. Nothing in RSA 547:3 grants the probate court authority over divorce
cases. Thus the probate court lacked jurisdiction to hear the grandparents’
petition for visitation.
We also reject the grandparents’ argument that the probate court’s
jurisdiction over ancillary matters as defined in RSA 547:3-l includes RSA 461-
A:13 petitions. Rather, the “ancillary matters” over which the probate court
has jurisdiction are expressly limited to “claims for liquidated or non-liquidated
damages or for the recovery of money or property brought on behalf of an
estate, trust, conservatorship, or guardianship against a third party or brought
by a third party against an estate, trust, conservatorship, or guardianship.”
RSA 547:3-l (Supp. 2010). Because RSA 461-A:13, III requires a petition for
grandparent visitation to be filed in the court having jurisdiction to hear
divorce cases from the town or city where Athena resides, and RSA 547:3 does
not confer upon the probate court the power to decide divorce cases, we
4
conclude that the probate court did not err by dismissing the petition for
grandparent visitation.
Nor did the probate court err by denying the grandparents’ motion to
stay the adoption while they litigated a petition for grandparent visitation rights
in the family division. Whether to stay judicial proceedings is a matter left to
the sound discretion of the trial court. See In re Baby K., 143 N.H. 201, 204
(1998). Here, the record reflects that the parental rights of Athena’s biological
parents were terminated on January 26, 2006. Thereafter, Athena was placed
with multiple families, including her maternal grandparents, who initially
decided to adopt her but then changed their minds. She has documented
behavioral problems which have seen marked improvement while living with
the L. family. Under these circumstances, the probate court’s conclusion that
it was “in Athena’s best interest to have her adoption finalized as soon as
possible” was not an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Finally, to the extent the grandparents argue that the probate court
“fail[ed] to give sufficient review to post hearing documents that indicated bad
faith on the part of the [adoptive parents]” in ending contact between Athena
and the grandparents, we again note that the probate court lacked jurisdiction
over the issue of grandparent visitation. The grandparents’ remaining
arguments are without merit, warranting no further discussion. See Vogel v.
Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
5