THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2010-412
DAVID MONTENEGRO
v.
CITY OF DOVER
Submitted: June 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 2, 2011
David Montenegro, by brief, pro se.
Allan B. Krans, of Dover, by brief, for the City of Dover.
HICKS, J. The petitioner, David Montenegro, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Brown, J.) denying his petition under the Right-to-Know Law,
RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp. 2010), requesting disclosure of information
pertaining to certain surveillance equipment and procedures under the control
of the respondent, the City of Dover (City). We affirm in part, reverse in part
and remand.
The following facts are recited in the trial court’s order or are supported
in the record. The petitioner filed a request with the City on January 14, 2010,
seeking the disclosure of: (1) the precise locations of the City’s surveillance
equipment; (2) the recording capabilities for each piece of equipment; (3) the
specific time periods each piece of equipment is operational; (4) the retention
time for any recordings; and (5) the job titles of those who monitor the
recordings.
On January 21, the City denied his request on the basis that “it would
disclose techniques and procedures for law enforcement investigations or
prosecutions, or would disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or
prosecutions.” In addition, the City stated that “disclosure could reasonably be
expected to risk circumvention of the law.” Nevertheless, the City represents
that it disclosed to the petitioner: the general location and buildings where
cameras are, or are proposed to be, sited; the number of cameras in or around
each site; “[t]he capability and intent of the Dover Police to monitor cameras
from remote locations”; the “intent of the Dover Police not to monitor the
cameras on a regular basis,” but to view them as needed when it would assist
in law enforcement; “[t]he cost of the security equipment”; “[t]he names of the
vendors installing the security equipment”; “[t]he contracts for installing the
security equipment”; and when the equipment was installed.
Subsequently, the petitioner filed a petition with the superior court,
seeking the information he had requested from the City. On March 26, the
trial court held a hearing at which the City provided the court with a Vaughn
index describing each document withheld or redacted, and justifying the
reason for nondisclosure. See Vaughn v. Rosen, 484 F.2d 820 (D.C. Cir. 1973);
Union Leader Corp. v. N.H. Housing Fin. Auth., 142 N.H. 540, 548-49 (1997)
(discussing use of Vaughn index). The court found that the City had sustained
its burden of justifying withholding the precise locations of the City’s
surveillance equipment, the type of recording capabilities for each piece of
equipment, the specific time periods each piece of equipment is expected to be
operational, and the retention time for any recordings. The court also found
the job titles of those who monitor the surveillance recordings exempt from
disclosure as “internal personnel practices” pursuant to RSA 91-A:5, IV (Supp.
2010).
On appeal, the petitioner argues that: (1) the federal Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA), 5 U.S.C. §§ 552 et seq., does not control requests for
governmental records pursuant to our Right-to-Know Law; (2) Part I, Article 8
of the New Hampshire Constitution and RSA chapter 91-A hold the government
to a “higher standard of public accountability” than does the FOIA; (3)
disclosure of the information requested could not reasonably be expected to
interfere with enforcement proceedings, risk circumvention of the law, or
endanger the life or physical safety of any individual; (4) the job titles of those
allowed to monitor the surveillance recordings are not exempt from disclosure
under RSA 91-A:5, IV; (5) people conducting their private affairs in public
buildings have the right to know how those activities are monitored; and (6) the
2
operation of hidden cameras for routine surveillance of the public by local
government violates Part I, Article 8 of our constitution.
“Resolution of this case requires us to interpret the Right-to-Know Law,
which is a question of law that we review de novo.” ATV Watch v. N.H. Dep’t of
Transp., 161 N.H. 746, 752 (2011) (quotation and ellipsis omitted). “When
interpreting a statute, we first look to the plain meaning of the words used and
will consider legislative history only if the statutory language is ambiguous.”
Id. (quotation omitted). We do not consider words and phrases in isolation, but
rather within the context of the statute as a whole. In the Matter of Scott &
Pierce, 160 N.H. 354, 360 (2010). This enables us to better discern the
legislature’s intent and to interpret statutory language in light of the policy or
purpose sought to be advanced by the statutory scheme. Id. “The purpose of
the Right-to-Know Law is to ensure both the greatest possible public access to
the actions, discussions and records of all public bodies, and their
accountability to the people.” N.H. Civil Liberties Union v. City of Manchester,
149 N.H. 437, 438 (2003) (quotation omitted). Thus, the Right-to-Know Law
helps further our state constitutional requirement that the public’s right of
access to governmental proceedings and records shall not be unreasonably
restricted. Id.; see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8.
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred because the FOIA
“does not control” requests for New Hampshire governmental records under the
Right-to-Know Law. The trial court, however, did not apply the FOIA in this
case, but rather concluded that the requested information “fit[] squarely within
exemptions (A), (E), and (F) as laid out in Murray [v. N.H. Div. of State Police,
154 N.H. 579, 582 (2006)].” While the test employed in Murray is admittedly
one we adopted from the FOIA, use of the Murray test does not constitute an
application of federal law. Rather, in interpreting and applying our own Right-
to-Know Law, we “look to the decisions of other jurisdictions, since other
similar acts, because they are in pari materia, are interpretively helpful,
especially in understanding the necessary accommodation of the competing
interests involved.” Murray, 154 N.H. at 581 (quotation omitted).
The petitioner further argues that the trial court erred in applying
Murray and its predecessor, Lodge v. Knowlton, 118 N.H. 574 (1978), because,
by doing so, it “appears to have treated the requested information as part of a
law enforcement investigation or prosecution.” He asserts that his request
sought “no investigatory information.”
In Lodge, we adopted “the six-prong test of 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7) (Supp.
1975) . . . for the guidance of our judges who may be faced with” cases dealing
with “police investigatory files.” Lodge, 118 N.H. at 577. We determined that
the FOIA test “provides a good standard to effectuate the balance of interests
required by RSA [chapter] 91-A with regard to” such files. Id. At the time, the
3
test exempted, under certain circumstances, “investigatory records compiled
for law enforcement purposes.” Id. at 576 (quotation omitted).
In 1986, Congress amended 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7) by deleting the word
“investigatory” and inserting the words “or information,” so that protection is
now available to all “records or information compiled for law enforcement
purposes.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7) (2006); see Abdelfattah v. United States Dept.
of Homeland Sec., 488 F.3d 178, 184 (3d Cir. 2007). In Murray, we employed
this amended test, which exempts:
“records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes, but
only to the extent that the production of such law enforcement
records or information (A) could reasonably be expected to interfere
with enforcement proceedings, (B) would deprive a person of a right
to a fair trial or an impartial adjudication, (C) could reasonably be
expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy,
(D) could reasonably be expected to disclose the identity of a
confidential source, including a State, local, or foreign agency or
authority or any private institution which furnished information on
a confidential basis, and, in the case of a record or information
compiled by criminal law enforcement authority in the course of a
criminal investigation or by an agency conducting a lawful national
security intelligence investigation, information furnished by a
confidential source, (E) would disclose techniques and procedures
for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would
disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or
prosecutions if such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk
circumvention of the law, or (F) could reasonably be expected to
endanger the life or physical safety of any individual . . . .”
Murray, 154 N.H. at 582 (quoting 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7) (2002)) (emphasis
added).
The petitioner correctly points out that even though Murray quoted the
amended FOIA test, it applied a requirement from the pre-amendment Lodge
case; namely, that “[t]he entity resisting disclosure under exemption (A) must
initially show that the requested documents are: (1) investigatory; and (2)
compiled for law enforcement purposes.” Id.; see Lodge, 118 N.H. at 576-77.
Recitation of this apparent vestige was of no consequence in Murray, however,
because “[t]he petitioner [did] not challenge the trial court’s findings that the
requested documents [were] investigatory in nature and that they were
[compiled] for law enforcement purposes.” Murray, 154 N.H. at 582. We now
clarify that in Murray, we intended to adopt the amended test set out in 5
U.S.C. § 552(b)(7) (2006). Thus, to withhold materials under the modified test
adopted in Murray, an agency need not establish that the materials are
4
investigatory, but need only “establish that the records at issue were compiled
for law enforcement purposes, and that the material satisfies the requirements
of one of the subparts of” the test. Richardson v. United States Dept. of
Justice, 730 F. Supp. 2d 225, 233 (D.D.C. 2010) (quotation omitted).
Accordingly, even accepting the petitioner’s assertion that his request did not
encompass investigatory files, we conclude that the trial court did not err in
applying the Murray test.
Here, the petitioner does not challenge the trial court’s implicit finding
that the requested records were compiled for law enforcement purposes. See
Demers Nursing Home, Inc. v. R.C. Foss & Sons, Inc., 122 N.H. 757, 761
(1982) (noting “in the absence of specific findings, a court is presumed to have
made all findings necessary to support its decree” (quotation omitted)).
Therefore, the City has satisfied the initial prong of the test.
The petitioner challenges the trial court’s finding that the information he
requested was exempt from disclosure under sections (A), (E), and (F) of the
Murray test, contending that disclosure would not interfere with enforcement
proceedings, risk circumvention of the law or endanger the life or physical
safety of any individual. The City counters that release of the precise locations
of cameras, the type of recording capabilities for each piece of equipment, the
specific time periods each piece of equipment is expected to be operational, and
the retention time for any recordings “would provide a roadmap for the
commission of crime.” It argues that disclosure of detailed law enforcement
surveillance procedures would allow suspects to draw conclusions about which
monitoring techniques law enforcement routinely implements, and thus
provide them with potential countermeasures to circumvent such practices.
Looking again to cases construing the FOIA for guidance, see Lamy v. N.H.
Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 152 N.H. 106, 108 (2005), we agree with the City.
In Lewis-Bey v. United States Department of Justice, 595 F. Supp. 2d
120 (D.D.C. 2009), the court addressed whether the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) properly withheld under section (E)
“details of electronic surveillance techniques, specifically, the circumstances
under which the techniques were used, the specific timing of their use, and the
specific location where they were employed.” Lewis-Bey, 595 F. Supp. 2d at
138 (quotation and ellipsis omitted). In holding that this information was
correctly withheld, the court apparently accepted ATF’s assertion that
disclosure “would illustrate the agency’s strategy in implementing these
specific techniques” and thus “could lead to decreased effectiveness in future
investigations by allowing potential subjects to anticipate and identify such
techniques as they are being employed.” Id. (quotations and ellipsis omitted).
In New York Civil Liberties Union v. Department of Homeland Security,
771 F. Supp. 2d 289 (S.D.N.Y. 2011), the plaintiff did not contest that the
5
information it sought regarding “the placement of surveillance cameras in
Lower Manhattan” by the New York City Police Department (NYPD) could be
used to circumvent the law, but argued that disclosure would not increase the
risk of circumvention because NYPD’s use of security cameras was already
publicly known. N.Y. Civil Liberties Union, 771 F. Supp. 2d at 290, 291. The
court disagreed, noting that “although it is publicly known that . . . [the NYPD]
uses cameras . . . , the specific locations of those devices are unknown, and
their disclosure could unquestionably aid criminals in evading detection and
thereby circumventing the law.” Id. at 292. Similarly, the court in Showing
Animals Respect and Kindness v. United States Department of the Interior, 730
F. Supp. 2d 180 (D.D.C. 2010), noted that “although trespassers and poachers
on Wildlife Refuges likely know that they are subject to surveillance, the details
of the surveillance techniques are unknown to them.” Showing Animals
Respect and Kindness, 730 F. Supp. 2d at 200. The court was therefore
“satisfied that documents which disclose the location and timing of such
surveillance could be reasonably expected to risk circumvention of the law.”
Id.
We conclude that the precise locations of the City’s surveillance
equipment, the recording capabilities for each piece of equipment, the specific
time periods each piece of equipment is expected to be operational, and the
retention time for any recordings are exempt from disclosure. This information
is of such substantive detail that it could reasonably be expected to risk
circumvention of the law by providing those who wish to engage in criminal
activity with the ability to adjust their behaviors in an effort to avoid detection.
Accordingly, the release of such information “would disclose techniques and
procedures for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions, or would
disclose guidelines for law enforcement investigations or prosecutions” and
“such disclosure could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the
law.” Murray, 154 N.H. at 582 (quotation omitted).
The petitioner nevertheless contends that N.H. Civil Liberties Union
mandates disclosure of the information he seeks. He maintains that providing
the information he requests is analogous to the “police surveillance tactics
[that] were considered disclosable information” in that case. We disagree. In
N.H. Civil Liberties Union, the petitioner sought access to consensual
photographs of individuals stopped, but not arrested, that were taken by the
Manchester Police Department. N.H. Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 438.
The “trial court explicitly exempted from disclosure photographs that . . . were
part of police investigations, including pictures of victims, witnesses and
suspects.” Id. at 441. Moreover, the issues of law raised in N.H. Civil Liberties
Union are dissimilar to those presented in this case. See id. at 439-40. In an
effort to withhold the photographs, the City of Manchester relied on the
exemption in RSA 91-A:5, IV (2001) for records “whose disclosure would
constitute invasion of privacy.” Id. at 440 (quotation omitted). Here, the court
6
upheld the withholding of the requested information under exemptions (A), (E),
and (F) of the Murray test. In light of our ruling that these records were
properly withheld under section (E), we need not further analyze the
applicability of the other exemptions.
The petitioner also contends that Part I, Article 8 of the New Hampshire
Constitution and RSA chapter 91-A hold government to a “higher standard” of
public accountability than does the FOIA. Part I, Article 8 provides that “the
public’s right of access to governmental proceedings and records shall not be
unreasonably restricted.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8 (emphasis added). Because
we cannot conclude that an exemption from disclosure for certain information
that “could reasonably be expected to risk circumvention of the law,” Murray,
154 N.H. at 582 (quotation omitted), is an unreasonable restriction on public
access to governmental records, we find no conflict between the exemption
applied here and Part I, Article 8 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
The petitioner next contends that the trial court erred by exempting from
disclosure the job titles of any persons who monitor the City’s surveillance
equipment. The court found that the information was properly withheld under
RSA 91-A:5, IV as records pertaining to “internal personnel practices.” RSA
91-A:5, IV.
We construe provisions favoring disclosure broadly, while construing
exemptions narrowly. Murray, 154 N.H. at 581. When a public entity seeks to
avoid disclosure of material under the Right-to-Know Law, that entity bears a
heavy burden to shift the balance toward nondisclosure. Id.
We first applied the “internal personnel practices” exemption of RSA 91-
A:5, IV in Union Leader Corp. v. Fenniman, 136 N.H. 624, 626 (1993). There,
the defendants sought to withhold documents compiled during an internal
investigation of a Dover Police Department lieutenant accused of making
harassing phone calls. Fenniman, 136 N.H. at 625-26. We concluded that
such files were exempt from disclosure as “[r]ecords pertaining to internal
personnel practices,” under RSA 91-A:5, IV. Id. (quotation omitted). Finding
that “the plain meanings of the words ‘internal,’ ‘personnel,’ and ‘practices’ are
themselves quite broad,” id., we concluded that the investigatory files fell
within the plain meaning of the statutory language: “These files plainly
‘pertain[] to internal personnel practices’ because they document procedures
leading up to internal personnel discipline, a quintessential example of an
internal personnel practice.” Id. Similarly, in Hounsell v. North Conway Water
Precinct, 154 N.H. 1 (2006), we found that a report generated in the course of
investigating claimed employee misconduct was a record pertaining to “internal
personnel practices.” Hounsell, 154 N.H. at 4 (quotation omitted).
7
We have not, however, had occasion to interpret RSA 91-A:5, IV outside
the context of employee misconduct or discipline. Looking again to cases
interpreting the FOIA for guidance, we find instructive the United States
Supreme Court’s recent interpretation of Exemption 2 under the FOIA, see 5
U.S.C. § 552(b)(2) (2006), “which shields from compelled disclosure documents
related solely to the internal personnel rules and practices of an agency.”
Milner v. Department of Navy, 131 S. Ct. 1259, 1262 (2011) (quotation
omitted). The Court ruled that “[a]n agency’s ‘personnel rules and practices’
are its rules and practices dealing with employee relations or human resources.
. . . They concern the conditions of employment in federal agencies – such
matters as hiring and firing, work rules and discipline, compensation and
benefits.” Id. at 1265. In so doing, it rejected an interpretation adopted by the
D.C. Court of Appeals that “Exemption 2 should also cover any predominantly
internal materials whose disclosure would significantly risk circumvention of
agency regulations or statutes.” Id. at 1263 (quotations, citation, brackets and
footnote omitted). In Crooker v. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms, 670
F.2d 1051 (D.C. Cir. 1981), abrogated by Milner v. Department of the Navy,
131 S. Ct. 1259 (2011), the D.C. Circuit Court had “approved the use of
Exemption 2 to shield a manual designed to train Government agents in law
enforcement surveillance techniques.” Milner, 131 S. Ct. at 1262. In Milner,
the Supreme Court rejected the D.C. Circuit Court’s interpretation and held
that Exemption 2 “does not stretch so far” as to shield “data and maps used to
help store explosives at a naval base in Washington State.” Id.
In light of the foregoing, we conclude that the job titles of persons who
monitor the City’s surveillance equipment are not an “internal personnel
practice[]” within the meaning of RSA 91-A:5, IV. They are not related to
internal personnel discipline, which we found to be “a quintessential example
of an internal personnel practice” in Fenniman. Fenniman, 136 N.H. at 626.
Nor are they akin to “such matters as hiring and firing, work rules and
discipline,” which, among other things, the Supreme Court noted to be matters
within the contemplation of Exemption 2 of the FOIA. Milner, 131 S. Ct. at
1265. Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s ruling with respect to the
withholding of job titles of persons who monitor the City’s surveillance
equipment.
The petitioner next contends, making reference to “Federal constitutional
law,” that the City’s failure to disclose the requested information implicates the
privacy rights of private parties. He argues:
While all New Hampshire citizens have a right to know the manner
in which government conducts surveillance of the public, this right
is particularly compelling when private parties utilize public
buildings to conduct private affairs. Examples of this include
8
rental or lease of city facilities for use by clubs, civic groups, and
similar organizations.
We need not address this argument because the petitioner does not allege that
he has “utilize[d] public buildings to conduct private affairs.” Thus, he has not
demonstrated standing to assert this claim. See Gen. Elec. Co. v. Comm’r,
N.H. Dep’t of Revenue Admin., 154 N.H. 457, 461 (2006) (“The general rule in
New Hampshire is that a party has standing to raise a constitutional issue only
when the party’s own rights have been or will be directly affected.”).
Finally, the petitioner appears to argue that the operation of hidden
cameras for routine surveillance of the public by local government violates Part
I, Article 8 of the New Hampshire Constitution. Because this claim is not
supported by an adequately developed legal argument, however, we need not
address it further: “[N]either passing reference to constitutional claims nor off-
hand invocations of constitutional rights without support by legal argument or
authority warrants extended consideration.” Petition of Lussier, 161 N.H. 153,
159-60 (2010) (quotation omitted).
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9