THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rochester Family Division
No. 2010-609
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF NICHOLAS P.
Argued: May 5, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2011
Krans Law Firm, of Dover (Hamilton R. Krans, Jr. on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
Kay Oppenheimer, of Barrington, on the brief and orally, for the
respondent.
Michael Alfano, guardian ad litem, of Portsmouth, by memorandum and
orally.
CONBOY, J. The respondent, Rebecca P., appeals an order of the
Rochester Family Division (Ashley, J.) awarding guardianship of her son,
Nicholas P., to Jonathan P., her son’s half-brother. We affirm.
The trial court found the following facts. Nicholas is the son of Rebecca
P. and Martin P. Jonathan P. is Martin’s son from a previous relationship. In
May 2007, Martin and Rebecca lived in Dover with then nine-year-old Nicholas,
fifteen-year-old Jonathan, and Rebecca’s teenage daughter from a previous
relationship, Danielle. The couple were having marital difficulties, and on May
14, 2007, Rebecca left with Danielle for South Carolina without advance notice
to the rest of the family. Rebecca left behind a note addressed to Martin,
Jonathan, and Nicholas in which she promised to return in a month, but she
never relocated back to New Hampshire.
Martin and Nicholas briefly visited Rebecca in South Carolina in the
summer of 2008, and Nicholas spent six weeks with her there the following
summer. Otherwise, mother and son saw each other only briefly over the next
two years. Nicholas was upset and angry, and felt abandoned. In August
2009, Martin initiated divorce proceedings against Rebecca.
Martin died suddenly on October 13, 2009. Soon thereafter, Rebecca
sought ex parte approval in the divorce case to take Nicholas with her to South
Carolina. Her request was denied. Jonathan then petitioned for guardianship
of Nicholas. A hearing on Jonathan’s guardianship petition was held on June
25, 2010. A guardian ad litem (GAL) represented Nicholas’s interests.
At the time of the hearing, Jonathan was eighteen years old. His high
school record evidenced a history of “skipping classes, defiance, and
disrespect.” He testified that Rebecca had introduced him to drug and alcohol
use at age fourteen, and that he had experimented with both. However, the
trial court found that “almost overnight following the death of the boys’ father,
[Jonathan] transformed himself into a man and a parent figure for Nicholas.
By all accounts, including that of Rebecca P[.], Jonathan . . . ‘stepped up to the
plate.’” Jonathan had not used drugs or alcohol since Martin’s death. He was
working thirty-one hours a week at a Wendy’s restaurant, keeping weekends
and one weekday available to take Nicholas to counseling and medical
appointments. At home, he was cooking, cleaning, supervising Nicholas’s
studying, and enforcing reasonable rules. He and Nicholas were interacting in
a “gray area between parent and older sibling.” In sum, the trial court found
that “Jonathan’s devotion to his brother . . . has allowed Nicholas to remain in
his home environment and not just survive his many losses, but actually grow
and succeed educationally, socially and emotionally.”
The court found that Nicholas and Rebecca love each other, but their
relationship is strained. Nicholas described his relationship with his mother to
the GAL: “I don’t know her. I have no connection to her. We rarely talk on the
phone and when we do we talk for only a minute.” The court found that
Rebecca had not fulfilled her parental responsibilities since 2007, and that
Nicolas remains “terribly upset” and angry about her abandonment of him. He
also does not feel safe in her “environment.” Rebecca and Nicholas have not
seen each other on a consistent basis since 2007. They have not spent any
substantial periods of time together since Nicholas’s six-week trip to South
Carolina in 2009.
2
While noting that, in the context of a guardianship proceeding, it was
unnecessary to make a determination as to Rebecca’s fitness as a parent, the
trial court observed that the recent birth of Rebecca’s youngest daughter was
“surrounded by alleged confusion over the identification of [the baby’s] birth
father, her mother’s ongoing drug use, and the baby’s safety in her mother’s
care.” Although Rebecca completed an intensive six-month drug rehabilitation
program, the trial court disbelieved her claim that she entered this program
because of one “aberrant” positive test result for marijuana during her
pregnancy. Further, the trial court noted witness testimony that Rebecca was
a “challenged mother” before 2007 and had mistreated Jonathan, Nicholas,
and Danielle. Rebecca responded to this testimony “by calling the people
making the accusations liars, including Jonathan and Nicholas.”
At the hearing, Nicholas’s sixth-grade teacher testified that he told her, “I
don’t even know my mom. I would be scared to live with her.” The teacher also
testified that Nicholas has strong friendships with his Dover classmates and a
“really strong bond” with his brother. In contrast to Jonathan being “very
involved” during Nicholas’s sixth grade year, the teacher never heard from
Rebecca. She expressed her opinion that it was in Nicholas’s best interests to
stay with his brother and friends. She also testified that she believed a move to
South Carolina “would be damaging.”
The GAL recommended that Nicholas remain in Dover with his brother:
“It would be psychologically harmful to move Nicholas from his brother,
friends, and Dover at this time.” He observed mother and son during a joint
interview and concluded that there was “no connection” between them.
Nicholas’s counselor agreed that relocating to his mother’s home in
South Carolina would be psychologically harmful to Nicholas. She also
reported that Nicholas was tearful, worried, and suffering from anxiety,
sleeplessness, and headaches over the possible move. Nicholas said to her:
“This is where I have been my whole life. My friends are here[,] and everyone is
starting to really know me . . . . Why should I leave where I feel safe?”
As noted by the trial court, Rebecca became Nicholas’s guardian by
operation of law when Martin died. RSA 463:3, I (2004) (“Upon the death of
either parent, the survivor shall be the sole guardian of the person of the
minor.”). Jonathan’s petition to be substituted as guardian is governed by RSA
463:8, III(b) (Supp. 2010), which requires a non-parent seeking to establish
guardianship over the objections of a parent to show “by clear and convincing
evidence that the best interests of the minor require substitution or
supplementation of parental care and supervision to provide for the essential
physical and safety needs of the minor or to prevent specific, significant
psychological harm to the minor.” The trial court ruled that Jonathan had
sustained his burden, and granted him sole guardianship of Nicholas. It also
3
ordered the parties to negotiate Rebecca’s parenting time with Nicholas to take
place in South Carolina.
On appeal, the respondent argues that the trial court’s award of
guardianship of her son to a non-parent over her objections: (1) violated the
guardianship of minors statute (RSA chapter 463); (2) violated her fundamental
right to parent her child as guaranteed by Part I, Article 2 of the New
Hampshire Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States
Constitution; and (3) was a de facto termination of her parental rights.
At the outset, we note that the respondent did not provide a record in
support of her appeal. It is the burden of the appealing party to provide this
court with a record sufficient to decide her issues on appeal. See Rix v.
Kinderworks Corp., 136 N.H. 548, 553 (1992); see also Sup. Ct. R. 13. Absent
a transcript of the hearing in the trial court, we must assume that the evidence
was sufficient to support its decision. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
N.H. 248, 250 (2004). We must also assume that the trial court made all
findings necessary to support its decision. In re Jonathan T., 148 N.H. 296,
304 (2002). We further note that the respondent does not challenge the
constitutionality of the guardianship statute. Accordingly, we review the trial
court’s order for legal errors only. See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 397
(1997).
Parental rights are “natural, essential, and inherent” within the meaning
of Part I, Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution. In re Adam R., 159 N.H.
788, 792 (2010). “Similarly, the United States Supreme Court has recognized
that ‘the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects the
fundamental right of parents to make decisions concerning the care, custody,
and control of their children.’” In the Matter of R.A. & J.M, 153 N.H. 82, 90
(2005). Nevertheless, the fundamental rights of parents are not unassailable.
In re Adam R., 159 N.H. at 788.
Resolution of this appeal requires us to interpret RSA chapter 463, which
governs guardianship of minors. We review the trial court’s interpretation of a
statute de novo. Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). We are the
final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. Id. We first examine the language of the
statute, and, where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to
the words used. Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its
meaning is not subject to modification. Dalton Hydro v. Town of Dalton, 153
N.H. 75, 78 (2005). We will neither consider what the legislature might have
said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. Id.
As to her first claim of error – that the trial court’s decision violated the
guardianship statute – the respondent appears to argue, first, that RSA 463:3,
4
I, mandates that, upon the death of one parent, the surviving parent is entitled
to guardianship of the minor unless she has been declared unfit. We reject
this argument. RSA 463:8 plainly provides a procedure for the substitution of
a non-parent guardian for a parent; that procedure does not require a court to
find the parent unfit.
The respondent next argues that the trial court violated RSA 463:8 in
several ways, including: (1) failing to identify the specific, psychological harm
Nicholas would suffer under his mother’s guardianship; (2) using erroneous
legal standards; and (3) placing the burden of proof on her, as shown by the
trial court’s characterization of her as a “contestant.” A review of the trial
court’s order does not support the respondent’s contentions.
The trial court identified and applied the proper statutory standard – that
is, whether Jonathan showed by clear and convincing evidence that Nicholas’s
best interests require substitute guardianship to provide for his essential
physical and safety needs or to prevent specific, significant psychological harm
to him. See RSA 463:8, III(b). Contrary to the respondent’s assertions, the
guardianship statute does not require the non-parent to present expert
witnesses to establish psychological harm to the minor. Id. Moreover,
assuming, without deciding, that the trial court was required to make specific
findings as to potential psychological harm, the trial court made such findings.
The trial court found that Nicholas and the respondent have not had
regular, sustained contact, either in person or by telephone, since the
respondent left the family in 2007. Nicholas stated that he did not know his
mother and would be afraid to live with her. The trial court found that he is
angry with her, does not feel safe in her “environment,” and suffers from
anxiety, sleeplessness, and headaches over the possible move. The respondent
does not contest that Nicholas told “the Guardian ad litem, his therapist and
his teacher, consistently and repeatedly, that he does not want to move.”
The trial court found that it is Jonathan who has helped Nicholas to
weather the painful blows of his mother’s abandonment and his father’s death.
Nicholas has lived in Dover all his life, has strong bonds with his brother and
friends in Dover, and says he feels “safe” in Dover.
We cannot agree with the respondent’s contention that the trial court
applied erroneous legal standards or shifted the burden of proof to her. The
few phrases in the trial court’s decision cited by the respondent do not support
an inference that the trial court substituted its own standards for the statutory
standard. For example, we interpret the trial court’s use of the word
“contestant” to describe the respondent as referring to the fact that she was
contesting Jonathan’s petition for guardianship, not as an indication that the
trial court had shifted the burden of proof to her.
5
The respondent’s second claim of error is that the trial court’s decision
violated her fundamental right to parent her child as guaranteed by Part I,
Article 2 of the New Hampshire Constitution and the Fourteenth Amendment to
the United States Constitution. We first consider her arguments under the
State Constitution, using federal cases only to aid in our analysis. State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Citing Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57 (2000), the respondent argues that
the trial court was required to accord special weight to her assessment of what
is best for Nicholas. We do not agree that the holding in Troxel requires
reversal in this case. That decision involved a Washington state statute that
allowed “any person” to petition for visitation rights and allowed courts to grant
such visitation whenever “visitation may serve the best interest of the child.”
Troxel, 530 U.S. at 60. The United States Supreme Court concluded that the
statute unconstitutionally infringed on the parent’s fundamental rights
because it did not accord any weight to the parent’s determination of what
would be in the best interests of the child. Id. at 67.
Our statute, however, safeguards a parent’s fundamental rights by
imposing a high evidentiary standard – that is, by requiring a non-parent
seeking a substitute guardianship to establish the need for it by clear and
convincing evidence. While there is a presumption that fit parents act in the
best interests of their children, that presumption is subsumed in the clear and
convincing evidence standard. See Hunter v. Hunter, 771 N.W.2d 694, 706
(Mich. 2009) (“Although a fit parent is presumed to act in his or her child’s best
interests, a court need give the parent’s decision only a ‘presumption of validity’
or ‘some weight.’ That is precisely what [the statute] does when it requires
clear and convincing evidence to rebut the presumption.”).
Because the State Constitution provides at least as much protection as
the Federal Constitution under these circumstances, see In re Jeffrey G., 153
N.H. 200, 204-05 (2006), we reach the same result under the Federal
Constitution as we do under the State Constitution.
Finally, the respondent argues the trial court’s order had the practical
effect of terminating her parental rights, and, therefore, the trial court should
have applied the standard set forth in RSA 170-C:5 (Supp. 2010) (“Grounds for
Termination of the Parent-Child Relationship”). She alleges that, given the
distance between her home in South Carolina and New Hampshire, she does
not have the resources to visit with Nicholas and cannot exercise the parenting
time awarded by the court. The respondent cites no legal authority for the
proposition that her alleged inability to exercise visitation rights amounts to a
de facto termination of parental rights.
6
The appointment of a guardian is not a de facto termination of
parental rights, which results in a final and complete severance of
the child from the parent and removes the entire bundle of
parental rights. . . . [A] guardian is subject to removal at any time.
In re Guardianship of Elizabeth H., 771 N.W.2d 185, 193 (Neb. 2009).
Because, in the absence of a transcript, we review the trial court’s
decision for legal errors only, we do not address the respondent’s argument
that the GAL’s report to the court is meritless. See Atwood, 142 N.H. at 396-
97.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7