THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2011-646
APPEAL OF ERIC JOHNSON
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: September 20, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 25, 2013
Backus, Meyer & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (Jon Meyer on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Molan, Milner & Krupski, PLLC, of Concord (John S. Krupski on the brief
and orally), for the respondent.
BASSETT, J. The petitioner, Eric Johnson, appeals a decision of the New
Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB) finding the
evidence insufficient to support his claim that the respondent, the New
Hampshire Troopers Association (Union), breached its duty of fair
representation. We affirm.
The parties either stipulated to, or the PELRB found, the following facts.
The petitioner became a New Hampshire State Trooper in 1994 and retired in
July 2007. In 2004, the Union filed an unfair labor practice charge alleging
that the State had unlawfully deducted annual and sick leave from the
troopers’ leave accounts. The PELRB ruled in favor of the Union and ordered
the State to “restore accumulated annual . . . and sick leave to [affected
bargaining unit] members.” We affirmed the PELRB’s decision. See Appeal of
N.H. Dep’t of Safety, 155 N.H. 201 (2007). Immediately thereafter, the Union
demanded that the State restore leave for all troopers, including retired
troopers.
The negotiations over restoring leave to the troopers lasted for more than
a year, during which time the petitioner retired. From the beginning of the
negotiations, the State opposed restoring leave to non-active troopers.
Additionally, the Union was advised by its attorney that it “did not represent
retired or other non-active troopers because upon leaving their employment
they were no longer members of the bargaining unit.” See Chemical Workers v.
Pittsburgh Glass, 404 U.S. 157, 181 n.20 (1971). Eventually, on July 16,
2008, the Union and the State entered into a settlement agreement that did not
provide compensation for troopers who had retired or resigned before the
settlement date.
In 2010, the petitioner filed an unfair labor practice charge alleging that
the Union had breached its duty of fair representation when it agreed to a
settlement that did not provide compensation to retired troopers. The
petitioner alleged that, by so doing, the Union acted arbitrarily and in bad
faith. The Union did not dispute that it owed the petitioner a duty of fair
representation even though he was retired, but denied that it breached its
duty.
The PELRB determined that the petitioner had failed to prove that the
Union acted in bad faith. Specifically, the PELRB found that there was no
evidence “proving animosity or discriminatory intent on the part of the Union
. . . with respect to [the petitioner] or other retired or resigned troopers.”
The PELRB also found that the petitioner failed to prove that the Union
acted arbitrarily. Relying upon O’Brien v. Curran, 106 N.H. 252, 256-57
(1965), the PELRB stated that “[t]he duty of fair representation does not
prevent a union from choosing to seek a particular outcome even though the
inevitable result may be harmful to some members of the bargaining unit.”
Examining the totality of the circumstances, the PELRB decided that “the
Union’s decision to enter into a Settlement Agreement, which did not provide
compensation for retired troopers but was otherwise beneficial to the rest of the
bargaining unit members, was [not] . . . so far outside a wide range of
reasonableness as to be irrational.” (Quotation omitted.) See Air Line Pilots v.
O’Neill, 499 U.S. 65, 67 (1991). The petitioner unsuccessfully moved for
rehearing, and this appeal followed. On appeal, the petitioner challenges only
the PELRB’s finding that he failed to prove that the Union acted arbitrarily.
“When reviewing a decision of the PELRB, we defer to its findings of fact,
and, absent an erroneous ruling of law, we will not set aside its decision unless
2
the appealing party demonstrates by a clear preponderance of the evidence that
the order is unjust or unreasonable.” Appeal of Laconia Sch. Dist., 150 N.H.
495, 496 (2004); see RSA 541:13 (2007).
“[A] union breaches the duty of fair representation when its conduct
toward a member of the bargaining unit is arbitrary, discriminatory, or in bad
faith.” Marquez v. Screen Actors, 525 U.S. 33, 44 (1998); see O’Brien, 106 N.H.
at 256-57 (relying upon federal law when discussing breach of duty of fair
representation); cf. University System v. State, 117 N.H. 96, 99 (1977)
(suggesting that newly created PELRB look to decisions of the National Labor
Relations Board (NLRB) for guidance). “[U]nder the arbitrary prong, a union’s
actions breach the duty of fair representation only if the union’s conduct can
be fairly characterized as so far outside a wide range of reasonableness that it
is wholly irrational or arbitrary.” Marquez, 525 U.S. at 45 (quotations omitted).
“This ‘wide range of reasonableness’ gives the union room to make
discretionary decisions and choices, even if those judgments are ultimately
wrong.” Id. at 45-46. “A union’s conduct can be classified as arbitrary only
when it is irrational,” meaning that “it is without a rational basis or
explanation.” Id. at 46.
On judicial review of a union’s performance, a court may not substitute
its own view of the merits of a bargain for that of the union. Air Line Pilots,
499 U.S. at 78. “Any substantive examination of a union’s performance,
therefore, must be highly deferential, recognizing the wide latitude that
negotiators need for effective performance of their bargaining responsibilities.”
Id. In the instant case, in order to prevail, the petitioner must show that the
Union’s decision to negotiate a settlement agreement that did not provide a
remedy for retired troopers was “without a rational basis or explanation.”
Marquez, 523 U.S. at 46.
The petitioner first argues that the mere fact that retired troopers had no
remedy under the settlement agreement establishes, as a matter of law, that
the Union breached its duty of fair representation. We disagree. As the
Supreme Court has noted:
Inevitably differences arise in the manner and degree to which the
terms of any negotiated agreement affect individual employees and
classes of employees. The mere existence of such differences does
not make them invalid. The complete satisfaction of all who are
represented is hardly to be expected. A wide range of
reasonableness must be allowed a statutory bargaining
representative in serving the unit it represents, subject always to
complete good faith and honesty of purpose in the exercise of its
discretion.
3
Ford Motor Co. v. Huffman, 345 U.S. 330, 338 (1953); see O’Brien, 106 N.H. at
256. “As a practical matter, unions are rarely able to negotiate agreements
that completely satisfy the desires of all its represented members.” Bowerman
v. UAW Local 12, 646 F.3d 360, 369 (6th Cir.), cert. denied, 132 S. Ct. 766
(2011). “Moreover, there is no requirement that unions treat their members
identically as long as their actions are related to legitimate union objectives.”
Vaughan v. Air Line Pilots Ass’n, Intern., 604 F.3d 703, 712 (2d Cir. 2010). A
union has the discretion to “balance the rights of individual employees against
the collective good, or it may subordinate the interests of one group of
employees to those of another group, if its conduct is based upon permissible
considerations.” Postal Workers (Postal Service), 345 N.L.R.B. 1282, 1285
(2005). “If a union resolves conflicts between employees or groups of
employees in a rational, honest, and nonarbitrary manner, its conduct may be
lawful . . . , even if some employees are adversely affected by its decision.” Id.
Thus, in Postal Workers (Postal Service), the NLRB ruled that the union’s
decision to exclude the estates of deceased employees from sharing the
settlement proceeds was reasonable, practicable, and did not breach the duty
of fair representation. Id. at 1284-85. The NLRB similarly decided in Letter
Carriers (Postal Service), 347 N.L.R.B. 289, 289-90 (2006), that the union did
not breach the duty of fair representation when it allocated more settlement
proceeds to active employees than it did to retired employees. In Steelworkers
Local Union No. 2869, 239 N.L.R.B. 982, 982-83 (1978), the NLRB explained
that a union’s decision to limit distribution of settlement proceeds to those
employees in the bargaining unit at the time of settlement “simply constituted
one of a series of reasonable, practical administrative determinations regarding
those employees entitled to share in the settlement proceeds.”
Accordingly, in this case, merely because the Union agreed to a
settlement that excluded retired troopers from a remedy does not establish, as
a matter of law, that the Union breached its duty of fair representation. This is
particularly so given the “ambiguous nature of the legal landscape on the issue
of whether unions owe any duty of fair representation to retirees.” Letter
Carriers (Postal Service), 347 N.L.R.B. at 289. We have not yet decided
whether a union owes a duty of fair representation to retirees under the New
Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Act (PELRA). The PELRA pertains
to “public employees,” RSA 273-A:1, IX (2010), and we have not yet determined
whether the statutory definition of “public employees” includes retirees.
Although the petitioner posits, and the Union appears to agree, that we
decided the issue in Rochester School Board v. New Hampshire PELRB, 119
N.H. 45 (1979), he is mistaken. In that case, we held only that the PELRB had
jurisdiction to adjudicate the back-pay claims of former employees. Rochester
School Bd., 119 N.H. at 55-57. While we may have implied that the retired
employees in that case constituted “public employees” under the PELRA, we
4
did not so hold. Indeed, we specifically acknowledged that “some claims of
former employees may not be within the jurisdiction of the PELRB.” Id. at 56.
In Rochester School Board, we did not hold that, or even address whether, the
duty of fair representation extends to retired employees. Thus, this is an open
question under our state law.
Under federal law, it appears well-established that, generally, a union
does not owe a duty of fair representation to retired employees. In Pittsburgh
Glass, 404 U.S. at 165-76, the United States Supreme Court held that a retired
worker is not an “employee” within the meaning of the National Labor Relations
Act for purposes of establishing the scope of an employer’s duty to bargain
collectively. In a footnote, the court stated: “Since retirees are not members of
the bargaining unit, the bargaining agent is under no statutory duty to
represent them in negotiations with employers.” Id. at 181 n.20.
Subsequently, in UMWA Health & Retirement Funds v. Robinson, 455 U.S.
562, 574-75 (1982), the Court reiterated its view that “former union members
. . . may suffer from discrimination in collective bargaining agreements because
the union need not affirmatively represent them or take into account their
interests in making bona fide economic decisions on behalf of those whom it
does represent.” (Quotation, brackets, and ellipses omitted.)
Federal courts have relied upon Pittsburg Glass and Robinson to hold
that a union owes no duty of fair representation to retirees. See Anderson v.
Alpha Portland Industries, Inc., 727 F.2d 177, 181-82 (8th Cir. 1984); Merk v.
Jewell Food Store Div., Jewell Companies, 641 F. Supp. 1024, 1027-32 (N.D.
Ill.), aff’d on other grounds, 848 F.2d 761 (7th Cir. 1986). In Anderson, the
court observed that imposing a duty on unions to represent both active and
retired employees “would create the potential for severe internal conflicts that
would impair the bargaining unit’s ability to function” because of the
divergence of interests between the two groups. Anderson, 727 F.2d at 183
(quotation omitted). The court also noted that any actual conflicts of interests
would unavoidably be resolved in favor of the active employees because retirees
are not eligible to vote in union elections and therefore the union leadership
could have “no political interest in serving the interests of retirees.” Id.
The district court in Merk, like the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in
Anderson, concluded that former employees were no longer bargaining unit
members and, therefore, the union owed them no duty of fair representation.
Merk, 641 F. Supp. at 1030. The court reasoned that if the union owed the
former employees a duty of fair representation, it “would be forced to deal with
an intolerable conflict of interest,” which would ultimately operate to their
detriment, because, being unable to participate in union elections, they would
have “no control over their representatives.” Id. at 1028 (emphasis omitted).
5
We find Merk instructive because it is factually similar to the instant
case. In Merk, the union and the employer had a dispute regarding the
employer’s reduction of employee wages and benefits. Id. at 1026. The union
and employer eventually settled the dispute with the employer agreeing to
restore “most of the wages and benefits to their previous level,” but only for
employees who were then on the payroll. Id. The employer in Merk, like the
State in this case, insisted that the settlement exclude former employees. Id. at
1032. The union in Merk, like the Union here, “reluctantly abandoned [the
former employees] at [the employer’s] insistence.” Id. As a result, a class of as
many as 2,000 former employees filed an action, alleging that the union had
breached its duty of fair representation. Id. at 1026-27.
In deciding that the union did not owe a duty of fair representation to the
former employees, the Merk court observed that there was a real conflict of
interest between the active and former employees. Id. at 1029. Once they left
employment, the court noted, the former employees “had one narrow interest –
recovering lost wages,” while active employees had a much broader range of
interests, including obtaining good future wages and working conditions, as
well as securing future peace and stability. The current employees had
everything to gain and nothing to lose by cutting [the former employees] loose
without a remedy.” Id. at 1029-30. In leaving the former employees out of the
settlement, the current employees “gave up nothing of economic value to
themselves, but gave [the employer] an economic plum.” Id. at 1030. The
court stated: “Because [the employer] apparently took a hard line as to [the
former employees], the current employees could not have helped [the former
employees] without hurting their own position. This is a classic case of conflict
of interest.” Id.
Similarly, here, the Union reasonably could have decided that given the
State’s insistence upon excluding retired troopers from the settlement
agreement, there was “an intolerable conflict of interest” between the interests
of active and retired State Troopers. Id. at 1028. Under these circumstances,
and “in light of the ambiguous nature of the legal landscape” regarding whether
unions even owe a duty of fair representation to retirees, Letter Carriers (Postal
Service), 347 N.L.R.B. at 289, we cannot say that, by entering into the
settlement agreement, the Union acted “so far outside a wide range of
reasonableness” as to be “wholly irrational or arbitrary.” Marquez, 525 U.S. at
45 (quotations omitted).
In arguing to the contrary, the petitioner likens this case to Baker v.
Board of Education, Hoosick Falls, 770 N.Y.S.2d 782, 786 (App. Div. 2004). In
Baker, the union and employer had negotiated a collective bargaining
agreement that included a new salary schedule reflecting retroactive salary
increases. Baker, 770 N.Y.S.2d at 784. The union and employer had also
negotiated a separate agreement under which the retroactive salary increases
6
would be paid only to active employees. Id.
Thereafter, eleven retired employees sued the union for breaching its
duty of fair representation by failing to represent them in the negotiations. Id.
The union unsuccessfully moved to dismiss the claim and then appealed. Id.
at 784-85. In determining whether the union had a duty to represent the
retired employees, the court first observed that, generally, “a union does not
have a duty to represent its former members in contract negotiations because,
among other things, retirees typically do not have the same interests as active
employees.” Id. at 785; see Pittsburgh Glass, 404 U.S. at 171-73.
Nevertheless, the court decided that the retired and active employees shared a
mutuality of interests with regard to the retroactive salary increases. Baker,
770 N.Y.S.2d at 785. The court also ruled that the plaintiffs sufficiently stated
a cause of action for breach of the duty of fair representation. Id. at 786. In so
deciding, the court rejected the union’s argument that distinguishing between
current and former employees is “permissible and, thus, neither arbitrary nor
discriminatory.” Id. (citation omitted). To the contrary, the court ruled, the
union “did not endeavor to balance the rights of these two classes of
employees; it quite simply failed to represent plaintiffs at all.” Id.
Baker is distinguishable from this case. In Baker, it was alleged that the
union had never advocated for the interests of retired employees. See id. at
784-86. Indeed, it was alleged that the union had rejected the employer’s “offer
to have the retroactive salary schedule apply to retirees.” Id. at 784. Here,
however, the PELRB specifically found that during the lengthy negotiations
over the settlement, the Union “did not propose to exclude retired or other non-
active troopers from the list of troopers to be compensated.” The PELRB also
found that the Union “satisfied its duty of fair representation” to all of the
bargaining unit members, “including [the petitioner], when it successfully
pursued a breach of contract claim against the State before the PELRB . . . and
later before the Supreme Court.” The PELRB further found that following the
issuance of our opinion in Appeal of New Hampshire Department of Safety, 155
N.H. 201, “the Union demanded that the State comply with [our] decision and
restore all leave for all troopers, including the retired troopers.” In short, in
this case, the PELRB found that the Union advocated for the retired troopers
initially, even though it ultimately entered into a settlement agreement that did
not provide them with compensation.
The petitioner next asserts that “[t]he [Union’s] decision . . . did not meet
the threshold for fair representation because it was not based upon a reasoned
decision regarding [his] claim or even the weighing of that claim against the
claims of other bargaining unit members.” He contends that absent “a
weighing of the pros and cons of inclusion of retired troopers in the agreement,
and more generally, the development of a reasonable standard for determining
inclusion under the Agreement,” the Union’s decision to exclude retired
7
troopers lacked a rational basis or explanation. The petitioner asserts that the
Union could not possibly have engaged in such a balancing of interests
because retired troopers, like him, received no remedy under the agreement.
Contrary to the petitioner’s assertions, the PELRB found that the Union
did balance the interests of retired troopers against those of active troopers
when it entered into the settlement. The PELRB found that the Union’s
attorney informed the Union “that attempting to resolve retired troopers’
compensation issue[s] would slow down negotiations,” which would further
delay a remedy to all bargaining unit members when bargaining unit members
were, according to the Union, already “upset that this matter ha[d] been
pending for so long.” Although the petitioner argues that there is no record
support for this finding, he is mistaken. This finding is supported by an e-mail
from the Union’s attorney as well as hearing testimony.
To the extent that the petitioner argues that the Union had to meet
particularized standards for its decision to fall within the “wide range of
reasonableness,” Marquez, 525 U.S. at 45 (quotation omitted), we disagree. We
decline to subject the Union’s decision-making to such standards because
doing so would not comport with the deference required by Air Line Pilots, 499
U.S. at 78.
The Supreme Court in Air Line Pilots rejected a similar argument. In
that case, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals had ruled that for a union decision
“to be non-arbitrary” it had to be: “(1) based upon relevant, permissible union
factors . . . ; (2) a rational result of the consideration of those factors; and (3)
inclusive of a fair and impartial consideration of the interests of all employees.”
Air Line Pilots, 499 U.S. at 72 (quotation and emphasis omitted). The Supreme
Court ruled that this “refinement of the arbitrariness . . . standard authorizes
more judicial review” of union decisions “than is consistent with national labor
policy.” Id. at 77. Like the Supreme Court in Air Line Pilots, we decline to
“unduly constrain[ ] the ‘wide range of reasonableness’ within which unions
may act without breaching their fair representation duty.” Id. at 79 (citation
omitted).
The petitioner next contends that “the overwhelming weight of testimony
from the [Union’s] own witness [was] that [the Union] was . . . motivated by a
belief that it could not represent retired troopers.” This belief, the petitioner
asserts, was the Union’s “exclusive motivation” for “failing to advocate” on
behalf of the retired troopers. The Union, for its part, appears to agree with the
petitioner that it decided, ultimately, to exclude retired troopers from the
settlement agreement based upon advice from counsel.
The petitioner argues that the Union cannot satisfy its duty of fair
representation by contending that it relied upon advice of counsel. See Gregg
8
v. Chauffeurs, Teamsters & Helpers U. Local, 699 F.2d 1015, 1017 (9th Cir.
1983) (reliance on advice of counsel does not “insulate [a] union from liability
for its breach of its duty to represent its members fairly”). While we agree with
this general proposition, we conclude that where, as here, counsel’s advice was
itself reasonable given the legal landscape at the time, the Union’s reliance on
such advice was rational. Letter Carriers (Postal Service), 347 N.L.R.B. at 289.
Although the petitioner challenges other PELRB factual findings, they are
not material to our decision and are supported by the record. Because the
petitioner has failed to demonstrate by a clear preponderance of the evidence
that the PELRB’s order was unjust or unreasonable, we uphold it. See Appeal
of Laconia Sch. Dist., 150 N.H. at 496.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9