THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-130
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ANDRE RIVERA
Argued: April 7, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Ann M. Rice, associate attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.), the
defendant, Andre Rivera, was convicted of accomplice to reckless second-degree
murder, see RSA 626:8 (2007); RSA 630:1-b, I(b) (2007). He appeals his
conviction, arguing that the trial court: (1) erred in refusing to dismiss the
indictment; and (2) provided erroneous instructions to the jury. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. In August 2007, the
defendant, Christopher Gagne, Troy Whipple, Ryan Mead, and Jordan Webster
discussed committing a robbery. Gagne had a Mac 11 submachine gun, which
he had stolen a few days earlier. The defendant suggested robbing Jason
Violette, whom the defendant knew to be a drug dealer, of money and drugs.
The others agreed to this plan. Whipple told the others that Violette had a gun,
which he normally kept in a safe. The group decided that Gagne would bring
his gun to subdue Violette while the others searched the house. In discussing
the possibility of an armed standoff with Violette, Gagne stated, “If it’s him
[Violette] or me, it’s him.” The defendant replied, “Do what you got to do.”
Whipple called Violette to arrange to buy drugs from him.
On the night of August 12, 2007, the defendant, Gagne, Webster,
Whipple and Mead met at Gagne’s brother’s house. The defendant drove the
others to Mead’s father’s house to change cars for the robbery, then to a
wooded hiding place to collect Gagne’s gun, and then to Violette’s house.
Whipple and Mead waited outside while Webster, Gagne, and the defendant
entered through a side door. They found Violette upstairs in the kitchen.
Gagne ordered him to turn around and “give [them] his things, his stuff.” The
defendant began punching Violette, who fought back. Gagne noticed that
Violette had a gun in his pocket and shouted this information to his
companions. Webster and the defendant promptly ran downstairs. Gagne and
Violette struggled. Gagne testified that when Violette pulled out his gun,
Gagne shot him. Gagne then ran downstairs. The defendant and Webster
were in the basement, and the defendant was looking through a dresser
drawer. Gagne told the others that he had shot Violette, after which Gagne,
Webster, and the defendant left the house, ran back to the car, and left with
Whipple and Mead.
The defendant was subsequently indicted on charges of reckless second-
degree murder under an “accomplice in conduct” theory, as well as conspiracy
to commit burglary, and burglary. He was found guilty by a jury on all three
charges.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the murder indictment on
the grounds that it failed to allege that he acted with the purpose to promote or
facilitate the specific actus reus of the principal offense – Gagne’s shooting the
gun, which caused Violette’s death. The trial court denied the motion, and at
trial, also denied the defendant’s request for a jury instruction that would have
required the jury to find he acted with such purpose in order to find him guilty
of the murder charge. On appeal, the defendant challenges both rulings.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. State v. Dodds, 159 N.H. 239, 244 (2009). “In matters of statutory
interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed
in the words of the statute considered as a whole.” Id. We construe provisions
of the Criminal Code according to the fair import of their terms and to promote
2
justice. See RSA 625:3 (2007). We first look to the language of the statute
itself, and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. Dodds, 159 N.H. at 244. Further, we interpret legislative
intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature
might have said or add language it did not see fit to include. State v. Hynes,
159 N.H. 187, 193 (2009), cert. denied, 130 S. Ct. 1083 (2010). Finally, we
interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id.
Our accomplice statute, RSA 626:8, was based upon section 2.06 of the
Model Penal Code. See Commission to Recommend Codification of Criminal
Laws, Report of Commission to Recommend Codification of Criminal Laws
§ 571:8 cmts. at 17 (1969). It provides, in relevant part:
III. A person is an accomplice of another person in the commission
of an offense if:
(a) With the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
commission of the offense, he solicits such other person in
committing it, or aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other
person in planning or committing it . . . .
IV. Notwithstanding the requirement of a purpose as set forth in
paragraph III(a), when causing a particular result is an element of
an offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an
accomplice in the commission of that offense, if he acts with the
kind of culpability, if any, with respect to that result that is
sufficient for the commission of the offense. In other words, to
establish accomplice liability under this section, it shall not be
necessary that the accomplice act with a purpose to promote or
facilitate the offense. An accomplice in conduct can be found
criminally liable for causing a prohibited result, provided the result
was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the conduct and the
accomplice acted purposely, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently
with respect to that result, as required for the commission of the
offense.
RSA 626:8 (emphasis added). We look to the Model Penal Code commentaries
for guidance. See State v. Lamy, 158 N.H. 511, 515 (2009). As discussed by
the Model Penal Code commentaries, the language of RSA 626:8, IV, most
commonly pertains to situations “where unanticipated results occur from
conduct for which the actor is responsible . . . .” Model Penal Code and
Commentaries § 2.06 cmt. 7, at 321 (1985) (emphasis added). The
commentaries describe the relevance of RSA 626:8, IV to homicide
prosecutions:
3
A manslaughter prosecution could be brought on the theory
that the defendant consciously disregarded a substantial risk that
death would result from the assisted conduct, the risk being of
such a nature and degree that, considering the nature and
purpose of the defendant’s conduct and the circumstances known
to him, its disregard involved a gross deviation from the standard
of conduct that a law-abiding person would have observed in the
defendant’s situation. A murder prosecution could be brought on
the theory that the defendant was reckless as described, and
moreover that he was reckless under circumstances manifesting
extreme indifference to the value of human life. . . . [T]he
presumption that the requisite recklessness and indifference to
make out a case of murder exist is afforded by the fact that the
actor is an accomplice in the commission of [a] robbery.
Id. cmt. 7, at 321 n.70 (quotations, ellipses, and citations omitted).
We have interpreted RSA 626:8, III and IV to require that the State prove
that the accomplice (a) “intended to promote or facilitate another’s unlawful or
dangerous conduct,” and (b) “acted with the culpable mental state specified in
the underlying statute with respect to the result.” State v. Anthony, 151 N.H.
492, 495 (2004) (quotations omitted). Here, the statute underlying the
defendant’s accomplice-in-conduct charge was the second-degree murder
statute, RSA 630:1-b (2007). With respect to the mental state required for
second-degree murder, the statute provides, in relevant part,
I. A person is guilty of murder in the second degree if:
. . .
(b) He causes such death recklessly under circumstances
manifesting an extreme indifference to the value of human life.
Such recklessness and indifference are presumed if the actor
causes the death by the use of a deadly weapon in the commission
of, or in an attempt to commit, or in immediate flight after
committing or attempting to commit any class A felony.
RSA 630:1-b, I (emphasis added). RSA 635:1, I and II (2007) provide that
burglary is a class A felony when perpetrated in the dwelling of another at
night or if the actor is armed with a deadly weapon.
The defendant argues that, in order to prove second-degree murder, the
State was required to prove that he aided and had the purpose to promote the
conduct that directly resulted in Violette’s death, i.e., the shooting.
4
We believe the defendant’s reading of the statute is contradicted by the
language of RSA 626:8, IV. Paragraph IV plainly states that accomplice liability
can flow from conduct “provided the result was a reasonably foreseeable
consequence of the conduct.” RSA 626:8, IV (emphasis added). To require the
State to prove that the defendant had a purpose to promote or facilitate the
actus reus of a prohibited results crime would limit accomplice liability to only
the direct, not the “reasonably foreseeable,” consequences of the defendant’s
conduct. We agree with the State that Violette’s death was a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of the defendant’s actions in planning an armed
burglary of a house occupied by a person he knew to have a gun; driving his
companions, one of whom he knew was armed with a gun, to Violette’s home;
entering the home with his companions; confronting and scuffling with the
victim; and searching the victim’s property while Gagne, armed with a gun,
remained with the victim.
The defendant points to the following language in Anthony to support his
argument: “[T]he standard interpretation of the phrase ‘intent to promote or
facilitate the commission of the offense’ is that it requires proof of the
accomplice’s intent to promote or facilitate another person’s conduct that
constitutes the actus reus of the offense.” Anthony, 151 N.H. at 494 (quotation
omitted). This passage addresses RSA 626:8, III alone. Id. However, when
causing a prohibited result is an element of an offense, paragraph IV modifies
the formulation stated in paragraph III. See RSA 626:8, IV (“Notwithstanding
the requirement of a purpose as set forth in paragraph III(a), when causing a
particular result is an element of an offense, an accomplice in the conduct
causing such result is an accomplice in the commission of that offense . . . .”).
Paragraph IV specifically provides that, in such a case, “it shall not be
necessary that the accomplice act with a purpose to promote or facilitate the
offense.” (Emphasis added.)
We also disagree with the defendant’s reliance on State v. Locke, 144
N.H. 348, 352 (1999) (“Section III . . . sets forth the elements which must be
present above, beyond, and regardless of the substantive offense.” (quotation
omitted)), and the plurality opinion in State v. Etzweiler, 125 N.H. 57, 65 (1984)
(“[U]nder our statute, the accomplice must aid the primary actor in the
substantive offense with the purpose of facilitating the substantive offense.”).
These cases are inapplicable to the question at hand because both dealt with
an earlier version of RSA 626:8. Compare RSA 626:8, IV (1974) and RSA
626:8, IV (2007). Our interpretations of the earlier versions of RSA 626:8 were
superseded by legislative amendments to the statute in 2001, which clarified
that “[n]otwithstanding the requirement of a purpose as set forth in paragraph
III(a),” in the case of a prohibited results crime such as murder, the accomplice
need not have acted with a purpose to promote or facilitate that result in order
for the State to establish criminal liability for the crime if the result was a
reasonably foreseeable consequence of the accomplice’s actions. RSA 626:8, IV
5
(2007); see Anthony, 151 N.H. at 494 (“We read the 2001 amendment to RSA
626:8 as a legislative rejection of the interpretation of that statute stated by the
plurality in Etzweiler and reiterated by the court in Locke.”).
We disagree with the defendant’s assertions that our accomplice-in-
conduct formulation is indistinguishable from a felony murder scheme. “The
classic formulation of the felony-murder doctrine declares that one is guilty of
murder if a death results from conduct during the commission or attempted
commission of any felony. . . . As thus conceived, the rule operated without
separate proof of any culpability with regard to the death.” Model Penal Code
§ 210.2 cmt. 6, at 30-31 (1980). Our statutory scheme does not allow
imposition of guilt regardless of the actor’s mental state, but requires that the
State prove that the defendant possessed the mental state required by the
underlying offense – in this case, recklessness. See RSA 626:8, IV; RSA 630:1-
b, I(b).
The defendant further argues that the indictment and jury instructions
“referred the jury to the wrong conduct and the wrong substantive offense,”
essentially charging him only with promoting or facilitating an armed burglary,
not promoting or facilitating second-degree murder. The indictment alleged
that:
Andre Rivera . . . did commit the crime of [s]econd [d]egree
[m]urder . . . in that Andre Rivera, acting in concert with and
aiding Christopher Gagne, recklessly caused the death of Jason
Violette under circumstances manifesting an extreme indifference
to the value of human life. With the purpose of promoting or
facilitating the burglary of the dwelling of another at night with a
deadly weapon as defined in RSA 635:1, by Christopher Gagne
and/or Jordan Webster, Andre Rivera acted in concert with and
aided Christopher Gagne and/or Jordan Webster in such burglary
by entering Jason Violette’s home with them with the purpose to
commit theft therein. In the commission of such burglary,
Christopher Gagne caused the death of Jason Violette by shooting
him with a gun in the chest.
The jury was instructed in accordance with the indictment.
In response, the State contends that the indictment and the jury
instructions recited the elements of accomplice to second-degree murder, as
the defendant’s facilitation of the armed burglary of Violette’s home satisfied
the State’s burden, articulated in Anthony, to show that the defendant “acted
with the culpable mental state specified in the underlying statute with respect
to the result.” Anthony, 151 N.H. at 495. We agree.
6
As the defendant concedes, there is a statutory presumption that
participation in an armed burglary, a class A felony, is proof that the defendant
acted recklessly with extreme indifference to the value of human life. See RSA
630:1-b. The defendant appears to argue that, at trial, the State wrongly relied
on this presumption to show causation, rather than to show the defendant’s
mental state. The transcript does not support this interpretation. The court
instructed the jury, “You may presume that a person acted recklessly with
extreme indifference to the value of human life required for the crime of
second-degree murder if you find that a person used a deadly weapon while
committing or attempting to commit a class A felony.” (Emphasis added.) This
instruction made clear that the presumption applied to the mens rea, not the
actus reus, of the crime of murder. Further, the State asserts, and we agree,
that the evidence was sufficient for a jury to find beyond a reasonable doubt,
even without the operation of the presumption, that the defendant acted
recklessly with extreme indifference to human life. The defendant entered
Violette’s home at night with two other men, one of whom he knew carried a
loaded gun, with the intention of stealing money and drugs; the men had
agreed that Gagne would hold Violette at gun point while the defendant and
Webster searched the house; the defendant was also aware that Violette might
be armed and had discussed the possibility that Gagne would shoot Violette if
there was a stand-off.
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying the
motion to dismiss and in instructing the jury as it did.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
7