THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Concord District Court
No. 2010-765
PHYLLIS BUATTI
v.
ALICIA PRENTICE
Submitted: May 19, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2011
Phyllis Buatti, by brief, pro se.
Alicia Prentice, by brief, pro se.
LYNN, J. The defendant, Alicia Prentice (tenant), appeals from a
judgment entered by the Concord District Court (DeVries, J.) in favor of the
plaintiff, Phyllis Buatti (landlord), ruling that the landlord is entitled to a writ of
possession. We reverse.
The tenant rents an apartment in Pittsfield from the landlord. On
September 7, 2010, the tenant was served with a demand for rent alleging that
the rent was in arrears in the amount of $1,520.00 for the period from July 18,
2010, to September 11, 2010. On September 12, 2010, the tenant was served
with a “notice to quit” requiring her to deliver up the premises to the landlord
“unless the total rent and $15.00 ($615.00), pursuant to RSA 540[:]9, is
received in accordance with the demand for rent served simultaneously upon
you.” Thereafter, the landlord sought a writ of possession in the district court.
Following a hearing, the district court issued an order stating:
The Court finds that the Tenant is not current on her rent
although the exact amount of arrearage is unclear. Both parties
were unable to establish a specific amount due although a finding
is entered that rent has not been paid as required [and] that
landlord is entitled to possession of the property.
Thereafter, the tenant appealed.
The tenant has not provided us with a transcript of the hearing held
below. In the absence of a transcript of the trial in the district court, we assume
that the evidence was sufficient to support the result reached by the district
court. See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151 N.H. 248, 250 (2004).
Accordingly, we will review the district court’s decision for errors of law only.
See Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H. 396, 396-97 (1997).
The tenant challenges the demand for rent, stating that it sets forth an
“outrageous amount[] owed, that didn’t add up.” She contends that the
demand exceeds the amount of back rent actually owed – indeed, she argues
that she did not owe any back rent at all. The trial court found that the tenant
is not current on her rent, but further found that it was unable to determine
the amount owed. The court ruled that both parties were unable to establish
the specific amount due. In the absence of a transcript, we assume that the
evidence supports the trial court’s finding that the tenant is not current on her
rent. We conclude, however, that the court’s finding that the landlord failed to
prove the amount of the arrearage requires reversal in this case.
The landlord’s eviction action is governed by RSA chapter 540. Because
that chapter establishes rights and benefits that a landlord did not enjoy at
common law, strict compliance with its terms is required. So. Willow Properties
v. Burlington Coat Factory of N.H., 159 N.H. 494, 498 (2009); Lavoie v. Szumiez,
115 N.H. 266, 267 (1975). RSA 540:2, II(a) (2007) authorizes the landlord to
terminate a tenancy by giving the tenant a notice in writing to quit the premises
for “[n]eglect or refusal to pay rent due and in arrears, upon demand.” “Such
demand may be made when the rent is due or while it is in arrears, but the
lessor shall not demand a greater sum than the whole rent in arrears when
demand is made.” RSA 540:8 (2007).
Here, the September 7, 2010 demand for rent provided to us on appeal
alleges that the arrearage was $1,520. The September 12, 2010 notice to quit
provided to us indicates that total rent due was $600. The burden of proving
strict compliance with RSA chapter 540 lay with the landlord. Part of that
2
burden was proving compliance with RSA 540:8; i.e., proving that the landlord
did not demand a greater sum than the whole rent in arrears when demand was
made. Here, the trial court specifically found that neither party was able to prove
the amount of the arrearage – the trial court found simply that an unspecified
amount of rent had not been paid as required. As it follows that the landlord
failed to prove that she did not demand a greater sum than the whole rent in
arrears when demand was made, the trial court erred by awarding judgment to
the landlord.
The same result would have been reached under the common law. In
Nowell v. Wentworth, 58 N.H. 319 (1878), we considered the sufficiency of a
demand for rent, and concluded:
The demand was not sufficient because it was for a greater sum
than was due.
The common law on the subject of tenancies has been adopted
in this state, except as it has been modified by statute. Under it, the
demand must be of the precise amount of rent due; and this
requirement has not been modified or changed by the statute.
Nowell, 58 N.H. at 319 (citations omitted). After Nowell was decided, the
legislature adopted the requirement in what is now RSA 540:8 that the demand
not exceed the amount due; the legislature neither required that the demand be
of the precise amount of rent due, nor prohibited a demand for less than the
amount due. See Laws 1905, 57:1. Thus, while the legislature has modified the
common law requirement that the demand be of the precise amount of rent due,
it remains the law that the demand must not be for a greater sum than was due.
“A tenant possesses a right to a demand for payment of rent and to a
reasonable opportunity to pay . . . .” 49 Am. Jur. 2d Landlord and Tenant § 246
(2006). RSA chapter 540 furthers this purpose of a demand for rent by requiring
that when an eviction notice is based upon nonpayment of rent, after demand,
the notice shall inform the tenant of his or her right to avoid the eviction by
payment of the arrearages plus $15.00 as liquidated damages prior to the
expiration of the notice. See RSA 540:3, IV (2007); RSA 540:9 (2007). If the
demand exceeds the actual arrearage, then the tenant is deprived, at least in
part, of his or her right to avoid the eviction by paying the actual arrearages due.
In this case, because the landlord failed at the hearing to prove the amount of the
actual arrearages due, the only remedy available that will “cure” this deprivation
is to deny the landlord’s petition for a writ of possession.
We note that if the trial court is able to determine by a preponderance of
the evidence that some amount certain was due, even if other amounts claimed
are not proven, it should so find. If that amount equals or exceeds the amount
3
demanded, then the landlord will have demonstrated compliance with RSA
540:8. If the amount proven to have been due was less than the demand,
however, then the issue may arise as to what remedies, if any, other than denial
of the writ of possession, are available to the trial court. A range of other
remedies might be available. For example, it may be that the trial court has
discretion, in an appropriate case, to order that unless the tenant pays to the
landlord or into court within a specified time the amount that the landlord was
able to prove, a writ of possession will be issued. Cf. RSA 540:9. Such a remedy
would arguably restore to the tenant his or her right to a reasonable opportunity
to avoid the eviction by paying the proved arrearages due while protecting a
landlord who may have in good faith served a demand that exceeded the
arrearage that the landlord was able to prove. Under the circumstances of this
case, however, where there is no finding as to the actual arrearage that was due,
we need not decide this question. Here, we conclude that the proper remedy is
reversal.
Finally, we emphasize that it is within the power of the legislature to
determine the proper remedy for a landlord’s failure to prove compliance with
RSA 540:8, should it wish to do so, by enactment of appropriate legislation.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4