THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Employment Security
No. 2011-644
APPEAL OF CASEY B. MOORE
(New Hampshire Department of Employment Security)
Argued: June 7, 2012
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2012
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Concord (Sarah Mattson on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (James S. Culp, attorney, on the
brief and orally), for the New Hampshire Department of Employment Security.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Casey B. Moore, appeals a decision of the
appeal tribunal (tribunal), as affirmed by the appellate board, of the New
Hampshire Department of Employment Security (DES) finding him ineligible for
unemployment benefits because he voluntarily left his job without good cause.
See RSA 282-A:32, I(a) (2010). We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. Moore began working as an
arborist in 2008 for Guillemette Tree Services (GTS), a small business owned
by Ken Guillemette. He worked part-time at a rate of $31.25 per hour,
sometimes getting paid as an employee of GTS and sometimes as an
independent contractor. On Thursday, July 15, Moore and Guillemette had a
dispute about when Moore would be paid for work he had previously
performed. The following Saturday, Moore met with Guillemette to collect his
wages, which Guillemette paid partially by cash and partially by check. He
also issued Moore a written warning for failing to show up at work on the
previous day. Moore, however, claimed he was unaware that he had been
required to work that day.
The next Monday, Moore arrived at Guillemette’s house early in the
morning to begin that day’s work. Before they started work, however, Moore
told Guillemette that he wanted to “finish our conversation from Saturday,”
and stated that he wished to continue working for GTS as a subcontractor for
$51.25 per hour. Guillemette expressed frustration and said, “I’ll have to think
about it.” He then asked Moore, “So what’s going on for today?” Moore
responded that he would work as soon as Guillemette hired him as a
subcontractor. Moore then left, and there was no further contact between
them.
Moore thereafter applied for unemployment benefits, but DES denied his
application based upon its finding that he voluntarily left his job at GTS
without good cause. See RSA 282-A:32, I(a). Moore appealed and the tribunal
held a hearing at which only Moore and his attorney appeared. The tribunal
affirmed the denial of benefits because it also concluded that Moore voluntarily
left his job. Moore then filed a motion to re-open the tribunal hearing, which
was denied. He subsequently appealed to the appellate board, which affirmed
the tribunal’s ruling. The appellate board denied his timely motion for
reconsideration, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, Moore argues that the appeal tribunal erred by failing to
assign the burden of proof to GTS to show that Moore left work voluntarily.
The State, on the other hand, argues that whether a claimant voluntarily quit
or was fired is a factual inquiry to be made in the first instance by DES. Moore
also argues that, whatever the burden of proof, the tribunal erred in concluding
that he left work voluntarily.
Judicial review of DES decisions is governed by RSA 282-A:67 (2010):
The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
appeal tribunal as to the weight of the evidence on questions of
fact. The court shall reverse or modify the decision of the appeal
tribunal, or remand the case for further proceedings, as
determined by the court, only if the substantial rights of the
appellant had been prejudiced because the administrative findings,
inferences, or conclusions are:
(a) In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions;
2
(b) In excess of statutory authority;
(c) Made upon unlawful procedures;
(d) Clearly erroneous in view of the substantial evidence on the
whole record; or
(e) Affected by other error of law.
RSA 282-A:67, V.
We have not previously had occasion to address the issue of which party
bears the burden of proof with regard to eligibility for unemployment
compensation benefits. Our review of the overall statutory scheme as well as
case law from other jurisdictions persuades us that the burden of initially
proving statutory eligibility for benefits rests with the claimant. Cf. Steffen v.
Davison, Copple et al., 814 P.2d 29, 32 (Idaho 1991); Duncan v. Accent
Marketing LLC, 328 S.W.3d 488, 491 (Mo. App. 2010); Blue v. Department of
Labor, 27 A.3d 1096, 1098 (Vt. 2011). Once the claimant has established the
basic elements of employment and termination, however, the burden is on the
employer – or the DES, if it opposes payment of the claim and the employer did
not participate in the proceedings – to establish that a disqualification applies.
Cf. Appeal of John Hancock Distributors, 146 N.H. 124, 127 (2001) (“Where the
applicability of a statutory exception is contested, the burden is on the
purported employer to establish the exception.”). For example, the employer
may show, among other disqualifications, that the individual “left work
voluntarily without good cause in accordance with the rules of the
commissioner,” RSA 282-A:32, I(a); that the individual was “discharged for
misconduct connected with his work,” RSA 282-A:32, I(b); or, that the
individual has “failed, without good cause, either to apply for available, suitable
work when so directed . . . or to accept suitable work when offered him,” RSA
282-A:32, I(d).
Of course, the mere fact that the employer normally bears the burden of
proving that a disqualification applies does not preclude DES from concluding,
based upon all the evidence presented, that the employee is ineligible for
benefits under a statutory disqualification even where the employer does not
appear in the DES proceedings. In other words, such a finding need not derive
solely from evidence proffered by the employer, as a contrary rule would all but
require the State to pay benefits whenever the employer is unavailable or
unwilling to participate in the proceedings.
In this case, Moore’s own testimony established that he voluntarily quit
working for GTS. He admitted, for example, that on the very morning he
alleges that he was fired, Guillemette expected that they would proceed to work
3
as usual. Yet he told Guillemette that he would not work that day unless he
was hired as a subcontractor for $51.25 per hour – $20 more per hour than he
had been paid the previous two years. Moore presented no evidence to support
his claim that Guillemette fired him; to the contrary, Moore admitted that
Guillemette was “frustrated” and “all ticked off” when faced with the choice of
either acceding to Moore’s request for a significant pay raise or losing him as
an employee altogether. And, instead of continuing to work while Guillemette
considered his demand for increased pay, Moore left of his own volition and
thereafter severed his relationship with Guillemette. Therefore, under these
facts, there is ample support for DES’s finding that Moore voluntarily
“terminate[d] the employee-employer relationship.” See N.H. Admin. Rules,
Emp 503.01(a)(1).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4