THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Auctioneers
No. 2010-535
APPEAL OF HAROLD FRENCH
(New Hampshire Board of Auctioneers)
Argued: May 5, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 30, 2011
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Richard J. Lehmann on
the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Anthony I. Blenkinsop, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the New Hampshire
Board of Auctioneers.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Harold French, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Board of Auctioneers (board) sanctioning him with a letter of
reprimand and probation for submitting a fictitious bid at an auction. We
affirm.
French is a licensed auctioneer in New Hampshire and has conducted
auctions since 1976. On December 10, 2009, he attended an auction run by
another auctioneer, Stephen Bennett, in Portsmouth and registered as a bidder
under his own name. The items for sale included a painting owned by William
Noonan. Bennett and Noonan had entered into a contract regarding the
auctioning of the painting and set a reserve price of $10,000. However,
promotional materials for the auction did not state that the painting had a
reserve and Bennett’s website advertised the auction as without reserve.
Immediately prior to the auction, Bennett asked Noonan if he would like to
remove the reserve and Noonan indicated that he did not wish to do so.
Bennett and French discussed Noonan’s painting just before the auction
began. Bennett told French about the reserve and asked him to bid on the
painting if the reserve price was not met during the normal course of bidding.
French agreed to do so. When the bidding price for the painting reached
$9,000, he bid $9,500. He later testified before the board that he did not
intend to actually purchase the painting, but sought only to protect the reserve
and ensure that the painting was sold. There were no further bids on the
painting. Bennett indicated to the gallery that the painting was sold and
attached French’s tag number to the painting. Noonan believed that his
painting had been sold because he thought that he had waived the reserve by
gesturing to Bennett following French’s bid.
Noonan subsequently requested payment from Bennett. However,
Bennett told Noonan that the painting did not sell because the reserve was not
met. Noonan later filed a complaint with the board, which charged both
Bennett and French with misconduct. Following a hearing, the board
concluded that French “willingly submitted a fictitious bid during an auction
and otherwise engaged in collusive bidding in violation of RSA 358-G:2 and, in
turn, RSA 311-B:11, II(c), when he, as detailed in the [b]oard’s findings of fact,
with knowledge of the reserve, submitted a bid on the painting which he knew
was fictitious.” Based upon these violations, the board issued a letter of
reprimand, the board’s lowest form of discipline, and placed French on
probation for one year. French filed a motion for reconsideration, which the
board denied. This appeal followed.
A party appealing a decision of the board has the burden of proof to show
that the decision is clearly unreasonable or unlawful. RSA 541:13 (2007); see
also RSA 311-B:11-a, II (2005) (amended 2010) (directing that all appeals from
a decision of the board “shall be in accordance with RSA 541”). All findings of
the board “upon all questions of fact properly before it shall be deemed to be
prima facie lawful and reasonable.” RSA 541:13. Accordingly, we will not set
aside or vacate a decision of the board unless we are satisfied by a clear
preponderance of the evidence that such decision is unjust or unreasonable.
Id.
Pursuant to RSA 311-B:11, II(c) (2005) (amended 2010), the board has
the authority to discipline a licensed auctioneer for “[a]ny unprofessional
conduct, or dishonorable conduct unworthy of, and affecting the practice of,
the profession.” The board found that French violated this provision because,
2
among other things, he engaged in collusive bidding, contrary to RSA 358-G:2
(2009). French contends that because RSA 311-B:11 (2005) (amended 2010)
does not specifically authorize the board to discipline an auctioneer for a
violation of RSA 358-G:2, the board exceeded its authority. We disagree.
While the legislature provided the board with authority to discipline a
licensed auctioneer for “unprofessional” or “dishonorable” conduct, the
legislature did not further define these terms. Instead, the legislature left it to
the board to decide how to interpret and apply this provision. See RSA 311-B:3
(providing the board with rulemaking authority to determine how disciplinary
actions by the board shall be implemented). In this case, the board properly
looked to another chapter, RSA chapter 358-G (2009), which specifically
pertains to the regulation of auctions, for guidance in interpreting RSA 311-
B:11, II. See Nilsson v. Bierman, 150 N.H. 393, 395 (2003) (“We do not
construe statutes in isolation; instead, we attempt to do so in harmony with
the overall statutory scheme.”).
RSA 358-G:2 prohibits the practice of collusive bidding, which is defined
as:
a practice whereby the auctioneer, the seller, or anyone acting on
behalf of the auctioneer or seller, causes, employs any person to
engage in, or knowingly allows, fictitious bidding during an auction
for the purpose of bidding up the price of any goods in competition
with bona fide bidders to purchase, or for the purpose of
encouraging or enticing bona fide bidders to purchase, or for the
purpose of stimulating competitive bidding to purchase. Collusive
bidding shall include any use of false bidders, cappers, shills, or
by-bidders.
RSA 358-G:1, II. The board concluded that French willingly submitted a
fictitious bid in violation of RSA 358-G:2 because he had no intention of
purchasing the painting. The board then correctly determined that because a
New Hampshire statute prohibits collusive bidding, it is also a form of
“unprofessional” or “dishonorable” conduct pursuant to RSA 311-B:11, II(c).
Accordingly, the board did not exceed its authority by disciplining French for
collusive bidding.
Nonetheless, French contends that even if it was permissible for the
board to rely upon RSA 358-G:2, his conduct did not constitute collusive
bidding. He argues that the board failed to “identify any facts or evidence
supporting a finding that [his] purpose in bidding was ‘bidding up the price of
any goods.’” Contrary to French’s argument, the board specifically found that
French “with knowledge of the reserve, submitted a bid on the painting which
he knew was fictitious.” French also asserts that none of the auction
3
participants could have actually purchased the painting until the reserve was
met, and, accordingly, his bid below the reserve price did not actually cause or
entice anyone to bid. However, nowhere in the statute is there a requirement
that another auction participant actually bid based upon a fictitious bid.
Indeed, the purpose of French’s bid was to entice another bidder to bid above
the reserve, which is exactly the conduct prohibited by the statute.
French also argues that the board improperly sanctioned him based
upon Bennett’s conduct. In support of this argument, he directs us to what he
characterizes as five “findings of fact” made by the board in its denial of
French’s motion for reconsideration. These “findings of fact” established,
among other things, that the board did not find French’s testimony that he
sought only to protect the interests of the painting’s owner to be credible
because: (1) the auction was advertised as a no reserve auction on Bennett’s
web site; (2) French was not identified as bidding for the house prior to the
auction; (3) French and Bennett did not agree upon making a single bid prior
to the auction; (4) the bid was fictitious because Bennett had the authority to
release French from purchasing the painting; and (5) Bennett sought to
deliberately conceal that the painting had not actually been sold.
Even if we were to agree with French that these findings established
misconduct only on the part of Bennett, the board did not sanction him based
solely upon these findings. Rather, in its initial decision and order, the board
concluded that the respondent “willingly submitted a fictitious bid during the
auction” because “with knowledge of the reserve, [he] submitted a bid on the
painting which he knew was fictitious.” The board’s conclusion was supported
by factual findings that the respondent submitted a bid despite never intending
to actually purchase the painting. The board made the five findings, which
French now relies upon, in its order on the motion for reconsideration simply
to explain why it did not find his testimony to be credible. Later in that order,
it again emphasized that it sanctioned French because he engaged in “fictitious
bidding during the auction for the purpose of stimulating competitive bidding
and enticing a bona-fide bidder to place a bid.” Thus, the board correctly
sanctioned French for his own role in deceiving other auction participants.
French also suggests that the board improperly relied upon Stormy
Weathers, Inc. v. F.D.I.C., 834 F. Supp. 519 (D. N.H. 1993), in which the
United States District Court for the District of New Hampshire looked to our
decision in Towle v. Leavitt, 23 N.H. 360 (1851), and determined that a bank’s
use of unidentified agents to bid on its property in order to maximize its return
on the sale constituted collusive bidding. Stormy Weathers, 834 F. Supp. at
523-24. French contends that Stormy Weathers actually supports his
argument that bidding once on behalf of the owner is permissible because he
bid once solely to prevent the property from being sold at an unreasonably low
price.
4
French is correct that Stormy Weathers distinguished between the
practice of entering “successive fictitious bids intended to stimulate others to
bid higher, on the one hand, and one bid entered to prevent ‘sacrifice’ of the
property at an unreasonably low price, on the other.” Id. at 523. However, the
court reasoned that an owner’s interests can be adequately protected by either
offering one bid, setting a reserve price at the outset of the auction, or reserving
the right to reject all bids. Id. at 524. While in the absence of setting a reserve
price a “designated person in the audience may cast one bid” on the owner’s
behalf, the court emphasized that the identity of that person must be clear to
the other participants. Id. Here, not only did the painting’s owner set a reserve
price, which was sufficient to protect the owner from a sale at an
“unreasonably low price,” but French also fictitiously bid without the
knowledge of the owner or any of the other auction participants.
Finally, French attempts to justify his conduct based upon a provision of
the Uniform Commercial Code, RSA 382-A:2-328(4) (2011), which provides
that:
If the auctioneer knowingly receives a bid on the seller’s behalf or
the seller makes or procures such a bid, and notice has not been
given that liberty for such bidding is reserved, the buyer may at his
option avoid the sale or take the goods at the price of the last good
faith bid prior to the completion of the sale.
French reads this provision as permitting an auction participant to bid on the
seller’s behalf. Even if we were to agree with French’s interpretation, this
section is inapplicable here as the seller, Noonan, did not bid on his own
property or procure such a bid. Rather, Bennett, the auctioneer, procured a
bid on Noonan’s behalf, and did so without Noonan’s knowledge or consent and
without notice to other bidders at the auction. Moreover, here there was no
buyer to whom the statutory remedy could apply. Accordingly, we are
unpersuaded by French’s argument.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
5