THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2011-546
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSEPH BAKUNCZYK
Argued: June 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Bernstein, Mello & Chadwick, PLLC, of Nashua (Roger Chadwick and
Adam Bernstein on the brief, and Mr. Chadwick orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. After a jury trial, the defendant, Joseph Bakunczyk, was
convicted of two counts of felonious sexual assault. See RSA 632-A:3, III (2007
& Supp. 2011). On appeal he contends that the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.)
erred in denying his motion to dismiss one of the charges for insufficiency of
the evidence. We affirm.
RSA 632-A:3, III provides that a person is guilty of felonious sexual
assault if such person “[e]ngages in sexual contact with a person other
than his legal spouse who is under 13 years of age.” The defendant
challenges his conviction on the indictment alleging that he “engaged in
sexual contact with [the victim] . . . by touching her genital area under
her clothing . . . .” The defendant does not dispute that the evidence was
sufficient to support a finding that he touched the six-year-old victim’s
upper thigh between her legs in close proximity to her genitals. He
argues, however, that the upper thigh between the legs is not a “sexual
or intimate part” as defined by RSA 632-A:1, IV (Supp. 2011). We
disagree.
RSA 632-A:1, IV defines “sexual contact” as:
the intentional touching whether directly, through
clothing, or otherwise, of the victim’s or actor’s sexual
or intimate parts, including emissions, tongue, anus,
breasts, and buttocks. Sexual contact includes only
that aforementioned conduct which can be reasonably
construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal
or gratification.
Several features of this statute lead us to reject the defendant’s argument.
First, unlike the act proscribed for commission of the more serious offense of
aggravated felonious sexual assault without penetration, see RSA 632-A:2, II
(2007), sexual contact in violation of the felonious sexual assault statute is not
limited to touching of the “genitalia.” Compare RSA 632-A:2, II, with RSA 632-
A:3, III and RSA 632-A:1, IV; see Webster’s Third New International Dictionary
946 (unabridged ed. 2002) (“genitalia” means “the organs of the reproductive
system; esp: the external genital organs”).
Second, although the word “intimate” can have a directly sexual
connotation, see Webster’s, supra at 1184 (definition of “intimate” includes
“engaged in or marked by sexual relations”), construing it in this fashion would
make it duplicative of the word “sexual,” thus suggesting that the legislature
intended no differentiation between “sexual parts” and “intimate parts.” Such
a construction runs afoul of the well-recognized principles of statutory
construction that all words of a statute are to be given effect, that the
legislature is presumed not to use words that are superfluous or redundant,
and that when the legislature uses two different words, it generally means two
different things. Fischer v. Hooper, 143 N.H. 585, 588 (1999); see State v.
Gingras, 162 N.H. 633, 639 (2011). Giving effect to these principles, we
conclude that the legislature intended “intimate parts,” as distinguished from
“sexual parts,” to mean parts of the body that are deeply personal and usually
kept private and discreet. See Webster’s, supra (“intimate” also can mean “of,
relating to, or befitting deeply personal . . . matters or matters usu[ally] kept
private or discreet”).
2
Finally, the statute’s specific listing of parts of the body that are not part
of the reproductive system (e.g., tongue, anus, buttocks) preceded by the word
“including” both confirms that “sexual contact” is not confined to touching of
the genitals and indicates that the proscribed conduct can involve touching of
areas of the body beyond the specific parts enumerated, provided the areas in
question are similar in character to the enumerated ones. See State v. Gibson,
160 N.H. 445, 450 (2010); Conservation Law Found. v. N.H. Wetlands Council,
150 N.H. 1, 5-6 (2003) (“term ‘including’ indicates that the factors listed are not
exhaustive,” but items covered are limited to “those of the same type as the
items specifically listed”).
We, therefore, conclude that an “intimate part” means any part of the
body the touching of which, for sexual arousal or gratification, is offensive to
an objectively reasonable sense of personal dignity, privacy, and modesty.
Applying this standard to the facts of this case, we have no difficulty in
concluding that the victim’s inside upper thigh adjacent to her genitals was an
“intimate part” of her body within the meaning of that term in RSA 632-A:1,
IV. See Com. v. Lavigne, 676 N.E.2d 1170, 1173 (Mass. App. Ct. 1997) (“The
‘inner thigh’ is, under our contemporary views of personal integrity and privacy
– whether clothed or unclothed – a body part that our law views as requiring
protection from improper touching.”); State v. Harstad, 218 P.3d 624, 628-29
(Wash. Ct. App. 2009) (A jury may determine that “parts of the body in close
proximity to the primary erogenous areas” are intimate parts and that the
defendant placing his hand on the victim’s upper inner thigh area constituted
touching an “intimate part.”). Accordingly, there is no basis to upset the jury’s
verdict on the indictment at issue.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
3