THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-370
PROGRESSIVE NORTHERN INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
ARGONAUT INSURANCE COMPANY & a.
Argued: February 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 26, 2011
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg orally), for Progressive Northern
Insurance Company.
Primmer Piper Eggleston & Cramer, of Littleton (Gregory M. Eaton on the
brief and orally), for Argonaut Insurance Company.
Mallory & Friedman, PLLC, of Concord (Mark L. Mallory on the brief and
orally), for Craig Kelly.
A.W. Perkins Law Offices, PLLC, of Concord (Arthur W. Perkins on the
memorandum of law), and Phillips Law Office, PLLC, of Concord (Roger B.
Phillips on the memorandum of law), for Martin and Linda Morasse.
DALIANIS, C.J. Argonaut Insurance Company (Argonaut) appeals a
ruling of the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) denying its motion for summary
judgment and granting summary judgment to Craig Kelly and partial summary
judgment to Progressive Northern Insurance Company (Progressive). We
affirm.
The following facts were either found by the trial court or are undisputed
by the parties. On June 7, 2006, Kelly left his car for service at Tom’s Auto
Sales (Tom’s), which his parents own and operate. Tom’s loaned Kelly a 1991
Honda Accord to use while his car was being serviced. The next day, Kelly was
involved in a car accident with Martin Morasse. Subsequently, Morasse and
his wife brought suit against Kelly alleging negligence and loss of consortium.
At the time of the accident, Kelly had a personal automobile insurance policy
issued by Progressive with liability limits of $100,000 per person; Tom’s had a
garage insurance policy issued by Argonaut with liability insurance limits of
$25,000 and $750,000, depending upon the circumstances.
Argonaut investigated the accident and concluded that Kelly’s use of the
vehicle was personal and that he was not a scheduled driver on the policy.
Accordingly, Argonaut concluded that it would only provide a defense to Kelly
under the $25,000 limit set forth in the policy’s “Additional Garage Limitations”
endorsement (endorsement). Argonaut identified Progressive as the primary
insurer and contended that Progressive was obligated to defend and indemnify
Kelly in the Morasse lawsuit. Progressive then sued Argonaut, asserting that
Argonaut must defend and indemnify Kelly under Argonaut’s $750,000 policy
limit. Both insurers moved for summary judgment. The trial court concluded
that Argonaut was obligated to provide primary liability coverage up to
$750,000 and that Progressive’s policy provides excess coverage. The trial
court also ruled that Progressive must pay its pro rata share of defense costs.
This appeal followed.
In reviewing a trial court’s summary judgment ruling, we consider the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them, in
the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Furbush v. McKittrick, 149
N.H. 426, 429 (2003). Summary judgment may be granted only where no
genuine issue of material fact is present, and the moving party is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law. Id. We review the trial court’s application of the
law to the facts de novo. Id.
“In New Hampshire, an insurer’s obligation to defend its insured is
determined by whether the cause of action against the insured alleges
sufficient facts in the pleadings to bring it within the express terms of the
policy.” Marikar v. Peerless Ins. Co., 151 N.H. 395, 397 (2004) (quotation
omitted). Thus, our analysis begins with an examination of the insurance
policy language. Id. The interpretation of insurance policy language, like any
contract language, is ultimately an issue of law for this court to decide. Id. We
look to the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in context. Id.
2
Policy terms are construed objectively, and when the terms of a policy are clear
and unambiguous, we accord the language its natural and ordinary meaning.
Id. When an insurance policy’s language is ambiguous, however, and one
reasonable interpretation favors coverage, we construe the policy in the
insured’s favor and against the insurer. Id.
Argonaut’s primary argument is that its liability in this case is limited to
the financial responsibility law limit of $25,000, see RSA 259:61 (Supp. 2010),
pursuant to the endorsement. The endorsement states:
The limits for Liability Coverage applicable to “bodily injury”,
“property damage” or “loss” arising out of the use of covered
“autos” owned by you and “furnished or available for regular use”
of owners, partners, officers, employees, spouses, children or
relatives of yours or any other person are reduced to the
compulsory or financial responsibility law limits for any claim
arising from an “accident” which occurs while a covered “auto” is
being driven by any driver who is not listed on this endorsement.
“Furnished or available for regular use” means the right to
frequent use of an “auto” for purposes that are not necessary or
incidental to [“]garage operations[.”] This limitation does not apply
to the persons named in the Schedule of Drivers Furnished
“Autos.”
The parties agree that, pursuant to the endorsement, Argonaut’s
coverage is limited to $25,000 when the covered auto is: (1) owned by the
named insured; (2) used by a driver not listed on the schedule; (3) used “for
purposes that are not necessary or incidental to [‘]garage operations[’]”; and (4)
used by a driver who has the “right to frequent use” of the covered auto.
Because the parties agree on this construction, we will apply it. There is no
dispute as to the first two elements – Kelly was using a covered auto owned by
the named insured and he was not a driver listed on the schedule. The parties
dispute whether the third and fourth elements are also met.
We begin by addressing the third element: whether Kelly was using the
covered auto “for purposes that are not necessary or incidental to [‘]garage
operations.[’]” Argonaut suggests that we should not consider this element
because Progressive did not previously make this argument before the trial
court. We disagree. The issue of the interpretation of Argonaut’s endorsement
is properly preserved for our review and is a question of law, which we review
de novo. Concord Gen. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Green & Co. Bldg. & Dev. Corp., 160
N.H. 690, 693 (2010).
The endorsement requires us to consider whether Kelly was using a
covered vehicle for “purposes that are not necessary or incidental to [‘]garage
operations.[’]” The policy defines “[g]arage operations” as
3
the ownership, maintenance or use of locations for garage
business and that portion of the roads or other access that adjoin
these locations. “Garage operations” includes the ownership,
maintenance or use of the “autos” indicated in Section I of this
Coverage Form as covered “autos”. “Garage operations” also
include all operations necessary or incidental to a garage business.
(Emphasis added.)
Progressive asserts that, based upon the second sentence of this
definition, “garage operations” includes all use of the covered vehicles.
Argonaut appears to argue that the definition should be read as a whole such
that a person’s use of a covered auto must be necessary or incidental to a
garage business. There is support for both interpretations. Compare Spangle
v. Farmers Ins. Exchange, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 763, 769-70 (Ct. App. 2008), with
Lambert v. Northwestern Nat. Ins. Co., 769 P.2d 1152, 1155-56 (Idaho Ct. App.
1989). However, adopting Progressive’s construction would render the
endorsement a nullity, which we will not do. See Weeks v. Co-Operative Ins.
Cos., 149 N.H. 174, 177-78 (2004) (interpreting policy in manner that would
render exclusion meaningless is not reasonable); Int’l Surplus Lines Ins. Co. v.
Mfgs. & Merchants Mut. Ins. Co., 140 N.H. 15, 19 (1995) (language in
insurance policy not presumed to be mere surplusage). Accordingly, we accept
Argonaut’s construction that “garage operations” includes the use of a covered
auto for operations that are necessary or incidental to a garage business. Even
applying this definition, Tom’s provided the accident vehicle, a “covered auto,”
to Kelly as a “loaner” while his car was being repaired at Tom’s; thus, his use
was incidental to Tom’s garage business. See Henry ex rel. Weis v. General
Cas. Co., 593 N.W.2d 913, 919 (Wis. Ct. App. 1999). Therefore, Kelly’s use of
the “loaner” fits the definition of “garage operations.”
Because Kelly’s use of the accident vehicle fell within “garage operations,”
the third element of the endorsement is, therefore, not met. Accordingly, even
if we assume that Kelly met the fourth element of the endorsement, in that he
had a “right to frequent use” of the covered auto, the endorsement would still
not apply because, by definition, Kelly was using the covered auto for garage
operations.
Argonaut asserts that if Kelly did not have the right to frequent use of
Tom’s vehicles and was not using the accident vehicle for a purpose incidental
to Tom’s garage business, then Kelly must have been a customer of Tom’s. The
Argonaut policy contains a separate provision, which limits Argonaut’s liability
when a customer of Tom’s drives a covered auto. The trial court concluded
that the customer provision did not apply to Kelly because “he did not pay and
did not intend to pay for the work” done on his car. We decline to address
Argonaut’s argument that Kelly was a customer of Tom’s because Argonaut did
not challenge the trial court’s ruling in its notice of appeal. See LaMontagne
4
Builders v. Bowman Brook Purchase Group, 150 N.H. 270, 276 (2003)
(arguments not included in notice of appeal are deemed waived).
Argonaut next argues that Argonaut and Progressive should contribute
to any settlement or judgment in favor of the Morasses on a pro rata basis.
Progressive acknowledges that it must provide coverage to Kelly, but maintains
that its coverage is excess over Argonaut’s coverage.
Both the Argonaut and the Progressive policies contain “other insurance”
clauses. The Argonaut clause states that, “[f]or any covered ‘auto’ you own,
this Coverage Form provides primary insurance.” The clause further states,
“When this Coverage Form and any other Coverage Form or policy covers on
the same basis, either excess or primary, we will pay only our share.” The
Progressive clause provides that “any insurance we provide for a . . . vehicle,
other than a covered vehicle . . . will be excess over any other collectible
insurance.”
Therefore, we consider whether Argonaut’s coverage is, as Progressive
asserts, primary coverage, or, as Argonaut maintains, pro rata coverage. The
Argonaut clause provides that its coverage is primary for any auto “you” own.
“[Y]ou” refers to the “Named Insured shown in the Declarations.” “Tom’s Auto
Sales, Inc.” is the “Named Insured” listed in the Declarations. It is undisputed
that Tom’s owned the accident vehicle. Therefore, the Argonaut policy provides
primary coverage.
Argonaut attempts to convert its primary coverage into pro rata coverage
by way of the second sentence of its “other insurance” clause, which states
that, under certain circumstances, Argonaut will pay “only [its] share.”
However, the language upon which Argonaut relies is only triggered when there
exists “any other Coverage form or policy” that covers “on the same basis.”
Here, the basis for Argonaut’s coverage is that the accident vehicle was owned
by its named insured. The basis for Progressive’s coverage is that its insured
was driving the accident vehicle. Thus, the Progressive policy does not cover
on the same basis as the Argonaut policy. Accordingly, the pro rata provision
of Argonaut’s policy is not triggered. Argonaut’s policy affords primary
coverage for the accident and Progressive’s policy affords excess coverage.
Because Argonaut’s pro rata provision does not apply, we need not address
Argonaut’s assertion that its pro rata provision and Progressive’s excess
provision are mutually repugnant and, thus, both insurers must provide
coverage on a pro rata basis.
Argonaut next asserts that the costs of defense in this case should be
shared equally between Argonaut and Progressive. Progressive maintains that
the issue of defense costs was not raised in the notice of appeal and thus was
not properly preserved for our review. Argonaut contends that the issue of
defense costs is a subsidiary question contained in its third issue raised on
appeal that “the trial court err[ed] in finding that the Progressive policy . . . is
5
excess to the Argonaut policy” and that “the ‘other insurance’ clauses of the
policies require Progressive and Argonaut to share any coverage on a pro-rata
basis.” “Appellate questions not presented in a notice of appeal are generally
considered waived by this court.” Lassonde v. Stanton, 157 N.H. 582, 587
(2008).
While the statement of a question need not be worded exactly as it
was in the appeal document, the question presented shall be the
same as the question previously set forth in the appeal document.
The statement of a question presented will be deemed to include
every subsidiary question fairly comprised therein.
Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b). The issue raised in Argonaut’s notice of appeal is limited
to the coverage afforded by each insurer; we do not find that defense costs are
subsumed in that question. Therefore, we decline to address Argonaut’s
argument regarding defense costs. Lassonde, 157 N.H. at 587-88; Sup. Ct. R.
16(3)(b).
Argonaut contends that we may still consider the issue of defense costs
under our plain error analysis. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. Even assuming that the
trial court erroneously allocated defense costs, we do not find the error plain.
For the plain error rule to apply: “(1) there must be an error; (2) the error must
be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must
seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Clark & Lavey Benefits Solutions v. Educ. Dev. Ctr., 157 N.H.
220, 225 (2008) (quotation omitted). “An error is plain if it was or should have
been ‘obvious’ in the sense that the governing law was clearly settled to the
contrary.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Generally, when the law is not clear at the
time of trial, and remains unsettled at the time of appeal, a decision by the trial
court cannot be plain error.” Id. (quotation omitted). As we have never
addressed the precise issue of allocation of defense costs between a primary
insurer and an excess insurer, and the trial court relied upon authority from
other jurisdictions to support its ruling, we cannot say that the law in this area
is settled. Accordingly, we decline to hold that the trial court committed plain
error.
The remaining issues raised by Argonaut in its notice of appeal, but not
briefed, are deemed waived. In re Estate of King, 149 N.H. 226, 230 (2003).
Affirmed.
DUGGAN and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6