THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2011-323
KILNWOOD ON KANASATKA CONDOMINIUM UNIT ASSOCIATION, INC.
v.
PERRY SMITH & a.
Argued: May 3, 2012
Opinion Issued: June 29, 2012
Patrick Wood Law Office, PLLC, of Laconia (Patrick H. Wood on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
McLane, Graf, Raulerson & Middleton, P.A., of Manchester (Steven J.
Dutton and Scott H. Harris on the brief, and Mr. Dutton orally), for the
respondents.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Kilnwood on Kanasatka Condominium Unit
Association, Inc. (Association), appeals the decision of the Superior Court
(Houran, J.) dismissing its petition to change the ownership form of twenty-
nine units in a residential subdivision from condominiums to single-family fee
simple lots. We affirm.
I
The record reflects the following facts. The Association was created by
The Thomson Company, Inc. (Developer), under a document titled “Declaration
of Condominium” (Declaration), in accordance with The Unit Ownership of Real
Property Act, RSA ch. 479-A (2001 & Supp. 2011). In 2010, the Association
members considered reforming the Declaration to convert it from a
condominium association to single-family homes, but they could not reach the
unanimous vote required by the Declaration to do so. Unable to reach an
accommodation with the minority members, Perry Smith, Andy and Jill
Belliveau, and Rob and Candy Baker, the Association petitioned the superior
court to reform the Declaration. The minority members, who are the
respondents in this case, cross-petitioned the court to declare that Kilnwood
remain a condominium association, and moved to dismiss. The trial court
granted the motion to dismiss on the ground that the record did not support
reformation based upon mutual mistake. The Association appeals.
II
The Association argues that the Declaration should be reformed because
it was not intended to create a condominium, but rather a subdivision of
single-family residential lots.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss, our standard
of review is whether the allegations in the petitioner’s pleadings are reasonably
susceptible of a construction that would permit recovery. In the Matter of
Lemieux & Lemieux, 157 N.H. 370, 372 (2008). We assume the petitioner’s
pleadings to be true and construe all reasonable inferences in the light most
favorable to it. Id. at 372-73. We then engage in a threshold inquiry that tests
the facts in the petition against the applicable law, and if the allegations
constitute a basis for legal relief, we must hold that it was improper to grant
the motion to dismiss. Id. at 373.
The petitioner’s burden of proof in a reformation action is a heavy one.
Sommers v. Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 690 (1999). Reformation may be proper
when an instrument fails to express the intention the parties to its making had
on the grounds of either fraud or a mutual mistake of fact. A.J. Cameron Sod
Farms v. Continental Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 275, 282-83 (1997). “Courts are not in
the business of rewriting contracts to bail out parties who have failed to
prudently construct their business transactions.” 28 Williston on Contracts
§ 70:209, at 232 (4th ed. 2003). Courts may grant reformation only when the
evidence is clear and convincing that the written instrument does not express
the true agreement of the parties. Grabowski v. Grabowski, 120 N.H. 745, 747
(1980).
2
Even in the light most favorable to the Association, the record does not
support its contention that the development was not intended to be created as
a condominium association. As the trial court observed, the enabling
document is titled “Declaration of Condominium” and explicitly states that it is
a document governed by RSA ch. 479-A, the predecessor statute to the current
Condominium Act, RSA ch. 356-B (2009 & Supp. 2011). See Laws 1977,
468:1. Moreover, the Association adopted a condominium plan and
condominium bylaws. The Association has alleged no facts in its petition that
would support a finding by clear and convincing evidence that the Developer
was mistaken in creating, and the members mistaken in purchasing,
condominium units.
The fact that a large majority of the Association’s members no longer find
it desirable to own their property as condominiums does not alter the
underlying contractual requirement, contained in the Declaration, that any
amendment to “matters . . . adjudicating the ownership interest in common
areas” must be approved by unanimous vote. The failure of one local realtor to
list the homes for sale in Kilnwood as condominiums is irrelevant to the inquiry
into the intent of the Developer when it created Kilnwood as a condominium
association or when Association members purchased condominium units
within Kilnwood. Cf. Gauthier v. Robinson, 122 N.H. 365, 368 (1982)
(Reciprocal servitudes created by developer are “binding upon purchasers . . .
who had notice of the restrictions when they acquired the land.”). The same is
true for the specific manner in which the town assesses a tax upon the lots.
The petitioner also contends that “enforcing the current legal structure
will impose a hardship” on the Association’s members. We consider this
argument to be insufficiently developed for appellate review. See Sabinson v.
Trustees of Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 459 (2010).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
3