THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Portsmouth District Court
No. 2011-291
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JOSIAH DAVIES
Argued: May 3, 2012
Opinion Issued: August 17, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Josiah Davies, appeals an order of the
Portsmouth District Court (Gardner, J.) partially denying his motion to
withdraw his guilty plea and vacate his conviction. We affirm.
The defendant was charged with two counts of false imprisonment and
one count of simple assault following a single incident of alleged domestic
violence. On June 1, 2009, he appeared pro se for arraignment on the three
class A misdemeanor charges. Prior to his arraignment, he spoke with the
prosecutor regarding a potential plea agreement. During this discussion, the
defendant indicated his intention to plead guilty, and then signed the
acknowledgement and waiver of rights form that the prosecutor provided him.
At this time, he was nineteen years old and had a GED and some technical
college experience. The scheduled arraignment then went forward as a plea
hearing.
The defendant’s hearing followed other plea hearings and commenced
with the trial court reading the complaints to him. The court then asked, “Sir,
do you understand the nature of all three complaints?” to which the defendant
responded, “Yes.” Next, the court advised the defendant of his “absolute right
to be represented by counsel,” but the defendant indicated his intent to
proceed pro se. Then, referencing its earlier colloquies with other defendants,
the court asked, “Would you like me to review [your constitutional rights] again
with you, or are you satisfied that you understand them?” The defendant
replied, “I understand them.”
Next, the court reviewed the acknowledgement and waiver of rights form
with the defendant. The defendant authenticated his signature on the form,
and indicated that he did not have any questions. After confirming that the
defendant was not under the influence of any substances or medication that
might impair his judgment, the court asked, “Sir, what is your plea?” to which
he responded, “Guilty, I guess.”
Following the defendant’s plea, the prosecutor made an offer of proof.
The court did not question the defendant regarding the State’s offer, nor did
the defendant comment on the offer. After hearing the State’s sentencing
recommendation and questioning the defendant regarding his personal
circumstances, the trial court asked, “And you’re satisfied with what you have
worked out?” The defendant replied, “Yup.” The court imposed the negotiated
suspended sentence, which among other things, required the defendant to
complete a batterer’s evaluation within sixty days. The court again asked the
defendant if he had any questions, and the defendant replied, “Nope.”
The defendant failed to complete the batterer’s evaluation within sixty
days. Consequently, in September 2009, the State filed a motion to impose his
suspended sentence. Thereafter, in February 2010, the State and the
defendant’s court-appointed counsel entered into an agreement to stay the
State’s motion, conditioned on his completion of the batterer’s evaluation and
compliance with its recommendations.
In November 2010, after repeatedly failing to comply with the
recommendation that he participate in classes and counseling, the defendant
moved to vacate his guilty pleas. He argued that the false imprisonment
charges were defective because they did not allege that he confined the victims
unlawfully. Additionally, he challenged the sufficiency of the court’s plea
2
colloquy, see Boykin v. Alabama, 395 U.S. 238, 242-43 (1969), arguing that the
trial court failed to specifically review the elements of the simple assault
charge. After a hearing, the trial court vacated his guilty pleas on the two false
imprisonment charges, but found that he knowingly, voluntarily, and
intelligently entered a guilty plea to the simple assault charge.
On appeal, the defendant argues that he did not enter a valid guilty plea
because he was not advised of the essential elements of the simple assault
charge. He contends, therefore, that his plea was not knowing, voluntary, and
intelligent as required by Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution
and the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. See State v.
Thornton, 140 N.H. 532, 536 (1995). We first address the defendant’s claim
under the State Constitution, and rely on federal law only to aid in our
analysis. State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). Allowing withdrawal of a
plea rests within the sound discretion of the trial court, and we will not set
aside its findings absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Thornton,
140 N.H at 537.
It is well established that to be valid, a guilty plea must be knowing,
intelligent, and voluntary. E.g., State v. Dansereau, 157 N.H. 596, 603 (2008);
see Boykin, 395 U.S. at 243. “A guilty plea does not qualify as intelligent
unless the defendant first receives real notice of the true nature of the charge
against him.” State v. Arsenault, 153 N.H. 413, 416 (2006) (quotation omitted);
see Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637, 645 (1976) (noting plea is not
voluntary unless defendant receives “real notice of the true nature of the
charge against him, the first and most universally recognized requirement of
due process” (quotation omitted)). Therefore, prior to pleading guilty, the
defendant must be informed of every essential element of the alleged offense
and the court must determine that the defendant understands the charge.
State v. Kinne, 161 N.H. 41, 47 (2010).
To mount a successful collateral challenge to a guilty plea, the defendant
bears the initial burden and must describe the specific manner in which his
waiver of rights was in fact involuntary or without understanding, and must at
least go forward with evidence sufficient to indicate that his specific claim
presents a genuine issue for adjudication. State v. Offen, 156 N.H. 435, 438
(2007). If the defendant meets his initial burden, and if the record indicates
that the trial court affirmatively inquired into the knowledge and volition of the
defendant’s plea, then the burden remains with the defendant to demonstrate
by clear and convincing evidence that the trial court was wrong and that his
plea was either involuntary or unknowing for the reason he specifically claims.
Id. On the other hand, if there is no record or an inadequate record of the trial
court’s inquiries into the defendant’s volition and knowledge, the burden rests
on the State to respond to the defendant’s claim by demonstrating to a clear
3
and convincing degree that the plea was voluntary or knowing in the respect
specifically challenged. Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 416.
Because the defendant seeks to collaterally attack his plea, he bears the
initial burden. He argues that although the court read the simple assault
complaint at the beginning of the hearing, “it did not explain to [him] what the
complaint required the State to do in order to secure a simple assault
conviction.” In particular, he contends that he “did not understand what
‘unprivileged’ [physical contact] meant, and no one explained to him that it was
an independent element of the offense that the State had to prove in order to
secure a conviction.” The defendant also points out that in his motion to
vacate, he stated that at the time he entered his plea, he was nineteen years
old and had limited exposure to the criminal justice system. Thus, the
defendant carried his initial burden of describing the specific manner in which
his plea was allegedly unknowing.
Next, we look to whether the record complies with Boykin. See Offen,
156 N.H. at 438. Relying on Arsenault, the defendant contends that the record
is insufficient because the trial court failed to ensure that he adequately
understood the nature and elements of the charge. He maintains that reading
the complaint to a pro se defendant does not, by itself, satisfy the due process
requirements of a valid plea.
In Arsenault, the defendant sought to vacate an uncounseled guilty plea
that resulted in a conviction for driving while intoxicated. Arsenault, 153 N.H.
at 414-15. He argued that his guilty plea was not knowing, intelligent, and
voluntary because the elements of the offense were never explained to him. Id.
at 415. Additionally, he alleged that at the time of the plea, he was twenty
years old, had minimum schooling, and had not consulted with counsel prior
to appearing in court. Id. at 417. The trial court denied his motion. Id. at
415.
In reversing the trial court’s decision, we concluded that the defendant
met his initial burden of describing the specific manner in which his waiver
was involuntary or without understanding. Id. at 417. Then, acknowledging
the State’s concession that the trial court did not advise the defendant of the
essential elements of the offense, we noted that the record contained no
indication that the trial court “affirmatively inquired into the knowledge and
volition of the defendant’s plea.” Id. Thus, we concluded, the burden shifted to
the State to demonstrate, to a clear and convincing degree, that the plea was
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary in the respect challenged. Id. at 417-18.
The State advanced three arguments to support its contention that the
defendant’s plea was valid. Id. at 418-19. We rejected the State’s first
argument – that the court may assume that the defendant understands each
4
element of the crime, see Thornton, 140 N.H. at 537 – noting this assumption
is sometimes warranted, but only when the defendant is represented by
counsel. See Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 418. We also rejected the State’s second
argument – that the defendant’s receipt of the complaint prior to the plea
colloquy was sufficiently adequate, in and of itself, to inform him of the
elements and nature of the charged offense. Id. Finally, we rejected the
contention that the defendant’s signing of the acknowledgement and waiver of
rights form was a sufficient indicator of his comprehension of the elements of
the offense. Id. at 419. We concluded, therefore, that the State failed to
demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant’s plea was
knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. Id.
Although the defendant likens the plea colloquy at issue to that in
Arsenault, the two are distinguishable. Unlike in Arsenault, in which the
record contained no discussion about either the elements or the nature of the
offense charged, see id. at 417, here, the record is not similarly deficient. After
reading the three charges to the defendant, the trial court then asked, “Sir, do
you understand the nature of all three complaints?” The defendant responded,
“Yes.” In addition, the State specifically described the basis for the simple
assault charge in its offer of proof, stating that when the alleged victim
attempted to leave, the defendant grabbed her arm to prevent her departure.
We note that the trial court asked for the defendant’s plea before hearing the
State’s offer of proof and that the defendant was not given the opportunity to
respond to the offer. This practice should not be followed. Nonetheless, in this
case, we cannot conclude that the colloquy was fatally flawed as a result.
Here, the trial court did not assume that the defendant understood the
charges, see id.; rather, the defendant affirmatively indicated his
understanding.
The defendant also signed an acknowledgement and waiver of rights
form, wherein he acknowledged that “all elements of the charge(s) . . . have
been explained to me.” In addition, he initialed the section on the form
describing the constitutional rights forfeited by a guilty plea. When given the
opportunity to seek clarification, the defendant indicated that he had no
further questions. Then, at the hearing on his motion, he admitted, “I guess I
thought I did [understand the form] at the time.”
In addition to giving the defendant “real notice of the true nature of the
charge against him,” Henderson, 426 U.S. at 645 (quotation omitted);
Arsenault, 153 N.H. at 416, the trial court affirmatively inquired into his
knowledge and volition. The court reiterated the defendant’s right to be
represented by counsel, it offered him several opportunities to ask questions
and obtain clarification, and it questioned him regarding his age and
educational level. Further, the court asked the defendant whether he needed
further explanation of his constitutional rights, whether he understood the
5
maximum penalties for each offense, whether he had taken any substances
that might impair his judgment, and whether he was satisfied with what he
“worked out” with the State.
Because the record indicates that the trial court affirmatively inquired
into the defendant’s knowledge and the volition of his plea, the burden remains
with the defendant to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that the
trial court was wrong and that his plea was either involuntary or unknowing
for the reason he specifically claims. Kinne, 161 N.H. at 47. While the
defendant notes his age and “limited prior history and experience with the
criminal justice system,” these factors are insufficient to compel a finding that
his plea was unknowingly entered. Thus, based on the record before us, we
cannot conclude that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in
denying the defendant’s motion.
Because the State Constitution provides at least as much protection as
the Federal Constitution under these circumstances, see Henderson, 426 U.S.
at 644-47, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution. See Thornton, 140 N.H. at 536.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6