THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Grafton
No. 2010-042
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
RYAN LAPLACA
Argued: March 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 28, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Constance N. Stratton, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief, and Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, orally), for the State.
David M. Rothstein, deputy chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Ryan LaPlaca, appeals the decision of the
Superior Court (Vaughan, J.) denying his motion for a hearing on the issue of
whether his suspended sentence should be imposed. We reverse in part,
vacate in part and remand.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order or are
undisputed on the record before us. On June 18, 2009, the defendant pled
true to a probation violation. In July, he was sentenced to the New Hampshire
State Prison for two-and-one-half to five years, suspended for five years. As a
condition of his sentence, the defendant agreed to participate in the Grafton
County Drug Court Sentencing Program (Program) and signed a Grafton
County Drug Court Sentencing Program Participation Agreement. See State v.
Belyea, 160 N.H. 298, 301-02 (2010) (providing a brief description of the
Program). An addendum to his sentence provided in part:
The prison sentence is suspended for a period of 5 years. The
suspension is conditioned on good behavior and compliance with
all terms and conditions of the [Program]. Any violation of the
terms and conditions of the [Program] shall result in the imposition
of sanctions, without hearing, by the court as deemed fair and
appropriate, consistent with statutory authority and the
descriptions as outlined in the [Program] policy manual. The
defendant waives any right(s) to any and all hearings. Termination
of participation in the [Program] shall result in the imposition of
the suspended prison sentences and fines without hearing. The
defendant shall affirmatively waive any and all rights to a hearing.
(Emphasis added.) At the sentencing hearing, the defendant was represented
by counsel and advised of his rights.
On December 8, the State moved to impose the defendant’s suspended
sentence, alleging that the defendant had violated the conditions of his
sentence by being terminated from the Program. A hearing on the State’s
motion was scheduled for December 16. On December 15, the defendant filed
an assented-to motion to continue the hearing in order to provide defense
counsel “more time to prepare to represent [the defendant] adequately.” The
trial court denied the motion. Due to a scheduling conflict, the defendant’s
counsel was unable to attend the December 16 hearing. On that day,
substitute counsel filed a motion for a hearing on the State’s motion to impose
the defendant’s suspended sentence. In his motion, the defendant challenged
the basis for his termination from the Program and requested a hearing on the
State’s motion to impose pursuant to his state and federal due process rights.
On December 22, the trial court issued an order denying the defendant’s
motion and granting the State’s motion to impose the suspended sentence.
The court found that “by entering into the [Program], the defendant voluntarily,
knowingly, and intelligently waived any rights to hearings in connection with
sanctions or imposition of [suspended] . . . sentences.” The court further found
that:
2
The defendant was sentenced to the New Hampshire State
Prison for 2 ½ - 5 years, [suspended] . . . for 5 years on the
conditions of good behavior and compliance with the terms and
conditions of the Participation Agreement. The Participation
Agreement required participation in treatment. The defendant has
been terminated from treatment. The [Program] team has
determined that there are no reasonable alternatives to treatment.
Treatment is an integral part of the [Program]. The treatment
requirements are established by the [Program] treatment team.
The defendant, in entering into the [Program], acknowledged the
obligation to participate in treatment. His termination from
treatment renders his further participation in the [Program]
impossible.
The basis for the defendant’s termination from treatment is not apparent from
the record. Nor are the reasons as to why the Program team determined there
were no reasonable alternatives to treatment. This appeal followed.
The defendant argues that the trial court erred in imposing his
suspended sentence without a hearing and that this failure violated his state
and federal constitutional rights to due process. See N.H. CONST. pt. I, art.
15; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV. We first consider the defendant’s argument
under the State Constitution, using federal cases only to aid in our analysis.
State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983). Because this issue poses a
question of constitutional law, we review it de novo. State v. Hall, 154 N.H.
180, 182 (2006).
Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution provides in part: “No subject
shall be . . . deprived of his property, immunities, or privileges, put out of the
protection of the law, exiled or deprived of his life, liberty, or estate, but by the
judgment of his peers, or the law of the land . . . .” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 15.
“Law of the land in this article means due process of law.” State v. Veale, 158
N.H. 632, 636 (quotation omitted), cert. denied, 130 S. Ct. 748 (2009). “The
ultimate standard for judging a due process claim is the notion of fundamental
fairness.” Id. at 637 (quotation omitted). “Fundamental fairness requires that
government conduct conform to the community’s sense of justice, decency and
fair play.” Id. (quotation omitted).
“Our threshold determination in a procedural due process claim is
whether the challenged procedures concern a legally protected interest.” Id.
(quotation omitted). If such an interest is at stake, we then determine whether
the procedure at issue afforded the requisite safeguards. State v. Mwangi, 161
N.H. ___, ___ (decided April 12, 2011). To do this, we balance three factors:
3
First, the private interest that will be affected by the official action;
second, the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest
through the procedures used, and the probable value, if any, of
additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and finally, the
Government’s interest, including the function involved and the
fiscal and administrative burdens that the additional or substitute
procedural requirement would entail.
Veale, 158 N.H. at 639 (quotation omitted); Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319,
335 (1976).
We have recognized that a significant liberty interest exists which is
worthy of due process protection under our State Constitution when the State
seeks to revoke a suspended sentence and incarceration may be the sanction.
See Stapleford v. Perrin, 122 N.H. 1083, 1088 (1982); State v. Flood, 159 N.H.
353, 355 (2009). This is so because the conditional liberty of a defendant
under a suspended sentence “includes many of the core values of unqualified
liberty and its termination inflicts a ‘grievous loss’ on the [defendant] and often
on others.” Morrissey v. Brewer, 408 U.S. 471, 482 (1972) (discussing the
conditional liberty interests of a parolee). Therefore, in a circumstance where
the State seeks to revoke a suspended sentence,
the record must show that the following procedures have been
afforded: (1) written notice of the conduct which triggers the
sought-after incarceration; (2) disclosure to the defendant of the
evidence against him; (3) the opportunity to be heard in person
and to present witnesses and evidence; (4) the right to confront
and cross-examine adverse witnesses; (5) a statement in the record
by the court indicating in substance the evidence relied upon and
the reasons for imposing commitment; and (6) representation by
counsel, to be appointed by the court if the defendant is indigent.
Stapleford, 122 N.H. at 1088; see Stone v. Shea, 113 N.H. 174, 177 (1973).
The State bears the burden of proving that the defendant violated the
conditions of his suspended sentence by a preponderance of the evidence. See
Flood, 159 N.H. at 357. Affording the defendant these procedures ensures
“that the fact-finder will make an accurate determination on the basis of
reliable evidence and verified facts.” Moody v. Cunningham, 127 N.H. 550, 554
(1986); Morrissey, 408 U.S. at 484 (stating that a parole revocation hearing
should be “structured to assure that the finding of a parole violation will be
based on verified facts and that the exercise of discretion will be informed by
an accurate knowledge of the parolee’s behavior”).
Here, the trial court imposed the defendant’s two-and-one-half to five
year suspended sentence without a hearing. Nonetheless, the State argues
4
that the defendant was not deprived of his right to due process “[b]ecause [he]
validly waived the right” to a hearing. The defendant does not dispute that he
understood the waiver provision at the time of his July 2009 sentencing or that
the provision was imposed voluntarily. Rather, the defendant argues that basic
due process protections require that a defendant be afforded a hearing when he
contests the imposition of his suspended sentence and that a defendant cannot
waive the right to a hearing prior to that right being implicated.
It is indisputable that a defendant can waive certain constitutional
rights. For example, “[w]hen a defendant knowingly and intelligently enters a
plea of guilty, he waives a series of constitutional guarantees including the
privilege against compulsory self-incrimination and the rights to confront the
witnesses against him and to obtain a trial by jury.” State v. O’Leary, 128 N.H.
661, 665 (1986). Notably, however, a defendant’s waiver of rights on a guilty
plea is made after those rights have been implicated and with the knowledge
and understanding of the particular allegations against him triggering those
rights. In fact, the crux of a knowing, voluntary, and intelligent guilty plea is
that the defendant understand the essential elements of the crime to which he
is pleading guilty. State v. Thornton, 140 N.H. 532, 537 (1995); see also
Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637, 645 (1976) (stating that the defendant’s
“plea could not be voluntary in the sense that it constituted an intelligent
admission that he committed the offense unless the defendant received real
notice of the true nature of the charge against him, the first and most
universally recognized requirement of due process” (quotation omitted)).
Likewise, a defendant can waive the right to a hearing to contest
allegations that he has violated the terms of his suspended sentence once he is
fully informed of the allegations triggering that right. See, e.g., State v. Rogers,
170 P.3d 881, 886 n.6 (Idaho 2007) (noting that a defendant could waive his
due process rights in the context of a drug court termination); Gosha v. State,
931 N.E.2d 432, 435 n.3 (Ind. Ct. App. 2010) (same); cf. United States v.
LeBlanc, 175 F.3d 511, 515 (7th Cir. 1999) (waiver of the right to a hearing on
revocation of supervised release, made after State petitioned for revocation,
must be knowing and voluntary).
The issue of the validity of a defendant’s waiver of the right to a hearing,
made in advance of knowledge of the factual allegations against him, is an
issue of first impression in New Hampshire. Our review of case law outside of
New Hampshire reveals that there is a paucity of authority on this issue. See
W. Meyer, Nat’l Ass’n of Drug Court Prof’l Nat’l Conf., Constitutional and Other
Legal Issues in Problem-Solving Courts 10 (2009) (noting that “[t]he law in this
area is very much in a state of flux”), available at http://09conferencecd.
nadcp.org/Handouts/A-19%20Constitutional%20Issues%203-15-09%20(2).pdf
(last visited June 1, 2011). We have found the most helpful case on point to be
Staley v. State, 851 So. 2d 805 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2003).
5
In Staley, the defendant “was placed on probation for drug offenses.”
Staley, 851 So. 2d at 806. Shortly thereafter, the defendant “admitted violating
his probation in exchange for a suspended sentence of two years’ imprisonment
with the requirement that he spend two years on drug offender probation,
subject to all the conditions of drug court.” Id. “He signed a ‘drug court
contract,’ which included the special condition that he ‘agree[d] to waive his
rights to an adversarial hearing or trial and w[ould] instead proceed directly to
sentencing upon determination” that he failed to successfully complete the
Drug Court Program. Id. Subsequently, the defendant allegedly violated the
conditions of the Drug Court Program. See id. “An arrest/notice to appear and
probable cause statement was issued . . . but no affidavit of violation of
probation was ever filed.” Id. The Florida circuit court held a hearing, at which
the State presented no proof of violation. Id. The court found that the
defendant “had violated his probation, and sentenced him to two years’
imprisonment.” Id.
On appeal, the Florida District Court of Appeal noted that, as a
probationer, the defendant was entitled to minimal due process, including “a
probation revocation hearing if the probationer disputes the charges.” Id. It
found that the procedure employed in the defendant’s case “failed to satisfy the
statutory and constitutional requirements.” Id. The court disagreed with the
State’s contention “that the procedure was sufficient because [the defendant]
waived his right to an adversarial hearing in his drug court contract,”
reasoning, in part:
[The defendant] simply could not have knowingly and intelligently
waived his right to contest allegations against him without
knowing what those allegations were. A probationer can certainly
waive his rights to due process and to statutory procedures after
they have been implicated. Thus, for instance, once an affidavit of
violation has been filed the probationer may elect not to contest it.
But we do not believe he can prospectively waive these rights.
Id. at 806-07. The court concluded that the defendant’s “purported waiver
. . . would impugn the integrity of the judicial system and undermine public
confidence in the system” as the defendant “would be subject to imprisonment
without a hearing and without a court determination that the evidence against
him was sufficient.” Id. at 808. We share the concerns of the Florida Court of
Appeal.
Here, as in Staley, when the defendant agreed to participate in the
Program, he executed a waiver of “any right(s) to any and all hearings.” This
waiver, however, did not relieve the State of its burden to prove, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that he violated the conditions of his suspended
sentence, because the defendant could not have knowingly and intelligently
6
waived his right to a hearing to contest the allegations of misconduct against
him without full knowledge of what those allegations were. See Thornton, 140
N.H. at 537; Staley, 851 So. 2d at 807; cf. People v. Orozco, 103 Cal. Rptr. 3d
646, 649 (Ct. App. 2010) (“A broad or general waiver of appeal rights ordinarily
includes error occurring before but not after the waiver because the defendant
could not knowingly and intelligently waive the right to appeal any unforeseen
or unknown future error.” (quotation omitted)). It was impossible for the
defendant to have full knowledge of the allegations against him when the facts
giving rise to those allegations had yet to occur. The defendant’s advance
waiver of the right to any and all hearings was akin to pleading guilty to any
future allegations brought against him because the effect of such a waiver
eliminated the obligation of the State to prove the allegations against him, and
deprived him of the opportunity to contest them.
It would subvert the requirements of due process to uphold the
defendant’s prospective waiver of his right to a hearing. Cf. Stapleford, 122
N.H. at 1088-89; Thornton, 140 N.H. at 537. When the defendant faces the
potential imposition of a full sentence of incarceration, an advance waiver of
any and all hearing rights presents a serious risk of an erroneous deprivation
of the defendant’s significant liberty interest. See Veale, 158 N.H. at 639. To
allow this course in the present case would be inconsistent with “the
community’s sense of justice, decency and fair play.” Id. at 637 (quotation
omitted).
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court’s failure to provide the
defendant with a hearing in this case deprived him of his right to due process
under the State Constitution. We therefore reverse the ruling denying the
defendant’s request for a hearing on the State’s motion to impose, vacate the
imposition of the defendant’s suspended sentence and remand for proceedings
consistent with this opinion and with the rights afforded under Stapleford and
its progeny.
Because we conclude that the trial court’s failure to provide the
defendant with a hearing violated the defendant’s rights under the State
Constitution in this case, we need not address the defendant’s argument under
the Federal Constitution.
As a final note, we recognize “that the requirements of due process are
flexible and call for such procedural protections as the particular situation
demands.” Mwangi, 161 N.H. at ___ (quotations omitted). The imposition of a
suspended sentence “is not part of a criminal prosecution and thus the full
panoply of rights due a defendant in such a proceeding does not apply.”
Morrissey, 408 U.S. at 480 (discussing due process requirements applicable to
parole revocations). Nevertheless, the liberty interest involved in this case “is
valuable and its termination calls for some orderly process, however informal.”
7
State v. Almodovar, 158 N.H. 548, 554 (2009) (quotation omitted). It bears
emphasizing, however, that our decision herein is solely limited to whether a
defendant can prospectively waive the right to a hearing in the context of the
imposition of his full suspended sentence of incarceration. We leave for
another day whether such prospective waiver would be valid in the context of
the imposition of lesser sanctions.
Reversed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8