THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2011-281
APPEAL OF HOLLIS EDUCATION ASSOCIATION, NEA-NEW HAMPSHIRE
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: January 18, 2012
Opinion Issued: March 9, 2012
Jackson Lewis LLP, of Portsmouth (Thomas M. Closson on the brief and
orally), for the petitioner.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, staff attorney, NEA-New Hampshire,
by brief and orally, for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, the Hollis Education Association, NEA-New
Hampshire (association), appeals a decision of the public employee labor
relations board (PELRB) sustaining an unfair labor practice complaint filed by
the petitioner, the Hollis School Board (board), and ruling that the speech-
language pathologists and occupational therapists employed by the Hollis
School District (district) are not members of the bargaining unit represented by
the association. We affirm.
The following facts were found by the PELRB or are supported in the
record. In 1976, the association and the district entered into a collective
bargaining agreement (CBA) that contained a recognition clause, defining the
scope of the bargaining unit as “[c]ertified full-time teachers, librarians and
guidance counsellors who actively teach at least 50% of their time in the Hollis
School District and are employed by said district, in accordance with Article I,
Agreement dated October 1, 1975.” That same year, the PELRB certified the
association as the bargaining unit’s exclusive representative. See RSA 273-A:8,
I (Supp. 1975) (amended 1983, 2008, 2011).
Pamela Banks and Robin Fitton were hired by the district as speech-
language pathologists in 1994 and 2002, respectively. Banks and Fitton are
speech-language pathologists licensed through the New Hampshire Office of
Licensed Allied Health Professionals (NH Allied Health Professionals) and are
certified by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. Fitton
testified that, when she was hired, she was told that her salary had to conform
to the salary schedule in the CBA.
William Olszewski was hired by the district in 2003 as an occupational
therapist. He is an occupational therapist licensed through NH Allied Health
Professionals and certified by the National Board for Certification in
Occupational Therapy. When Olszewski was hired, the superintendent told
him that his position was covered by the CBA. He was also told that he could
not negotiate a higher salary because the district had to comply with the salary
schedule in the CBA.
Banks, Fitton and Olszewski each signed a “New Hampshire Teacher
Contract” every year of their employment through 2009. These contracts were
the same as those received by members of the bargaining unit. They were also
required to provide written receipts acknowledging that they received copies of
every new CBA. In addition, for the years 2005, 2007 and 2009, all three
individuals were included in a salary schedule given to the association by the
board during collective bargaining negotiations; the schedule listed employees
presumed to be in the bargaining unit.
In April 2010, the superintendent notified Fitton that, “due [to] a
reduction in force caused by decreasing enrollments and accompanying
budgetary reductions,” her employment with the district would be terminated
effective June 30, 2010. Shortly thereafter, the association filed a grievance
with the superintendent claiming that Fitton’s termination violated the CBA.
The superintendent denied the grievance, ruling that Fitton’s termination did
not violate the CBA because speech-language pathologists are not members of
the CBA as stipulated in the recognition clause.
In July, Banks and Olszewski received employment agreement letters for
the 2010-2011 school year that differed from the annual “New Hampshire
Teacher Contract.” Subsequently, the association, believing that Banks and
Olszewski were members of the collective bargaining unit, filed a grievance
claiming that speech-language pathologists and occupational therapists are
2
entitled to the same individual contracts as other members of the bargaining
unit. It then made a demand for arbitration pursuant to the terms of the CBA.
In August, the board filed an unfair labor practice complaint with the
PELRB, claiming that the association could not file a grievance or request
arbitration on behalf of speech-language pathologists because they are not
members of the applicable bargaining unit. The board alleged that the
association’s demand for arbitration violated RSA 273-A:5, II(f) and (g) (2010),
and sought to have the PELRB order the association to cease and desist its
demand. On October 5, the PELRB held a hearing on the board’s complaint.
At the hearing, the parties agreed that in connection with the board’s
complaint, the PELRB could address the association’s grievance and demand
for arbitration on behalf of the speech-language pathologists and the
occupational therapists.
Following the hearing, the PELRB ruled that speech-language
pathologists and occupational therapists are not members of the 1976
bargaining unit certification. While it found that, “for a number of years prior
to 2010,” the association and the district treated speech-language pathologists
and occupational therapists “just like bargaining unit positions, and in
particular just like the certified teacher position,” it concluded that “[t]he
disputed positions are not part of the PELRB bargaining unit certification”
because they “are not listed in the [1976] certified bargaining unit” and are not
included within the term “certified teacher.” As a result, it found that it could
not “recognize any right of the Association to proceed to arbitration” on behalf
of those positions. The association’s motion for rehearing was denied, and this
appeal followed.
Our standard of review in this case is governed by RSA 541:13 (2007).
Appeal of Londonderry School Dist., 142 N.H. 677, 680 (1998); RSA 273-A:14
(2010). To succeed on appeal, the association must show that the PELRB’s
decision is unlawful, or clearly unjust or unreasonable. Appeal of Town of
Deerfield, 162 N.H. 601, 602 (2011); RSA 541:13. The PELRB’s findings of fact
are presumptively lawful and reasonable and will not be disturbed if they are
supported by the record. Appeal of Town of Deerfield, 162 N.H. at 602; see
RSA 541:13.
The PELRB has the exclusive authority to certify a bargaining unit.
Appeal of Somersworth School Dist., 142 N.H. 837, 840 (1998); RSA 273-A:8, I.
However, it must do so according to the dictates of the statute granting that
authority. Appeal of Somersworth School Dist., 142 N.H. at 840. RSA 273-A:8,
I, provides that “[t]he board . . . shall determine the appropriate bargaining unit
and shall certify the exclusive representative thereof when petitioned to do so
under RSA 273-A:10.” “The composition of a bargaining unit is limited by law
to those positions identified in the recognition clause at the time the original
3
unit is certified by the PELRB and by any subsequent modifications approved
by the PELRB.” Appeal of Londonderry School Dist., 142 N.H. at 680.
Here, although the CBA in effect in 2010 contains a slightly modified
version of the recognition clause, no changes to the composition of the
bargaining unit have been approved by the PELRB since 1976. See RSA
273-A:8, I, :10 (Supp. 2011). Thus, we will examine the relevant language of
the 1976 recognition clause to determine whether the bargaining unit certified
by the PELRB includes speech-language pathologists and occupational
therapists. See Appeal of Somersworth School Dist., 142 N.H. at 840.
Interpretation of the recognition clause is a question of law, which we
review de novo. See Appeal of Londonderry School Dist., 142 N.H. at 680. The
1976 recognition clause defines members of the bargaining unit as “[c]ertified
full-time teachers, librarians and guidance counsellors who actively teach at
least 50% of their time in the Hollis School District and are employed by said
district.” The recognition clause does not specifically refer to speech-language
pathologists or occupational therapists. Nonetheless, the association argues
that the term “certified teacher” is “broad enough to include speech-
pathologists and occupational therapists.” It maintains that “[s]ince both job
titles teach and are certified, they should fall within . . . the recognition clause.”
We disagree.
Since there is no dispute that the employees in this case were “full-time,”
we will look to the plain meaning of the term “certified teachers.” The common
meaning of “certified” is “endorsed authoritatively : guaranteed or attested as to
quality, qualifications, fitness, or validity.” Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 367 (unabridged ed. 2002). “Teacher” has the following relevant
meaning: “one that teaches or instructs . . .; esp : one whose occupation is to
instruct.” Id. at 2346. Thus, a “certified teacher” refers to an employee whose
occupation is to teach and who has the necessary qualifications to do so, i.e.,
an individual with a certification to teach. By its plain language, the term
“certified full-time teachers” does not include speech-language pathologists or
occupational therapists.
There is no dispute that Banks, Fitton and Olszewski are both licensed
and certified in their respective fields, see RSA 326-C:5 (2011) (statute
governing licensing of occupational therapists); RSA 326-F:3 (2011) (statute
governing licensing of speech-language pathologists), and that speech-language
pathologists may be certified by the New Hampshire Department of Education,
see RSA 189:14-e (2008) (statute governing certification of speech-language
specialists who “provide speech-language pathology services for schools”); N.H.
Admin. Rules, Ed 507.23 (Board of Education certification standards for
speech-language specialists). Furthermore, there is no dispute that these
individuals were treated, and required to perform many of the same duties, as
4
“certified full-time teachers.” However, these facts do not render them
“certified full-time teachers” under the 1976 recognition clause. See N.H.
Admin. Rules, Ed 507.11 (Board of Education certification standards for
elementary education teachers).
The association asserts that “[t]he PELRB erred in tying certification and
bargaining unit standards to 1976 requirements” because “the teaching
profession – and State Board of Education certifications – have changed
markedly in the last 45 years.” While the teaching profession may have
changed since 1976, the PELRB must follow the necessary statutory
procedures for determining the composition of a bargaining unit. As laid out
above, pursuant to RSA 273-A:8, I, “[t]he board . . . shall determine the
appropriate bargaining unit and shall certify the exclusive representative
thereof when petitioned to do so under RSA 273-A:10.” (Emphasis added.)
The association further contends that the PELRB should have considered
parol evidence, specifically, “the long history of the inclusion of [speech-
language pathologist and occupational therapist] employees in the bargaining
unit.” A review of the PELRB’s decision reveals that it, in fact, considered this
history but nonetheless was not persuaded that the term “certified full-time
teachers” included these employees. As discussed above, we find no error in
this decision.
Moreover, “[s]imilarity in compensation between employees holding
different positions is not dispositive of an employee’s inclusion in a bargaining
unit. Otherwise, an employer could never provide similar compensation for
union and non-union positions without fear of enlarging the bargaining unit.”
Appeal of Londonderry School Dist., 142 N.H. at 682 (citations omitted). An
employer cannot define the scope of the bargaining unit by compensating one
position at the same rate as a position within a bargaining unit. Id. Likewise,
neither an employer nor a union can “avoid the need to satisfy the statutory
requisites for adding [a] position to the bargaining unit,” id., by simply treating
certain positions as though they were included within the bargaining unit. See
RSA 273-A:8, I.
Finally, we reject the association’s suggestion that the PELRB should
have acted “equitably in reaching a decision” in this case. As we stated in
Appeal of the Somersworth School District, “[t]he PELRB’s broad jurisdiction
. . . applies only to those matters specifically encompassed within” RSA chapter
273-A and “the statute does not give it the ability to grant all equitable
remedies.” Appeal of Somersworth School Dist., 142 N.H. at 841. While the
PELRB might have included these positions in the bargaining unit had a
petition to modify been filed, the legislature did not give it the authority to
modify the bargaining unit in the absence of such a request. See RSA 273-A:8,
I; cf. Appeal of Somersworth School Dist., 142 N.H. at 841 (finding “that it was
5
error for the PELRB to use an equitable remedy to include [an individual] in a
collective bargaining agreement which by its terms did not apply to him”).
In light of our ruling, we need not address the association’s remaining
arguments as they are premised upon inclusion of speech-language
pathologists and occupational therapists in the bargaining unit.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6