THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2009-872
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LUIS LOPEZ
Argued: February 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: June 15, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (Brown, J.), the defendant,
Luis Lopez, was convicted of one count of felony endangering the welfare of a
child, see RSA 639:3, III (2007), and seven misdemeanor counts of endangering
the welfare of a child, see RSA 639:3, I (2007). On appeal, he argues that the
trial court erred in finding sufficient evidence to convict him on the felony
count. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. Between December 2006
and September 2007, the defendant lived with the victim, L.P., her mother,
H.W., and H.W.’s two other young children. L.P. turned eleven that summer.
During that time, L.P. enjoyed watching the television show “America’s Next
Top Model,” which she described as being about “regular girls that want to be
models.” She wanted to be a model and would pretend to be one by “putting on
appropriate clothes, and looking at [herself] in the mirror.”
In June 2007, the defendant began using his cell phone to take
photographs of L.P. Some of the photographs were benign, showing, for
instance, L.P. with her cat or her siblings. Others, however, were of L.P.
wearing her mother’s clothing and lingerie and some were sexually suggestive.
The defendant told L.P. that if she told anyone about the photographs, or if
anyone found out about them, she would be taken from her family.
On one occasion, the defendant asked L.P. to take off all of her clothes
for a picture. L.P. believed that the defendant made this request in her
bedroom, but she could not remember. When L.P. refused, the defendant went
downstairs and smoked a cigarette.
On September 20, 2007, H.W. discovered some of the photographs on the
defendant’s cell phone and contacted the police. The police recovered 155
images from the defendant’s phone and its memory cards, of which 116 were of
L.P. At trial, Detective Mark Dumas of the Concord Police Department testified
that out of those 116 photographs, “a good percentage . . . were objectionable.”
The defendant was tried on charges including one count of felony
endangering the welfare of a child, which alleged that he solicited L.P. “to take
off all her clothes for the purpose of creating a visual representation to a
pornographic picture.” At the close of the State’s case, he moved to dismiss the
felony charge for insufficient evidence. The trial court denied the motion and
the jury returned a guilty verdict on that charge.
On appeal, the defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence to
find him guilty of felony endangering the welfare of a child. Our standard for
review of the trial court’s denial of a defendant’s motion to dismiss based upon
the sufficiency of the evidence is well established.
To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable
doubt. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable
to the State and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation.
State v. Fandozzi, 159 N.H. 773, 782 (2010) (quotation omitted).
2
The defendant was charged with the statutory variant of child
endangerment set forth in RSA 639:3, III, which provides in part:
[T]he solicitation by any person of a child under the age of 16 to
engage in sexual activity as defined by RSA 649-A:2, III for the
purpose of creating a visual representation as defined in RSA 649-
A:2, IV, or to engage in sexual penetration as defined by RSA 632-
A:1, V, constitutes endangering the welfare of such child.
At the time the charged act was committed, RSA 649-A:2, III defined “[s]exual
activity” as:
human masturbation, the touching of the actor’s or other person’s
sexual organs in the context of a sexual relationship, sexual
intercourse actual or simulated, normal or perverted, whether
alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals, any lewd exhibitions of the genitals,
flagellation or torture.
RSA 649-A:2, III (2007) (amended 2008). The specific sexual activity at issue
here is a lewd exhibition of the genitals.
The legislature has not defined what constitutes a lewd exhibition of the
genitals, nor have we directly addressed the issue. We find instructive the
factors articulated in United States v. Dost, 636 F. Supp. 828 (S.D. Cal. 1986),
aff’d, 813 F.2d 1231 (9th Cir. 1987), and aff’d sub nom. United States v.
Wiegand, 812 F.3d 1239 (9th Cir. 1987), to “determin[e] whether a visual
depiction of a minor constitutes a lascivious exhibition of the genitals or pubic
area.” Dost, 636 F. Supp. at 832 (quotation omitted). We discern no
meaningful distinction between the terms “lewd” and “lascivious.” See United
States v. Wiegand, 812 F.2d 1239, 1243 (9th Cir. 1987) (noting that
“‘[l]ascivious’ is no different in its meaning than ‘lewd’”). We also accept the
defendant’s contention that a visual depiction of mere nudity of a child,
without more, is not a lewd exhibition of the genitals. See Tovar v. State, 165
S.W.3d 785, 790, 791 (Tex. App. 2005) (noting that offenses “requir[ing]
evidence of lewd exhibition of genitals by [a] child” do “not criminalize mere
nudity of minors”).
Under the Dost analysis for determining the lewdness of a visual
depiction, “the trier of fact should look to the following factors, among any
others that may be relevant in the particular case,” Dost, 636 F. Supp. at 832:
1) whether the focal point of the visual depiction is on the
child’s genitalia or pubic area;
3
2) whether the setting of the visual depiction is sexually
suggestive, i.e., in a place or pose generally associated with sexual
activity;
3) whether the child is depicted in an unnatural pose, or in
inappropriate attire, considering the age of the child;
4) whether the child is fully or partially clothed, or nude;
5) whether the visual depiction suggests sexual coyness or a
willingness to engage in sexual activity;
6) whether the visual depiction is intended or designed to elicit
a sexual response in the viewer.
Id. Not all factors must be present to reach a determination that a visual
depiction is a lewd exhibition of the genitals. See id.
The defendant argues that the evidence at trial was insufficient to prove
that the defendant solicited from L.P. a lewd exhibition of the genitals.
He contends that his “request did not mention L.P.’s genitals, anything specific
about the proposed picture, or any direction as to posing other than a request
that she be unclothed.” He asserts that the evidence proved only that he
“requested a naked picture of L.P.” Notably, he “does not dispute the
sufficiency of the evidence of his purpose to create a visual representation of a
lewd exhibition of L.P.’s genitals.”
The State argues that the defendant’s request for a nude picture must be
viewed “in the context of all his behavior toward [L.P.] and the photographs he
had actually taken,” and that taken in that light, “the evidence was then
sufficient to show that he was soliciting her to engage in a lewd exhibition of
her genitals.” We agree that “viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable
inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State,” Fandozzi, 159 N.H.
at 782 (quotation omitted), a rational trier of fact could have concluded that the
defendant solicited L.P. for a photograph that would constitute a lewd
exhibition of the genitals under the Dost analysis.
L.P. testified about pictures taken of her by the defendant that she was
not, in the prosecutor’s words, “okay with.” She stated these pictures were
taken in her bedroom or her mother’s bedroom. She testified that the
defendant would bring her articles of either her or her mother’s clothing and
tell her to put them on. He would also “tell [her] to do poses.” The jury saw at
least seven photographs, connected to the seven misdemeanor counts, that
showed L.P. in sexually suggestive poses and/or settings, wearing sexually
suggestive clothing. Some of the photographs cropped out L.P.’s head, while
some focused on her breasts or buttocks. The jury could reasonably conclude
4
that these visual depictions were “intended or designed to elicit a sexual
response in the viewer.” Dost, 636 F. Supp. at 832. L.P.’s testimony affirmed
that on one occasion, the defendant asked her to take all her clothes off for a
picture. In the context of such evidence, a reasonable jury could infer that the
defendant’s solicitation of a nude photograph was a request for a picture
similar to the seven photographs underlying the misdemeanor charges, and
thus was a request for a picture that would satisfy most, if not all, of the Dost
factors.
The defendant argues, however, that the photographs in evidence and
the defendant’s other actions cannot be used to inform his request for a nude
picture because L.P.’s testimony did not establish the order in which the events
occurred. He argues:
Without evidence that [his] other actions took place before his
request, and therefore contributed to its meaning, these other acts
do not supply a context sufficient to prove that, in asking her to
remove her clothes for a picture, he communicated a request that
she submit to a photograph amounting to a lewd exhibition of her
genitals.
We disagree.
First, we disagree that there was no evidence of an order of events. The
evidence established that the solicitation took place between June and
September 2007. Detective Dumas testified that the recovered images did not
contain “access data,” so he could not determine the specific dates on which
they were taken or deleted. Nevertheless, he stated that “within th[e] 116
[photographs of L.P.], there appeared to be clearly somewhere in a series of
photographs, and then there also appeared to be, what I would describe, a
progression of photographs. They were readily apparent when I looked at that
116.” He further testified:
So there was a range of photos I was looking at. That range went
from artistic-type photographs, like you’d expect to see a child in a
catalog with maybe colorful clothes in a funny hat, posing. They
were very benign in nature. And then there were ones that,
appeared to me, very sexually oriented in nature.
In addition, the prosecutor asked L.P. whether “there [were] ever any pictures
that [the defendant] took that were just kind of silly, fun pictures,” to which
L.P. responded, “When he first got the phone.”
“The trier of fact may draw reasonable inferences from facts proved and
also inferences from facts found as a result of other inferences, provided they
can be reasonably drawn therefrom.” State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 455
5
(2009). A reasonable jury could infer from Dumas’ and L.P.’s testimony that
there was a certain order to the photographs taken, progressing from benign to
sexually suggestive. Although the evidence did not pinpoint when the
solicitation of a nude photograph occurred in relation to other acts of the
defendant or the suggestive pictures actually taken, the jury could draw an
inference as to when, in the progression described by Dumas and L.P., and in
the context of all of the photographs taken, such a request likely took place.
An inference that the request would have followed at least some of the sexually
suggestive clothed photographs would not be unreasonable.
Furthermore, we cannot say that the jury could not interpret the
defendant’s request for a nude photograph in light of the suggestive
photographs of L.P. clothed, as well as his other acts, even if they took place
after the request. The defendant’s citation of a case for the proposition that
prior acts can inform a request, see Foster v. Com., 369 S.E.2d 688, 697 (Va.
Ct. App. 1988), does not establish the converse proposition that subsequent
acts may not supply meaning to a solicitation. We note that in People v.
Braddock, 809 N.E.2d 712, 720 (Ill. App. Ct. 2004), the court found that the
meaning of words constituting a solicitation for prostitution was “reinforce[d]”
by words the defendant spoke after the solicitation. In addition, in the context
of criminal threatening, some courts have ruled that subsequent acts can give
meaning to ambiguous words alleged to constitute the offense. Thus, for
instance, in People v. Martinez, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 303 (Ct. App. 1997), the court
stated that the “[d]efendant’s activities after the threat give meaning to the
words and imply that he meant serious business when he made the threat.”
Martinez, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 309; see People v. Mendoza, 69 Cal. Rptr. 2d 728,
732, 733 (Ct. App. 1997), superseded by statute on other grounds, as stated in
People v. Franz, 106 Cal. Rptr. 2d 773 (Ct. App. 2001). We conclude that the
jury was entitled to consider all of the surrounding circumstances to determine
the meaning of the defendant’s request for a nude photograph of L.P.,
particularly when that request occurred some time during a continuing series
of events producing 116 photographs of L.P., many of which were sexually
suggestive, over a relatively short period of time.
The defendant next argues that the evidence was insufficient to prove
that he solicited L.P. at all. He cites Petition of State of N.H. (State v. Laporte),
157 N.H. 229 (2008), in which we stated that “[t]he plain meaning of
solicitation is ‘to entice’ or ‘to strongly urge.’” Laporte, 157 N.H. at 232
(quoting Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 2169 (unabridged ed.
2002)). He then argues that “[t]hese words connote a determined entreaty
through methods beyond simply making a request. Conversely, solicit does not
mean ‘to ask.’” The defendant concedes that he may not have preserved this
argument below, but asserts that “the trial court committed plain error in
finding sufficient evidence.”
6
Our plain error rule requires: “(1) there must be an error; (2) the error
must be plain; (3) the error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error
must seriously affect the fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” State v. MacInnes, 151 N.H. 732, 737 (2005). We find no error.
We need not decide whether, as the State urges, solicit does “mean[] to
ask,” People v. Pfaffle, 632 N.W.2d 162, 171 (Mich. Ct. App. 2001), because we
agree with the State’s alternative argument that the evidence in this case was
sufficient to prove solicitation under the defendant’s own definition of “to
entice.” The State argues:
[T]he defendant’s behavior here easily met the definition of “to
entice.” . . . [T]he evidence of the defendant’s request . . . [should
be viewed] in the entire context of the case, where the defendant
knew of [L.P.’s] interest in modeling and took advantage of that
interest by causing [L.P.] to pose for 116 other photographs,
including many that were inoffensive, but at least seven of which
were sexually suggestive. The jury could infer that he was building
up to the request at issue by progressively encouraging [L.P.’s]
ambition.
(Citations omitted.) We agree that in light of all the evidence, a rational jury
could find that the defendant enticed L.P. by playing to her ambition to be a
model and that “his request that she pose nude was the culmination of a
sequence intended to gain her trust and confidence so that she would pose for
pornography.”
We conclude that the evidence was sufficient to prove both that the
defendant engaged in “solicitation” within the meaning of RSA 639:3, III and
that the object of the solicitation was a “lewd exhibition[] of the genitals” within
the meaning of RSA 649-A:2, III.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7