THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Tax and Land Appeals
No. 2011-368
APPEAL OF LIBERTY ASSEMBLY OF GOD
(New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals)
Argued: February 9, 2012
Opinion Issued: May 22, 2012
Lisa A. Biron, of Manchester, by brief and orally, and Alliance Defense
Fund, of Leawood, Kansas (Joel Oster on the brief), for the petitioner.
City Solicitor’s Office, of Concord (James Kennedy and Danielle L. Pacik
on the brief, and Ms. Pacik orally), for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Liberty Assembly of God (Assembly), appeals
the decision of the New Hampshire Board of Tax and Land Appeals (BTLA)
upholding a 2008 decision of the respondent, City of Concord (City), denying
Assembly’s request for a religious use tax exemption. We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. Assembly is a “regularly
recognized and constituted” religious denomination, incorporated in the State
of New Hampshire. RSA 72:23, III (2003). Assembly owns 26.13 acres of land
in Concord; approximately twenty acres are in “current use.” See RSA ch. 79-A
(2003 & Supp. 2011). The undeveloped land is used primarily for agricultural
or forestry purposes, although there is a “prayer trail” around its perimeter.
The developed portion of Assembly’s property includes a main building, a
freestanding barn now used for storage, and the parsonage and associated
garage.
From 1994, when Assembly acquired its property, until 2008, the City
granted Assembly a religious use tax exemption on all of its property. However,
in 2008, the City granted Assembly an exemption on only forty percent of its
property, concluding that sixty percent of the property was not used and
occupied for religious training or other religious purposes, and was therefore
taxable. The City subsequently revised its determination and exempted sixty
percent of the property.
The City exempted from taxation the storage barn, parsonage and
garage, and one of the six acres of land not in current use “appertaining to
them.” RSA 72:23, III. The remaining five acres not in current use were
allocated as taxable or exempt at the same proportion as the taxable and
exempt square footage of the main building; 2.2 acres were assessed as a
primary commercial site supporting the main building and 2.8 acres were
assessed as supplemental commercial land. The City arrived at the sixty
percent exempt/forty percent taxable ratio based upon the use of various areas
of the combined square footage of both floors of the main building.
The City concluded that of the 13,988 square feet of the first floor,
12,516 square feet were exempt as they were used directly for religious
purposes; this included the sanctuary, church offices, child care space, prayer
room, recreation room, kitchen and fellowship hall, library and record room,
classrooms and computer lab, food pantry, storage rooms, and restrooms. The
remaining 1,472 square feet on the first floor, consisting of an apartment and
an additional room available for missionaries on furlough, were considered
taxable under the City’s assessment. These rooms were not used by
furloughed missionaries at any time during 2008, and only three or four times
during the preceding four-year period.
The City considered the entire second floor of the main building (6,916
square feet) taxable as not being used for religious purposes. This space
consisted of five general areas: (1) an apartment and two storage rooms
occupied or utilized by a part-time caretaker and his family; (2) a room
occupied by the grandson of Assembly’s then-secretary/treasurer; (3) vacant
apartments; (4) “dorm” rooms minimally used for storage; and (5) a men’s
restroom, auxiliary to the restrooms on the first floor. Following appeal, the
BTLA upheld the City’s apportionment for tax year 2008.
2
Our review of BTLA decisions is well established:
The burden of proof shall be upon the party seeking to set aside
any order or decision of the BTLA to show that the same is clearly
unreasonable or unlawful, and all findings of the BTLA upon all
questions of fact properly before it shall be deemed to be prima
facie lawful and reasonable; and the order or decision appealed
from shall not be set aside or vacated except for errors of law,
unless the court is satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the
evidence before it, that such order is unjust or unreasonable.
Appeal of City of Concord, 161 N.H. 169, 171 (2010) (quotation and brackets
omitted); see RSA 541:13 (2007). “Although we review the [BTLA’s] findings of
fact pursuant to this deferential standard, we review its statutory
interpretation de novo.” Appeal of Gamas, 158 N.H. 646, 648 (2009).
Assembly asserts that the BTLA’s ruling was erroneous on three
interrelated grounds: (1) the City and the BTLA misinterpreted RSA 72:23, III
because it should be read as fully exempting houses of worship from taxation;
(2) the City’s inquiries into the religious uses and purposes of each room within
the church building unconstitutionally “entangled” the government with
religion; and (3) even if the statute and constitution permit parsing taxable
from exempt space within a house of worship, all of Assembly’s space should
be exempt as serving a religious purpose. We address each argument in turn.
I. Whether RSA 72:23, III Fully Exempts Houses of Worship from Taxation
The statutory provision setting forth the tax exemption at issue states in
pertinent part:
The following real estate and personal property shall, unless
otherwise provided by statute, be exempt from taxation: . . .
. . .
Houses of public worship, parish houses, church parsonages
occupied by their pastors, convents, monasteries, buildings and
the lands appertaining to them owned, used and occupied directly
for religious training or for other religious purposes by any
regularly recognized and constituted denomination, creed or sect,
organized, incorporated or legally doing business in this state and
the personal property used by them for the purposes for which
they are established.
RSA 72:23, III.
3
Assembly argues that, pursuant to the “last antecedent rule” of statutory
construction, see Gen. Insulation Co. v. Eckman Constr., 159 N.H. 601, 610
(2010), courts should construe statutes so that “a modifying clause is confined
to the last antecedent unless there is something in the subject matter or
dominant purpose which requires a different interpretation.” Mt. Valley Mall
Assocs. v. Municipality of Conway, 144 N.H. 642, 652 (2000) (quotation
omitted). Thus, it urges us to read RSA 72:23, III as creating five religious use
exemptions that are not modified by the clause “owned, used and occupied
directly for religious training or for other religious purposes” – that is, “[h]ouses
of public worship,” “parish houses,” “church parsonages occupied by their
pastors,” “convents,” and “monasteries.” It argues that the clause modifies
only the last category of property – that is, “buildings and the lands
appertaining to them.” Thus, once a structure is determined to be among the
first five enumerated categories, it is automatically exempt from taxation, and
any analysis of the extent to which it is “owned, used and occupied” for
religious purposes is improper. Moreover, Assembly maintains that
qualification as one of these first five enumerated structures is essentially
definitional: “[I]f the building, owned by the church, is its ‘house of public
worship[,]’ it is used and occupied for a religious purpose, and room-by-room
scrutiny is inappropriate, unworkable, and unconstitutional.” The City
counters that, reading the statute as a whole, the qualifying phrase “owned,
used and occupied directly for religious training or other religious purposes” is
intended to modify all of the enumerated properties set forth in RSA 72:23, III,
including “houses of public worship.”
“In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole.” Appeal of City of Nashua, 155 N.H. 443, 445 (2007). When examining
the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the
words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Id. In construing a religious exemption
statute, we adopt neither a liberal attitude because it is a charity, nor a hostile
attitude because it seeks exemption from taxation. Id. “We review legislative
history to aid our analysis when the statutory language is ambiguous or
subject to more than one reasonable interpretation.” First Berkshire Bus.
Trust v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Revenue Admin., 161 N.H. 176, 180 (2010).
Both the City’s and Assembly’s constructions of RSA 72:23, III are
reasonable. Accordingly, the language of RSA 72:23, III is ambiguous. See id.
We implicitly construed a prior version of the statute as urged by the
City. In Alton Bay Camp Meeting Association v. Town of Alton, 109 N.H. 44
(1968), the version of RSA 72:23, III then in effect exempted from taxation
“houses of public worship, parish houses, church parsonages occupied by their
4
pastors, convents, monasteries, buildings used principally for religious training
or for other religious purposes, and the lands thereto appertaining owned and
occupied by any regularly recognized and constituted denomination.”
(Quotation omitted; emphasis added.) We held that the statute required the
applicant to establish that the purportedly exempt land “be ‘appertaining’ to
one or more of the types of buildings specified as exempt in RSA 72:23[,] III.”
Alton Bay, 109 N.H. at 49 (emphasis added). By considering the modifying
clause, “lands thereto appertaining” to govern exemptions for land appertaining
to “one or more” of the enumerated “types of buildings specified as exempt in
RSA 72:23,” id., we implicitly interpreted RSA 72:23, III as setting forth a list of
properties all of which are subject to a subsequent modifying clause.
We now explicitly adopt the statutory construction we impliedly adopted
in Alton Bay. We recognize that the statute has been amended since our
holding in Alton Bay, and we consider those amendments in our analysis of
legislative intent. As we have previously noted:
Examining the legislative history of the statute, we discover there
have been no significant changes in its wording since our ruling in
Alton Bay. In 1994, RSA 72:23, III was amended from exempting
“buildings used principally for religious training or for other
religious purposes, and the lands thereto appertaining owned and
occupied by [a religious organization]” to exempting “buildings and
the lands appertaining to them owned, used and occupied directly
for religious training or for other religious purposes.” This
language merely clarifies that land owned by religious
organizations must be “used and occupied directly” for religious
purposes. Accord N.H.H.R. Jour. 579-80 (1994).
E. Coast Conf. of the Evangelical Covenant Church of America v. Town of
Swanzey, 146 N.H. 658, 663 (2001) (quotations omitted; emphasis added).
Assembly points to our holding in St. Paul’s Church v. Concord, 75 N.H.
420 (1910), to support its argument that a “house of public worship” is, by
definition, exempt from taxation in its entirety. When we issued our opinion in
St. Paul’s Church, the religious exemption statute provided: “Real estate . . . is
liable to be taxed, except houses of public worship.” St. Paul’s Church, 75 N.H.
at 421 (quotation omitted). In analyzing the legislative intent underlying that
version of the statute, however, we held:
If the house serves all the religious purposes for which it was
designed and is not appropriated to other uses in the sense of a
substantial exclusion of the religious use from any part of it, no
reason is apparent why it does not promote all the uses which the
legislature had in mind when it was exempted as a house of public
worship. In this view, it is exclusively used as such a house. So
5
long as the church organization occupies it for such public services
of a religious character as it deems useful and desirable and as the
building is adapted to subserve, to the exclusion of all secular
uses, it is used exclusively as a house of public worship.
Id. at 425 (emphases added). Thus, even in that case, before intervening
amendments, we recognized that applying the statutory tax exemption required
analyzing the religious and secular uses of various portions of a building
purported to be a “house of public worship.”
Nor are we persuaded by Assembly’s analysis of the legislative history of
the current statute. Assembly contends that the 1994 statutory amendments
“were not intended to change the application of the exemption to ‘houses of
public worship’ or any of the other specifically listed properties,” and that,
therefore, the legislative history supports its contention that a house of public
worship is entitled to a blanket exemption from taxation.
The legislature enacted amendments in 1994, “relative to the tax exempt
status of certain properties,” N.H.H.R. Jour. 579 (1994), which “increased
restrictions on the granting of property tax exemptions on property owned by
churches.” Id. at 580. As the report from the House Municipal and County
Government Committee explained:
While this bill touches a lot of nerves, testimony confirmed the base
argument: exemption laws, as they now exist, leave a great deal of
uncertainty for those who have to enforce them. The bill, as
amended, intends to remove those uncertainties without removing
the traditional exemptions for which there is broad public support.
Its effect will be to close loopholes and protect against abuse.
Id. at 579. The amendments included adding the following provision: “The
exemptions afforded by RSA 72:23 . . . shall be construed to confer exemption
only upon property which meets requirements of the statute under which
exemption is claimed. The burden of demonstrating the applicability of any
exemption shall be upon the claimant.” Id. at 580.
Other amendments also undermine Assembly’s argument that a tax
assessing body should simply accept a religious entity’s assertion that a
particular building represents a “house of public worship” and is, thus,
exempt. Before the 1994 amendments, the statute required religious entities to
submit a list of properties for which a tax exemption was claimed. However,
pursuant to the amendments, “City assessors . . . and other officials having
power to act under the provisions of this chapter to grant or deny tax
exemptions to religious . . . organizations shall have the authority to request”
materials concerning the organization seeking exemption, as well as the nature
of the property for which the exemption is claimed, “and such other
6
information as shall be reasonably required to make determinations of
exemption of property under” RSA chapter 72. RSA 72:23-c, II (2003). The
amendments also provide that an organization’s failure to provide such
information within thirty days of a reasonable written request shall result in a
denial of exemption. Id.
The legislative scheme therefore does not support Assembly’s argument
that a church’s assertion that a building constitutes a “house of public
worship” is sufficient to place it beyond investigation. The statute provides
that the City must determine whether a building owned by a religious entity is
entitled to exemption because it is “used and occupied” directly for a religious
purpose – an interpretation that our precedent, including St. Paul’s Church
and Alton Bay, supports. Accordingly, in light of the evidence that the
legislative intent of the statute is to render all of the buildings specified in RSA
72:23, III subject to the modifier “owned, used and occupied directly for
religious . . . purposes,” the last antecedent rule does not require a contrary
interpretation. See DeVere v. Attorney General, 146 N.H. 762, 768 (2001)
(declining to apply the last antecedent rule where such an interpretation would
be counter to legislative intent, as apparent from the statutory scheme).
Having determined that the legislative intent supports the BTLA’s
interpretation of the statute, we turn to the question of apportionment. We
have previously directly addressed this question. In this case, as in Appeal of
Emissaries of Divine Light, “[t]he taxpayer . . . argues that the statute does not
allow apportionment between exempt and non-exempt uses in religious
exemption cases.” Appeal of Emissaries of Divine Light, 140 N.H. at 556. As
we explained in Emissaries of Divine Light, this assertion is unsupported by
our case law. Id. We have previously “recognized that certain property may be
exempt, while other property, not used for religious activity, would not be
exempt from taxation.” Id. “Additionally, in considering other statutory
exemptions, we have consistently utilized apportionment when appropriate.
We find nothing in the language of the religious exemption statute to suggest
that the legislature intended to treat religious exemptions differently than other
tax exemption statutes.” Id. (citations omitted).
Assembly seeks to distinguish Emissaries of Divine Light on the ground
that the structures in that case were not among those enumerated in RSA
72:23, III. This argument is foreclosed by our holding today that the legislature
did not intend that a “house of public worship” be evaluated differently from
any other church-owned property; to be entitled to exemption any church-
owned property must be “owned, used and occupied directly for religious . . .
purposes.”
The apportionment of exempt and non-exempt uses within a single
building is also supported by our precedent. In Trustees Exeter Academy v.
Exeter, we noted that a building partly used for exempt purposes and partly for
7
taxable purposes “clearly may receive a proportional division of value according
to the parts assigned to the different uses.” Trustees Exeter Academy v.
Exeter, 90 N.H. 472, 503 (1940); see also Appeal of City of Concord, 161 N.H.
344, 353-54 (2011). We agree with the BTLA, however, that an apportionment
inquiry “must not be taken to an absurd extreme so that every square foot of a
building is rigidly scrutinized. Rather, . . . judgment is the touchstone.”
II. Whether Apportioning Between Taxable and Tax-Exempt Space is
Unconstitutional
Assembly argues that examining the religious uses and purposes of each
room inside of the main building “unconstitutionally entangle[s] the
government with religion,” and violates the Establishment Clause of the First
Amendment to the Federal Constitution, as well as the Equal Protection Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal Constitution. Because Assembly
raises no claim under the State Constitution, we confine our analysis to its
federal constitutional claims. See State v. White, 155 N.H. 119, 125 (2007).
We note that many of Assembly’s arguments duplicate those we found
unavailing in Emissaries of Divine Light, 140 N.H. at 554. Assembly first
contends that “the City and BTLA rejected the Church’s stated religious
purpose based on the review of the Church’s various rooms and uses, looking
for whether such uses were religious enough. This analysis is flawed as it is
essentially a test of whether the Church is ‘sufficiently religious.’”
However, the record reflects that the City and the BTLA accepted the
authenticity of Assembly’s religion. We, accordingly, read Assembly’s argument
to oppose the City’s review of the religious or secular use of portions of the
main building. In Emissaries of Divine Light, as in this case, the taxpayer
argued that apportionment was improper in religious exemption cases because
it requires an impermissible inquiry into the validity of the taxpayer’s religion.
Emissaries of Divine Light, 140 N.H. at 556. We rejected that assertion in
Emissaries of Divine Light because the BTLA “never questioned the validity of
the taxpayer’s religion,” but, instead, “simply attempted to determine whether
the land was occupied and used principally by church members for their own
private and secular purposes and not for the statutory exempted religious
purposes of the [taxpayer].” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted).
We, likewise, reject Assembly’s assertion in this case. As in Emissaries
of Divine Light, the BTLA never questioned the validity of Assembly’s religion.
As the BTLA explained when evaluating whether Assembly’s vacant rooms were
used or occupied directly for a religious purpose:
To be clear, the [BTLA] is neither, on one hand, questioning
[Assembly’s] stated assertion that providing [housing for the needy]
8
is one of its biblical mandates nor, on the other, ruling that such
use would necessarily qualify as a religious use; rather, we simply
find neither by public knowledge nor in practice is there evidence
the Property is used to any significant degree to house the needy.
In determining whether the statutory requirements for receiving an
exemption have been met, “we look to both its charter or
organizational statements and its actions taken pursuant to those
statements.”
(Emphasis added; quotation omitted.) Thus, as in Emissaries of Divine Light,
the BTLA merely examined whether Assembly “owned, used and occupied
directly” its property “for religious training or for other religious purposes,” as
required by statute. RSA 72:23, III.
As for Assembly’s argument, first advanced in its reply brief, that it has
been “singled out” among other denominations for application of the statute,
our consideration is brief. The record does not support this argument. Here,
Assembly questions why the City did not examine and tax the “bathrooms and
unused or messy rooms” of other religious denominations, without advancing
any evidence to suggest that the City has not, in fact, examined or taxed other
similarly situated churches. Nor has Assembly submitted evidence tending to
show that the BTLA’s inspection and partial denial of exemptions was
improperly motivated on the basis of religion. In the absence of such evidence,
we decline to further consider Assembly’s selective prosecution argument. See
Branch Ministries v. Rossotti, 211 F.3d 137, 144 (D.C. Cir. 2000).
We also reject Assembly’s argument that its stated religious beliefs are
sufficient to satisfy the requirement that its property be directly used for a
religious purpose. We rejected a similar argument in Emissaries of Divine
Light, 140 N.H. at 556, explaining that a taxpayer’s religious beliefs are
inadequate to determine whether land is being used for a religious purpose.
Because our own case law on this subject is dispositive, we need not consider
the out-of-state authorities upon which Assembly relies.
Without developed argument, Assembly states, “The Constitutional
problems with the City’s methods are apparent.” To the extent that Assembly
reiterates the constitutional arguments it lodged against the BTLA, we reject
them for the reasons stated above. Assembly proposes an alternative
methodology: “[T]he . . . analysis should be two-fold: (1) does the church
espouse a religious purpose for [the property’s] use and (2) is that assertion
bona fide?” Having decided that the City’s methodology was not flawed, we
need not address Assembly’s proposed methodology.
9
III. Whether Assembly’s Premises Were Exempt Because They Were Used for
Religious Purposes
Alternatively, Assembly argues that, even if the statute and Federal
Constitution permit apportionment within a house of public worship, all of the
uses to which Assembly put the property in 2008 were religious uses and,
thus, tax-exempt.
Assembly first argues that the space occupied by the grandson was used
for religious purposes because this space, although temporarily occupied by
the grandson, was “made available for missionaries and the homeless/needy.”
Assembly describes the space occupied by the grandson in 2008 as a first-floor
missionary apartment and a dorm-style room on the second floor.
The BTLA found that the apartment on the first floor was taxable
because, in fact, it was not used by furloughed missionaries at any time in
2008. The BTLA also observed that in the four-year period that the caretaker
resided on the second floor of the main building, he could recall missionaries
using the apartment on the first floor “only three or four times.” The BTLA
decided that this use was “slight and insignificant,” and, therefore, “[did] not
qualify the [first floor missionary apartment] [as] being used for religious
purposes.” The BTLA also ruled that “the fact that [Assembly] designated and
made [the first floor apartment] available for missionary use does not by such
designation automatically qualify [the apartment] as being used ‘directly for
religious training or for other religious purposes.’”
With respect to the second floor dorm-style room, which Assembly
claimed was used to house the needy, the BTLA found that “there was no
evidence of any recent historical use [of the room] for such purpose that was
more than ‘slight, negligible or insignificant’ or ‘indefinite or prospective.’” The
BTLA noted that the City’s director of human services testified that Assembly
was not one of the churches identified as providing immediate or short-term
housing for the needy. The BTLA specifically found that the grandson’s
occupancy of the room “was not so much the result of an expression of
[Assembly’s] intent to provide housing for the needy as it was a consequence of
him being related to a member of [Assembly’s] advisory board and a
convenience for him by not having to find alternative housing.”
Assembly asserts that the BTLA erred when it found these areas to be
taxable because Assembly’s religious use of them, to house the needy and/or
furloughed missionaries, was “too infrequent to serve a religious purpose.”
Assembly contends that the BTLA misapplied the governing law when it based
its decision upon the infrequency of the religious use of these rooms.
Assuming, without deciding, that housing the needy and/or furloughed
missionaries constitutes a religious purpose, we find no error. We have
previously held “that a tax exemption is not warranted when the asserted
10
compliance with any of the requirements therefor is no more than slight,
negligible or insignificant, indefinite and prospective, or theoretical.” Appeal of
City of Concord, 161 N.H. at 351 (quotations and citations omitted).
Assembly’s remaining arguments about the space occupied by the
grandson are based upon its misreading of the BTLA’s decision. Contrary to
Assembly’s assertions, the BTLA did not find that “residential use cannot be
tax exempt.” Nor did it focus upon the grandson’s use of the space, instead of
Assembly’s use of it.
Assembly next addresses the caretaker’s housing. Assembly argues that
“since the beginning of time[,] . . . churches have had onsite caretakers and
this did not negate their status as churches.” Again, Assembly misreads the
BTLA’s decision. Nothing in that decision contravenes Assembly’s “status” as a
church.
Assembly further asserts that the BTLA erred when it found that there
was “no compelling evidence” that the caretaker’s “physical presence at the
Property was necessary for the religious use of the Property by [Assembly].”
Assembly argues that, in fact, the caretaker’s physical presence was necessary
for security, and implies that providing security constitutes use for a religious
purpose. Assuming, without deciding, that providing security for a church is a
religious purpose, we uphold the BTLA’s finding that the caretaker’s physical
presence for that purpose was not necessary. But cf. Appeal of City of Nashua,
155 N.H. at 446 (providing maintenance and security services to deconsecrated
parishes were not religious purposes). The BTLA found that the caretaker’s
physical presence was not necessary to secure Assembly’s property because
“the main building could be secured (even the ‘prayer room’ which had 24/7
exterior access had its interior door locked), and the adjacent parsonage
provided on-site physical presence for any security concerns.” As the record
supports these findings, we uphold them. To the extent that Assembly
contends, in effect, that the BTLA failed to weigh the testimony properly, we
defer to its judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in the testimony,
measuring the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight to be given
evidence. See LLK Trust v. Town of Wolfeboro, 159 N.H. 734, 739 (2010).
Assembly next asserts that the BTLA’s finding that the second floor
men’s bathroom was not “significant or critical for the religious use of the
Property” was erroneous. The BTLA found that the bathroom “appeared to
exist primarily to serve any occupants of the second floor dorm rooms and did
not appear to be critical for the congregation’s activities that occur on the first
floor.” To the extent that the bathroom was used by congregants, “such use,”
the BTLA found, “did not appear to be significant or critical for the religious use
of the Property on the first floor.” Assembly apparently challenges these
findings as unreasonable because the caretaker testified that parishioners used
the second-floor men’s room during worship services. Assembly, thus,
11
impliedly asserts that the BTLA failed to weigh the testimony properly. We
defer to the BTLA’s judgment in determining the weight to be given evidence.
See id. Because Assembly has not demonstrated by a clear preponderance of
the evidence, see RSA 541:13, that the second-floor restroom was “owned, used
and occupied directly for religious training or for other religious purposes,” RSA
72:23, III, we cannot find error in the BTLA’s finding such space taxable.
We have reviewed Assembly’s remaining arguments regarding whether
the BTLA erred in its apportionment between tax-exempt and taxable uses of
the property and conclude that they warrant no extended consideration. See
Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993); see also Sabinson v. Trustees of
Dartmouth College, 160 N.H. 452, 459 (2010) (declining to address arguments
that are insufficiently developed for appellate review).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
12