THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–northern judicial district
No. 2011-154
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
EMPIRE AUTOMOTIVE GROUP, INC.
Argued: November 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: December 28, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Constance N. Stratton, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (W. Michael Dunn
and Paul S. Reuland on the brief, and Mr. Dunn orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. This is an interlocutory appeal from the ruling of the Superior
Court (Abramson, J.) denying defendant Empire Automotive Group, Inc.’s
motion to dismiss two indictments charging it with felony violations of the New
Hampshire Consumer Protection Act (CPA). We affirm and remand.
The pertinent facts, as reflected by the record and the interlocutory
appeal statement, are as follows. The defendant is licensed by the New
Hampshire Banking Department pursuant to RSA chapter 361-A (2009 &
Supp. 2011) as a seller of motor vehicles subject to retail installment sales
contracts. On May 20, 2010, the defendant was indicted by the grand jury on
two counts of violating the CPA by allegedly placing inspection stickers
(indicative of having passed inspection) on two automobiles sold to consumers
under installment sales contracts when the defendant knew the vehicles had
not passed the on-board diagnostic emissions tests required by the New
Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles. See RSA 358-A:2, V (2009) (making it
unlawful to represent that goods have approvals or qualities they do not have);
RSA 358-A:6, I (2009) (providing that conviction of a person, other than a
natural person, of violating RSA 358-A:2 is a felony).
The defendant moved to dismiss the indictments on the grounds that its
conduct was exempt from the CPA and subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of
the banking department, and that the department of justice, which initiated
the criminal proceedings, lacked authority to do so. The trial court denied the
motion as well as the defendant’s motion to reconsider.
On appeal, the defendant first argues that RSA 358-A:3, I (2009) exempts
it from the CPA. This is a matter of statutory construction, and we therefore
begin our analysis by considering the plain meaning of the words used in the
CPA. See Averill v. Cox, 145 N.H. 328, 330-31 (2000). RSA 358-A:3 provides,
in relevant part:
The following transactions shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter:
I. Trade or commerce that is subject to the
jurisdiction of the bank commissioner, the director of
securities regulation, the insurance commissioner, the
public utilities commission, the financial institutions
and insurance regulators of other states, or federal
banking or securities regulators who possess the
authority to regulate unfair or deceptive trade
practices. This paragraph includes trade or commerce
under the jurisdiction of, and regulated by, the bank
commissioner pursuant to RSA 361-A, relative to retail
installment sales of motor vehicles.
The defendant contends that because it is licensed under RSA chapter 361-A,
it is subject to the jurisdiction of the bank commissioner and therefore its
alleged conduct falls within the terms of the above statutory exemption. We
disagree.
RSA chapter 361-A establishes a comprehensive licensing and regulatory
scheme for persons engaged in the business of selling or providing financing for
the sale of motor vehicles using “retail installment contract[s].” RSA 361-A:1, X
2
(Supp. 2011). Thus, the “trade or commerce” subject to the jurisdiction of the
bank commissioner under RSA chapter 361-A involves the sale of motor
vehicles pursuant to such retail installment contracts. Here, however, the fact
that the two motor vehicles in question may have been sold under retail
installment contracts has nothing whatsoever to do with the fraudulent
conduct alleged in the indictments.
The indictments make no mention of the financial terms under which the
vehicles at issue were sold; rather, they allege that the defendant placed
inspection stickers on vehicles that had not, in fact, passed inspection. This
alleged conduct, having nothing at all to do with the financing of the vehicles,
would clearly violate the CPA regardless of whether the vehicles were sold
under retail installment contracts by an RSA chapter 361-A licensed dealer,
such as the defendant, or were sold for cash by a dealer not required to be
licensed under chapter 361-A. Cf. Hughes v. DiSalvo, 143 N.H. 576, 578
(1999) (holding that CPA is “not available where the transaction is strictly
private in nature, and is in no way undertaken in the ordinary course of a
trade or business” (quotation omitted)); Beer v. Bennett, 160 N.H. 166 (2010)
(upholding private civil judgment against New Hampshire licensed automobile
dealer for violating the CPA).
Likewise, the defendant does not identify, nor have we located, any
provision of RSA chapter 361-A that grants the bank commissioner authority to
regulate the inspection of motor vehicles or the placement of inspection
stickers on motor vehicles. Compare Averill, 145 N.H. at 334 (concluding that
attorney disciplinary scheme established by judiciary “protects consumers from
fraud and deception in the marketplace in a manner calculated to avoid the
same ills as RSA chapter 358-A” (quotation omitted)); Bell v. Liberty Mut. Ins.
Co., 146 N.H. 190, 194 (2001) (“regulation of the insurance industry is
comprehensive and protects consumers from the same fraud and unfair
practices as RSA chapter 358-A” (quotation omitted)). Such authority resides
with the department of safety, see RSA 266:1 (Supp. 2011), :59-b (Supp. 2011),
an agency not listed among those whose regulatory jurisdiction creates an
exemption from the CPA. RSA 358-A:3, I.
For all these reasons, we hold that the “trade or commerce” involved in
this case is the sale of motor vehicles. It is not the sale of motor vehicles
pursuant to retail installment contracts within the jurisdiction of the bank
commissioner. Accordingly, the claims at issue here are not exempt from the
CPA.
The defendant also argues that RSA 383:10-d (2006) supports its status
as exempt from the CPA with respect to the transactions at issue. This statute
states, in part: “The [bank] commissioner shall have exclusive authority and
jurisdiction to investigate conduct that is or may be an unfair or deceptive act
3
or practice under RSA 358-A and exempt under RSA 358-A:3, I . . . .”
(Emphasis added.) But as the quoted statutory text makes clear, in order to
fall within the “exclusive authority and jurisdiction” of the bank commissioner,
the conduct at issue must be both an actual or potential violation of the CPA
and exempt under RSA 358-A:3, I. Since, as discussed above, the conduct
involved here is not exempt from the CPA pursuant to RSA 358-A:3, I, it does
not fall within the exclusive investigative authority of the bank commissioner.
For this same reason, even if we were to assume that conduct that does fall
within the reach of RSA 383:10-d, and which is criminal in nature, could not
be prosecuted by the department of justice absent a referral from the bank
commissioner, see RSA 383:10-d, no such conduct is at issue in this case.
Finally, the defendant argues that, if construed to permit the department
of justice to bring criminal charges without a referral from the bank
commissioner, the statutory scheme is rendered “so confusing that it
authorizes or encourages arbitrary enforcement” and is therefore
“impermissibly vague.” However, the defendant failed to raise this issue before
the trial court and it therefore is not preserved for our review. State v.
Duquette, 145 N.H. 374, 376 (2000).
Affirmed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4