THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-228
GREAT AMERICAN INSURANCE COMPANY
v.
ROBERT CHRISTY, ESQUIRE & a.
Argued: March 8, 2012
Opinion Issued: September 28, 2012
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (Margaret H. Nelson on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Sheehan Phinney Bass + Green, P.A., of Manchester (James Q. Shirley
on the brief and orally), for defendants Robert Christy and Christy & Tessier,
P.A.
Backus, Meyer & Branch, LLP, of Manchester (B.J. Branch on the brief,
and Barry M. Scotch orally), for defendant Debra Johnson.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Manchester (Stephen J.
Schulthess on the brief and orally), for defendant Kathleen Tremblay.
Law Office of Steven M. Latici, P.A., of Gilmanton (Steven M. Latici on the
brief and orally), for intervenor Frederick Jakobiec, M.D.
Bernstein Shur, P.A., of Manchester (Andru H. Volinsky and Edward J.
Sackman on the brief), for New Hampshire Association for Justice, as amicus
curiae.
CONBOY, J. The defendants, Robert Christy, Christy & Tessier, P.A.,
Debra Johnson, and Kathy Tremblay, appeal a decision of the Superior Court
(Tucker, J.) rescinding a professional liability policy issued by the plaintiff,
Great American Insurance Company (GAIC), to the law firm of Christy &
Tessier, P.A. We reverse and remand.
We set forth the relevant facts as presented in the parties’ agreed
statement of facts. Robert Christy (Christy) and Thomas Tessier (Tessier) were
partners in the firm of Christy & Tessier, P.A., practicing together for over forty-
five years. In August 1987, Frederick Jakobiec, M.D. (Jakobiec) retained
Tessier to draft a will for him. In 2001, Jakobiec’s mother, Beatrice Jakobiec
(Beatrice), died intestate. Her two heirs were Jakobiec and his brother,
Thaddeus Jakobiec (Thaddeus). Thaddeus had been blind since birth, was
developmentally disabled, and resided with his mother in her home in
Manchester, which she owned with Jakobiec as joint tenants with rights of
survivorship.
In May 2001, Jakobiec asked Tessier, who was Beatrice’s nephew, to
handle the probate administration for his mother’s estate. In June 2002, the
probate court appointed Tessier to administer the estate. From 2002 through
2005, Tessier created false affidavits and powers of attorney, which he used to
gain unauthorized access to estate accounts and assets belonging to Jakobiec
and Thaddeus. Tessier misappropriated for his personal use estate assets and
assets belonging to Jakobiec and Thaddeus.
There is no evidence that Christy was aware of Tessier’s thefts and
misappropriations. However, Christy’s actions at various times enabled Tessier
to gain access to, and steal money and misappropriate assets belonging to, the
estate and Jakobiec. On two separate occasions, in 2003 and 2005, Christy
falsely notarized documents by purportedly witnessing the signatures of
Thaddeus and Jakobiec when in fact they were not present. In addition, in
2002, Christy acted as the appraiser for purposes of an inventory submitted by
Tessier to the probate court wherein Christy accepted Tessier’s identification of
the estate’s assets without independent examination. The inventory was
2
inaccurate, however, in that it did not disclose that Tessier had wrongly
diverted funds from the estate.
Defendant Debra Johnson (Johnson), a long-time employee of Christy &
Tessier, P.A., worked part-time as Tessier’s secretary during the time Tessier
represented Beatrice’s estate. She was also a notary public and, in 2002,
falsely notarized a durable power of attorney for health care from Thaddeus to
Tessier on which Christy had falsely attested to the signature and state of mind
of Thaddeus. Defendant Kathy Tremblay (Tremblay), also a long-time employee
of the firm, served as its part-time bookkeeper during the time that Tessier
represented Beatrice’s estate. Tremblay worked one day a week paying bills,
making deposits into either the trust account or the operating account, and
assembling materials for the firm’s accountants. She gave Christy and Tessier
a weekly handwritten report on the status of the firm’s finances.
On June 26, 2006, Attorney Regina Rockefeller (Rockefeller),
representing Jakobiec, met with Tessier to discuss his representation of the
estate. Rockefeller described the meeting as “cordial,” but noted that Tessier’s
“story did not hang together.” Tessier called Rockefeller the next day and told
her he had taken money from the estate, Jakobiec, and Thaddeus, and
promised to make restitution.
On October 10, 2006, Rockefeller wrote to Tessier’s counsel regarding
claims arising out of Tessier’s administration of the estate. According to
Rockefeller, Tessier acknowledged forging the power of attorney for Jakobiec,
making false declinations on behalf of Jakobiec of his interest in his mother’s
estate, falsifying two deeds, forging a power of attorney on behalf of Thaddeus,
and filing false documents with the probate court. Rockefeller also alleged that
Tessier owed Jakobiec more than $754,000 in assets from his mother’s estate
and more than $800,000 that Tessier took, by use of the forged power of
attorney, from Jakobiec’s personal bank and brokerage accounts between April
29, 2003, and May 31, 2006. Rockefeller indicated that as of October 10,
2006, Tessier had repaid Jakobiec approximately $460,000.
Following negotiations between their counsel, Tessier and Jakobiec
entered into a settlement agreement dated April 1, 2007, in which Tessier
acknowledged a debt to Jakobiec and established a payment plan to satisfy his
remaining obligations. On September 28, 2007, Tessier’s counsel advised
Rockefeller in writing that despite an initial cash payment of $55,000 and the
sale of certain real estate in Vermont that was deeded to Jakobiec under the
settlement agreement, Tessier would not be able to pay the remaining amount
owed under the settlement agreement.
GAIC first issued a professional liability policy to the law firm of Christy
& Tessier effective August 1, 2001, and issued policies on an annual basis
3
thereafter. Issuance of the successive policies required completion of renewal
applications, which were reviewed by GAIC’s underwriters. The basic policy
remained the same from 2001 through 2007.
On May 22, 2007, two months after Tessier and Jakobiec entered into
the settlement agreement, Christy executed a renewal application for
professional liability coverage on behalf of the law firm. Question 6(a) on the
renewal application asked: “After inquiry, is any lawyer aware of any claim,
incident, act, error or omission in the last year that could result in a
professional liability claim against any attorney of the Firm or a predecessor
firm?” Christy’s answer on behalf of the firm was “No.” The application also
contained the following acknowledgment: “The undersigned proprietor,
partner, member, or officer, acting on behalf of the applicant, and all other
proposed Insureds, hereby declares after diligent inquiry that the above
statements are true and that no material facts have been suppressed or
misstated.”
According to Christy, he asked Tessier whether he had any information
that should be disclosed on the application and Tessier told him there was
none. GAIC issued a professional liability policy to the firm effective August 1,
2007, through August 1, 2008. The first notice to GAIC about Tessier’s
misappropriations was by letter from Christy dated January 17, 2008.
Subsequently, Christy advised GAIC of his 2003 improper notarization of a
power of attorney from Jakobiec to Tessier.
In its petition for declaratory judgment, GAIC requested that the court:
(1) “rule that GAIC’s Policy . . . for the period August 1, 2007-August 1, 2008 is
rescinded”; (2) “[o]rder the Respondents to reimburse GAIC for any costs,
including legal fees it has incurred in defending the Respondents”; and (3) “[i]n
the alternative, declare and rule that GAIC has no obligation to defend and
indemnify Christy & Tessier, P.A., Robert Christy and Debra Johnson with
respect to the underlying action.” Following a hearing, the trial court granted
GAIC’s request for rescission.
The trial court found that Christy’s negative answer to the question in
the renewal application asking “[a]fter inquiry, is any lawyer aware of any
claim, incident, act, error or omission in the last year that could result in a
professional liability claim against any attorney of the Firm or a predecessor
firm,” was false “since Tessier at least knew of Dr. Jakobiec’s claim against him
in 2006.” In addition, the trial court found that Christy’s acknowledgment,
that “[t]he undersigned . . . acting on behalf of the applicant and all other
proposed Insureds, hereby declares after diligent inquiry that the above
statements are true and that no material facts have been suppressed or
misstated,” was also false “in that the negative answer to the preceding
question was untrue and Tessier suppressed the fact of Dr. Jakobiec’s claim.”
4
The trial court reasoned that “[e]ven though Christy’s answer to the question
and his subsequent declaration on the application were unwittingly false, the
question on the application did not pertain solely to Christy’s knowledge, but
rather to the knowledge of ‘any lawyer’ at the law firm. . . . Accordingly,
Tessier’s knowledge was imputed to Christy and the other insureds.” Because
the settlement agreement between Tessier and Jackobiec was conditional, the
trial court found that “Tessier knew when he spoke with Christy that
Jakobiec’s claim could result in a professional liability claim against him.”
The trial court also found that the misstatements in the application were
material. The court based its finding on the uncontested testimony of GAIC’s
underwriting unit manager that “[i]nformation about the facts giving rise to the
Jakobiec claim and Mr. Tessier’s acknowledgment of liability and his execution
of the Settlement Agreement with Dr. Jakobiec were . . . important to the
underwriting evaluation as to whether to renew the Policy” and would have
caused GAIC to decline to renew the policy if it had been informed of the facts.
Finally, the trial court found that rescission was not substantially unfair to
defendants Christy and Johnson, because they “knowingly violated their duties
in witnessing documents and in doing so aided Tessier, albeit unwittingly, in
the commission of his crimes.” Thus, the court did not find that these
violations constituted the basis for rescission; neither did the court address
whether these violations would warrant non-coverage under the policy’s
provisions.
On appeal, the defendants argue that rescission was improper because:
(1) Christy’s answer to question 6(a) on the renewal application was objectively
true; (2) rescission of the policy or denial of coverage would be substantially
unfair to Christy and the other innocent insureds who neither knew nor could
have known of Tessier’s fraud; and (3) the alleged misrepresentation was made
on a renewal application as opposed to an initial policy application. GAIC
argues that rescission as to all insureds is the sole appropriate remedy given
the material misrepresentations in the law firm’s renewal application. We note
at the outset that Tessier failed to file an appearance in this case and the trial
court entered an order of final default against him in March 2009.
The interpretation of insurance policy language is a question of law for
this court to decide. Bianco Prof. Assoc. v. Home Ins. Co., 144 N.H. 288, 292
(1999). “We take the plain and ordinary meaning of the policy’s words in
context, and we construe the terms of the policy as would a reasonable person
in the position of the insured based on more than a casual reading of the policy
as a whole.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Policy terms are construed objectively;
where the terms are clear and unambiguous, we accord the language its
natural and ordinary meaning.” Brown v. Concord Group Ins. Co., 163 N.H.
522, 525 (2012) (quotation omitted). To the extent that a provision in an
insurance contract is unclear, ambiguities must be construed in favor of the
5
insured and against the insurer. Calabraro v. Metropolitan Prop. & Cas. Ins.
Co., 142 N.H. 308, 310 (1997). A policy exclusion is enforceable only if it is “so
clear . . . as to create no ambiguity that might affect the insured’s reasonable
expectations.” Progressive N. Ins. Co. v. Concord Gen. Mut. Ins. Co., 151 N.H.
649, 653 (2005).
The Shortform Application submitted by Christy to renew the claims-
made policy with GAIC for the 2007-2008 policy year states that “this
application will be the basis of the contract if a policy is issued,” and that “the
Company in providing coverage will have relied upon, as representations, the
declarations and statements which are contained in or attached to or
incorporated into the policy.” In addition, the Policy Coverage Form states that
the policy is issued “in reliance upon the statements in the application, and
subject to the Limits of Liability shown in the Declarations, and subject to all of
the terms of this insurance.” Accordingly, in interpreting the agreement
between the parties we consider the contract as a whole, including both the
Shortform Application and the policy language.
Section I of the policy, titled Coverage, provides:
A. This policy shall pay on behalf of each Insured all sums . . .
which the Insured shall become legally obligated to pay as
damages as a result of CLAIMS FIRST MADE AGAINST THE
INSURED DURING THE POLICY PERIOD AND REPORTED TO THE
COMPANY DURING THE POLICY PERIOD
(i) caused by any act, error or omission for which the
Insured is legally responsible . . .
and, in each case, arising out of the rendering or failure to render
professional legal services, PROVIDED ALWAYS THAT such act,
error or omission . . . happens:
1. during the policy period; or
2. prior to the policy period, provided that prior to the
effective date of the first [Policy] issued by the Company to
the Named Insured and continuously renewed and
maintained in effect to the inception of this policy period:
. . .
(b) the Insured had no reasonable basis to believe that
the Insured had breached a professional duty or to
6
foresee that a claim would be made against the
Insured . . . .
Section IV, titled Exclusion, provides:
A. This policy does not apply:
1. to any judgment or final adjudication based upon or
arising out of any dishonest, deliberately fraudulent,
criminal, malicious or deliberately wrongful acts or
omissions committed by any Insured, however, the Company
will defend allegations of the foregoing acts or omissions
until the time that the act or omission is factually proven;
. . . .
B. Waiver of Exclusion (Innocent Insured) and Breach of
Conditions: Whenever coverage under any provision of this policy
would be excluded, suspended or lost
1. because of Section IV, Exclusions, sub-section 1, relating
to any judgment or final adjudication based upon or arising
out of any dishonest, deliberately fraudulent, criminal,
malicious or deliberately wrongful acts or omissions by any
Insured, or
2. because of noncompliance with Section VII, Claims,
subsection A, Notice of Claims relating to the giving of notice
to the Company with respect to which any other Insured
shall be in default solely because of the default or
concealment of such default by one or more Insureds
responsible for the loss or damage otherwise insured
hereunder,
the Company agrees that such insurance as would otherwise be
afforded under this policy shall apply with respect to each and
every insured who did not personally participate in committing one
or more of the acts, errors or omissions described in either such
exclusion or such condition; provided that if the condition be one
with which such Insured can comply after receiving knowledge
thereof, the Insured entitled to the benefit of the Waiver of the
Exclusion and Breach of Conditions shall comply with such
condition promptly after obtaining knowledge of the failure of any
other Insured to comply therewith.
7
(Emphasis added.)
Section VII, titled Claims, provides:
A. Notice of Claims: The Insureds shall, as soon as practicable,
give to the Company written notice of any claim(s) or potential
claim(s) made against any Insured.
Applying the plain and ordinary meaning of these provisions, under the
innocent insured provision in Section IV, B, where a claim has gone unreported
in violation of the notice provision set forth in Section VII because an insured
concealed wrongful acts from the other insureds, GAIC must provide coverage
to those insureds who did not “personally commit or personally participate” in
the act, error or omission. Thus, an insured who does not have actual
knowledge of the wrongful acts and, therefore, does not have the ability to
report them and the foreseeable claims that may arise from them, is entitled to
coverage provided the insurer is notified promptly after the insured obtains
knowledge of the wrongful acts.
The innocent insured provision shows that the parties intended to
distinguish actual from imputed knowledge and not to penalize insureds who
did not have actual knowledge of wrongful acts. See Maher & Williams v. ACE
American Ins. Co., No. 3:08cv1191, 2010 WL 3546234, at *13 (D. Conn. Sept.
3, 2010); see also Holloway v. Sacks and Sacks, Esqs., 713 N.Y.S.2d 162, 164
(App. Div. 2000). Prior to executing the renewal application for professional
liability insurance coverage in May 2007, Christy inquired of Tessier whether
he was aware of any information that should be disclosed on the renewal
application and Tessier told him that there was none. Christy had no actual
knowledge of Tessier’s misconduct, and the policy expressly precludes
imputing Tessier’s knowledge “to each and every Insured who did not
personally participate in committing” wrongful acts by another insured.
Question 6(a) on the renewal application asked: “After inquiry, is any
lawyer aware of any claim, incident, act, error or omission in the last year that
could result in a professional liability claim against any attorney of the Firm or
a predecessor firm?” GAIC argues that this question “did not simply ask for
information which . . . Christy . . . felt was true and accurate based on his
personal knowledge. Rather the application required a complete and truthful
response about claims and incidents in the last year that could give rise to a
claim as to the Firm and all proposed Insureds which GAIC would be relying on
in deciding whether to issue any policy.” It is not clear, however, that the
policy provision excluding imputed knowledge to innocent insureds does not
apply to giving notice on the Shortform Application. Thus, in the absence of
language specifically imputing knowledge to innocent insureds of false
statements made on the Shortform Application, the contract read as a whole is
8
ambiguous. “In view of the ambiguity, we will read the policy against the
insurer in order to honor the reasonable expectations of the policyholder.”
Cacavas v. Maine Bonding & Casualty Co., 128 N.H. 204, 207 (1986). Of
course, an insurance company can preclude interpretation of language against
it by including “clear and unambiguous policy language.” See Orleans v.
Commercial Union Ins. Co., 133 N.H. 493, 496 (1990).
We hold that the trial court erred as a matter of law in ruling that
Tessier’s knowledge is imputed to Christy and the other defendants thereby
voiding the policy ab initio. We make no ruling, however, as to whether any of
the defendants’ conduct would result in non-coverage under the policy and
remand for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9