THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2011-683
APPEAL OF THOMAS PHILLIPS
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: March 13, 2013
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2013
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Michael R. Mortimer
and Emily G. Bolton on the brief, and Mr. Mortimer orally), for Thomas Phillips.
Bernard & Merrill, PLLC, of Manchester (Andrew A. Merrill and Gary S.
Harding on the brief, and Mr. Merrill orally), for State Farm Fire & Casualty
Company.
BASSETT, J. The petitioner, Thomas Phillips, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board (CAB) denying him recovery
under the Workers’ Compensation Law. See RSA ch. 281-A (2010 & Supp.
2012). The CAB ruled that the petitioner was not entitled to benefits because
he had failed to timely notify his employers, Norman and Diane Crocker, of his
workers’ compensation claim. See RSA 281-A:19 (2010). The CAB further
ruled that the petitioner was not entitled to benefits because, unbeknownst to
the Crockers, he was intoxicated at the time of his injury. See RSA 281-A:14
(2010). We affirm in part, reverse in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The CAB found or the record supports the following facts. In 2006, the
petitioner and his wife lived in a trailer that they rented from the Crockers. As
part of the lease agreement, the petitioner performed yard work and minor
home repairs for the Crockers in exchange for a rent reduction. The Crockers
lived on the abutting property.
On August 11, 2006, Mr. Crocker asked the petitioner to remove the
branch of a tree that was growing near the Crockers’ house. The next day, the
petitioner fell from a ladder while cutting the branch with a chainsaw. No one
witnessed the petitioner’s fall. The petitioner’s wife found him shortly after he
fell, and she immediately summoned the Crockers. Mr. Crocker later stated
that “it seem[ed] the branch snapped in half causing [the petitioner] to [lose]
his balance and he fell.” The petitioner was taken to the hospital, where it was
determined that he had a blood alcohol content of approximately .27. As a
result of the fall, the petitioner was rendered a quadriplegic.
Nearly three years later, on August 10, 2009, the petitioner filed a claim
for workers’ compensation benefits, identifying the Crockers as his employer.
The Crockers were insured under a homeowner’s insurance policy issued by
State Farm Fire and Casualty Company (State Farm) that included workers’
compensation coverage for domestic employees. See RSA 281-A:6 (2010)
(requiring all insurance companies that provide homeowner’s insurance to
provide workers’ compensation insurance covering the domestic employees of
the insured, unless the insured has arranged for such coverage elsewhere). On
August 24, State Farm denied the petitioner workers’ compensation benefits on
the grounds that: (1) there was no employer-employee relationship; (2) the
petitioner’s injury was not causally related to employment; (3) the petitioner
was at fault for his injury; and (4) the petitioner’s notice of injury to the
Crockers was untimely. Thereafter, the petitioner requested a hearing with the
New Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL). The DOL Hearing Officer
determined that the petitioner was entitled to workers’ compensation benefits.
State Farm appealed to the CAB.
After a de novo hearing, the CAB determined that the petitioner was an
employee of the Crockers at the time of his injury. However, the CAB denied
the petitioner’s claim, finding that his claim was barred pursuant to RSA 281-
A:19 and RSA 281-A:20 (2010) because he failed to provide timely notice of his
injury to the Crockers. The CAB further found that the petitioner was
intoxicated at the time of the injury. Because the CAB also found that the
Crockers did not know that he was intoxicated when he fell, it determined that
they were not liable for workers’ compensation payments. See RSA 281-A:14.
The petitioner’s motion for reconsideration was denied, and this appeal
followed.
2
The petitioner makes two arguments on appeal. First, he argues that,
because the Crockers had actual, timely notice of his injury, the CAB erred in
ruling that his claim was barred under RSA 281-A:19 and RSA 281-A:20. The
petitioner next argues that the CAB erred in applying RSA 281-A:14 to bar his
claim. We address each argument in turn.
I. Standard of Review
Our standard of review is set forth by statute:
[A]ll findings of the [CAB] upon all questions of fact properly before
it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable; and the
order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated
except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear
preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is unjust
or unreasonable.
RSA 541:13 (2007). Thus, we review the factual findings of the CAB
deferentially. Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Corrections, 162 N.H. 750, 753 (2011).
We review its statutory interpretation de novo. Id.
On questions of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Id. We first examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain
and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Appeal
of Gamas, 158 N.H. 646, 648 (2009). We construe the Workers’ Compensation
Law liberally to give the broadest reasonable effect to its remedial purpose. Id.
Thus, when construing it, we resolve all reasonable doubts in favor of the
injured worker. Id.
II. Notice
The petitioner first argues that the CAB erred when it found that he did
not provide the Crockers with timely notice of his injury and, therefore, that his
claim was barred. He maintains that the CAB misinterpreted Appeal of Gamas
when it ruled that actual notice of injury was not sufficient because the
Crockers did not have expertise in the field of workers’ compensation law to
know when an injury triggers obligations under the Workers’ Compensation
Law. He argues that Appeal of Gamas “requires only that the employer have
knowledge of the injury and its causal relationship to the employment” and
that, here, those requirements were satisfied.
3
State Farm disagrees, and argues that an employer’s obligations under
the Workers’ Compensation Law should be treated differently when, as here,
workers’ compensation coverage is required under RSA 281-A:6. Specifically,
State Farm maintains that “[t]he relative level of sophistication between a
typical employer and homeowners who happen to employ ‘domestic labor’ and
have workers’ compensation coverage under [section] 6, must be taken into
account.” Thus, it contends that the CAB properly distinguished the
experienced and knowledgeable employer in Appeal of Gamas from the
Crockers, homeowners who do not have experience with workers’ compensation
matters.
We begin by reviewing Appeal of Gamas. In that case, we addressed
whether an employee’s actual notice of injury to an employer is sufficient notice
under our Workers’ Compensation Law. Appeal of Gamas, 158 N.H. at 648-50.
Under RSA 281-A:19, “[c]laims for [workers’ compensation] benefits . . . shall
be barred unless notice of injury is given to the employer within 2 years from
the date of the injury.” RSA 281-A:20, entitled “Contents of Notice,” provides
that “[n]otice of injury in writing on a form prescribed by the commissioner
shall apprise the employer of the injury and shall state the name and address
of the worker injured and the date and place of the accident.” Based upon our
review of these statutory provisions, we determined that they are susceptible to
more than one reasonable interpretation, and, therefore, we examined
legislative history. Appeal of Gamas, 158 N.H. at 649. We found that the
legislative record is inconclusive as to whether the legislature intended written
notice on a form prescribed by the commissioner to be the exclusive means of