THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-746
THE SUNAPEE DIFFERENCE, LLC
v.
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
Argued: September 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: April 30, 2013
James E. Higgins PLLC, of Manchester (James E. Higgins on the brief
and orally), for the plaintiff.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Richard W. Head, associate
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
HICKS, J. The plaintiff, The Sunapee Difference, LLC, appeals: (1) an
order of the Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendant, the State of New Hampshire, on Sunapee’s claims for breach of
contract, equitable estoppel, promissory estoppel, breach of an implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, reformation, and inverse condemnation;
and (2) an order of the Superior Court (Mangones, J.) partially granting the
State’s motion to dismiss Sunapee’s inverse condemnation claim. The State
appeals an order of the Superior Court (Brown, J.) ruling that Sunapee has
standing to bring its reformation claim. We affirm in part, reverse in part,
vacate in part, and remand.
The following facts were assumed by the trial court in ruling on the
State’s motion for summary judgment, or are supported by the record. In
1996, the legislature authorized the New Hampshire Department of Resources
and Economic Development (DRED) to draft an agreement to lease the ski area
at Mount Sunapee State Park. RSA 12-A:29-a (2003). The next year, the
legislature directed the commissioner of DRED, in consultation with a joint
legislative committee, to develop a request for proposals (RFP) for, among other
things, “a lease, concession agreement, or management contract” for the Mount
Sunapee ski area. Laws 1997, ch. 119.
In October 1997, the State released a draft RFP, giving prospective
operators, interested parties, and the public an opportunity to comment.
Representatives from Sunapee’s predecessor, Okemo Mountain Resort, Inc.,1
attended both a public hearing on the RFP on November 12, 1997, and a
mandatory informational meeting held a week later for operators considering
submitting a proposal.
On January 15, 1998, the State issued the final RFP, requiring proposal
submission by April 1, 1998. The RFP stated that “[i]f the Commissioner
recommends the award of a lease, concession agreement or management
contract resulting from this RFP, it shall not be final or binding upon the State
unless and until it is approved by the Capital Budget Overview Committee and
the Governor and Executive Council.” Included with the RFP was a partial map
of Mount Sunapee State Park showing the existing ski area. The property to be
leased was depicted as a shaded area; the state park boundaries were not
shown. Sunapee alleges that it understood, based upon representations by
agents of the State, that the leased premises extended to the state park’s
northern and western boundaries.
Sunapee submitted its proposal, which the State accepted. DRED
Commissioner Robb Thomson and Sunapee president Timothy Mueller
negotiated a Lease and Operating Agreement (the Lease), which they signed on
April 30, 1998. Senior Assistant Attorney General Michael Walls approved the
Lease on May 4. Sunapee and Thomson had previously agreed in writing that
the State, through DRED, would complete a metes and bounds survey of the
leasehold premises. At the time of signing, however, no legal description of the
leasehold or map showing its metes and bounds had been provided to Sunapee
or attached to the Lease.
1 At some point after the lease agreement at issue was executed, Okemo assigned all of its right,
title, and interest therein to The Sunapee Difference. For ease of reference, we will treat Sunapee
as having been the party in interest all along and use the name Sunapee in this opinion to refer to
Okemo as well as The Sunapee Difference.
2
The Capital Budget Overview Committee approved the Lease on May 14.
Sometime after that date, but prior to June 10, the State produced a map and
property description with the metes and bounds of the leasehold area. The
leased premises as described in those documents did not extend to the
northern and western boundaries of the state park, but rather left a buffer area
between the park boundaries and leasehold boundaries. Those documents
were appended to the Lease when Governor Jeanne Shaheen and the Executive
Council approved it on June 10, 1998.
Sometime in 2000, Sunapee discovered that the northern and western
leasehold boundaries described in the Lease were not coterminous with those
of the state park. Sunapee’s attorney, George Nostrand, contacted Attorney
Walls, who agreed that an error had been made and suggested the lease be
amended to correct it. Director of Parks Richard McLeod also acknowledged an
error. Nevertheless, while Nostrand and Walls exchanged proposals for
amending the Lease between January and April 2001, the Lease was never
amended.
From the time it responded to the RFP, Sunapee had proposed expanding
the ski area to the east. During the RFP pre-submittal stage, the State
provided prospective operators with eastern expansion plans the State had
itself developed but had never implemented. Sunapee’s plans were thwarted,
however, when old growth forest was discovered in the area of its proposed
expansion. At that point, expanding to the west became the only viable option.
In 2000, Sunapee obtained options to buy privately-owned land
bordering the western boundary of the state park. Because the leasehold and
state park boundaries were not described as coterminous in the Lease,
however, this land could not be used for expansion without including the
buffer land in the leasehold. Accordingly, Sunapee requested that DRED
approve inclusion of the buffer land in an amendment to the Lease.
On February 27, 2002, George Bald, who was then commissioner of
DRED, announced that he would recommend such a lease amendment to the
Governor and Executive Council only after Sunapee met three enumerated
conditions. Around this time, Sunapee informed the State that its purchase
options on land adjacent to the state park would soon expire. Based upon
Bald’s assurances that he still favored the western expansion plan as long as
Sunapee satisfied his enumerated conditions, Sunapee exercised the purchase
options for $2.1 million.
Although Sunapee met Bald’s conditions, the expansion plan was not
presented to the Governor and Council while Bald was commissioner and while
Craig Benson was Governor. In 2004, Sean O’Kane became commissioner of
DRED. He imposed additional conditions, which Sunapee also met.
3
John Lynch became Governor in 2005. While campaigning, he strongly
opposed Sunapee’s plan for expansion. Once in office, Governor Lynch urged
Commissioner O’Kane to reject the plan, but O’Kane nevertheless
recommended that the State conditionally approve a lease amendment
expanding the leasehold. Governor Lynch, however, refused to bring the
amendment before the Executive Council.
In October 2007, Sunapee sued the State for damages or, alternatively,
mandamus relief, alleging breach of contract, estoppel, breach of an implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing, and inverse condemnation. The State
moved to dismiss, which the trial court denied except as to the mandamus
claim and so much of the inverse condemnation claim as concerned “land
outside the boundaries of [Sunapee’s] original lease.” The mandamus claim
was dismissed without prejudice and Sunapee was given leave to amend its bill
of complaint to add a claim for reformation of contract. Sunapee filed its
amended bill of complaint, adding a reformation count, in December 2008.
The State moved to strike the reformation claim on the ground that
Sunapee had assigned all of its right, title and interest in the Lease to CNL
Income Mount Sunapee, LLC (CNL), and, therefore, lacked standing to bring a
reformation claim. The State also moved for summary judgment on all claims.
The trial court granted that motion, assuming, without deciding, that Sunapee
had standing to seek reformation of the Lease. Sunapee appealed.
In its response in that appeal, the State again asserted that Sunapee
lacked standing to seek reformation of the Lease. Because standing is
jurisdictional, we declined to proceed with the appeal without a finding on the
issue. Furthermore, because standing is a question of fact and the record was
insufficient for us to determine the issue as a matter of law, we remanded for a
factual finding by the trial court. Although the State challenged standing only
with respect to the reformation claim, we remanded for a determination of
standing as to all counts, while otherwise retaining jurisdiction of the appeal.
On remand, the trial court ruled that: (1) a release of claims against the
State contained in the assignment to CNL (the Release) did not apply to
Sunapee and therefore did not bar any of its claims; and (2) Sunapee retained
the right to assert its reformation claim. The State filed an appeal, which we
accepted. Accordingly, the standing issue and all issues decided by summary
judgment are currently before us.
I. Standing
We begin with the issue of standing. As Sunapee notes, the State has
appealed only the trial court’s finding that Sunapee has standing to seek
reformation of the lease, and thus has conceded that Sunapee has standing as
4
to its other claims. We therefore consider Sunapee’s standing with respect to
the reformation claim only.
On appeal, the State concedes that the Release language applies only to
CNL and not to Sunapee. Nevertheless, it argues that the trial court erred in
finding that Sunapee has standing to pursue the reformation claim because:
(1) Sunapee, having “assigned all of its right, title, and interest in the Lease to
CNL[,] . . . is no longer a party to the Lease, and . . . [therefore] lacks standing
to seek its material reformation”; and (2) CNL, having acquired any claim for
reformation that Sunapee may have had, released those claims.
“In evaluating whether a party has standing to sue, we focus on whether
the party suffered a legal injury against which the law was designed to protect.”
Libertarian Party of N.H. v. Sec’y of State, 158 N.H. 194, 195 (2008) (quotation
omitted). We will uphold the trial court’s ruling on a jurisdictional challenge
based upon a lack of standing unless that decision is not supported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous. Birch Broad. v. Capitol Broad. Corp., 161 N.H.
192, 199 (2010).
The State’s first argument appears to rest on the “general rule that a
non-party to a contract has no remedy for breach of the contract,” Arlington
Trust Co. v. Estate of Wood, 123 N.H. 765, 767 (1983), and, by analogy to that
rule, no right to reform the contract. Thus, the State first asserts that following
the assignment to CNL, “Sunapee Difference [was] no longer a party to the
Lease.” See Tulley v. Sheldon, 159 N.H. 269, 272 (2009) (noting that a lease is
a form of contract). Sunapee counters that “[t]he assignment did not
completely terminate [its] privity with the State,” and asserts that it still stood
in privity of contract. Cf. Robo Sales, Inc. v. McIntosh, 495 S.W.2d 420, 423
(Mo. 1973) (noting that court of equity will reform a lease as between original
parties and those in privity). We pause, then, to consider the nature of the
relationship between the parties to a lease, and the effect of an assignment on
that relationship.
“Between the lessor and the lessee there is both privity of contract and
privity of estate, so long as the lessee retains the term.” The Trustees of
Dartmouth College v. N. Clough, 8 N.H. 22, 28 (1835). “A grant by the lessee of
his entire interest constitutes an assignment.” Machinist v. Koorkanian, 82
N.H. 249, 252 (1926). Such an assignment terminates the privity of estate
between lessor and lessee, but “there still remains the privity of contract
between them, created by the lease, which is not affected by the assignment.
The lessee still continues liable on his covenant [to pay rent] by virtue of the
privity of contract.” La Société v. Owen, 79 N.H. 318, 319 (1919) (quotation
omitted). This is true even where the lessor assents to the assignment. Id.
The assignor “remain[s] liable for the rent in the absence of novation,
substitution or release.” Machinist, 82 N.H. at 253.
5
As the foregoing makes clear, Sunapee is correct in claiming continued
privity of contract with the State. This does not, however, afford Sunapee
standing to reform the lease with respect to the description of the leasehold
property. While Sunapee, through privity of contract, remains liable on its
covenant to pay rent, “that liability will remain unchanged and unaffected by
any decree that can be made upon this bill [in equity], which is brought to
reform the instrument in a particular in no way connected with the amount of
the rent, or the times and mode of its payment.” Cole v. Lake Company, 54
N.H. 242, 272 (1874) (finding assignors were not necessary parties in an action
to reform a lease).
Nevertheless, the trial court found that “[i]n assigning the lease to CNL,
Sunapee specifically reserved its rights in the litigation against the State.” In
other words, notwithstanding what otherwise may have been the legal
consequence in the absence of an indication of contrary intent, cf. National
Reserve Co. v. Metropolitan Trust Co., 112 P.2d 598, 602 (Cal. 1941) (Given
“[a]n unqualified assignment . . . with no indication of the intent of the parties,
. . . the assignment of a contract passes from assignor to assignee an accrued
cause of action for . . . reformation.”), the parties here contracted to keep the
right of action in Sunapee.
We have held:
[T]he meaning of a contract is ultimately a matter of law for this
court to decide. In reviewing a contract, we will give its language
the interpretation that best reflects the parties’ intentions. In
interpreting a contract, we will consider the situation of the parties
at the time of their agreement and the object that was intended
thereby, together with all the provisions of their agreement taken
as a whole.
Butler v. Walker Power, 137 N.H. 432, 435 (1993) (quotations and citation
omitted).
The assignment here does not explicitly state that Sunapee retains the
right to sue for reformation. It first provides that Sunapee assigns to CNL “all
of [Sunapee’s] right, title and interest in, to and under the Lease Agreement,
subject to the terms and conditions of the Lease Agreement.” It then references
the ongoing litigation between Sunapee and the State in an estoppel provision,
in which Sunapee and the State (joining in the assignment for this purpose)
represent and warrant to CNL that “[a]s of the date of this Assignment: . . . (iii)
there are no existing claims, defenses or offsets against obligations of either
[the State] or [Sunapee] under the Lease Agreement, . . . (excepting therefrom
the claim by [Sunapee] with respect to the leasehold boundary).” Finally, it
6
contains a release that, in its final form, mentioned the reformation claim
explicitly:
1.5 Release by Assignee [CNL]. Assignee releases and forever
discharges [the State] from any and all claims, demands, benefits,
damages, relief, judgments, or the like relating to or resulting from
claims of [Sunapee] against the [State] relating to the subject
matter of the lawsuit known as The Sunapee Difference, LLC v.
State of New Hampshire, Merrimack County Superior Court Docket
No. 07-E-458, including any potential claim that could have or
may be brought by [Sunapee] relating to reformation of the
leasehold boundary; provided, however, Assignee retains all rights
with respect to other matters not currently known or existing.
The trial court found that “[t]he effect of [this] language clearly refers only to
CNL releasing its right to pursue the underlying matter” and, as noted above,
the State now concedes as much. The trial court also found telling Sunapee’s
absence from the release provision, as do we. The court found that the State
acknowledged Sunapee’s reservation of the claim when the State “required the
release from the assignee, CNL, without reference to Sunapee’s interest.”
Consideration of “the situation of the parties at the time of their
agreement and the object that was intended thereby,” Butler, 137 N.H. at 435
(quotations omitted), further supports the trial court’s conclusion. In seeking
the State’s approval of the assignment, Sunapee described the transaction as
“a sale and leaseback[,] . . . a form of financing” that Nostrand testified at his
deposition was common in the ski industry. Sunapee stated that the
contemplated transaction would involve an assignment of the Lease to CNL and
sublease of the premises back to Sunapee.
The asset purchase agreement between Sunapee and CNL specifically
excluded from the assets conveyed to CNL “[a]ny monetary judgment in favor of
Sunapee arising out of the Sunapee Lease Litigation,” thus clearly evincing the
intent between Sunapee and CNL to leave the chose in action with Sunapee.
The State notes, however, that it was never provided a copy of the asset
purchase agreement and was assured by Nostrand, after all reference to that
document was deleted from the assignment, that the purchase agreement was
“not an important part of the [a]ssignment.” We need not rely upon the asset
purchase agreement, however, to determine that the record contains ample
support for the trial court’s ruling on the standing issue.
On October 29, 2008, during the course of negotiations over the
assignment, the State requested information from Sunapee, including “[a]
written explanation regarding what the Sunapee Difference is proposing to
assign to CNL.” Specifically, in that letter, Associate Attorney General Anne
7
Edwards referenced Sunapee’s ongoing “litigation against the State over the
leasehold boundary and issues of expansion” and inquired as to “[e]xactly what
. . . the Sunapee Difference [was] planning to assign and/or do with the
pending lawsuit.” Edwards wrote that “[u]ltimately, the State can only agree to
an assignment of the lease approved by the Governor and Executive Council on
June 10, 1998.”
Nostrand replied that the “[a]ssignment only affects the existing
described leasehold and is not intended to deal with any of the issues
addressed in the pending lawsuit. All parties are aware that there is presently
nothing additionally to assign.” At the time, Sunapee had not yet moved to add
a claim for reformation, but neither had its mandamus claim been dismissed.
Accordingly, Edwards knew at the time that reformation “was a potential claim
that was out there” because “the request for mandamus was essentially a
request for reformation.”
On December 2, 2008, Senior Assistant Attorney General Anthony
Blenkinsop proposed release language that included claims for reformation of
the lease. Edwards testified at her deposition that “[t]he intent in offering this
language was to make sure that CNL waived any claims and any potential
claims to make sure that Sunapee Difference had no ability to bring a
reformation claim against the State.” Nevertheless, the State did not require
Sunapee to join the release and Edwards admitted that the State “knew that
Sunapee would not be willing to openly waive its lawsuit.” We conclude that
the record demonstrates that the State knew Sunapee intended to retain its
reformation claim against the State, and that the State acquiesced thereto.
This conclusion does not end our inquiry, however. Having determined
that the parties intended and agreed to keep the reformation claim in
Sunapee’s hands, we must now determine whether the law will countenance
that agreement and recognize Sunapee as the real party in interest. Cf.
Connecticut v. Physicians Health Services of CT, 287 F.3d 110, 118 (2d Cir.
2002) (finding that State, as assignee of plan participants’ rights to bring
equitable actions under ERISA, did not have standing where State did not have
requisite injury and “[e]ven if the assignments are valid as a contractual
matter, they . . . merely give the State the right to act as a nominal party”).
As noted above, ordinarily a lessee/assignor retains no interest in the
lease with respect to the property interest conveyed, even though it remains
liable under its covenant to pay rent. See Cole, 54 N.H. at 272. Thus, when a
lessee “assigns all of its rights, title and interest under a lease, it cannot assert
standing in an action predicated upon a breach of that lease.” Staples, Inc. v.
W.J.R. Associates, No. 04 CV 904 (SJ) (KAM), 2007 WL 1039535, at *2
(E.D.N.Y. Mar. 30, 2007) (discussing New York law). The United States District
Court, in Staples, explained the rule as follows: “The underlying logic of this
8
black letter law is simple: once a lessee has relinquished his interest and
obligations in the leased premises, there is no practical way he can be harmed
by a subsequent breach.” Id. Similarly, once a lessee breaks the privity of
estate by assigning the lease, any remedy that would affect the property
interest under the lease would ordinarily inure to the benefit of the assignee,
not the assignor. The situation is loosely analogous to that in Physician’s
Health Services, in which the State of Connecticut was held to lack standing
despite having contractually acquired from plan participants the right to bring
certain equitable actions under ERISA. Physicians Health Servs., 287 F.3d at
112. Although the contracts gave the State the nominal right to sue, they did
not “confer ‘actual’ rights or benefits under ERISA on the State.” Id. at 115.
The court held that the State “fail[ed] to meet the injury requirement because it
does not have a concrete private interest in the outcome of the suit.” Id. at 118
(quotation omitted). “Through the assignments, the State has acquired only
the right to control the equitable portion of a lawsuit seeking redress of the
assignor-participants’ rights under ERISA. None of the remedies being sought
would flow to the State as assignee.” Id.
We need not decide whether a party that holds a contractual right to
bring an equitable claim but does not stand to benefit from the remedy would
have standing to sue. Here, Sunapee has a concrete interest in the outcome of
the reformation action. As the sublessee of CNL, Sunapee remains in
possession of the leasehold property. The sublease, which was provided to the
State for review, provides that “[a]ny additional property that is hereafter added
to or incorporated into the [Lease] shall be automatically and immediately
added to and encompassed in the definition of Land upon the amendment or
modification of such [Lease].” The sublease also granted Sunapee a right of
first offer, under which, as described by Nostrand, “if CNL decides to
individually sell Mt. Sunapee’s lease/operations they would first offer it to
[Sunapee] for a specific price.” We conclude that Sunapee contractually
retained a sufficient interest in the outcome of the reformation claim to grant it
standing to sue. Cf. Birch Broad., 161 N.H. at 200 (assignor had standing
despite assigning rights under contract to acquire radio station from
defendants where defendants’ refusal to close transaction harmed assignor by
denying it benefits retained in assignment agreement, including right to
repurchase radio station from assignee under certain circumstances).
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court on this issue.
II. Sunapee’s Claims for Relief
We now turn to the claims disposed of on summary judgment.
In reviewing a grant of summary judgment, we look at the
affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn
therefrom, in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. If
9
our review of that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material
fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment.
Del Norte, Inc. v. Provencher, 142 N.H. 535, 537 (1997) (quotation, citation,
and brackets omitted). “We review the trial court’s application of the law to the
facts de novo.” Hopkins v. Fleet Bank - NH, 143 N.H. 385, 388 (1999).
A. Breach of Contract
Sunapee’s breach of contract claim alleges that the State, through the
Governor and Council, had a contractual duty under the Lease “to hear and
vote on a proposal for a Lease Amendment” and “to approve some form of
expansion outside of the present leasehold boundary.” The State breached that
duty, Sunapee alleges, “(A) by continually refusing to fulfill its promise to hear
proposals for amendments to the [Lease], (B) by refusing to consider expansion
when expansion had been promised to Sunapee, and (C) by refusing to correct
the leasehold description to coincide with the Park’s Northern and Western
boundaries.” The trial court rejected each claimed breach.
Sunapee first contends that the trial court erred in failing to find the
Lease ambiguous as to: (1) “whether the Governor alone can approve/deny an
amendment, or whether he is required to present the amendment to the
Executive Council for a combined vote”; and (2) “expansion rights.”
“A lease is a form of contract that is construed in accordance with the
standard rules of contract interpretation.” N.A.P.P. Realty Trust v. CC
Enterprises, 147 N.H. 137, 139 (2001) (quotation omitted). “The interpretation
of a contract, including whether a contract term is ambiguous, is ultimately a
matter of law for this court to decide. A clause is ambiguous when the
contracting parties reasonably differ as to its meaning.” Hopkins, 143 N.H. at
388 (quotation and citation omitted).
The first Lease provision that Sunapee claims is ambiguous is contained
in paragraph 27, which provides: “This Agreement may be amended, waived or
discharged only by an instrument in writing signed by the parties hereto and
only after approval of such amendment, waiver or discharge by the Governor
and Executive Council of the State of New Hampshire.” (Emphasis added.)
Sunapee contends that the term “‘[a]nd’ commonly means ‘along with or
together with.’” It therefore reads paragraph 27 to require the Governor to
submit its expansion plans to the Council for approval. The State, on the other
hand, contends that the language does not compel the Governor to present the
Executive Council with a proposed amendment that he opposes and for which
“his approval is necessary.” The trial court adopted the State’s view, ruling
that “the use of the conjunction ‘and’ to a layperson would mean that the
10
consent of the Governor is required independently of that of the Executive
Council.”
We disagree with the trial court and conclude that the parties reasonably
differ as to the meaning of paragraph 27. It could be read, as Sunapee
contends, to require submission of a proposed amendment to the Council so
that the Governor could act with that body’s advice. It could also be read, as
the State contends, to require, in any event, the approval of both the Governor
and the Council, so that rejection by the Governor would make submission to
the Council a futile exercise. Accordingly, we find paragraph 27 to be
ambiguous.
If [an] agreement’s language is ambiguous, it must be determined,
under an objective standard, what the parties, as reasonable
people, mutually understood the ambiguous language to mean. In
applying this standard, a court should examine the contract as a
whole, the circumstances surrounding execution and the object
intended by the agreement, while keeping in mind the goal of
giving effect to the intentions of the parties.
Birch Broad., 161 N.H. at 196-97 (citation omitted). While the process of
applying this standard “necessarily involves factual findings,” N.A.P.P. Realty
Trust, 147 N.H. at 141, and, thus, “[a]n argument between the parties about
the meaning of an ambiguous contractual term is typically an argument about
a material fact,” Hopkins, 143 N.H. at 389-90 (quotation omitted), here, we are
able to resolve the ambiguity as a matter of law.
Paragraph 27 sets forth the method by which the lease may, among other
things, be amended. We presume that the parties, as reasonable people,
intended this method to be one that would validly effectuate an amendment
under the law. We therefore also presume that the parties intended the
provision to comply with RSA 4:40 (Supp. 2012), the statute relating to
disposal of state-owned real estate. That statute provides that “all requests for
the disposal or leasing of state-owned properties shall be . . . [submitted] to the
governor and council for approval.” RSA 4:40, I. We conclude that the
language “approval of such amendment . . . by the Governor and Executive
Council” in the Lease was intended by the parties to refer to approval by the
Governor and Council according to RSA 4:40. Thus, we further conclude that
the parties intended the phrase “Governor and Executive Council” in the Lease
to mean the same thing as the phrase “governor and council” in the statute.
RSA 21:31-a (2012) defines “[t]he phrase ‘governor and council’ . . . [to]
mean the governor with the advice and consent of the council.” The Supreme
Judicial Court of Massachusetts has interpreted a phrase equivalent to “with
the advice and consent of the council” as follows:
11
As to th[e] class of cases, where the Constitution declares that the
power to act is in the Governor, or that the act may be done by the
Governor, “by and with the advice of council,” or “by and with the
advice and consent of the council,” we are of opinion that the
responsibility rests primarily upon the Governor to determine as
the supreme executive magistrate whether any action is called for,
and what action, if any, is desirable; and that the provision for
advice of the council is a requirement that their approval and
concurrence shall accompany the affirmative act and enter into it
before it becomes complete and effective. . . . [Accordingly], the
natural course of proceeding would seem to be that [the Governor]
should seek such aid as he might desire from any proper source,
and not be obliged to ask advice, in the first instance, from an
official body whose opinion could never relieve him from the duty
of deciding.
In re Opinion of the Justices, 78 N.E. 311, 312 (Mass. 1906). Our case law is
in accord. See Brouillard v. Governor and Council, 114 N.H. 541, 547 (1974)
(where statute called for appointment of official by governor and council, “[i]n
accordance with RSA 21:31-a the sole power of appointment lies with the
Governor subject to the consent of the council” (quotation omitted)); cf. Opinion
of the Justices, 340 A.2d 25, 30 (Me. 1975) (noting that under statute calling
for appointment of official by the Governor with the advice and consent of
Council, Governor and Council act independently, the Governor “may or may
not seek the advice of the Council,” and “it is no part of the duties of the
Council to attempt to dictate the nomination or to originate the action”).
Guided by the foregoing principles, we conclude that RSA 4:40 would not
require the Governor to put before the Executive Council a proposed lease of
state lands that the Governor does not approve. Addressing a similar issue,
namely, whether the Governor was required to submit a petition to pardon a
convicted criminal to the Council, where the Massachusetts Constitution rests
the power of pardoning “in the Governor, by and with the advice of council,” In
re Opinion of the Justices, 78 N.E. at 311, the Massachusetts high court
opined that the Governor was not “obliged to bring before the council an
application for pardon when he was plainly of opinion that no pardon should
be granted. Nothing could ever be gained by asking the council to give advice
under such conditions.” In re Opinion of the Justices, 78 N.E. at 312.
Similarly, here, RSA 4:40 did not require the Governor to present the proposed
lease amendment to the Executive Council when he did not approve the
amendment himself. Thus, because we interpret paragraph 27 to conform to
RSA 4:40, paragraph 27 also did not require Governor Lynch to present the
proposed lease amendment to the Executive Council. We affirm the trial court
on this issue.
12
Sunapee also asserts ambiguity regarding the right to expand. Sunapee
argues that “[a] right to expand is necessarily implied in the lease.” While that
implied right does “not guarantee a particular form of expansion,” Sunapee
asserts that it does “guarantee that all expansion could not be denied.”
In rejecting Sunapee’s argument, the trial court “recognize[d] that there
is substantial evidentiary support for a conclusion that all parties at the time
the Lease was executed contemplated and even desired the future expansion of
the ski area.” It concluded, however, that “no ‘right’ to expand or ‘guarantee’ of
expansion of the ski area can be found in the [Lease’s] language.” We, too, find
no such right or guarantee, either express or implied, in the Lease.
Accordingly, we affirm the trial court on this point.
Sunapee further contends that the State breached the Lease by “fail[ing]
to draw the leasehold boundary lines as promised.” We agree with the trial
court that this argument is more properly addressed in connection with
Sunapee’s reformation claim, and, therefore, affirm the trial court’s ruling on
the breach of contract claim.
B. Estoppel
Sunapee next argues that the trial court erred in granting summary
judgment in favor of the State on Sunapee’s estoppel claims. The parties
appear to agree that only claims of equitable estoppel are before us. A party
making such a claim must prove four elements:
first, a representation or concealment of material facts made with
knowledge of those facts; second, the party to whom the
representation was made must have been ignorant of the truth of
the matter; third, the representation must have been made with
the intention of inducing the other party to rely upon it; and
fourth, the other party must have been induced to rely upon the
representation to his or her injury.
A.J. Cameron Sod Farms v. Continental Ins. Co., 142 N.H. 275, 281 (1997)
(quotation omitted). With respect to the last element, the reliance of the party
claiming estoppel must have been reasonable. City of Concord v. Tompkins,
124 N.H. 463, 468 (1984).
Sunapee advances two estoppel claims based upon separate
representations by the State: that Sunapee would be permitted to expand the
leasehold area and that the leasehold’s northern and western boundaries
would be coterminous with those of the state park. We examine each claim in
turn.
13
The trial court found that the first claim, relating to expansion of the
leasehold area, was contradicted by the Lease’s plain language. In response,
Sunapee reprises its argument that the Lease’s language is ambiguous and, “in
light of the extrinsic evidence, grants [it] a right to expansion.” Having
concluded above that the Lease contains no express or implied right or
guarantee of expansion, we need not consider this claim further.
With respect to Sunapee’s second claim of estoppel, relating to the
leasehold’s northern and western boundaries, the trial court found that it failed
with respect to two of the required elements: false representation or
concealment of a material fact and reasonable reliance. The court first found
“inadequate support for a finding that Commissioner Thomson or other State
official knowingly made a false representation or concealed a material fact.” We
disagree with the trial court’s determination, and conclude that Sunapee has
raised a genuine issue of material fact.
The record establishes that on January 15, 1998, DRED issued the RFP,
which included a map of the leased premises dated October 1997. The map
was prepared at the direction of Thomson, who instructed that “the leasehold
area [be defined] as closely to the existing ski area and ski trails. Only what
was necessary for the existing operation of that ski area and no more.” Thus,
at his deposition, Thomson answered affirmatively to the question of whether
he “knew that the area that [the State was] offering for lease did not come up to
the edge of the park boundary on the north and west.”
Sunapee’s general manager, Donald MacAskill, testified at his deposition
that at a site visit in 1997 or early 1998, “the way the leased portion of the land
was presented[] [was such] that any interested parties that would submit a
proposal would be leasing the entire ski resort, as well as those lands adjacent
to and around the perimeter of the ski trail and lift network.” Thus, “it was
[Sunapee’s] understanding that lands to the north and to the west, that the
leased portion of the ski area would be – those lands could be coterminous or, I
should say, the boundary of the RFP would be coterminous with the state-park
boundary.” As previously noted, the map provided in the RFP is shaded to
depict the area leased, but does not show the boundaries of the state park.
Thus, as Commissioner Thomson acknowledged in his deposition testimony,
one cannot tell from the map where the park boundary is in relation to the
shaded area.
MacAskill testified at his deposition that between the time the RFP was
issued and Sunapee submitted its proposal, he spoke to Thomson three or four
times and was told “that the leasehold would include the land around the
perimeter of the lifts and trail network. And, specifically on the north and west
side, would be coterminous with the state-park boundary.” Mueller testified
14
that at one or two meetings he had with Thomson prior to execution of the
Lease, Thomson also told him that the leasehold boundary would be
coterminous with the state park boundary on the north and west. Thomson
denied making that statement to Mueller, but, when asked if he could
“remember saying anything to Mr. Mueller about the park boundary and its
relationship to the leasehold area,” he stated that he did not recall. In
addition, despite admitting that he knew the boundaries were not coterminous,
Thomson could not recall ever telling that to any of the people who responded
to the RFP. Similarly, when asked if he ever told any of those people “that
there was a buffer zone being preserved between the park boundary on the
north and west side and the area [the State was] leasing,” Thomson responded
“No.” We conclude, therefore, that Sunapee raised a genuine issue of material
fact as to whether Thomson knowingly made a false representation or
concealed a material fact relating to the leasehold’s northern and western
boundaries.
The trial court also found, however, that “[e]ven if Sunapee could show
that a State official knowingly made a false representation or concealed a
material fact, [it] cannot show it was reasonable in relying on any such
representation.” It reasoned that, because both the RFP and the Lease stated
that the Governor and Council must approve the Lease and any amendment
thereto, “Sunapee knew that neither DRED nor the Attorney General had the
authority to bind the State by promises made during the lease negotiations or
by a promise to enter into an amendment to increase the leasehold after the
lease had been approved.”
Under New Hampshire law, the State is not estopped by an unauthorized
statement of its official. Turco v. Town of Barnstead, 136 N.H. 256, 262 (1992);
City of Concord, 124 N.H. at 468. “We have long recognized that all private
parties dealing with government officials are charged with notice of the extent
and limits of their authority.” City of Concord, 124 N.H. at 470 (quotation
omitted). “Governmental estoppel is appropriate,” however, “when government
officials are acting within their prescribed sphere and functions, and are
exerting no excess of authority.” Id. at 468 (quotations, citation, and brackets
omitted). Accordingly, we examine the authority of the State officials in this
case.
Laws 1997, chapter 119 directed that the commissioner of DRED “shall,
in consultation with the committee established in section 2 of th[at] act,
develop and issue a request for proposals to include but not be limited to a
lease, concession agreement, or management contract for the Mount Sunapee
. . . ski area operation[ ].” Laws 1997, 119:1, I. Thus, Thomson was
authorized to develop the RFP, which we interpret to include the authority to
define the leasehold. Thomson testified at his deposition that he directed the
preparation of the map appended to the RFP and instructed how it should be
15
drawn “to define the leasehold area.” That later approval of the Lease by the
Governor and Council was required does not affect our conclusion that at the
time Thomson allegedly made representations to Sunapee about the leasehold
boundary, it was within his authority to do so.
We must determine, nevertheless, whether the requirement of Governor
and Council approval still precludes, as a matter of law, the availability of
estoppel in this case. The State asserts that pursuant to RSA 4:40, only the
Governor and Council are authorized to lease state lands. Accordingly, the
State argues, Sunapee “was bound to understand that the Commissioner of
DRED could not promise or agree to the ultimate leasehold boundary.”
In City of Concord, we noted a “changing attitude toward the application
of governmental estoppel” expressed in decisions from other jurisdictions. City
of Concord, 124 N.H. at 471. Thus, we cited the observation by one court that
“some forms of erroneous advice are so closely connected to the basic fairness
of the administrative decision making process that the government may be
estopped from disavowing the misstatement.” Id. at 472 (quotation omitted).
We also cited cases from other jurisdictions holding “that a finding of
affirmative misconduct on the part of a government official” can support a
claim for governmental estoppel. Id. (quotation omitted). “In considering the
imposition of estoppel against the government, courts have employed an equity
balancing test, weighing the public interest in preventing the government from
capriciously dealing with its citizens, against the risk, posed by estoppel, of
undermining important governmental interests.” Id.
Here, Sunapee has alleged the kind of capricious dealing or affirmative
misconduct we discussed in City of Concord. Thus, we conclude that, upon
the record before us, the balance of equities weighs against a strict application
of our governmental estoppel rules. Cf. id. at 473 (finding it unnecessary to
depart, in that case, from existing New Hampshire case law). We note,
however, that we signal no general departure from our case law on
governmental estoppel and limit our holding on this issue to the facts of this
case.
We must now determine whether Sunapee has raised any genuine issue
of material fact regarding its allegations of official misconduct or capricious
dealing that would require reversal of the trial court’s grant of summary
judgment on this issue. We conclude that it has. In addition to the issue of
whether Thomson affirmatively represented to Sunapee that the boundaries of
the leasehold and the state park were coterminous, we conclude that Sunapee
has raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Thomson knowingly
delayed providing Sunapee with a map showing the true boundary of the
leasehold or a metes and bounds description of the same prior to Sunapee’s
execution of the Lease. When asked in his deposition whether, “[p]rior to
16
signing [the Lease], . . . [he] contact[ed] anyone from the State to express any
concerns or thoughts about there not being any documents attached to it,”
Mueller testified that he did, and that “[i]t was explained that they would come
after.” Sunapee argues that “[t]here is evidence that Commissioner Thomson
knowingly delayed the production of a map and legal description until well after
the lease was signed” by Sunapee. It notes that Thomson’s deposition
testimony that a surveyed map could not have been produced and provided
with the RFP because of “[t]he time involved and it’s rather difficult to get on
the ground during the snow season” is contradicted by the testimony of Ronald
Duddy, a surveyor/mapper with DRED, who produced the surveyed map and
legal description. Duddy’s deposition testimony indicates that he did not
receive the instruction to produce the map until the beginning of May 1998,
after Sunapee signed the lease. When asked whether there was “any reason
[he] couldn’t have done it in October as opposed to May,” Duddy responded,
“No.” We conclude that Sunapee has raised a genuine issue of material fact
requiring us to reverse the grant of summary judgment on this claim. We note
that the trial court addressed reliance only with respect to Thomson’s authority
and we express no opinion as to the reasonableness of Sunapee’s reliance in
any other respect.
C. Breach of Implied Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
Sunapee alleges that the State, through the Governor’s refusal to submit
its expansion proposal to the Executive Council and “to approve some form” of
expansion, exceeded the limits on its discretionary power under the Lease
imposed by the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. See Centronics
Corp. v. Genicom Corp., 132 N.H. 133, 143-44 (1989) (discussing implied
covenant of good faith and fair dealing). The trial court concluded that this
claim failed as a matter of law. It noted that “implied covenants are qualified
and restrained by any express covenants of a more limited character,” Great
Lakes Aircraft Co. v. City of Claremont, 135 N.H. 270, 284 (1992) (quotation
omitted), and concluded that the Governor’s authority under the Lease
comported with his power under RSA 4:40 to reject any proposed lease
amendment. We agree. Having concluded that paragraph 27 allowed the
Governor to decline to submit the proposed amendment to the Executive
Council, we will not recognize an implied covenant inconsistent with that
authority. See Great Lakes, 135 N.H. at 284. Accordingly, we affirm the trial
court on this issue.
D. Reformation
Sunapee’s reformation claim alleges that State officials represented to it
that the leasehold’s northern and western boundaries would be coterminous
with the state park boundaries and promised to later provide a boundary map
and written description. According to Sunapee, when the State produced the
17
description after Sunapee executed the Lease, it did not match what had been
represented and agreed upon. Sunapee alleges that representatives of the
State promised to correct the error but have not done so.
“The plaintiff’s burden of proof in a reformation action is a heavy one.”
Sommers v. Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 690 (1999) (quotation omitted).
Reformation of an instrument for mutual mistake of fact
requires that the party seeking reformation demonstrate by clear
and convincing evidence that (1) there was an actual agreement
between the parties, (2) there was an agreement to put the
agreement in writing, and (3) there is a variance between the prior
agreement and the writing.
Id. at 689-90 (quotation omitted). Although parol evidence generally may not
be considered to vary or contradict a written agreement, “it may establish that
the writing itself does not reflect the actual agreement reached by the parties.”
Id. at 690.
The trial court granted summary judgment to the State on this claim
because it found that “Sunapee cannot show by clear and convincing evidence
that the parties had an actual agreement” that the leasehold and state park
boundaries would be coterminous on the northern and western sides. The
court found that even if Sunapee could show an agreement between itself and
DRED, there is no evidence in the record that the Governor and Council
understood the boundaries to be coterminous. Rather, in fact, as the court
noted, the written agreement presented to the Governor and Council contained
the narrowly-drawn boundary.
Sunapee counters that the Governor and Council were not the
negotiators of the Lease. Rather, it alleges that Thomson was the authorized
negotiator, that he signed the Lease on behalf of the State, as he was
authorized to do, and that he “was obviously authorized to bind the state to
promises he made concerning the leasehold boundary.” Thus, Sunapee’s
reformation claim may be read to assert that the parties reached an agreement
as to the leasehold boundary, that the agreement was to be reduced to writing
in the form of a map and legal description to be appended to the Lease, and
that the map and description later appended and provided to the Governor and
Council for approval did not reflect the parties’ original agreement.
That the Governor and Council were given the more tightly-drawn
leasehold description, and therefore presumably did not share the alleged
misapprehension over the boundary at the time they approved the Lease, does
not preclude Sunapee’s reformation claim. Sunapee bases its reformation
claim on the alleged misrepresentation by then DRED Commissioner Thomson
18
that “the leasehold boundary on the north and west would be the State Park
boundary,” despite which, “[t]he boundary was purposefully drawn more
tightly.” Thus, Sunapee effectively asserts fraud by the State’s agent, obviating
the need to prove a mutual mistake of fact. Cf. A.J. Cameron Sod Farms, 142
N.H. at 283 (“Absent fraud, reformation requires a mutual mistake of fact.”);
Larchmont Properties v. Cooperman, 80 S.E.2d 733, 738 (Va. 1954) (noting
that “the right to have reformation is not limited solely to cases of [mutual]
mistake” but “may be granted where there is mistake on the part of one party
and misrepresentation and fraud perpetrated by the other party to the hurt
and detriment of the former”). As such, Sunapee’s reformation claim closely
resembles its estoppel claim, and, for the same reasons we held that summary
judgment was improperly granted with respect to the estoppel claim, we reverse
the grant of summary judgment on Sunapee’s reformation claim. Cf. Darner
Motor Sales v. Universal Underwriters, 682 P.2d 388, 401 (Ariz. 1984) (noting
that “[t]he same disputed material facts which demand trial on the merits
regarding the estoppel remedy can also be marshalled under the reformation
theory”).
E. Inverse Condemnation
Sunapee asserts inverse condemnation, alleging that the right to expand
that was promised to it “is an important and vital part of [its] property interest
in the leased premises” and that the right has been taken by the State, without
compensation, “through the actions of the Governor in refusing to” present
Sunapee’s expansion proposal to the Executive Council. See N.H. CONST. pt.
I, art. 12; U.S. CONST. amends. V, XIV. The Trial Court (Nicolosi, J.) granted
the State’s motion for summary judgment on this issue, ruling that because
Sunapee lacks a property right to use land outside the leasehold boundary as
presently written, no property right was taken. The court premised its ruling,
in part, upon the “[a]bsen[ce of] a successful claim for reformation.” Because
we have reversed the grant of summary judgment on the reformation claim, we
accordingly vacate the court’s ruling on this issue.
The Trial Court (Mangones, J.) had previously dismissed so much of
Sunapee’s inverse condemnation claim as concerned “land outside the
boundaries of [Sunapee’s] original lease.” This portion of the court’s order does
not make completely clear: (1) whether the land to which it refers is the land
Sunapee owns outside the State Park boundary or the buffer zone within the
State Park boundary; or (2) the basis upon which it differentiates that land
from the land on which it allowed Sunapee’s inverse condemnation claim to go
forward. Accordingly, we vacate the partial dismissal of Sunapee’s inverse
condemnation claim and remand for consideration of its entire inverse
condemnation claim in light of this opinion.
19
We note, however, that it is by no means clear that, upon these facts, an
inverse condemnation claim can be brought as an alternative to a breach of
contract claim. We have never addressed the issue, but courts in other
jurisdictions have analyzed analogous claims under varying theories. See, e.g.,
Barlow & Haun, Inc. v. United States, 87 Fed. Cl. 428, 438 (2009) (“Ordinarily,
the Government’s interference with contractual rights arising under a contract
with the Government will give rise to a breach of contract action, rather than a
taking claim.”); Tamerlane, Ltd. v. United States, 80 Fed. Cl. 724, 738 (2008)
(noting that “when a contract between a private party and the Government
creates the property right subject to a Fifth Amendment claim, the proper
remedy for infringement lies in contract, not taking”), aff’d, 550 F.3d 1135 (Fed.
Cir. 2008); Carl v. State, 665 S.E.2d 787, 796, 797 (N.C. Ct. App. 2008) (ruling
that because a claim under North Carolina Constitution “is available only in
the absence of an adequate state remedy,” plaintiffs’ taking claim should have
been dismissed where their breach of contract claims would “vindicate the
same rights” (quotations omitted)); State v. Holland, 221 S.W.3d 639, 643 (Tex.
2007) (noting that “[t]he State, in acting within a color of right to take or
withhold property in a contractual situation, is acting akin to a private citizen
and not under any sovereign powers”). We decline to address this issue in the
absence of briefing, however, and leave it to the trial court, should the issue
come before it on remand, to address in the first instance.
F. Attorney’s Fees
The State notes that Sunapee seeks an award of attorney’s fees in this
action and argues that we should deny the same because Sunapee “has not
presented a single argument in support of such an award.” We decline to
address this issue, however, because consideration of an attorney’s fees award
is premature at this stage of the litigation.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; vacated in part; and
remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
20