THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2011-095
J.K.S. REALTY, LLC & a.
v.
CITY OF NASHUA
Argued: April 5, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 10, 2012
Greene Lombardi Law Group, P.L.L.C., of Bedford (Arthur G. Greene on
the brief and orally), and Prunier & Prolman, P.A., of Nashua (Gerald R.
Prunier on the brief), for the petitioners.
Office of Corporation Counsel, of Nashua (James M. McNamee on the
brief, and Stephen M. Bennett orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, J.K.S. Realty, LLC and L.J.J. Realty, LLC,
appeal a ruling of the Superior Court (Lynn, J.) that the respondent, the City of
Nashua (City), did not take the petitioners’ property by inverse condemnation.
We affirm.
The following facts were either found by the trial court, are undisputed
by the parties, or are supported in the record. The petitioners are two trusts
that own, as tenants in common, a 26.8 acre parcel of land in Nashua (the
property). The property was purchased in 1980 for purposes of development or
sale to a developer. It is bisected by Baldwin Street, which provides the most
feasible access to the property. The northern section of the property abuts
railroad tracks. The property is located in the area of the planned Broad Street
Parkway (BSP).
The BSP was conceived by the City in the 1970’s “to address air quality
on Main Street . . . as well as congestion in downtown Nashua and, also, to
provide a second river crossing” over the Nashua River. In 1985, the BSP was
included in the City’s master plan. That same year, an environmental impact
study began for an environmental impact statement (EIS), which was required
for the BSP to receive federal funding. The EIS was completed in 1997 and the
BSP was approved that same year. At that point, it was decided that the New
Hampshire Department of Transportation (DOT) would take over the project
and manage it on behalf of the City. This was intended to be the final design
stage for the BSP and it was expected that the project would be completed in
2004; however, over the next several years various issues arose that resulted in
changes to the design and delayed implementation of the project.
Initially, the BSP was to be a four-lane roadway with an at-grade
crossing over the adjacent railroad right-of-way, creating what was to be called
Sargent Avenue Extension. The proposed Sargent Avenue Extension would
have discontinued Baldwin Street and crossed the petitioners’ property. As a
result, the petitioners were concerned about access to their property because
under this plan access would be from the proposed Sargent Avenue Extension,
the BSP, or streets located at the southern boundary of the property, which
“ha[d] very steep access issues.”
While never formalized, it was anticipated that the BSP would require
taking a 200-foot right-of-way across the northern portion of the property
parallel to the railroad tracks. From 1998 to 2003, many parcels surrounding
the property were acquired for the BSP and, in 1998, the petitioners were told
that the State might take the entirety of their property in the fall of 1999.
However, in early 1999, they learned that the State was unsure as to how
much land would be needed for the BSP and whether the petitioners’ property
would be taken in its entirety.
In or around 2000, the railroad objected to an at-grade crossing and DOT
changed the plan to have Sargent Avenue Extension be a “connecter loop” with
an above-grade crossing to connect to the BSP. Under this plan, the
“connector loop” extended onto a significant portion of the property, which
raised the possibility of a total taking of the property. At some point, a dispute
arose between the City and DOT as to the plans. In 2003, the plan was again
revised to reduce the BSP from four lanes to two lanes and to eliminate the
proposed Sargent Avenue Extension and instead retain Baldwin Street with a
2
newly constructed bridge. This plan would allow access to the petitioners’
property via Baldwin Street.
In 1983, the petitioners began to have the property rezoned to allow for
multi-family development, which was accomplished in January 1985. As a
stipulation of the rezoning process, the petitioners dedicated an eighty-foot
right-of-way along the northern border of the property for the purposes of the
BSP. From 1980 to 1994, the petitioners spent between $82,000 and $127,000
preparing the property for sale.
Since 1998, the petitioners made numerous unsuccessful attempts to
sell the property, or a portion thereof, including entering into three separate
purchase and sale agreements. At least one of the buyers expressed concern
with the topography of the property, including “the narrowness of the site, the
wetlands . . . and the ‘conservation buffer’ along the property line near the
residential subdivision.” The last purchase and sale agreement was entered
into on October 7, 2002, for sale of the entire property at a purchase price of
$4,000,000 with a closing in April 2004. At some point, the buyer learned that
the City was unsure whether it would take the property for the BSP and asked
the petitioners for an extension until he learned what the City intended to do.
The petitioners decided to keep the property until it was resolved whether the
City was going to take the property and, as a result, the sale did not go
through.
Since 2004, the petitioners have not marketed the property. However,
they have harvested timber on the property for a profit and there was testimony
that, unless prohibited by zoning regulations, the petitioners “would have been
able to undertake” building “single-family residences, . . . conservation
subdivisions, modular homes, manufactured homes, elderly housing,
commercial uses, and multi-family developments.”
In 2009, the petitioners filed a petition for inverse condemnation,
requesting that the trial court rule that the City took the property by inverse
condemnation on April 10, 2004, and seeking damages, including but not
limited to, the fair market value of the property on that date. They alleged that
the delays and continuing uncertainty regarding the BSP deprived them of all
economically viable use of their property as of April 2004, when the last
purchase and sale agreement fell through.
Following a three-day bench trial, the trial court found “that the
continuing uncertainty regarding the status of the BSP has [not] been so
substantial and prolonged as to rise to the level of a taking.” This appeal
followed.
3
As an initial matter, we address the City’s motion to dismiss this appeal.
The petitioners filed their notice of appeal in early February 2011. The record
indicates that, on March 16, 2011, DOT filed a declaration of taking and a
$1,315,000 deposit of damages with the New Hampshire Board of Tax and
Land Appeals (BTLA) to acquire a portion of the petitioners’ property by
eminent domain. See RSA 498-A:5 (2010). On March 31, the petitioners
requested a withdrawal of the deposit of damages and thereafter filed an
answer with the BTLA contesting the sufficiency of the damages amount. See
RSA 498-A:11, III (2010).
The City argues that it is inconsistent for the petitioners to seek damages
for a total taking in 2004 in this case while also seeking damages in the BTLA
proceeding based on a partial taking in 2010. Relying upon the doctrine of
election of remedies, the City maintains that the petitioners “could potentially
recover twice for a single alleged wrong” and “should elect one of those
remedies, but should not seek both.” The petitioners contend that they have
elected their remedy by filing the inverse condemnation claim in superior court.
As for the BTLA proceeding, they contend that they are merely defendants
whose participation is limited to protecting their rights under RSA chapter 498-
A.
“The purpose of the doctrine of election of remedies is not to prevent
recourse to any remedy, or to alternative remedies, but to prevent double
recoveries or redress for a single wrong.” 25 Am. Jur. 2d Election of Remedies
§ 3 (2004) (footnotes omitted). “Its purpose has also been described as
preventing a litigant from presenting inconsistent causes of action or testimony
before a court.” Id. It “does not prohibit assertion of multiple causes of action,
nor does it preclude pursuit of consistent remedies, even to final adjudication,
so long as the plaintiff receives but one satisfaction.” Pa. Nat. Mut. Cas. Ins.
Co. v. Pine Bluff, 354 F.3d 945, 951 (8th Cir. 2004) (citation omitted). Thus,
we have “held that the formal doctrine of election of remedies should be
confined to cases where the plaintiff may be unjustly enriched or the defendant
has actually been misled by the plaintiff’s conduct or the result is otherwise
inequitable or res judicata can be applied.” In re Estate of Ward, 129 N.H. 4,
10 (1986) (quotation omitted).
None of these circumstances applies to this case. First, unjust
enrichment would become relevant only if the petitioners attempted to collect
twice on the same cause of action. Id. at 11. Here, the petitioners avow that
they do not intend to collect twice. They contend that if they prevail in this
appeal, the deposit paid to them in the BTLA proceeding would be applied to
the damages owed under any inverse condemnation award in this case. They
further maintain that if they do not succeed in this appeal, the declaration of
taking will proceed before the BTLA and they will be entitled only to damages
awarded in that proceeding. Thus, the petitioners are not attempting to collect
4
twice on the same cause of action. Further, the petitioners have not misled the
City by accepting the deposit of damages in the declaration of taking
proceeding. In both proceedings, the petitioners maintain that the City has
taken their property and they are entitled to just compensation. There is no
suggestion that the City was unaware that the petitioners withdrew the deposit
of damages for the partial taking and are seeking additional compensation
before the BTLA. The petitioners’ pursuit of this appeal despite accepting the
deposit for a partial taking simply reflects their continued belief that they are
entitled to compensation for a taking of their entire property. Finally, res
judicata does not bar this appeal because no final adjudication has occurred in
the BTLA proceeding. Accordingly, the City’s motion to dismiss is denied. We
now turn to the merits of the petitioners’ appeal.
We begin by addressing the proper standard of review. On appeal, the City
maintains that we should review the trial court’s order for an unsustainable
exercise of discretion. We disagree. Whether the City’s actions are sufficient to
constitute a taking is a question of law reviewed de novo. Cf. Arcidi v. Town of
Rye, 150 N.H. 694, 698 (2004). Other jurisdictions apply a similar standard. See
Colorado Springs v. Andersen Mahon Ent., 260 P.3d 29, 32 (Colo. Ct. App. 2010);
Fitger Brewing Co. v. State, 416 N.W.2d 200, 205 (Minn. Ct. App. 1987); Tarrant
Regional Water Dist. v. Gragg, 43 S.W.3d 609, 615 (Tex. App. 2001), aff’d, 151
S.W.3d 546 (Tex. 2004); Brenner v. New Richmond Regional Airport, 816 N.W.2d
291, 299 (Wis. 2012). We will defer to the trial court’s factual findings, provided
there is evidence in the record to support them, but we review its application of
the law to the facts de novo. See ACAS Acquisitions v. Hobert, 155 N.H. 381, 400
(2007); Colorado Springs, 260 P.3d at 32.
The petitioners argue that the trial court erred under the New Hampshire
Constitution and existing case law by ruling that the City did not commit a
taking by inverse condemnation. Inverse condemnation occurs when a
governmental body takes property in fact but does not formally exercise the
power of eminent domain. Arcidi, 150 N.H. at 698. When this occurs, the
governmental body has committed an unconstitutional taking and the property
owner has a cause of action for compensation. Id. “Governmental action which
substantially interferes with, or deprives a person of, the use of his property in
whole or in part, may . . . constitute a taking, even if the land itself is not taken.”
Sundell v. Town of New London, 119 N.H. 839, 845 (1979); see Eaton v. B.C. &
M.R.R., 51 N.H. 504, 534 (1872) (“To the extent to which the owner is . . .
substantially deprived of its legitimate use, . . . he should be paid.” (quotations
omitted)); United States v. General Motors Corp., 323 U.S. 373, 378 (1945)
(“Governmental action short of acquisition of title or occupancy has been held, if
its effects are so complete as to deprive the owner of all or most of his interest in
the subject matter, to amount to a taking.”).
5
[T]he interference must be more than mere inconvenience or
annoyance and must be sufficiently direct, sufficiently peculiar,
and of sufficient magnitude to cause us to conclude that fairness
and justice, as between the State and the citizen, requires that the
burden imposed be borne by the public and not by the individual
alone.
Sundell, 119 N.H. at 845 (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
While “[i]nverse condemnation may be effected through either physical
act or regulation,” Pennichuck Corp. v. City of Nashua, 152 N.H. 729, 733
(2005), “[t]he right to recover for inverse condemnation . . . cannot be made to
depend upon the means by which the property is taken.” Sundell, 119 N.H. at
846. “We look to the individual circumstances of each case to determine
whether there is an unconstitutional taking.” Allianz Global Risks U.S. Ins. Co.
v. State of N.H., 161 N.H. 121, 124 (2010) (quotation omitted). The question is
one of degree and its resolution is governed by no set test. Funtown v. Town of
Conway, 127 N.H. 312, 317 (1985). Factual differences in each case will affect
the determination of whether a compensable taking has occurred. Id.
Here, the petitioners argue that “[t]he City’s actions have caused the
subject property to be under a ‘cloud of condemnation’ due to years of
uncertainty as to the date of acquisition, the amount of land to be acquired by
the City and the access that would be available for any remainder.” As a
result, they maintain that “the City’s actions concerning the development of the
[BSP] over an extended period of time rendered [their property] impossible to
develop or sell to a developer,” effectively taking the property as of April 2004.
We have not had occasion to address whether prolonged government
planning and delayed condemnation proceedings constitute a taking. However,
“the weight of authority in other states and in the federal courts [is] that mere
plotting and planning by a governmental body in anticipation of the taking of
land for public use, and preliminary steps taken to accomplish this, does not,
in itself, constitute a taking.” Colorado Springs, 260 P.3d at 33 (collecting
cases); see Weintraub v. Flood Control District of Maricopa Co., 456 P.2d 936,
939 (Ariz. 1969) (noting that “[o]ther jurisdictions have uniformly held that the
mere publication of the fact that particular or specified property may be” the
subject of a future condemnation proceeding, “or the plotting or planning
thereof, is not a taking or damaging of such property entitling the owner to be
compensated therefor”). The reasons most frequently cited for this rule are
that plotting or planning does not, in itself, amount to an invasion
of property, or deprive the owner of the use and enjoyment thereof;
that the projected improvement may be abandoned and the
property never actually disturbed; that the threat or possibility of
6
condemnation is one of the conditions upon which all property is
held; and that the rule is in aid of the growth and expansion of
municipalities.
Annotation, Plotting or Planning in Anticipation of Improvement as Taking or
Damaging of Property Affected, 37 A.L.R.3d 127, 131 (1971). We find the
rationale of these authorities persuasive.
Undoubtedly, there will be certain circumstances where landowners are
“caught in so-called ‘precondemnation blight’ or ‘precondemnation cloud’ . . .
when the condemning authority . . . engage[s] in aggravating delay or untoward
activity in instituting or continuing the condemnation proceedings.” G & A
Land, LLC v. City of Brighton, 233 P.3d 701, 708 (Colo. Ct. App. 2010)
(quotation omitted). “These situations generally have occurred when cities
have adopted urban renewal plans and the condemnation proceedings are
protracted.” Id. “Indeed, a number of jurisdictions have recognized the whole
character of an area may be changed to the detriment of the property owner
during the course of the proceedings and at times the area has been made a
wasteland by the condemning authority.” Id. (quotations omitted).
Nevertheless, we now hold that “damages arising from protracted delay alone
are not compensable and . . . mere plotting and planning do not, without more,
amount to an invasion of property or deprive the owner of the use and
enjoyment of the property.” Id. at 710-11.
In this case, the trial court found “that the continuing uncertainty
regarding the status of the BSP has [not] been so substantial and prolonged as
to rise to the level of a taking of [the petitioners’] property.” We agree. “The
fact that at some future time land might be taken under eminent domain, even
where the threatened taking is imminent, is but one of the conditions on which
an owner holds property.” Cayon v. City of Chicopee, 277 N.E.2d 116, 119
(Mass. 1971) (quotation omitted). While the possibility over a number of years
that the petitioners’ property may be the subject of a future eminent domain
proceeding “might have, as a practical matter, interfered with the marketability
of the property, it would cause but an incidental damage which is not
compensable.” Id. (quotation omitted).
In support of their argument that the City’s prolonged planning of the
BSP constituted a taking of their property, the petitioners rely upon cases from
other jurisdictions, most notably Washington Market Ent., Inc. v. City of
Trenton, 343 A.2d 408 (N.J. 1975), Lincoln Loan Co. v. State, State Highway
Com’n, 545 P.2d 105 (Or. 1976), and In re Philadelphia Parkway, 95 A. 429
(Pa. 1915). However, we agree with the trial court that these cases are
distinguishable as they involve “circumstances far more egregious than the
matter at hand.”
7
In Washington Market, the defendant declared the plaintiff’s property,
and the surrounding area, “a blighted area” in 1967 as part of an urban
redevelopment project that began in 1963. Washington Market, 343 A.2d at
410. Approximately ten years later, the defendant abandoned the project and
determined that the plaintiff’s land would not be taken. Id. As a result, the
plaintiff brought a takings action, alleging a loss of tenants and an inability to
obtain long-term tenants. Id. at 409-10. The plaintiff alleged that while it
eventually found two temporary tenants, the rent barely met the upkeep
expenses. Id. at 410. The premises were ultimately sold for taxes. Id. at 410
n.3. The court reversed the trial court’s grant of summary judgment for the
defendant, finding that the plaintiff was entitled to damages if it proved “that
there ha[d] been substantial destruction of the value of its property and that
defendant’s activities have been a substantial factor in bringing this about.” Id.
at 416.
Similarly, in Lincoln Loan, the plaintiff owned rental property in an area
proposed for a state highway, which the defendant declared necessary for
construction of the highway. Lincoln Loan, 545 P.2d at 106. The plaintiff
alleged that the defendant took property in the vicinity of the plaintiff’s
property, demolished adjacent buildings and filed condemnation proceedings
against the plaintiff’s property. Id. It further alleged that the defendant
“[c]aused notices to be given to tenants that they would be required to vacate
the buildings in the area because the defendant was taking them for roadway
purposes” and that it “would pay moving expenses and other compensation to
tenants if they vacated [the] plaintiff’s premises.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Nevertheless, after ten years, the defendant had not condemned the plaintiff’s
property. Id. Consequently, the plaintiff filed an action for inverse
condemnation, claiming a loss in the value of the property and “that the rental
income from the property was also reduced.” Id. Ruling on an appeal from a
trial court order granting the defendant’s motion to dismiss, the Oregon
Supreme Court found that the “[p]laintiff ha[d] alleged adequate facts which
indicate a substantial interference by the [defendant] with the use and
enjoyment of its property.” Id. at 109.
Finally, in Philadelphia Parkway, the petitioner owned property within
the lines of a proposed parkway. Philadelphia Parkway, 95 A. at 429. In
furtherance of the proposed parkway plan, the city took some properties by
condemnation, acquired some properties by purchase, tore down certain
buildings, began work on parts of the parkway, and took many of the necessary
steps toward completion of the parkway over a period of ten to twelve years. Id.
at 430. The petitioner sought an “appointment of viewers to assess its
damages” and the city moved to quash, arguing that until an ordinance to open
was passed there had been no taking of the petitioner’s property. Id.
8
In reversing the order quashing the petition, the Pennsylvania Supreme
Court examined the “long line of cases relating to the laying out, opening,
widening, and grading streets, lanes and alleys” that “hold that the mere
plotting of a street upon the city plan, without anything more, does not
constitute a taking of land in the constitutional sense so as to give an abutting
owner the right to have damages assessed.” Id. The court noted, however,
“[t]hat the right to compensation, based upon a taking, may exist in exceptional
cases without an ordinance to open” and found that the petitioner’s case
“belong[ed] to this exceptional class.” Id. at 431. The court found that the
city’s actions constituted “a series of unequivocal acts covering a period of
years and all evidencing the intention of the city to open and complete the
parkway.” Id. In fact, “at some points the parkway [was] open to public use.”
Id. The court considered the city’s actions to be the “equivalent of notice to the
property owners that their lands would be appropriated for parkway purposes
and that their possession was about to be disturbed.” Id. Consequently, the
court concluded that “under the facts of th[e] case the property of the
[petitioner] ha[d] been injured, and what the city ha[d] done constitute[d] a
taking in the constitutional sense.” Id. at 432.
In the instant case, unlike in Washington Market and Lincoln Loan,
there is no evidence that the delay in the BSP threatened the petitioners with a
loss of their property due to an inability to pay the taxes or loss of rental
income. Moreover, unlike in Philadelphia Parkway, the City here did not evince
an unequivocal intention to take the petitioners’ property for purposes of the
BSP. While the City indicated that it might take the petitioners’ property, its
intention and the extent of the possible taking fluctuated with the varying BSP
plans.
Citing Peacock v. County of Sacramento, 77 Cal. Rptr. 391 (Ct. App.
1969), the petitioners further argue that the trial court’s decision failed to
account for the unique issues presented by undeveloped land. In Peacock, the
plaintiffs owned land immediately south of an airport. Peacock, 77 Cal. Rptr.
at 393. The county adopted an ordinance and rezoned certain property in the
area of the airport, effectively frustrating the plaintiffs’ economic development
of their property. Id. at 394-96, 404. The court found that, as a result of the
county’s actions, the “plaintiffs were deprived totally of the economic use of
their property within the ‘take’ area” which resulted in inverse condemnation.
Id. at 405. Thus, Peacock involved the application of an ordinance and zoning
regulations to frustrate and “‘freeze’ development of any meaningful kind within
the area determined by the court to have been taken.” Id. at 403. Here,
however, as the trial court found, the City had not taken affirmative “steps to
prevent [the petitioners] from developing the property.”
The petitioners next contend that the trial court erred in choosing 1997
“as the beginning of the process for purposes of the inverse condemnation
9
analysis.” They argue that the court “failed to recognize that the beginning
date must focus on when the governmental action began to have serious effects
on the property rights of the landowner” and that it was the inclusion of the
BSP in the 1985 master plan that affected their property rights.
The trial court, in finding that no taking had occurred, stated that it did
not agree with [the petitioners’] suggestion that the seven year
period from 1997, when the BSP received federal approval, to
2004, when the claimed de facto taking occurred, constituted
‘extraordinary delay’ rather than normal incidents of ownership
attendant upon governmental planning activities for a project as
large and complex as the BSP.
While the trial court may have misunderstood the petitioners’ argument as
being that 1997 was the beginning date for the inverse condemnation analysis,
rather than 1985, to the extent that the court itself utilized this date, we find
no error.
“Although no precise rule determines when property has been taken, the
question necessarily requires a weighing of private and public interests.”
United States v. 156.81 Acres of Land, Etc., 671 F.2d 336, 339 (9th Cir. 1982)
(quotation and citation omitted). As evidence that the trial court should have
utilized an earlier date for its inverse condemnation analysis, the petitioners
point to the inclusion of the BSP in the City’s 1985 master plan, “[a] series of
nine (9) public hearings and/or meetings between 1985 and 1997 concerning
the” BSP, and an early schedule for the BSP, which showed that their “property
would be acquired in 1990 or 1991.” The record indicates that the BSP was
included in the City’s master plan in 1985 and, that same year, an
environmental impact study was begun. Nevertheless, the EIS was not
completed until 1997 and it was not until that year that the BSP was actually
approved. Furthermore, the petitioners have failed to articulate in what way
the earlier activities “denied [them] worthwhile property rights” so as to
constitute a taking. Thus, we hold that the trial court did not err in utilizing
1997 as the beginning date for determining whether a taking occurred.
The petitioners further argue that the trial court erred in “indicat[ing]
that the failure to seek approvals for a development on the property was a basis
for denying the [petitioners’] inverse condemnation claim.” They contend that
“[r]uling that an inverse condemnation case cannot prevail without a developer
having submitted plans for municipal approval, under the circumstances of
this case, cannot find support in the law or in logic.”
We conclude that the petitioners’ argument misconstrues the trial court’s
order. The trial court did not rule that an inverse condemnation case cannot
prevail unless a developer has submitted plans for municipal approval. Rather,
10
the court distinguished this case from Peacock by noting that, unlike in
Peacock, where the court found that the impact of the county’s actions “was to
‘freeze’ development of any meaningful kind within the area determined” to
have been taken, Peacock, 77 Cal. Rptr. at 403, here, the petitioners “and any
putative purchasers of the property remained free at all times to seek
appropriate City approvals for development of the property for any use
authorized by the applicable zoning; they simply chose, for whatever reasons,
not to do so.” Thus, the court did not rule that the submission of development
plans is a requirement for demonstrating inverse condemnation.
The petitioners next assert that the trial court “committed reversible
error by relying upon the reasonableness of the City’s actions, rather than on
the effect of the City’s actions on the [petitioners’] property rights.” Given that
we hold, as a matter of law, that the City’s actions did not amount to a taking,
we need not address this argument.
Finally, the petitioners argue that the trial court committed reversible
error by failing to find that a taking occurred where equity, fairness and justice
required that the burden imposed by the City should be borne by the public
and not the petitioners. They maintain that “[u]nder the circumstances,
fairness and justice require that [they] be treated the same as others whose
property was in the path of the [BSP]” and “[t]he burden of this unexplained
and excessive delay should be borne by the public, not the [petitioners].”
As stated above, to constitute a taking, the governmental interference
“must be sufficiently direct, sufficiently peculiar, and of sufficient magnitude to
cause us to conclude that fairness and justice, as between the State and the
citizen, requires that the burden imposed be borne by the public and not by
the individual alone.” Sundell, 119 N.H. at 845 (quotation and ellipsis
omitted). In this case, the record demonstrates that the BSP required a
substantial amount of planning among various entities prior to its
implementation. Similar to the development of an urban renewal area, “[a]n
important part of that planning involves disclosure to the community of the
proposed . . . action.” Cayon, 277 N.E.2d at 119. “Undoubtedly, one purpose
in . . . such disclosure is to afford community groups and property owners an
opportunity to persuade the taking authority to alter its plans.” Id. Were we to
hold that such disclosure and attendant planning of the BSP constituted a
compensable taking, this purpose would be frustrated as would the “orderly
procedures to be followed in” the planning process. Id. at 120; cf. City of
Buffalo v. J.W. Clement Company, 269 N.E.2d 895, 904 (N.Y. 1971) (“To hold
the date of the announcement of the impending condemnation . . . constitutes
a de facto taking at that time, would be to impose an ‘oppressive’ and
‘unwarranted’ burden upon the condemning authority” and “so impede the
actions of the municipality in preparing and publicizing plans for the good of
the community,” which would “encourage a converse policy of secrecy . . . .”).
11
Indeed, the BSP could have been abandoned, leaving the petitioners’ property
undisturbed. See G & A Land, LLC, 233 P.3d at 708 (recognizing that “[t]he
mere existence of funding and environmental approvals for the project and the
issuance of a notice of intent to acquire the property do[es] not automatically
result in a de facto taking” because “[a]t that point, the project still could have
been abandoned by the condemnor and the property never actually disturbed”
(quotation omitted)); cf. Danforth v. United States, 308 U.S. 271, 286 (1939)
(“The mere enactment of legislation which authorizes condemnation of property
cannot be a taking. Such legislation may be repealed or modified, or
appropriations may fail.”). Based upon these considerations, we hold that the
trial court properly declined to rule that fairness and justice, as between the
City and the petitioners, required that any burden imposed be borne by the
City.
Affirmed.
CONBOY, J., concurred; GALWAY, J., retired, specially assigned under
RSA 490:3, concurred.
12