THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Coos
No. 2011-248
DONALD GENTRY
v.
WARDEN, NORTHERN NEW HAMPSHIRE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
Argued: January 18, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 10, 2012
Lisa L. Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Suzanne M. Gorman, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Donald Gentry, appeals the decision of the
Superior Court (Bornstein, J.) denying his petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
The trial court held that the petitioner, an offender whose parole was revoked
by the parole board, was not entitled to receive credit against the ninety-day
term of recommitment to prison imposed pursuant to RSA chapter 651-A:19, I
(Supp. 2010) for the period between his arrest and revocation of his parole.1
We affirm.
I
The pertinent facts are not in dispute. The petitioner was arrested on a
parole violation warrant on October 13, 2010, and confined in prison until he
received a parole revocation hearing on December 7, 2010. Following the
hearing, the parole board recommitted the petitioner to prison for ninety days
pursuant to RSA 651-A:19, I (Supp. 2010). The petitioner requested that the
fifty-five days2 he spent in confinement before the hearing be credited against
the ninety-day recommitment period. The board denied that request, and the
superior court upheld the board’s decision, ruling that “inmates are not
entitled to pre-hearing confinement credit against the 90-day recommitment
period but against only the maximum sentence.” This appeal followed.
II
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. State v.
Beauchemin, 161 N.H. 654, 658 (2011). We are the final arbiters of legislative
intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole. Id.
When interpreting a statute, we first look to the language of the statute itself,
and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and ordinary
meaning. Id. We do not read words or phrases in isolation, but in the context
of the entire statutory scheme. New Hampshire Health Care Assoc. v.
Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 385 (2011). When the language of a statute is plain
and unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for further indications of legislative
intent. Id.
As amended by Laws 2010, 247:10, RSA 651-A:19, I, provided:3
A prisoner who is recommitted shall serve 90 days in
prison before being placed back on parole or the remainder
of his or her maximum sentence, whichever is shorter. The
1 At oral argument, the State advised that, as of that date, the petitioner had completed his
maximum sentence. Despite this, we do not regard the case as moot, because, given the short
ninety-day recommitment mandated by the statute, the petitioner’s position that he is entitled to
have the period of pre-hearing incarceration deducted from the sentence clearly is capable of
repetition yet evading review. See Asmussen v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Safety, 145 N.H. 578, 590-
91 (2000).
2 RSA 651-A:17 (2007 and Supp. 2011) requires that revocation hearings be held within forty-five
days after a parolee is arrested for a parole violation. The record does not indicate why this time
limit was not met in the instant case, but the petitioner does not challenge his parole revocation
based on the failure to hold a timely hearing.
3 In 2011, RSA 651-A:19 was substantially amended. See Laws 2011, 244:3 (effective July 13,
2011).
2
time between the return of the parolee to prison after arrest
and revocation of parole shall be considered as time served
as a portion of the maximum sentence.
The petitioner argues that his pre-hearing confinement should have been
credited toward the ninety-day recommitment period because the term
“maximum sentence” in the second sentence of RSA 651-A:19, I necessarily
includes the ninety-day recommitment period. He contends that the
distinction drawn by the trial court between the ninety-day recommitment
period and the maximum sentence “is neither one made in the statute nor
cognizable at law.”
The familiar doctrine of expressio unius est exclusio alterius (“the
mention of one thing excludes another”) persuades us that the trial court’s
interpretation of the statute is correct. In the first sentence of RSA 651-A:19, I,
the legislature adopted a maximum recommitment period of the shorter of
ninety days or the remainder of the maximum sentence for offenders found to
have violated their parole conditions. The second sentence of the statute
explains that whatever time the parolee spent confined after arrest but before
revocation of parole is to be credited against the maximum sentence. In light of
the reference in the first sentence to both the maximum sentence and the
ninety-day recommitment period, the inclusion of only “maximum sentence” in
the second sentence, addressing how to apply credit for time served post-
arrest/pre-revocation, indicates that the legislature intended this credit to be
applied solely to reduce the maximum sentence and not to reduce the
recommitment period (unless necessary to avoid exceeding the maximum
sentence). See 2A N. Singer & J.D. Shambie Singer, Statutes and Statutory
Construction § 47:23, at 417 (7th ed. 2007) (“The force of the maxim [expressio
unius est exclusio alterius] is strengthened where a thing is provided in one
part of the statute and omitted in another.”). This conclusion is reinforced by
RSA 651-A:17 (Supp. 2010), which makes it clear that the recommitment
period begins only when, after a hearing, the board formally revokes the
prisoner’s parole: “A prisoner whose parole is revoked shall be recommitted to
the custody of the commissioner of corrections.” (Emphasis added.)
We also reject the petitioner’s contention that our reading of the statute
leads to absurd results. While we agree that some parolees will serve more
time in confinement than others based solely on how quickly after arrest they
receive a revocation hearing, the plight of parole violators who must wait longer
for a hearing is not meaningfully different from that of parolees who are
arrested and detained for a violation but are ultimately exonerated at their
revocation hearings. Like the petitioner, parolees in the latter category receive
nothing more than credit against the maximum sentence for their pre-hearing
incarceration – despite the fact that, in retrospect, it has been determined they
should not have been re-incarcerated at all. In the absence of any suggestion
3
of parole board revocation hearings being improperly delayed, the fact that
some parolees serve more time in custody than others is an unfortunate
consequence of a system that cannot act instantaneously and occasionally
errs. Cf. People v. Idziak, 773 N.W.2d 616, 629-30 & n. 23 (Mich. 2009)
(rejecting constitutional challenge to Michigan’s procedure for calculating
sentences when a parolee commits a new offense while on release even though
methodology may result in some defendants serving more prison time than
others based on “‘arbitrary’ factors, such as the degree of docket congestion”).
Because we agree with the trial court’s conclusion that RSA 651-A:19 did
not permit the parole board to credit the time the petitioner spent in
confinement between his arrest and revocation of his parole against his ninety-
day recommitment period, we need not address the petitioner’s objections to
the parole board’s view that it retained discretion to award such time against
the ninety-day recommitment period.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4