THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2011-639
APPEAL OF NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: September 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2012
Nolan Perroni Harrington, LLP, of Lowell, Massachusetts (Kevin E. Buck
on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Lynmarie C. Cusack, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondent, the New Hampshire Department of
Corrections (DOC), appeals an order of the New Hampshire Public Employee
Labor Relations Board (PELRB) finding that the DOC had a valid and binding
past practice of compensating employees for their time spent completing a
mandatory fitness test, and that by changing this past practice unilaterally, the
DOC committed an unfair labor practice. We reverse and remand.
The PELRB found, or the record supports, the following facts. The
dispute in this case relates to physical fitness testing requirements that apply
to certain DOC employees. In December 2010, the petitioner, the New England
Police Benevolent Association, Local 250 (Union), filed an unfair labor practice
complaint against the DOC asserting that the DOC’s directive that such testing
must be accomplished on the employee’s own time without work release or
compensatory time was a unilateral change of a binding past practice. The
Union alleged that since 2001, the DOC had either allowed employees to
complete the physical fitness test during their work shift or had awarded such
employees compensatory time if the test was completed during the employee’s
non-work time. The Union averred that the change in the past practice
constituted a change in a term and condition of employment. Accordingly, the
Union asserted that by changing the practice unilaterally, the DOC breached
its duty of bargaining in good faith. The PELRB found in the Union’s favor, and
this appeal followed.
To succeed on appeal, the DOC must show that the PELRB’s decision is
unlawful or clearly unreasonable. Appeal of City of Laconia, 150 N.H. 91, 93
(2003); see RSA 541:13 (2007). “We review for errors of law without deference
to the PELRB’s rulings. The PELRB’s findings of fact are presumptively lawful
and reasonable, but we require that the record support the PELRB’s
determinations.” Appeal of City of Laconia, 150 N.H. at 93 (quotation and
brackets omitted).
The DOC first argues that the record does not support the PELRB’s
finding of a past practice. We agree.
“An employer’s practices, even if not required by a collective-bargaining
agreement, which are regular and long-standing, rather than random or
intermittent, become terms and conditions of [union] employees’ employment,
which cannot be altered without offering their collective-bargaining
representative notice and an opportunity to bargain over the proposed change.”
Sunoco, Inc., 349 N.L.R.B. 240, 244 (2007); see University System v. State, 117
N.H. 96, 99 (1977) (suggesting that newly created PELRB look to decisions of
the National Labor Relations Board for guidance). “A practice need not be
universal to constitute a term or condition of employment, as long as it is
regular and longstanding.” Sunoco, Inc., 349 N.L.R.B. at 244.
As the party alleging an established past practice, the Union had the
burden of proof on this issue. Eugene Iovine, Inc., 353 N.L.R.B. 400, 400
(2008), petition for enforcement granted by 371 Fed. Appx. 167 (2d Cir.),
vacated on other grounds by 131 S. Ct. 458 (2010). To meet this burden, the
Union had to show that the alleged practice “occurred with such regularity and
frequency that employees could reasonably expect [it] to continue or reoccur on
a regular or consistent basis.” Caterpillar, Inc., 355 N.L.R.B. 521, 522 (2010)
(quotations omitted). In addition, “[i]t is implicit in establishing a past practice
that the party which is being asked to honor it” – here, the DOC – “be aware of
its existence.” BASF Wyandotte Corp., 278 N.L.R.B. 173, 180 (1986).
2
“The record here falls short of such a showing.” Caterpillar, Inc., 355
N.L.R.B. at 522. The Union’s sole witness testified that he did not know how
many DOC employees had been given time off to complete physical fitness
testing or had been awarded compensatory time if such testing occurred during
their non-work time. The Union also failed to present any documents to
support its claims, such as leave slips. See Mittenthal, Past Practice and the
Administration of Collective Bargaining Agreements, 59 Mich. L. Rev. 1017,
1022 (1961) (observing that when past practice is alleged, written records “may
be the best possible evidence of what took place in the past”). By contrast, the
DOC’s witness testified that the DOC had no knowledge of a common practice
under which employees were given time off to complete physical fitness testing
or awarded compensatory time to do so.
Under these circumstances, we conclude that the Union failed to meet its
burden of showing that the DOC regularly and consistently either allowed
employees to complete physical fitness testing during their work shifts or
awarded such employees compensatory time if the testing was done during the
employee’s non-work time. See Caterpillar, Inc., 355 N.L.R.B. at 522 (without
evidence of specific circumstances surrounding prior changes in prescription
drug program, including dates on which prior changes occurred, and the
number of changes and their frequency, company failed to meet its burden of
showing that it had a past practice of making such changes); Eugene Iovine,
Inc., 353 N.L.R.B. at 400 (without evidence of when, or how frequently, or
under what circumstances the asserted unilateral layoffs occurred, board could
not conclude that employer had demonstrated that challenged layoffs were
allowed as continuation of established past practice).
Having concluded that the PELRB erred when it found that a past
practice existed, we need not address the DOC’s alternative contention that the
alleged past practice did not involve a mandatory subject of bargaining.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
3