THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2011-183
NICOLAS BOSONETTO
v.
TOWN OF RICHMOND
Argued: February 16, 2012
Opinion Issued: June 29, 2012
Bragdon, Dowd & Kossayda, P.C., of Keene (Kelly E. Dowd on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Tower & Crocker, P.A., of Jaffrey (David M. Tower on the brief and orally),
for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Nicolas Bosonetto, appeals a decision of the
Superior Court (Arnold, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
respondent, Town of Richmond (Town), and dismissing the petitioner’s appeal
of a decision of the Town of Richmond’s Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA). We
affirm in part and vacate in part.
I
The following facts are drawn from the record. Nicolas and Jill Bosonetto
own property located in Richmond at 71 Prospect Hill Road, a private road.
There are three mobile homes on the property, all placed pursuant to building
permits granted in 1980.
On May 18, 2009, the petitioner submitted a building permit application
to the Board of Selectman of the Town (BOS) requesting permission to replace
one of the mobile homes with a new three-bedroom residence at a different
location on the property. On June 8, 2009, the BOS denied the application
“based on the fact that the property is on a private road and the Town [of
Richmond] does not have provisions for building permits on private roads.”
RSA 674:41, I (2008) prohibits the issuance of a building permit “for the
erection of a building unless the street giving access to the lot upon which such
building is proposed to be placed” meets certain criteria. With regard to private
roads, the statute explicitly provides that permits may be issued only if, among
other things, “the local governing body . . . has voted to authorize the issuance
of building permits for the erection of buildings on said private road.” RSA
674:41, I(d)(1). The statute also sets forth an appeal process to the ZBA, and
authorizes the ZBA to “make any reasonable exception and . . . issue a permit
. . . if the issuance of the permit or erection of the building would not tend to
distort the official map or increase the difficulty of carrying out the master plan
upon which it is based, and if the erection of the building or issuance of the
permit will not cause hardship to future purchasers or undue financial impact
on the municipality.” RSA 674:41, II (2008). In its denial, the BOS
recommended that the petitioner pursue an appeal to the ZBA.
On June 25, 2009, the petitioner appealed the decision to the ZBA. On
July 28, 2009, the ZBA conducted a public hearing, and, on August 5, 2009,
the ZBA visited the site of the proposed building. On August 10, 2009, the
ZBA deliberated on the matter.
At its deliberation, the ZBA determined that the petitioner has a vested
right to use the existing structures because building permits were issued for
them. Several of the members noted, however, that that right does not permit
the petitioner to replace the existing mobile home with a building on a different
“footprint” and at a different location. The ZBA discussed whether the request
could be granted pursuant to the factors contained in RSA 674:41, II, and,
upon an oral motion, “den[ied] the application based on the criteria of 674:41.”
Mr. Bosonetto was present at this meeting.
On August 17, 2009, the ZBA convened to review a draft of a “Notice of
Decision,” which provided the following reasons for the ZBA’s decision:
1. The [ZBA] decided that the issuance of the building permit and the
construction of the 3-bedroom house would increase the difficulty in
carrying out the Master Plan.
2
2. The [ZBA] decided that the construction of the 3-bedroom house would
cause hardship to future purchasers.
3. The [ZBA] decided that the granting of the building permit could cause
undue financial impact on the municipality.
4. The [ZBA] decided that the applicant does not have a vested right to
replace the existing mobile home with a 3-bedroom house on a
“footprint” larger and at a different location than that of the existing
mobile home.
(Emphasis omitted.) One ZBA member stated that he “did not feel he had voted
on anything to do with vested rights.” Another member, however, explained
that the ZBA had discussed the issue at length at the August 10, 2009 meeting
and that each member was asked what his or her view was on the issue. The
ZBA ultimately voted to approve the draft notice of decision without any
additional deliberation and without a new vote on the application or any
subsidiary matter. The notice was placed on file for public inspection the day
after the meeting, on August 18, 2009.
On August 24, 2009, a Town clerk provided Mr. Bosonetto with
instructions on how to appeal the decision. Those instructions, on ZBA
letterhead, explained that to appeal the decision, the petitioner must first ask
the ZBA for a rehearing. The instructions then stated that “[t]he motion must
be made within 30 days after the decision is filed and first becomes available
for public inspection.” The instructions also contained the following language
in bold: “The [ZBA] strongly recommends that, before making any appeal, you
become familiar with the zoning ordinance, and also with the New Hampshire
Statutes . . . covering planning and zoning.”
On September 14, 2009 – more than thirty days after the oral denial of
the application, but less than thirty days after the written notice of decision
was approved by the ZBA – the petitioner filed a motion for rehearing with the
ZBA. At a meeting on October 8, 2009, the ZBA addressed the motion. It
noted that RSA 677:2 (2008) (amended 2009) requires that a motion for
rehearing be filed within “30 days after any order or decision of the [ZBA]” and
that the thirty-day time period “shall be counted in calendar days beginning
with the date following the date upon which the [ZBA] voted to approve or
disapprove the application.” The petitioner argued that he had been misled by
the ZBA instructions. The ZBA, however, noted that the instructions
specifically refer to the statute, and, by oral motion, the ZBA voted to deny the
rehearing request because the motion “was not filed within the 30 day
timeframe specified in [RSA 677:2].”
3
The petitioner then appealed the ZBA decision to the superior court. In
addition to asserting a statutory appeal of the ZBA’s decision, the petitioner
requested a declaratory judgment against the BOS and the ZBA, a writ of
mandamus against the BOS, and a writ of certiorari. The court ultimately
denied relief on all grounds. On appeal, the petitioner raises various points of
error. We address each issue in turn.
The petitioner first challenges the trial court’s dismissal of his statutory
appeal, which was based upon its ruling that his motion for rehearing was
untimely. Pursuant to RSA 677:2, “[w]ithin 30 days after any order or decision
of the [ZBA] . . . any party to the action or proceedings . . . may apply for a
rehearing.” “This 30-day time period shall be counted in calendar days
beginning with the date following the date upon which the board voted to
approve or disapprove the application . . . .” RSA 677:2. Pursuant to RSA
677:3 (2008), “[n]o appeal from any order or decision of the [ZBA] . . . shall be
taken unless the appellant shall have made application for rehearing as
provided in RSA 677:2.” This is a strict requirement: “[A] timely motion for
rehearing is a precondition to appealing a ZBA decision to the superior court,”
and “failure to timely move for a rehearing divests the superior court of subject
matter jurisdiction.” Cardinal Dev. Corp. v. Town of Winchester Zoning Bd. of
Adjustment, 157 N.H. 710, 712 (2008).
The petitioner argued to the trial court that his motion for rehearing was
timely filed because the thirty-day time period did not begin to run until
August 17, 2009, the day the ZBA voted to approve its written notice of
decision. The court noted that RSA 677:2 provides the following: “[I]f the
moving party shows that the minutes of the meeting at which such vote was
taken, including the written decision, were not filed within 144 hours after the
town vote pursuant to RSA 674:3, II, the person applying for the rehearing
shall have the right to amend the motion . . . within 30 days after the date on
which the written decision was actually filed.” The trial court concluded,
however, that this provision “merely provides the applicant with the
opportunity to amend his [motion]” and “does not change the date when the
thirty-day period begins to run in the event that the ZBA fails to file its meeting
minutes or written decision in a prompt manner.” It thus ruled that “the
petitioner’s motion for rehearing was not timely” because the date of the
decision was August 10, 2009. The trial court accordingly dismissed the
petitioner’s statutory appeal for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
On appeal, the petitioner points to the amendment provision and argues
that “August 17, 2009 is the triggering date for purposes of RSA 677:2.” Like
the trial court, we conclude that the statute’s amendment provision merely
permits a party, in certain circumstances, to amend a timely-filed motion for
rehearing. It does not address when a motion must be filed in the first
instance. As to that question, the statute is clear: a motion for rehearing may
4
be filed “[w]ithin 30 days after any order or decision” and the “30-day time
period shall be counted in calendar days beginning with the date following the
date upon which the [ZBA] voted to approve or disapprove the application.”
RSA 677:2 (emphasis added). “Any order or decision” is not limited to a written
order or decision, and a “vote to approve or disapprove the application” is not
limited to a memorialization of a vote which provides reasoning for the decision.
Thus, pursuant to the plain language of RSA 677:2, the thirty-day period began
to run the day after the ZBA disapproved the application by a vote on an oral
motion on August 10, 2009. Accordingly, to meet the deadline, the petitioner
had to file his motion for rehearing within thirty days of August 11, 2009.
Because the petitioner filed his motion on September 14, 2009, the trial court
correctly ruled that the petitioner’s motion for rehearing was untimely.
The petitioner next argues that the trial court erred when it ruled that
the Town is not equitably estopped from raising the timeliness issue.
Assuming that the doctrine of equitable estoppel is applicable to these
circumstances, to prevail on his estoppel claim, the petitioner must
demonstrate that: (1) a representation or concealment of material fact was
made by the Town and the Town had knowledge of that fact; (2) the petitioner
was unaware of the truth of the matter; (3) the representation was made with
the intention of inducing the petitioner to rely upon it; and (4) the petitioner
reasonably relied upon the representation to his detriment. Cardinal Dev.
Corp., 157 N.H. at 715-16. Existence of estoppel is a question of fact. Id. at
715. The burden of proving estoppel is on the party asserting it. Id. We will
uphold a trial court’s estoppel decision unless it is not supported by the
evidence or is legally erroneous. Id.
The instructions provided by the ZBA were incorrect. They stated that
“[t]he motion [for rehearing] must be made within 30 days after the decision is
filed and first becomes available for public inspection.” This statement is
contrary to the statutory requirements that the motion be made within thirty
days after the ZBA’s vote “to approve or disapprove the application” and that
the thirty-day time period be “counted in calendar days beginning with the date
following the date [of the vote].” RSA 677:2.
The trial court ruled that the Town was not estopped from raising the
timeliness issue because the court “[could not] conclude that the Town made
the misstatement of the law with the intention of inducing the petitioner to rely
upon it.” The record supports this ruling. The instructions were provided to
the petitioner when the petitioner spoke with a Town clerk about requesting a
rehearing. There is no evidence indicating that the instructions were
specifically created for the petitioner. Most importantly, the instructions, in
effect, warn the reader against solely relying upon them: The instructions
“strongly” recommend that the reader “become familiar” with the relevant
statutes. Thus, the evidence did not compel a finding that the Town made the
5
misstatement to induce the petitioner to rely upon it. Accordingly, we uphold
the court’s ruling that the petitioner failed to satisfy this element of equitable
estoppel.
Aside from this dispositive issue, several other factors militate against
application of equitable estoppel here. First, a “party may not assert equitable
estoppel to avoid the application of a statute.” Appeal of Alexander, 163 N.H.,
(2012) (quotation omitted). That is precisely what the petitioner is attempting
here. Second, “[a]lthough municipal corporations may be subject to estoppel,
the law does not favor its application against municipalities.” Hounsell v. N.
Conway Water Precinct, 154 N.H. 1, 6 (2006). Third, although we have yet to
address the issue, several courts have held that equitable estoppel applies only
to misstatements of fact, not misstatements of law. See, e.g., Elk Park Ranch,
Inc. v. Park County, 935 P.2d 1131, 1138 (Mont. 1997); Boutwell v. State, 988
So. 2d 1015, 1028 (Ala. 2007); Ryan v. Lumbermen’s Mutual Casualty
Company, 485 S.W.2d 548, 550-51 (Tenn. 1972). The misstatement here was
one of law. Finally, if we were to permit the superior court to apply estoppel
here, we would be permitting it to assume subject matter jurisdiction contrary
to our prior holdings that “failure to timely move for rehearing divests the
superior court of subject matter jurisdiction.” Cardinal Dev. Corp., 157 N.H. at
712. “[Subject matter] jurisdiction cannot be conferred where it does not
already exist.” Route 12 Books & Video v. Town of Troy, 149 N.H. 569, 575
(2003). Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court properly ruled that the
Town was not equitably estopped from raising the timeliness issue and thus
properly dismissed the petitioner’s appeal for failure to timely file a motion for
rehearing with the ZBA.
The petitioner next challenges the court’s declaratory judgment rulings.
As a general matter, before an administrative board’s decision may be reviewed
by a court, a party must exhaust its administrative remedies. See Sutton v.
Town of Gilford, 160 N.H. 43, 52 (2010). A party’s failure to timely file a motion
for rehearing before the ZBA constitutes a failure to exhaust its administrative
remedies. See Ireland v. Town of Candia, 151 N.H. 69, 70 (2004). In such a
situation, the party will typically not be able to challenge the ZBA’s decision in
court. See, e.g., McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72, 73-76 (2008); Ireland, 151
N.H. at 70. The exhaustion rule is based on reasonable policies of encouraging
the exercise of administrative expertise, preserving agency autonomy, and
promoting judicial efficiency. McNamara, 157 N.H. at 74.
This rule, however, is subject to exceptions. A petitioner may maintain a
declaratory judgment action – even though he has failed to timely file a motion
for rehearing – if the action addresses a zoning issue that is “peculiarly suited
to judicial rather than administrative treatment and no other adequate remedy
is available.” McNamara, 157 N.H. at 74 (quotation omitted); accord Huard v.
Town of Pelham, 159 N.H. 567, 573 (2009); Blue Jay Realty Trust v. City of
6
Franklin, 132 N.H. 502, 509 (1989). Judicial treatment is peculiarly suitable
when the issue raised is a pure question of law, such as the constitutionality or
validity of a zoning ordinance or the authority of an agency to act. See Collden
Corp. v. Town of Wolfeboro, 159 N.H. 747, 752 (2010); McNamara, 157 N.H. at
74. Requiring exhaustion in such a context is unnecessary because
“specialized administrative understanding plays little role” in answering legal
questions. McNamara, 157 N.H. at 74 (quotation omitted). However, where the
issue involves substantial questions of fact, a petitioner typically must exhaust
administrative remedies and, therefore, cannot pursue a declaratory judgment
action when the petitioner has failed to properly file a motion for rehearing
before the ZBA. See Huard, 159 N.H. at 572-73; McNamara, 157 N.H. at 73-
76. The rationale for this is straightforward – local zoning authorities are
uniquely qualified to answer questions of fact related to matters of local
concern and thus should resolve such issues in the first instance. Huard, 159
N.H. at 573.
The petitioner argued to the trial court that both the BOS and the ZBA
unconstitutionally and illegally applied RSA 674:41 to his use of his property.
In light of this, the petitioner asked the court to reverse and remand the case to
either the ZBA or the BOS. With regard to the ZBA, the court declined to rule
on the merits of the petitioner’s claim because the petitioner failed to meet the
timeliness requirement discussed above. With regard to the BOS, the court
declined to rule on the merits of the petitioner’s claim because it was “unclear
on what basis it would be proper to remand the matter to the [BOS].”
The petitioner’s basic argument is that the ZBA and the BOS applied the
wrong legal standard when they determined that the petitioner does not have a
vested right to construct the proposed house in the proposed location. The
petitioner maintains that he has such a vested right because his proposal is
merely a continuation of his prior lawful nonconforming use.
The right to continue a nonconforming use is recognized by the New
Hampshire Constitution, N.H. CONST., pt. I, arts. 2, 12, and by New
Hampshire statute, RSA 674:19 (2008). Cohen v. Town of Henniker, 134 N.H.
425, 427 (1991). “[A] past use of land may create vested rights to a similar
future use, so that a town may not unreasonably require the discontinuance of
a nonconforming use.” Loundsbury v. City of Keene, 122 N.H. 1006, 1009
(1982). This right extends to the expansion of a nonconforming use, but
“enlargement or expansion may not be substantial and may not render
premises or property proportionally less adequate.” New London Land Use
Assoc. v. New London Zoning Board, 130 N.H. 510, 516 (1988). Whether an
expansion is “substantial” depends primarily on the factual similarities and
differences between the proposed use and the extant nonconforming use. Id. at
516-17. Indeed, in this case, the ZBA visited the property at issue and
discussed the differences between the existing structure and the proposed
7
structure. Furthermore, the ZBA’s ruling on the issue was explicitly premised
on its factual finding that the proposed house would be on “a ‘footprint’ larger
and at a different location than that of the existing mobile home.” (Emphasis
omitted.) Because resolution of the substantial expansion issue involves
primarily questions “with respect to the characteristics of [the petitioner’s]
property,” Huard, 159 N.H. at 573, it is not “peculiarly suited” to judicial
treatment. Thus, the petitioner was required to exhaust his administrative
remedies before initiating court action. Because he failed to do so, he cannot
now raise the issue in a declaratory judgment proceeding, regardless of
whether his challenge is to action by the ZBA or the BOS.
The petitioner also requested a “declaratory judgment that RSA 674:41
violates Part I, Articles 12 and 12-a of the New Hampshire Constitution as it
applies to a lawful pre-existing use.” As the trial court put it, the germane
question is whether “compliance with RSA 674:41 . . . impinge[s] upon a
party’s rights to pre-existing structures and non-conforming uses of buildings.”
Although the trial court addressed the issue and upheld the law, we decline to
address the issue in the context of this declaratory judgment proceeding.
It is a bedrock principle that a declaratory judgment action cannot be
based upon a hypothetical set of facts. Baer v. N.H. Dep’t of Educ., 160 N.H.
727, 731 (2010). The petitioner challenges RSA 674:41 only as it applies to
lawful nonconforming uses. Thus, his argument presumes that his proposed
use is, in fact, a continuation of his prior lawful nonconforming use. The
record belies this presumption. The ZBA specifically ruled that the petitioner
“does not have a vested right to replace the existing mobile home with a 3-
bedroom house on a ‘footprint’ larger and at a different location than that of
the existing mobile home.” (Emphasis omitted.) As discussed above, the
petitioner has forfeited his ability to challenge this ruling. Therefore, the
petitioner’s constitutional challenge to the statute is based upon a hypothetical
premise not supported by the record and thus is not suitable for declaratory
judgment. Accordingly, we decline to address the issue and vacate the trial
court’s ruling on the constitutionality of RSA 674:41.
The petitioner next argues that the court erred in denying him a writ of
mandamus voiding the BOS decision and remanding the matter. A writ of
mandamus will not be issued “where the remedy by appeal or error to another
administrative board or tribunal has not been exhausted.” State Employees’
Ass’n v. Lang, 119 N.H. 637, 638 (1979) (quotation omitted). Accordingly, we
agree with the trial court that “[the petitioner] is not entitled to the remedy of
mandamus because . . . he had an adequate avenue for relief, which he
forfeited by failing to pursue it in a timely fashion.”
Finally, the petitioner argues that he is entitled to his attorney’s fees
because the Town acted in bad faith, see Harkeem v. Adams, 117 N.H. 687,
8
690-91 (1977), or, in the alternative, because the litigation conferred a public
benefit, see Asmussen v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Safety, 145 N.H. 578, 596
(2000). “We give substantial deference to a trial court’s decision on attorney’s
fees, and will not overturn it absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.”
Rabbia v. Rocha, 162 N.H. 734, 740 (2011) (quotation omitted). Here, the trial
court found that the petitioner’s bad faith claim was “entirely speculative and
unsupported.” With regard to his public benefit claim, the trial court
specifically noted that many of the petitioner’s claims were inadequately
developed and were necessitated only by the fact that “[the petitioner] failed to
avail himself timely of the administrative remedy granted to him by statute.”
The court concluded that the “[p]etitioner cannot hope to persuade [the court]
that such use of what are already overstretched judicial resources benefits the
public in any way.” The record supports both of these conclusions. We
therefore hold that the trial court sustainably exercised its discretion in
denying attorney’s fees.
Affirmed in part; and vacated
in part.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9