THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-704
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
HORACE KING
Argued: September 15, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 2, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (Sullivan, J.), the
defendant, Horace King, was convicted of two counts of aggravated felonious
sexual assault. See RSA 632-A:2 (Supp. 2010). On appeal, he argues that the
trial court erred in denying his supplemental motion for in camera review of the
victim’s, K.H.’s, medical and counseling records. We reverse and remand.
The details of this child molestation case need not be set forth; it is
sufficient to examine only those circumstances that surround the defendant’s
appeal. See State v. Hoag, 145 N.H. 47, 48 (2000).
Prior to trial, the defendant filed a motion for in camera review of certain
medical and New Hampshire Division for Children, Youth and Family (DCYF)
records related to K.H.’s allegations, as well as records of any counseling K.H.
received since 2007. The Court (Mangones, J.) granted the defendant’s motion
over the State’s objection. On April 24, 2009, the court issued an order
permitting the parties to “review [the] DCYF material at the courthouse.”
Shortly thereafter, on May 6, 2009, the Court (O’Neill, J.) issued another order
allowing the parties to “review the records received from the Mental Health
Center of Greater Manchester . . . at the Courthouse.”
After reviewing the DCYF and Mental Health Center (MHC) records,
which disclosed that K.H. suffered from Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD) and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD), the defendant filed a supplemental
motion seeking in camera review of any medical or counseling records
pertaining to K.H.’s treatment for these disorders. In this motion, the
defendant incorporated the arguments he made in his first request for in
camera review, and further focused on K.H.’s two disorders. He also argued
the records regarding K.H.’s diagnosis and treatment for ADD and ODD would
likely include information that formed the basis of those diagnoses. Further,
the defendant averred, the records would likely describe medications
prescribed to treat her ADD and ODD and their effect on her competence as a
witness.
In addition, the defendant noted that the DCYF and MHC records that
had been disclosed contained relevant and exculpatory material. Specifically,
they exposed K.H.’s tendency to “make up stories.” The records also revealed
that K.H. had previously made a false allegation of sexual assault. Thus, the
defendant argued that the additional requested records would likely contain
additional information material and relevant to his defense; specifically, K.H.’s
“tendency to lie” and her capacity to understand her obligation to tell the truth.
Both the State and the Guardian Ad Litem (GAL) objected to the supplemental
motion.
After hearing, the Trial Court (O’Neill, J.) denied the motion, finding the
defendant “failed to articulate how the requested medical records would be
material to his defense.” Further, the court noted the defendant had “access to
information regarding K.H.’s medical conditions and ha[d] counseling records
indicating what the defendant perceives to be K.H.’s inclination to lie or tell
stories.” The court concluded that “in light of the voluminous records already
provided to the defendant,” the additional records were “not material to his
defense.”
The defendant contends the trial court erred in denying his supplemental
motion for in camera review. We review the trial court’s decision on the
management of discovery under an unsustainable exercise of discretion
2
standard. State v. Guay, 162 N.H. __, __ (decided September 20, 2011). To
prevail, the defendant must show the trial court’s rulings were clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. State v. Sargent, 148
N.H. 571, 573 (2002).
The defendant’s request for an in camera review is governed by State v.
Gagne, 136 N.H. 101 (1992). In Gagne, we explained that “due process
considerations require trial courts to balance the State’s interest in protecting
the confidentiality of child abuse records against the defendant’s right to obtain
evidence helpful to his defense.” Gagne, 136 N.H. at 105. “An in camera
review of such records provides a useful intermediate step between full
disclosure and total nondisclosure.” Id. (quotation omitted). “[T]o trigger an in
camera review of confidential or privileged records, the defendant must
establish a reasonable probability that the records contain information that is
material and relevant to his defense.” Id.
This threshold showing “is not unduly high.” State v. Graham, 142 N.H.
357, 363 (1997). It requires only that a defendant meaningfully articulate how
the information sought is relevant and material to his defense. Id.
To do so, he must present a plausible theory of relevance and
materiality sufficient to justify review of the protected documents,
but he is not required to prove that his theory is true. At a
minimum, a defendant must present some specific concern, based
on more than bare conjecture, that, in reasonable probability, will
be explained by the information sought.
Hoag, 145 N.H. at 49 (quotation omitted).
Here, the record does not support the trial court’s conclusion that “the
defendant failed to articulate how the requested medical records would be
material to his defense.” The defendant presented specific arguments to carry
his burden under Gagne – K.H.’s prior false allegation of sexual assault, her
“tendency to lie,” and the potential effects her ADD and ODD medication may
have on her competence as a witness. Thus, his theory that the ADD and ODD
medical and counseling records may contain additional information material
and relevant to his defense is “based on more than bare conjecture.” Graham,
142 N.H. at 363. The trial court’s denial of the defendant’s discovery request,
therefore, was an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Further, the trial court erred in finding that “in light of the voluminous
records” already produced, the supplemental records were not material to the
defendant’s defense. Implicit in this finding was an assumption that the
additional records would be cumulative or duplicative. Since neither the State
nor the defendant had seen the information in the requested records, and the
3
trial court had not reviewed them, the trial court’s conclusion was speculative.
See Gagne, 136 N.H. at 105.
We are not persuaded by the State’s contention that the defendant
cannot demonstrate prejudice because his counsel did not explore information
contained in the medical and counseling records which were disclosed during
his examination of witnesses at trial. The trial court’s determination of
whether a defendant has made the requisite Gagne showing occurs when the
discovery request is made. Defense counsel’s examination of witnesses at trial,
therefore, is irrelevant to the question of whether the trial court’s pretrial ruling
is sustainable.
The State also suggests that we should consider the defendant’s refusal
to waive his right to speedy trial in determining whether the trial court
unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying the supplemental motion.
While we acknowledge the scheduling constraints on our busy trial courts,
here, the trial court did not base its denial on the defendant’s refusal to waive
his right to a speedy trial. Accordingly, the relevance of that factor is not before
us.
Because we conclude the trial court erred when it declined to review the
additional medical and counseling records in camera, we reverse the trial
court’s decision and remand the matter for further proceedings. On remand,
[the trial] court should conduct an in camera review of [K.H.’s
records], and then determine whether the records contain evidence
that would have been “essential and reasonably necessary” to the
defense at trial. If the records do contain such evidence, the court
should order a new trial unless it finds that the error of not
admitting the evidence in the first trial was harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
Graham, 142 N.H. at 364.
All other issues the defendant raised in his notice of appeal, but did not
brief, are deemed waived. State v. Blackmer, 149 N.H. 47, 49 (2003).
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4