THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-832
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
GEORGE QUINTERO
Argued: February 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: October 12, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, George Quintero, appeals his convictions
on one count of felonious sexual assault (FSA), RSA 632-A:3 (2007), and one
count of aggravated felonious sexual assault (AFSA), RSA 632-A:2 (2007). He
argues that the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) erred when it conditioned the
giving of a so-called “Williams instruction,” see State v. Williams, 137 N.H. 343
(1993) (requiring the State to prove the charged acts occurred in the time frame
alleged in the indictments), on his agreeing to an amendment of the
indictments to conform to the evidence presented at trial. After oral argument,
we directed the parties to provide supplemental briefing on whether Williams
should be overruled. We now affirm the defendant’s convictions and also hold
that the Williams instruction should no longer be given in cases tried after the
date of this opinion.
I
The jury could have found the following facts. The victim, who was the
defendant’s niece, turned eight years old in April 2007. The convictions rest
upon events that occurred when the victim spent the night at the home of the
defendant and his then-fiancée. That evening, the defendant asked the victim
to accompany him to the basement, where he instructed her to go into a
particular room and lay on the floor. The two lay side by side, and the
defendant kissed the victim. He exposed his “private part” and told her to
“hold it.” She complied, then pulled her hand away and refused his instruction
to touch him a second time. The defendant then rubbed the victim’s “private
part” with his hand. The victim told him to stop, and he complied. He told her
not to say anything, and she went upstairs. The fiancée was located elsewhere
in the residence when the assaults took place. The next day, the fiancée took
the victim shopping for clothing. When they returned to the residence, she
took a picture of the victim in her new clothing.
On March 23, 2008, the victim told her mother about the assaults and
the mother called the defendant to confront him; he denied assaulting his
niece. The mother also called the police. After an investigation, the defendant
was charged with three counts of FSA and one count of AFSA. The indictments
alleged that the assaults occurred “on or between” January 1, 2007 and April
30, 2007.
At trial, the State offered the testimony of three witnesses: a police
officer, the victim’s mother, and the victim. The victim remembered having a
“sleepover” at the defendant’s home on two occasions, and on a third occasion,
just “visit[ing].” She described the assaults and testified that the event
occurred during one overnight visit at the defendant’s home. She could not
recall how “long ago” the visit had occurred, but thought it happened when she
was eight years old. During cross-examination, defense counsel showed the
victim a photograph of herself in the defendant’s kitchen. She confirmed that
the picture had been taken some time during the overnight visit when the
assaults occurred, and she thought she was “still eight.” The victim’s mother
recalled that the victim spent the night at the defendant’s home on one
occasion, “but it could have been twice.” She was not certain of the date of the
sleepover, testifying: “I’m not that great with dates, but . . . if I remember
correctly, it was cold and . . . it was after visiting my sister, her son’s birthday.
I want to say probably September. I’m not exactly sure [of] the date.”
2
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss all of the
indictments, arguing that the evidence concerning the time frame for the
charged acts was not consistent with the time frame set forth in the
indictments. The photograph of the victim in her new clothes bore the date
September 17, 2006, but it had not been admitted into evidence at that point
in the trial. The trial court denied the defendant’s motion “without prejudice
to [raising it] again after other evidence is introduced.”
During the defense case, the defendant’s former fiancée and the
defendant testified. The fiancée recalled that the victim had stayed at the home
she shared with the defendant on one occasion. While she could not remember
“the month or day” of the overnight visit, she testified, “I knew it was before
school because she had told me she wanted some school clothes and her and I
went shopping.” She testified that the back of the photograph of the victim
indicated that she had it developed on October 14, 2006, and the front
indicated that she took the picture on September 17, 2006. The court then
admitted the photograph into evidence as a full exhibit.
The fiancée also testified as to the events of the evening, including that
she and the victim sorted through clothes, watched a movie, and did laundry in
the basement. She said that when they were in the basement, the defendant
was there as well painting in the side room, but when they watched a movie,
the defendant was in another room using the computer. According to the
fiancée, the victim woke up scared in the middle of the night and she had to
calm her down. The fiancée said that the following day she took the victim
clothes shopping and returned to the house where the victim modeled her new
outfits. She testified that she, the victim, and the defendant went to a park
before the victim returned to her home. The fiancée did not recall a time when
the victim and the defendant were alone together during the visit.
The defendant testified that the victim had stayed overnight at his home
on one occasion in September 2006. He recalled that during the evening, after
they returned from purchasing dinner, the three were in the basement
together, where his fiancée was doing laundry and he was painting in his
“paint room.” According to the defendant, the three returned upstairs and his
fiancée and niece watched a movie together, while he stayed in his bedroom
playing a computer game. He testified that when he was painting in the
basement he was never alone with the victim, and that he never sexually
assaulted her.
At the close of the evidence, the defendant informed the trial court that
he intended to request a jury instruction “pertain[ing] to lack of opportunity . . .
based primarily on State [v.] Williams.” The State sought a jury instruction
that “time is not an element of the sexual assault,” and moved to amend the
indictments “to have a time frame which begins from September 1, 2006
3
through April 30, 2007.” The next day, the defendant requested the trial court
to instruct the jury that the State was required to prove the offenses occurred
within the time frame alleged in the indictments. He argued that he was
entitled to such an instruction under Williams because the State had alleged a
specific time frame, and he had relied upon a substantial time-based defense.
With respect to the State’s request to amend the indictments, the defendant
argued that the grand jury issued indictments with a specific time frame, and
that amending them would circumvent the grand jury.
The State responded that the proposed amendments related to matters of
form, not substance, because time is not an element of sexual assault. It also
argued that the circumstances of Williams were inapposite, and that amending
the indictments would not prejudice the defendant because he prepared his
defense based upon having the photograph. Finally, the State argued that the
defendant’s conduct in first presenting the photograph to it and the court just
two days earlier, which was the day before trial, constituted a discovery
violation. Thus, the State argued that it would have “amended the
indictment[s] to include that time frame well before trial” had the defendant
provided the photograph sooner.
The trial court opined that Williams should not apply “when in the
middle of trial the State suddenly finds out the date that [the] defense is going
to rely on.” It further stated that it had agreed with the defendant’s “analysis
until [it considered] the timing with which [the defense] turned over reciprocal
discovery. And if the State had that, according to the rules, they would have
amended the indictment pretrial and we wouldn’t be having this argument.”
Ultimately, the court ruled:
I am going to give the defendant’s requested instruction that the
State must prove that the incidents occurred during the time
periods alleged in the indictments. However, I am going to allow
the State to amend the indictments to include the time period from
September 1, 2006 forward to April of 2007.
In response to a defense motion for reconsideration, the trial court ruled
that amending the time frame in the indictments did not circumvent the grand
jury because time is not an element of the offense, and that amending the time
frame would not prejudice the defendant. The court gave the defendant two
options: it would either: (1) amend the indictments and give a Williams
instruction; or (2) decline to amend the indictments and not give a Williams
instruction. The defendant chose the latter option, while objecting that he was
being forced to surrender a right he would not otherwise cede. When
instructing the jury, the trial court stated, “Time is not an element of these
offenses.”
4
The defendant was convicted of one count of FSA and one count of AFSA.
On appeal, he argues that he was entitled to a Williams instruction because he
pursued a time-based defense that he lacked the opportunity to commit the
offenses during the period alleged in the indictments. He further contends that
the trial court’s ruling, which conditioned the giving of a Williams instruction
upon amending the indictments to expand the charged time frame, violated his
rights to due process and to an indictment by a grand jury under Part I, Article
15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.
II
We begin by addressing whether the rule in Williams should be
overruled. “The doctrine of stare decisis demands respect in a society governed
by the rule of law, for when governing legal standards are open to revision in
every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of judicial will with
arbitrary and unpredictable results.” Jacobs v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor
Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 504 (2003) (quotations omitted); see State v. Holmes,
154 N.H. 723, 724 (2007). Among the factors to be considered in determining
whether precedent should be overruled are:
(1) whether the rule has proven to be intolerable
simply by defying practical workability; (2) whether the
rule is subject to a kind of reliance that would lend a
special hardship to the consequence of overruling; (3)
whether related principles of law have so far developed
as to have left the old rule no more than a remnant of
abandoned doctrine; and (4) whether facts have so
changed, or come to be seen so differently, as to have
robbed the old rule of significant application or
justification.
Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 505 (quotations omitted); see Holmes, 154 N.H. at 724-25.
Although “[t]hese factors guide our judgment, . . . no single factor is wholly
determinative,” State v. Duran, 158 N.H. 146, 154 (2008), because “the
doctrine of stare decisis is not one to be either rigidly applied or blindly
followed.” State v. Ramos, 149 N.H. 118, 127 (2003) (quotation omitted).
Application of these factors leads us to conclude that Williams should be
overruled.
First, the Williams rule has proven to be intolerable simply by defying
practical workability. In Williams, we addressed two competing concerns: the
difficulty that the State may encounter in fixing a precise date for a sexual
assault, particularly when the victim is a young child who cannot easily relate
the time of the offense to outside events, and the burden on a defendant who
must confront an allegation in an indictment alleging a broad range of dates for
5
the offense. Williams, 137 N.H. at 346. We recognized that “persons can rarely
find alibi witnesses for each day of a long time period.” Id. In an attempt to
alleviate this concern, we required that, when the State alleges a time frame in
an indictment, it has the obligation to prove that the offense occurred within
that time frame if the defendant asserts a defense based on lack of opportunity
within that time frame. Id. At the same time, we recognized that “[a]
defendant’s assertion of a time-based defense, such as an alibi, will not convert
time into a material element.” Id. at 347. Thus, the rule in Williams was an
attempt to require the State to prove, in a specific set of circumstances, that an
offense occurred during the alleged time frame, without going so far as to
convert time into an element of the offense.
Williams did not attempt to define precisely what constitutes a “time-
based defense.” The opinion pointed out that the original indictments charged
that the defendant committed the offense during a six-month period. Id. at
345. However, when the defendant moved to dismiss the indictments based
upon the deposition testimony of the victim’s parents, the State was permitted
to amend the indictments to allege that the offense occurred during a two-year
period, January 1988 to December 1989. Id.
At trial, the State’s evidence was that the defendant had sexual contact
once with the victim while the defendant was babysitting the victim, and that
the defendant babysat the victim twice: once when the victim’s parents went
Christmas shopping in December 1988 or 1989, and once when the parents
went out to celebrate his mother’s birthday in February 1988 or 1989. Id. The
defendant’s cross-examination of the victim’s mother caused her to equivocate
on whether the Christmas shopping occurred in December 1987, 1988, or
1989. Id. at 347. Three other witnesses said the Christmas shopping trip
occurred in 1987. Id. The defendant testified that he was alone with the victim
in June 1987, “but that he had not had the opportunity to commit the crime as
alleged because he had not been alone with the victim at any time since
December 1987.” Id. Other than this blanket denial by the defendant, no
other evidence was introduced to refute the February 1988 or 1989 date.
Thus, the time-based defense in Williams consisted of impeachment evidence
on cross-examination of the victim’s mother, testimony by witnesses
undercutting one of the dates alleged, and the defendant’s general denial of
access to the victim. Id. On these facts and without defining what constitutes
a time-based defense, we held that it was reversible error for the trial court to
refuse to give an instruction that the State was required to prove that the
offense occurred during the two-year period. Id. at 347-48.
Our first attempt at explaining the meaning of a time-based defense
came in State v. Carter, 140 N.H. 114 (1995). In Carter the trial court gave a
Williams instruction and, on appeal, the defendant argued that the evidence
was insufficient to find that the acts occurred within the alleged time frame.
6
Carter, 140 N.H. at 119. We held that the State was not obligated to prove that
the crimes occurred within the specified time frame because the defendant did
not present a “true” time-based defense, but instead offered evidence that
served mainly to impeach the victim’s testimony. Id. The defendant’s wife
testified that she never spent a night away from the defendant during the time
frame alleged in the indictment, contrary to the victim’s testimony. Id.
However, because the extensive descriptions that she gave of her activities
outside of the home during this time frame would have seriously discredited
the argument that the defendant lacked opportunity, we held that this
testimony was insufficient to establish a true time-based defense “based on
lack of opportunity within the time frame.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted). We did not explain how this result was consistent with Williams, in
which the time-based defense was based in part upon impeachment testimony.
Moreover, our holding suggested that in order to assert a true time-based
defense, the defendant would need to offer proof that he lacked the opportunity
during every moment of the entire alleged time frame. Id. The holding in
Carter thus made the Williams rule one of extremely limited applicability.
What was implicit in Carter became explicit in State v. Dixon, 144 N.H.
273 (1999). There, the defendant was charged with three single sexual
assaults, each one occurring within a forty-four month period. Id. at 275. We
rejected the applicability of Williams because “[a] defendant must actually
assert a time-based defense that he was unavailable for the entire period
charged in the indictment to be entitled to a Williams instruction.” Id. at 277
(emphasis added).
In State v. Hennessey, 142 N.H. 149 (1997), we also found that the
defendant had not introduced a time-based defense, but rather had simply
introduced evidence that tended to impeach the credibility of the victims. Id. at
160. The defendant had introduced testimony that his snow blower was
broken on the date that the victims testified that they had used the snow
blower to clear his driveway and then been assaulted. Id. Testimony further
showed that the victims had difficulty pinpointing the year in which the
assaults took place. Id. at 160-61. We concluded that this testimony did not
represent a true time-based defense requiring the State to prove the time of the
assaults. Id. at 161. Our holding in Hennessey meant that a time-based
defense could not be established by successfully attacking a witness’s
credibility, but instead placed the burden on the defendant to affirmatively
prove through direct evidence that he lacked the opportunity to commit the
offense during the entire alleged time frame.
In State v. Seymour, 142 N.H. 620 (1998), we further limited Williams to
apply “only when an indictment brackets criminal conduct within an extended
time period.” Id. at 623. We held that when the State alleges that an assault
occurred “on or about” a certain date, “the concerns underlying Williams are
7
not implicated.” Id. (quotation omitted). While a defendant arguably faces the
same difficulty in preparing an alibi for a particular time period only to have
the State prove a different time period, whether the time period is one day or a
range of dates, we limited Williams to its facts, reasserting that “[a]s a general
rule, the exact date of an assault is not an element of aggravated felonious
sexual assault.” Id. at 622 (quotation and brackets omitted).
The unworkability of the rule in Williams and its progeny is
demonstrated by the present case. The indictment charged the defendant with
sex offenses between January 1, 2007 and April 30, 2007. Through the cross-
examination of the victim, the defendant was able to tie the date of the assaults
to a photograph dated a September weekend in 2006 when the victim was
visiting the defendant and his girlfriend. The victim agreed that the
photograph was taken the same weekend that the assaults occurred.
On these facts, it is unclear whether the defendant was entitled to a
Williams instruction. On the one hand, his time-based defense was based
largely on impeachment evidence developed on cross-examination. The
defendant also did not show he was unavailable for the entire period charged.
See Carter, 140 N.H. at 119. On the other hand, in Williams itself we held that
the defendant was entitled to the instruction based largely upon testimony that
effectively refuted the State’s contention that the offense could have occurred
when the parents were Christmas shopping. Williams, 137 N.H. at 347. Here,
if the offense coincided with the September 2006 shopping photograph, then it
occurred outside the time frame alleged, a result Williams was designed to
avoid. The uncertain application of Williams and its progeny to the facts of this
case convincingly demonstrates that the rule is intolerable simply in defying
practical workability.
Second, in the time since Williams, related principles of law have
developed to undercut the Williams rule. One such development occurred in
the area of discovery. Superior Court Rule 98 governs the rules for discovery
prior to trial. Our liberal discovery rules came about in recognition of the
concept that “the ends of justice are best served by a system which gives both
parties the maximum amount of information available, thus reducing the
possibility of surprise at trial.” State v. Nadeau, 126 N.H. 120, 124 (1985)
(quotation omitted). It was this possibility of surprise that contributed to the
court’s concerns in Williams. See Williams, 137 N.H. at 346. We recognized
that a time-based alibi defense, while not converting time into an element, may
render time a significant issue. Id. at 347. We noted that persons can rarely
find alibi witnesses for each day in a long time period, and that the only way to
limit this burden on the defendant was to require the State to prove that the
offense occurred within the time frame alleged in the indictment. Id. at 346.
8
At the time of the Williams decision, Superior Court Rule 98 did not
provide for any sanctions for failure to comply with the discovery rules.
Indeed, we were hesitant to sanction parties for not complying with the rules
where the rules themselves did not provide for sanctions. See Nadeau, 126
N.H. at 124-25 (discouraging the technical application of court rules and
noting that Rule 98 “provides no sanction for failure to comply with its terms”).
Nearly four years after Williams, section J was added to Superior Court Rule
98, providing a list of possible sanctions that may be imposed for a violation of
the rule. The non-exhaustive list was aimed at reducing the likelihood of
surprise at trial, and included ordering the party to provide discovery not
previously provided, granting a continuance, prohibiting the party from
introducing evidence not disclosed, and assessing costs and attorney’s fees
against the party or counsel who violated the rule. Super. Ct. R. 98(J).
These sanctions provide a mechanism for trial courts to ensure that
defendants will not prepare for trial with a defense based upon the dates
alleged in an indictment only to be surprised at trial by evidence of a date
outside the alleged time frame. Such a surprise at trial would surely prejudice
a defendant’s case and potentially entitle him to the benefit of the sanctions
available to the trial court. Cf. Caldwell v. State, 228 S.E.2d 219, 224 (Ga. Ct.
App. 1976) (rejecting a Williams-style rule in favor of a rule in which “the state
may prove any date within the period of limitations as held in the general time-
variance cases; but if defendant, relying upon an alibi defense for the time
alleged in the indictment, is surprised and prejudiced by a time variance, upon
his motion therefor he will be afforded sufficient time to prepare his defense to
meet the new date” (citation omitted)).
The sanctions provided for in the Superior Court Rules protect
defendants against surprise at trial thereby obviating the need to require the
State to prove an additional element whenever a defendant asserts a time-
based defense. Such an approach alleviates the concerns that this court had
in Williams while at the same time adhering to our long-standing recognition
that “[t]ime is not an element of aggravated felonious sexual assault.”
Williams, 137 N.H. at 346. The development of discovery rules has left the
Williams rule an outdated, blunt instrument in dealing with the concerns that
we addressed in that case.
Third, we address whether “the rule is subject to a kind of reliance that
would lend a special hardship to the consequence of overruling.” Holmes, 154
N.H. at 725. Aside from any reliance on Williams asserted by the defendant in
the instant case and by other defendants whose trials have occurred prior to
the issuance of this opinion, the parties have not identified, nor can we
envision, any more general reliance interests that would lend special hardship
to the consequences of overruling Williams. Reliance interests are most often
implicated when a rule is operative “in the commercial law context . . . where
9
advance planning of great precision is most obviously a necessity[.]” Planned
Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 855-56 (1992). No one
suggests that individuals contemplating interacting with young children –
whether innocently or otherwise – are apt to base their decision-making on the
availability of the Williams instruction should they later be charged with sexual
assault arising out of the interaction. Cf. Duran, 158 N.H. at 157 (“no party
can reasonably argue they have structured their conduct in reliance upon
defendants not receiving pretrial credit while awaiting extradition”).
In sum, our decisions since Williams have shown that the rule is
unworkable within our current legal framework, developments in related
principles of law have undercut Williams and robbed the rule of significant
application or justification, and the rule does not lend itself to any general
reliance that would create a special hardship were it overruled. Further, we
can identify no other jurisdiction that follows a rule similar to the Williams
holding. In fact, the general rule continues to be that “[t]ime is not an element
of aggravated felonious sexual assault.” Williams, 137 N.H. at 346.
Henceforth, our decision in State v. Williams is overruled and trial courts
should no longer employ the Williams instruction.
Finally, we note that the concurring opinion would significantly expand
the factors in our stare decisis analysis. However, neither party has asked us
to alter our stare decisis framework or to add any additional factors. In fact, in
their arguments, both the State and the defendant rely upon the four-factor
test set forth in Jacobs. Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 505. The concurring opinion thus
addresses issues not raised or briefed by the parties and would modify our
stare decisis doctrine to include the following additional factors:
(5) the antiquity of the precedent; (6) whether it rested on
constitutional, rather than statutory or common law, grounds; (7)
whether the precedent was “joined by a strong majority of the
court” or instead “decided by the narrowest of margins, over
spirited dissents challenging [its] basic underpinnings”; and (8)
whether the precedent is well-reasoned.
Infra p. 17.
Not only have the suggested additional factors not been briefed by the
parties, but it is also unnecessary in this case to expand the four-factor test.
Generally, we decide cases on the narrowest grounds possible. See Bellville v.
Town of Northboro, 375 F.3d 25, 30 (1st Cir. 2004) (“Normally, we . . . attempt
to decide cases on the narrowest grounds possible.”). We also prefer not to
address issues that would have no effect on the outcome of the case.
Winnisquam Reg. Sch. Dist. v. Levine, 152 N.H. 537, 541 (2005). An analysis
of the four factors plainly supports overruling Williams, and adding new factors
10
has no effect on the outcome of this case. Even so, because the concurring
opinion relies upon additional factors, particularly whether a prior opinion was
well-reasoned, we address this factor.
The concurring opinion first argues that while we do not expressly
include a “well-reasoned” factor in our current analysis, in actuality we do
consider the reasoning behind the precedent. While we acknowledge that we
have on occasion used language indicating that the soundness of the reasoning
behind the precedent is relevant to the stare decisis analysis, e.g., State v.
Duran, 158 N.H. 146, 156-57 (2008), we have not given that factor the
prominence suggested by the concurring opinion. Rather, in the past we have
alluded to the quality of the reasoning behind the precedent because the
determination that an opinion was poorly reasoned is the starting point for a
stare decisis analysis. See Kozel, Stare Decisis As Judicial Doctrine, 67 Wash.
& Lee L. Rev. 411, 418 (2010) (“the ‘badly reasoned’ inquiry is not a component
of stare decisis doctrine; it is a signal that the doctrine is in play”). Upon
determining that a case was poorly reasoned, the court then invokes the four
stare decisis factors to decide whether to adhere to the precedent or overrule it,
but the “well-reasoned” inquiry is not itself part of the analysis.
The concurring opinion also argues that one of “the most compelling
reasons for overruling Williams [is] that its reasoning cannot withstand
analysis.” To state that a case was poorly reasoned is ultimately a merits
assessment. Adding a “well-reasoned” factor to our stare decisis analysis
would simply allow the court to reconsider the merits of the precedent, but in
Jacobs, we made clear that “when asked to reconsider a holding, the question
is not whether we would decide the issue differently de novo, but whether the
ruling has come to be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement was for that
very reason doomed.” Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 504-05 (quotation omitted). Merely
“restating a merits argument with additional vigor does not give it extra weight
in the stare decisis calculus.” Citizens United v. Fed. Election Com’n, 130 S.
Ct. 876, 939 (2010) (Stevens, J., dissenting).
While the concurring opinion suggests that we are “perpetuating
injustice,” our duty to achieve justice stems from our obligation to follow the
rule of law – the foundation of stare decisis. “The very concept of the rule of
law . . . requires such continuity over time that a respect for precedent is, by
definition, indispensable.” Casey, 505 U.S. at 854. When asked to reexamine
a prior holding, our task is “to test the consistency of overruling a prior
decision with the ideal of the rule of law, and to gauge the respective costs of
reaffirming and overruling a prior case.” Id.
Stare decisis is the essence of judicial self-restraint. Judges are not at
liberty to follow prior decisions that are well-reasoned and discard those that
are not. Indeed, principled application of stare decisis requires a court to
11
adhere even to poorly reasoned precedent in the absence of “some special
reason over and above the belief that a prior case was wrongly decided.” State
v. Gubitosi, 152 N.H. 673, 678 (2005); see also Patterson v. McLean Credit
Union, 491 U.S. 164, 171-74 (1989) (noting that “[s]ome Members of this Court
[continued to] believe that [the precedent] was decided incorrectly” but
nonetheless adhered to precedent because there was no “special justification”
beyond mere error).
According substantial weight to the poor reasoning of an opinion
undermines stare decisis and potentially bestows upon the court expansive
authority to overrule any prior decision it determines is poorly reasoned. As we
first explained in Jacobs, “when governing legal standards are open to revision
in every case, deciding cases becomes a mere exercise of judicial will with
arbitrary and unpredictable results.” Jacobs, 149 N.H. at 504. While poor
reasoning does trigger the stare decisis analysis, poor reasoning is not a
separate factor to consider when determining whether special justification for
departing from precedent exists.
With respect to the other factors suggested in the concurring opinion,
they are mentioned only in passing and we choose not to address them other
than to note that application of the antiquity factor is far from clear. Compare
Montejo v. Louisiana, 129 S. Ct. 2079, 2089 (2009) (holding antiquity weighed
in favor of overruling because the precedent was “only” two decades old) with
id. at 2098 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (“I would have thought that the 23-year
existence of a simple bright-line rule would be a factor that [supports retaining
the precedent].”) and Alonzi v. Northeast Generation Servs. Co., 156 N.H. 656,
659 (2008) (declaring the court would “not lightly overrule” precedent that was
twenty-five years old). Antiquity is relevant not as a separate factor, but rather
only insofar as it provides evidence of the practical workability of a rule of law
or reliance upon it.
III
The defendant argues that even if we overrule Williams, we must still
apply the Williams rule in this case. See Rogers v. Tennessee, 532 U.S. 451,
462 (2001) (“a judicial alteration of a common law doctrine of criminal law
violates the principle of fair warning, and hence must not be given retroactive
effect, only where it is unexpected and indefensible by reference to the law
which had been expressed prior to the conduct in issue” (quotation omitted;
emphasis added)). We will assume without deciding that under Rogers we
must apply Williams to this case and determine whether the defendant was
properly entitled to a Williams instruction. Here, the trial court refused to give
the instruction without also permitting the State to amend the indictments to
include the September 2006 time period evidenced by the photograph proffered
by the defendant. The trial court based its decision upon the defendant’s
12
failure to disclose the photograph until the day of jury selection, just one day
before the trial was set to begin.
The defendant acknowledges that his late production of the photograph
violated Superior Court Rule 98, but contends it was a mere “technical”
violation that did not prejudice the State. In support of this argument, the
defendant argues that the victim’s mother, a witness for the State,
acknowledged on cross-examination that the victim’s overnight visit with the
defendant likely occurred in September. The defendant also relies upon a
defense investigative report of an interview of the defendant’s fiancée, which
was turned over to the State at the final pretrial conference (held twelve days
before the start of the trial), and reflects that the victim visited the defendant’s
residence in September 2006. Finally, the defendant faults the State for not
moving for a continuance or seeking to exclude admission of the photograph
once it was disclosed to the State the day before trial. We do not find these
arguments persuasive.
While the State perhaps could have been more diligent in pursuing the
timing issue prior to jury selection, this does not excuse the defendant’s failure
to comply with his discovery obligations. Moreover, regardless of whatever
hints of a time discrepancy in the indictments may have been available to the
State before disclosure of the photograph, there can be no doubt that the
photograph itself was a particularly telling piece of evidence – it documented
the victim’s presence at the defendant’s residence at the very time the victim
indicated the assaults had occurred. Superior Court Rule 98(J) provides that
“[i]f at any time during the proceedings it is brought to the attention of the
court that a party has failed to comply with this rule, the court may take such
action as it deems just under the circumstances, including but not limited to” a
variety of possible sanctions. Accordingly, we have no difficulty in concluding
that the trial court did not unsustainably exercise its discretion by tailoring
relief to cure the particular prejudice the State would have suffered had the
Williams instruction been given without amending the indictments, and we find
no violation of the defendant’s due process rights. Cf. State v. Hearns, 151
N.H. 226, 238 (2004) (finding no violation of defendant’s constitutional due
process rights where trial court conditioned the defendant’s use of alternative
source DNA evidence disclosed to State beyond discovery deadlines upon
defendant agreeing to a continuance).
The trial court’s ruling was predicated on its finding that the State would
have been allowed to amend the indictments had the photograph been
disclosed in a timely fashion. Thus, in order to complete our analysis, we must
be satisfied that such amendments to the indictments would in fact have been
proper. RSA 601:1 (2001), which must be considered in conjunction with Part
I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution, requires that a person be
indicted by the grand jury before he or she may be tried for any offense
13
punishable by imprisonment in excess of one year. State v. Bean, 117 N.H.
185, 188 (1977). Once an indictment has been returned, the law imposes
limitations on the State’s ability to alter the allegations contained therein.
Amendments that purport to change an element of the offense are invalid,
State v. Prevost, 141 N.H. 559, 560 (1997); State v. Bell, 125 N.H. 425, 429
(1984), while amendments that involve merely the form of the indictment are
freely allowed and may be made without the need to return to the grand jury,
see RSA 601:8 (2001); State v. Spade, 118 N.H. 186, 188 (1978). There is a
third type of amendment that “does not alter the crime charged in the
indictment, but changes an allegation in the indictment that has the effect of
specifying and circumscribing the scope of the crime alleged; for instance, an
allegation of how the crime was committed.” State v. Elliott, 133 N.H. 759, 764
(1990) (quotation omitted). The test for determining whether changes of this
third type are permissible is “whether the change prejudices the defendant
either in his ability to understand properly the charges against him or in his
ability to prepare his defense.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Relying upon Elliott and State v. Erickson, 129 N.H. 515 (1987), the
defendant contends that the amendment of the time periods here falls into the
third category and was not permissible. But in Elliott and Erickson, the State’s
attempt to diverge from the allegations of the indictments occurred at trial or
on the eve of trial. The prejudice found to exist in each case arose because the
defendant was surprised and had no opportunity to adjust the defense strategy
to meet the amendment. See Elliott, 133 N.H. at 761, 766 (defendant alerted to
State’s position that he could be convicted of manslaughter, even if he was not
the one who pulled the trigger, on first day of trial when defense counsel viewed
State’s proposed jury instructions); Erickson, 129 N.H. at 518 (amendment
issue apparently first arose in connection with trial judge’s charge to jury).
Indeed, in Elliott, we specifically stated that such substantive-but-not-
elemental amendments to an indictment “might be disallowed, or might
constitute ground for a new trial, if the amendment surprises the defendant
and this surprise prejudices his defense.” Elliott, 133 N.H. at 765 (quotation
omitted; emphasis added). Additionally, we distinguished the case from State
v. Johnson, 130 N.H. 578 (1988), on the basis that in Johnson, “the defendant
had two months’ notice of the State’s intention to amend the indictment . . .
and thus was not surprised.” Elliott, 133 N.H. at 766.
We have never held nor suggested that an amendment of time allegations
in an indictment is impermissible when it is accomplished sufficiently before
trial to avoid prejudice to the defendant. See State v. Thresher, 122 N.H. 63,
68-69 (1982) (amendment of indictment to change date of death of victim
proper because amendment made prior to trial and defendant not prejudiced);
Spade, 118 N.H. at 189-90 (amendment at trial to time allegations in
indictment proper where defendant could show no prejudice and trial court
offered defendant one day postponement of commencement of defense case).
14
Accordingly, we agree with the trial court’s finding that if the defendant had
provided the photograph to the State thirty days prior to trial, as required by
Rule 98(B)(3), the State could have amended the indictments sufficiently in
advance of trial to avoid any undue prejudice to the defense.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred; LYNN, J.,
concurred specially.
LYNN, J., concurring specially. I agree with the majority that State v.
Williams, 137 N.H. 343 (1993), should be overruled prospectively and that the
defendant’s conviction should be affirmed. I write separately, however, because
I arrive at the first decision on somewhat different grounds than the majority.
As an initial matter, although I agree with the majority that our post-
Williams decisions have made it difficult to determine in exactly what
circumstances the jury instruction it requires is mandated, I am less skeptical
than the majority about the applicability of Williams to the facts of this case. I
believe that, absent the defendant’s discovery violation, even a narrow reading
of Williams would have entitled the defendant to the instruction. This was a
case involving sexual assaults that occurred on a single discrete occasion.
Absent any suggestion in the record that the date shown on the photograph
was incorrect, once the victim acknowledged that the photo was taken during
the same overnight visit when the assaults occurred, it became clear that, if the
allegations were true, the assaults must have occurred outside the four-month
time span alleged in the indictments.
I
In analyzing whether Williams should be overruled, the majority cites the
four-factor test taken from Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania
v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833, 854 (1992), and first utilized by this court in Jacobs v.
Director, New Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 505 (2003).
See also State v. Holmes, 154 N.H. 723, 724-25 (2007). While I agree that the
four factors are appropriate considerations, and also agree, as the majority
acknowledges, that “no single factor is wholly determinative . . . because the
doctrine of stare decisis is not one to be either rigidly applied or blindly
followed,” ante at 5 (quotations omitted), I deem it equally important to point
out that we have never indicated these four are the only factors to be
considered.1 More than eighty years ago, in Smith v. Twin State Gas & Electric
1 It also is worth noting that, even after we first adopted the Casey factors in Jacobs, we have not always
considered those factors in deciding whether to overrule precedent. For example, in State v. Miller, 155 N.H.
246 (2007), the issue was whether we should overrule State v. Gordon, 146 N.H. 258 (2001), insofar as the
latter case had held that in order to cross-examine a victim about prior allegations of sexual assault a
15
Company, 83 N.H. 439 (1928), Justice Allen eloquently set forth the guiding
principles that have properly governed our application of the doctrine of stare
decisis ever since:
While the stability of the law does not require the
continuance of recognized error, it does call for
settlement of principle and consistency of ruling when
due consideration has been given and error is not
clearly apparent. In the effort of the law to establish
and enforce principles of reasonable justice, difficulties
of application in individual cases are naturally
encountered, and a borderland is found where the
division line between duty and its absence, between
recovery and its denial for harm done, is not readily
subject to accurate survey. But a line established by a
survey properly made is better than a shifting one.
While the growth and development of the law means
that it shall be elastic, it does not mean that it shall be
fragile.
Id. at 447-48; see also Amoskeag &c. Co. v. Dartmouth College, 89 N.H. 471,
474-75 (1938) (“The doctrine [of stare decisis] is not a barrier which prevents
us from correcting prior judicial errors; it prevents changes only when in our
judgment it is better to suffer an error to persist than it is to undergo the
hardships which would result from its correction. The question of when the
defendant must demonstrate clearly and convincingly that the prior allegations were false. After concluding
that this part of our Gordon decision was erroneous, we overruled it in Miller without any discussion of the
Casey factors, stating simply: “While we recognize the value of stability in legal rules, we have also
acknowledged that the doctrine of stare decisis is not one to be either rigidly applied or blindly followed. The
stability of the law does not require the continuance of recognized error.” Miller, 155 N.H. at 251 (quotation
omitted).
Similarly, in State v. Duran, 158 N.H. 146 (2008), the issue was whether we should overrule the holding
in State v. Harnum, 142 N.H. 195 (1997), that a defendant was entitled to pretrial confinement credit only
for the time spent awaiting and during trial while in the custody of New Hampshire authorities. Although
Duran cited the four-factor test and claimed to apply it, see Duran, 158 N.H. at 153-54, the actual analysis
used by the court in that case makes it plain that we overruled Harnum not because it had become
unworkable or a remnant of abandoned doctrine, as the defendant argued, see id. at 154, but principally
because we believed the case was badly reasoned. That this is so is demonstrated by the following
passages, among others, from the decision: id. (“We believe there are principles of law the Harnum court
did not consider . . . [and] recognize [that] the vast majority of jurisdictions have decided to the contrary
. . . .”); id. (“departure from Harnum is justified because the majority opinion failed to give full
consideration to the plain language in RSA 651-A:23”); id. at 155 (“Had the Harnum court properly
perceived the significance of that statutory language, it would have been difficult to reach the result it
did.”); id. at 156 (“The majority’s reading of the statute was flawed . . . and makes little sense.”); id. at 157
(“We are unwilling to mechanically apply the principles of stare decisis to allow a decision that was wrong
when it was decided perpetuate as a rule of law.” (emphasis added)). The last quoted passage in
particular shows that our Duran decision was based not so much on developments occurring after
Harnum, but rather on the fact that Harnum was badly reasoned from the outset.
16
doctrine should be applied and when not is fundamentally one for the
discretion of this court.”), superseded by statute on other grounds, as stated in
In re Robbins Estate, 116 N.H. 248, 249 (1976); accord Helvering v. Hallock,
309 U.S. 106, 119 (1940) (“[S]tare decisis is a principle of policy and not a
mechanical formula of adherence to the latest decision.”).
In addition to the four Casey factors, among other considerations which
both this court and the United States Supreme Court have regarded as
important in determining whether to overrule a prior decision are the following:
(5) the antiquity of the precedent;2 (6) whether it rested on constitutional,
rather than statutory or common law, grounds;3 (7) whether the precedent was
“joined by a strong majority of the court”4 or instead “decided by the narrowest
of margins, over spirited dissents challenging [its] basic underpinnings”;5 and
(8) whether the precedent is well-reasoned.6 The cases from this court cited in
footnotes 2-4 and 6 refute the majority’s assertion that consideration of these
additional factors somehow represents an “expan[sion of] our stare decisis
analysis,” ante at 10; on the contrary, these factors have been part of our stare
decisis jurisprudence for many years, and it is the majority that now seeks to
constrict that jurisprudence in favor, apparently, of a “four-factor-only” test.7
2 See Montejo v. Louisiana, 129 S. Ct. 2079, 2088-89 (2009); accord Alonzi v. Northeast Generation Servs.
Co., 156 N.H. 656, 659 (2008) (“We do not lightly overrule a case that has been precedent for over twenty-
five years.”).
3 See Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, 491 U.S. 164, 175 n.1 (1989) (“[C]onsiderations of stare decisis
have added force in statutory cases because Congress may alter what we have done by amending the
statute. In constitutional cases, by contrast, Congress lacks this option, and an incorrect or outdated
precedent may be overturned only by our own reconsideration or by constitutional amendment.”), superseded
by statute on other grounds, as stated in Stender v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 780 F. Supp. 1302, 1305-06 (N.D.
Cal. 1992); accord Duran, 158 N.H. at 157 (“stare decisis generally has more force in statutory analysis than
in constitutional adjudication because, in the former situation, the legislature can correct our mistakes through
legislation” (quotations and brackets omitted)); cf. Brannigan v. Usitalo, 134 N.H. 50, 53 (1991) (stating that
stare decisis is “not binding” on a constitutional question).
4 Brannigan, 134 N.H. at 53 (citation omitted).
5 Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808, 828-29 (1991).
6 See Citizens United v. Federal Election Com’n, 130 S. Ct. 876, 912 (2010); Payne, 501 U.S. at 827; accord
Matarese v. N.H. Mun. Assoc. Prop.-Liab. Ins. Trust, 147 N.H. 396, 400 (2002) (“Where a decision has
proven unworkable or badly reasoned . . . we will not hesitate to revisit it.” (quotation omitted; emphasis
added)); see also Duran, 158 N.H. at 154-57.
As one recent commentator’s analysis indicates, all of the factors discussed in the text can be viewed either
as another way of asking “How wrong is the precedent?,” or as being rather imprecise proxies for various
kinds of reliance interests that might be upset by overruling the precedent, or as some combination of the
two. See Kozel, Stare Decisis as Judicial Doctrine, 67 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 411, 418-21, 449, 465 (2010).
7 The majority’s assertion that I have reached out to address issues not raised by the parties fails to take
account of the procedural posture of this case. When the case was first briefed and argued before this court,
the State had not asserted that Williams should be overruled, and we could have simply affirmed the
defendant’s conviction on the grounds that the trial court had appropriately exercised its discretion in
conditioning the giving of the Williams instruction on the defendant’s agreement to amendment of the
indictments, given the defendant’s discovery violation. We did not follow this course because all members of
the court believed Williams was problematic to the proper administration of justice and therefore a ripe
candidate for having its continuing validity reviewed. Accordingly, we ordered supplemental briefing on this
issue. Given that we raised sua sponte the issue of whether Williams should be overruled, I fail to see any
17
If, on the other hand, what this assertion means to imply is that Jacobs
somehow overruled sub silencio all our earlier stare decisis cases insofar as
they considered factors other than the four addressed in that case, the majority
is faced with an obvious problem: Jacobs conducted no analysis that even
attempted to demonstrate why the stare decisis factors considered in these
earlier precedents should be abandoned. In other words, to accept this
proposition one would have to assume that, although the court in Jacobs was
specifically focused on the importance of adhering to precedent, it had no
compunction about effectuating a wholesale abandonment of precedent when it
came to the doctrine of stare decisis itself. See 20 Am. Jur. 2d Courts § 134
(2005) (“a case is not binding precedent on a point of law where the holding is
only implicit or assumed in the decision but is not announced”).
The majority expresses particular consternation over the prospect that
precedent can be abandoned based on the fact that it was not well-reasoned.
While acknowledging that our case law has found unsound reasoning relevant
in assessing whether to overrule a prior decision, the majority asserts that poor
reasoning is merely the starting point for determining if a stare decisis analysis
is required rather than a factor in the analysis. But whether one characterizes
poor reasoning as a prerequisite to stare decisis analysis or a factor in the
analysis is largely a matter of semantics and of little practical importance. To
be clear, I do not suggest that precedent may be overruled merely because it is
poorly reasoned. However, almost by definition, a poorly reasoned decision is
apt to produce injustice – a consequence inimical to the very purpose for which
courts exist. See, e.g., Citizens United v. Federal Election Com’n, 130 S. Ct.
876, 904 (2010) (overruling Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494
U.S. 652 (1990), based, in part, on its “wholly foreign concept,” Buckley v.
Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 48-49 (1976), that the government has a legitimate interest
in suppressing First Amendment rights in order to “equalize[] the relative
ability of individuals and groups to influence the outcome of elections”
(citations omitted)). Because there obviously is no intrinsic value in
perpetuating injustice, where, as here, a poorly reasoned decision yields such a
result and where, also as here, there are no legitimate competing reliance
interests the upsetting of which would produce harm of a greater magnitude,
overruling the decision is entirely consistent with the proper role of the
judiciary. See Kozel, Stare Decisis as Judicial Doctrine, 67 Wash. & Lee L. Rev.
411, 466 (2010) (opining that the real question to be decided whenever stare
decisis is raised is: “Does the importance of reaching the correct result on the
merits outweigh the basket of aggregated reliance interests that would be
upset?”); Citizens United, 130 S. Ct. at 920 (Roberts, C.J., concurring) (“we
legitimate reasons why we should be precluded from considering all factors that have a proper bearing on
that inquiry. Moreover, given the majority’s view that poor reasoning is “the starting point for a stare decisis
analysis,” ante at 11, it is hard to understand how the majority could expect not to address this issue on
appeal, particularly where the defendant does not concede that Williams was poorly reasoned.
18
must balance the importance of having constitutional questions decided
against the importance of having them decided right”).
II
The majority predicates its decision to overrule Williams on three of the
Casey factors: (1) the unworkability of the decision; (2) developments in the law
since Williams was decided; and (3) the absence of justifiable reliance interests
(except for those who have already proceeded to trial, whose interests will be
protected by the prospective nature of the decision). I agree with the majority’s
analysis of the first and third factors, but I am not persuaded by its treatment
of the second factor. I do agree, of course, that, since Williams was decided,
Superior Court Rule 98 has been amended to add section J, which gives the
court explicit authority to impose sanctions for discovery violations. But
insofar as the majority suggests that this change supports overruling Williams
because it provides an alternative remedy to address problems resulting from
discovery lapses by the State, see ante at 9, I am aware of no case in which an
issue regarding the Williams instruction has arisen in which the prosecution
had withheld discovery from the defense regarding the time frame during which
the alleged offenses occurred. Instead, from all that appears, the recurrent
problem that likely spawns most Williams issues is the inability of a young
child to accurately remember the times when incidents of sexual abuse
occurred, with the result that the child changes his or her account of the time
frame – not infrequently offering a new date or dates for the first time at trial,
as much to the surprise of the prosecutor as to the defense. The trial court’s
explicit authority, conferred by Rule 98(J), to impose sanctions for discovery
violations is not likely to address this phenomenon. And while there will
certainly be circumstances in which remedies such as prohibiting or striking
testimony or granting a continuance would be warranted regardless of whether
the prosecutor was at fault, these remedies were available to trial courts long
before the adoption of section J of the rule. See State v. Nadeau, 126 N.H. 120,
122-25 (1985) (judge at first trial excluded late-disclosed confession, and judge
at retrial allowed confession into evidence only during cross-examination and
rebuttal); State v. Spade, 118 N.H. 186, 189-90 (1978) (trial court offered one
day postponement of defense case as remedy for allowing State at trial to
amend time allegations of indictment).
On the contrary, to the extent developments in criminal discovery law
subsequent to Williams have a bearing on whether the case should be
overruled, I believe our decisions in State v. Chagnon, 139 N.H. 671 (1995),
and State v. Drewry, 139 N.H. 678 (1995), which firmly established that a
criminal defendant can be ordered to provide reciprocal discovery (and which
were thereafter incorporated into Rule 988), are far more significant. As the
8 See Super. Ct. R. 98(B), (C)(2), (D).
19
facts of this case demonstrate, the Williams rule carries a great potential for
mischief. The defendant correctly points out that, although Williams creates a
defense somewhat analogous to an alibi, we have never held that a defendant
planning to assert a defense based on Williams has an obligation to provide
pretrial notice to the State. Cf. Super. Ct. R. 100 (defendant intending to rely
on an alibi defense must give pretrial notice). Thus, in a case such as this one
where the defendant clearly knew from early on that the time span alleged in
the indictments was erroneous, the defense – in the absence of the reciprocal
discovery obligations imposed by Rule 98 as amended post-Williams – could sit
back quietly and then simply “spring” its time-based defense on the
prosecution at trial without prior