THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-469
JOEL M. HARRINGTON
v.
METROPOLIS PROPERTY MANAGEMENT GROUP, INC. & a.
Submitted: June 9, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 22, 2011
Joel M. Harrington, by brief, pro se.
Craig, Deachman & Amann PLLC, of Manchester (W. John Deachman on
the brief), for respondent Metropolis Property Management Group, Inc.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, Joel Harrington, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Smukler, J.) granting the motion to dismiss of respondent
Metropolis Property Management Group, Inc. (Metropolis). We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order and the record,
or are otherwise undisputed. On May 27, 2005, the petitioner entered into a
residential lease for an apartment at Hollis Commons Apartments in Concord.
The lease agreement required the petitioner to pay a security deposit of $875 to
be held “until the termination of Lessee’s occupancy.” The petitioner entered
into two lease renewals, the first in May 2006 renewing the lease for one year,
and another in June 2007. The second renewal called for a term commencing
on July 1, 2007, and ending “60 days after written notice has been given.”
(Emphasis omitted.) The original lease agreement and both lease renewals
identified “Hollis Commons Apartments, LLC” as the lessor.
Metropolis is a property management company that manages the Hollis
Commons Apartments. The petitioner dealt directly with Metropolis in matters
related to the apartment and lease, including his entry into the lease
agreement and payment of rent.
In August 2006, Lily Carson moved into the apartment unit above the
petitioner’s. She had a dog. The petitioner documented increased noise levels
at the apartment after Carson moved in and complained many times to
Metropolis’s representatives about the noise.
On a few occasions, a representative from Metropolis spoke with Carson
about these complaints and the noise subsided for a short period. Eventually,
after continued complaints, Metropolis offered the petitioner another apartment
in the complex, but the petitioner declined the offer because he determined
that it was unacceptable. Metropolis later offered the petitioner a right of first
refusal on any other unit that became available in the complex and to pay his
moving expenses. The petitioner declined this offer as well.
By letter dated August 6, 2009, the petitioner, through counsel, informed
Metropolis of his intention to vacate the apartment no later than September 6,
2009. He followed through in vacating the premises. Metropolis later informed
the petitioner by letter, dated September 28, 2009, that his security deposit
would not be returned for failure to provide sixty days’ notice in advance of
vacating the apartment, as required by the lease.
The petitioner filed an action against Metropolis and Carson, raising
numerous common law and statutory claims. He later amended his lawsuit to
add a claim that Metropolis had wrongfully retained his security deposit. The
petitioner settled his claims against Carson before trial.
Slightly more than one month before trial, the petitioner filed a motion
seeking to add Hollis Commons Apartments, LLC, and/or Hollis Commons,
LLC as parties. The trial court denied the motion and conducted a bench trial
on the merits. At the close of the petitioner’s evidence, Metropolis moved to
dismiss the case, and after taking the motion under advisement, the trial court
granted it on all counts. The petitioner moved for reconsideration, and
Metropolis objected, also requesting attorney’s fees. The petitioner objected to
Metropolis’s request for attorney’s fees and responded with his own request for
fees. The trial court denied both the petitioner’s motion for reconsideration
and the parties’ cross-motions for attorney’s fees. This appeal followed.
2
The petitioner first argues that the trial court erred in dismissing his
claim for the return of his security deposit. He claims that, by operation of
certain provisions of RSA chapters 540 and 540-A, the lease term requiring
sixty days’ notice to terminate the tenancy is null and void, that he was only
required to give thirty days’ notice to terminate the lease, and that he is
entitled to the return of his security deposit, plus statutory damages. The
petitioner’s argument misapprehends the statutes.
Resolution of the petitioner’s argument requires us to review the trial
court’s interpretation of sections of RSA chapters 540 and 540-A. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Billewicz v. Ransmeier, 161 N.H. 145, 151 (2011). We determine the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.
Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not
subject to modification. Id. Further, we will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. Id.
RSA 540:11 (2007) provides that “[a] lessee may terminate his lease by
notice in writing, in the same manner as the lessor, and the notice shall have
the same effect for all purposes as a notice by the lessor to the lessee.” RSA
540:3, II (2007) states, in pertinent part, that for residential tenancies, “30
days’ notice shall be sufficient in all cases” for eviction. RSA 540:28 (2007)
provides that “no lease or rental agreement . . . shall contain any provision by
which a tenant waives any of his rights under [RSA chapter 540], and any such
waiver shall be null and void.” According to the petitioner, the application of
the lease term requiring sixty days’ notice would constitute a waiver of his
purported statutory right as a tenant to give only thirty days’ notice under RSA
540:3, II, and thus the term is null and void pursuant to RSA 540:28. We
disagree.
RSA 540:3, II addresses eviction notices issued by lessors, as evidenced
by its title and context. The use of the term “sufficient” in the statute connotes
that the legislature intended that thirty days be the minimum period of time
necessary for such