THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-478
PETITION OF STUART DEDOPOULOS
Submitted: June 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: July 21, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general, for the State, filed no brief.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R. Schulman on
the brief), for the petitioner, Stuart Dedopoulos.
Simpson & Mulligan, P.L.L.C., of Lebanon (Gary Apfel on the brief), for
the New Hampshire Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, as amicus
curiae.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Attorney Stuart Dedopoulos, challenges an
order of the Superior Court (Nadeau, J.) fining him $100 for failing to appear
for a pretrial conference. We reverse.
The following facts are undisputed. Amanda Wolfe was convicted of a
misdemeanor in Portsmouth District Court. She appealed for a de novo jury
trial in Rockingham County Superior Court and retained Attorney Dedopoulos
to represent her.
Dedopoulos also represented Robert Yeaton in an unrelated felony case
in Strafford County Superior Court. Both the Wolfe and Yeaton cases were
scheduled for final pretrial conferences on the morning of June 10, 2010, and
to begin jury selection on June 21, 2010. The prosecutor in Yeaton moved to
continue the trial in that case. Dedopoulos filed an objection, but the motion
was not ruled on until the day of the pretrial conference. On June 1, 2010,
Dedopoulos moved to continue the pretrial conference and jury selection dates
in the Wolfe case. He cited his scheduling conflict with the Yeaton case, and
the fact that Wolfe had moved to Florida and was finding it difficult to make
travel arrangements to return to New Hampshire in time for the trial date.
On June 7, Dedopoulos called the Rockingham County Superior Court
clerk’s office to inquire about the status of his motion. He was told that no one
from the criminal department was available to assist him, so he left a voicemail
message requesting a return telephone call. He did not receive a return call.
On June 9, the day before the scheduled pretrial conference in Wolfe,
Dedopoulos again called the clerk’s office at 1:04 p.m. The call was answered
by a recording saying that the clerk’s office had closed at noon due to the state
budget crisis.
Dedopoulos then conferred with Assistant County Attorney William Pate,
who represented the State of New Hampshire in the Wolfe case. Pate agreed
that when he appeared at the pretrial in Wolfe, he would inform the judge of
Dedopoulos’s situation. He also said that the State would not object to the
motion to continue the trial, but would not assent to it until Dedopoulos
confirmed that the Yeaton trial would take place as originally scheduled.
Dedopoulos told Pate that he was available to meet with the court on June 11,
the day after the scheduled pretrial conference.
On June 10, Dedopoulos attended the pretrial conference in Yeaton in
Strafford County Superior Court. At that conference, the prosecutor withdrew
her motion to continue, and the trial schedule remained unchanged, with jury
selection to commence on June 21.
Pate appeared at the pretrial conference in Wolfe. He explained to the
court that Dedopoulos was appearing in Strafford County Superior Court on a
contested motion to continue the Yeaton trial. He also advised the court that
the State would assent to a continuance of the Wolfe trial if the Yeaton trial
proceeded as scheduled. The court denied the motion to continue and fined
Dedopoulos $100 “for failing to appear without ruling on the motion.”
Dedopoulos filed a motion to reconsider, in which he detailed his
attempts to contact the court. He argued that he made a good faith effort to
obtain a ruling on the motion to continue, that he could not be in both courts
at once, and that it was unfair to fine him for not being at a conference he had
2
indicated he could not attend when the court did not rule on the motion to
continue the conference until the time of the conference. In response, the trial
court continued the trial, but declined to vacate the fine.
On appeal, Dedopoulos argues that the trial court’s imposition of a
punitive monetary sanction on him was error. We review the trial court’s order
for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Lamarche v. McCarthy, 158
N.H. 197, 205 (2008) (imposition of sanctions is a matter largely left to the
discretion of the trial court).
In State v. Saucier, we held that a trial court’s denial of a motion to
continue jury selection did not deny the defendant due process of law and
effective assistance of counsel and was not an unsustainable exercise of
discretion. State v. Saucier, 128 N.H. 291, 295-96 (1986); cf. State v. Lambert,
147 N.H. 295, 296 (2001) (explaining unsustainable exercise of discretion
standard). In that case, the defendant’s attorney, a public defender, was trying
a jury case in another county on the Monday jury selection was scheduled to
begin. Saucier, 128 N.H. at 294. On the Friday immediately before the start of
jury selection, the trial judge ordered the public defender’s office to assign
other counsel to conduct jury selection. Id. A second public defender was
notified, but was unable to prepare over the weekend. Id. On Monday, a
representative from the public defender’s office appeared and objected to
proceeding with jury selection under such circumstances. Id.
In upholding the trial court’s decision, we noted the following facts: (1)
the trial court had found that a delay in jury selection would throw the court
calendar into “disarray”; (2) the public defender’s office had two and one-half
days to secure another attorney to prepare for jury selection; (3) jury selection
is a limited procedure; and (4) the case was not complex. Id. at 295-96. In
conclusion, we stated, “Although we uphold the trial court’s denial of a
continuance in this case, we also admonish the justices of the trial courts that
in the future, when they are exercising their sound discretion in deciding
whether to grant requested continuances, they should make every effort to
accommodate the reasonable scheduling requests of attorneys.” Id. at 296.
In this case, Dedopoulos was scheduled to appear for a pretrial
conference in another court at the same time, and the outcome of that
conference bore directly on the scheduling of the Wolfe case. Dedopoulos filed
a motion to continue, informing the court of the conflict, conferred with
opposing counsel, and indicated that he would be available to appear in court
to discuss the Wolfe case on June 11. Opposing counsel promised to inform
the judge of the situation. Dedopoulos made timely and diligent efforts to
ascertain the status of his motion to continue, and nothing in the record
suggests any negligence on his part. Further, as noted by the amicus brief in
this case, while scheduling conflicts are an inherent part of criminal defense
3
practice, the filing of “motions based on contingent scheduling conflicts filed far
in advance of hearing[s] [is] discouraged by most trial courts, as the burden of
processing these motions would otherwise be unwieldy and conflicts oftentimes
dissipate before the time of hearing.”
Nonetheless, we need not decide whether the trial court erred by denying
the motion to continue the pretrial conference as that issue is not before us.
However, we conclude that, under the circumstances of this case, the
imposition of a fine upon Attorney Dedopoulos constituted an unsustainable
exercise of discretion.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4