THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire County Probate Court
No. 2011-171
IN RE GUARDIANSHIP OF MARY LOUISE EATON
Submitted: November 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 16, 2012
Laboe Associates, PLLC, of Concord (Kerri S. Glover on the brief), for the
petitioner.
Bradley & Faulkner, P.C., of Keene (Gary J. Kinyon on the brief), for the
respondent.
Tropiano Law Office, of Derry (Lisa J. Bellanti on the memorandum of
law), for the New Hampshire Chapter of the National Academy of Elder Law
Attorneys, as amicus curiae.
CONBOY, J. The petitioner, Daniel Eaton, appeals the denial of his
motion for payment of legal fees, arguing that the Cheshire County Probate
Court (Hampe, J.) erred in finding that the imposition of a guardianship does
not require the proposed ward to pay a good-faith petitioner’s attorney’s fees
pursuant to RSA 464-A:43 (2004). We affirm.
The pertinent facts are drawn from the record. In March 2010, Dean
Eaton (Dean), the petitioner’s brother, filed a petition for guardianship over
their mother, Mary Louise Eaton. The petitioner objected to Dean’s petition
and filed his own petition. In June 2010, in a written settlement agreement,
the petitioner and Dean agreed that their brother, Michael Eaton, the
respondent, would be appointed guardian. Shortly thereafter, the trial court
found Mrs. Eaton incapacitated and appointed the respondent guardian over
her person and estate.
Thereafter, the petitioner asked the court, pursuant to RSA 464-A:43, to
order the respondent, as guardian of Mrs. Eaton’s estate, to pay the attorney’s
fees he incurred during the proceedings. The respondent objected.
The trial court denied the petitioner’s motion, reasoning that under RSA
464-A:43, I, the statute providing for payment of guardianship costs, “the
phrase ‘fees for the counsel’ refers to the counsel for the proposed ward,” and
not to the counsel for the petitioner. The court further found that no other
justification existed to require payment of the petitioner’s attorney’s fees from
the ward’s estate. This appeal followed.
“An award of attorney’s fees must be grounded upon statutory
authorization, an agreement between the parties, or an established exception
to the rule that each party is responsible for paying his or her own counsel
fees.” Merrimack School Dist. v. Nat’l School Bus Serv., 140 N.H. 9, 14 (1995)
(quotation and ellipsis omitted). Here, the petitioner asserts entitlement to an
award of attorney’s fees pursuant to RSA 464-A:43.
We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. State v.
Bernard, 158 N.H. 43, 44 (2008). In matters of statutory interpretation, we are
the final arbiter of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole. Id. When examining the language of a statute,
we ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider what the
legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did not see fit
to include. Id. Further, we interpret a statute in the context of the overall
scheme and not in isolation. Id. We do not consider legislative history to
construe a statute that is clear on its face. Id.
RSA 464-A:43 provides in full:
The costs incurred by the imposition of a guardianship or
conservatorship pursuant to the procedures established in this
chapter shall be distributed in the following manner:
2
I. Except in cases in which the petitioner filed the petition in
bad faith, the court costs and fees for the counsel and resource
person shall be borne by the proposed ward. In cases in which the
petitioner acted in bad faith, he or she shall bear all costs of the
proceeding.
II. If the proposed ward is indigent, the costs and fees of the
proceeding shall be borne by the state.
III. The costs incurred in the petition for a conservatorship
shall be paid by the estate of the conservatee.
RSA 464-A:43 (emphasis added).
The petitioner argues that RSA 464-A:43, I, mandates the payment of his
fees from the ward’s estate in the absence of bad faith on his part. The
petitioner grounds his argument in: (1) a plain reading of the statute; (2) the
legislative history of the statute; and (3) public policy. We address his
arguments in turn.
First, the petitioner argues that entitlement to his attorney’s fees
necessarily flows from the plain meaning of the phrase, “fees for the counsel.”
The petitioner notes that the statute does not define or qualify the word “costs”
in the opening sentence, or the word “counsel” in paragraph I, or otherwise
specify that a petitioner’s attorney’s fees are not included. Further, the
petitioner argues that because proposed wards do not incur court costs in
guardianship proceedings, the phrase “court costs,” used in paragraph I,
cannot refer to a ward’s court costs. He contends, therefore, that the phrase
“court costs and fees for the counsel” necessarily refers to a petitioner’s court
costs and attorney’s fees. The petitioner acknowledges that in other sections of
the guardianship chapter, there are numerous references to the proposed
ward’s counsel. See, e.g., RSA 464-A:4-:6 (2004), :8 (2004), :11 (2004), :12
(Supp. 2011), :13 (2004), :25 (Supp. 2011), :43. He argues, however, that
those specific references to the proposed ward’s counsel support his position
that the unqualified word “counsel,” in subsection 43, I, does not exclude the
petitioner’s counsel.
In contrast, the respondent contends that the phrase “fees for the
counsel” does not include a petitioner’s attorney’s fees. He argues that the
purpose of the chapter is to protect the rights of proposed wards. He notes
that the chapter requires the court to appoint counsel for a proposed ward who
does not have counsel, see RSA 464-A:6, I, but has no similar provision
relating to a petitioner. He points out that the chapter refers to a proposed
ward’s counsel numerous times but never to a petitioner’s counsel. Finally, he
3
argues that a “resource person” acts on behalf of the proposed ward, not a
petitioner. Therefore, he argues, the phrase “fees for the counsel and resource
person” can only mean a proposed ward’s counsel and the resource person.
We agree with the trial court’s reasoning and hold that the statute’s
stated purpose and the statutory scheme indicate that the legislature intended
the phrase “fees for the counsel” to refer to a proposed ward’s counsel, not a
petitioner’s counsel.
The stated purpose of RSA chapter 464-A is to “promote and protect the
well-being of the proposed ward.” RSA 464-A:1 (2004). In particular, the
“chapter is designed to provide procedural and substantive safeguards for civil
liberties and property rights of a proposed ward.” Id. These safeguards are
needed considering the potentially adversarial nature of guardianship
proceedings, see, e.g., In re DeLucca, 121 N.H. 71, 72 (1981), and the
significance of the liberties and rights at stake, see, e.g., In re Gamble, 118
N.H. 771, 775 (1978) (“A person who is legally declared incompetent is
substantially deprived of liberty. An incompetent person is reduced to the
status of a child . . . .”).
Prominent among the statutory safeguards are the proposed ward’s right
to counsel and the potential appointment of a guardian ad litem. RSA 464-A:6,
I, provides in part:
The right to legal counsel for any person for whom a
temporary guardian or guardianship of the person and estate, or
person, or estate, is sought shall be absolute and unconditional. If
the proposed ward does not have his or her own counsel, the court
shall appoint counsel for the proposed ward immediately upon the
filing of a petition for guardianship . . . .
“The guarantee of counsel now makes the proposed ward an active party in the
very proceedings determining his need for a guardian, and who should be his
guardian.” In re Snow Estate, 120 N.H. 590, 592 (1980) (quotation omitted).
The role of counsel in guardianship proceedings is to, “as far as reasonably
possible, carry out the client’s decisions,” “[e]ven when representing a client
with a disability.” In re Guardianship of Henderson, 150 N.H. 349, 350 (2003).
The statute further protects a proposed ward by permitting courts “to appoint a
guardian ad litem when it appears that the rights of the allegedly incapacitated
person are not fully represented.” Id.; see RSA 464-A:41, I (Supp. 2011). The
guardian ad litem is charged with reaching “an independent conclusion on
what is in the best interest of the proposed ward.” Henderson, 150 N.H. at 350
(quotation and brackets omitted).
4
Representation by counsel and the potential for the appointment of a
guardian ad litem assure protection of the proposed ward’s desires and best
interests and obviate the need for a petitioner to employ counsel on behalf of
the proposed ward. Further, RSA 464-A:6, II protects proposed wards by
mandating that a proposed ward’s appointed counsel be compensated at a rate
determined by this court. See RSA 464-A:6. That provision makes no
reference to counsel fees incurred by a petitioner. See id. If a petitioner
chooses to employ counsel, that counsel represents the petitioner’s interests,
which may be adverse to the proposed ward or another petitioner. To read the
statute as requiring a proposed ward to pay a petitioner’s discretionary
attorney’s fees, even if the petitioner’s interests are adverse to the proposed
ward’s interests, would thus run counter to these legislative safeguards.
While a petitioner is free to choose to employ counsel, nothing in the
statute requires a petitioner to retain counsel to petition for guardianship.
Moreover, guardianship procedures contemplate that petitions may be filed
without the assistance of counsel. RSA 464-A:4 outlines the procedure by
which “[a]ny relative, public official, or interested person, or any individual in
his or her own behalf” may file a petition for appointment of a guardian. RSA
464-A:4. Although the petitioner bears the burden of establishing the
incapacity of the proposed ward, see RSA 464-A:8, IV, “[t]he statute is not
designed to erect procedural hurdles which only the most persevering and
painstaking proposed guardians can overcome.” DeLucca, 121 N.H. at 73.
The petitioner asserts that to read the statute as limiting “fees for the
counsel” to the proposed ward’s counsel renders the last sentence in RSA 464-
A:43, I, meaningless. That sentence provides, “In cases in which the petitioner
acted in bad faith, he or she shall bear all costs of the proceeding.” RSA 464-
A:43, I. The petitioner argues that the statute should be read to preclude an
award of attorney’s fees to a petitioner only when the petitioner has acted in
bad faith. He asserts that to construe the statute otherwise denies a petitioner
his attorney’s fees even when the petitioner acts in good faith. Our holding
today, that the statute does not contemplate a ward’s responsibility for
payment of a petitioner’s counsel fees, regardless of the petitioner’s good or bad
faith, is dispositive. We note, however, that the respondent’s reading of the
statute -- that absent bad faith by a petitioner, the proposed ward is liable for
her own attorney’s fees, but when the petitioner acts in bad faith, the petitioner
is liable for the proposed ward’s attorney’s fees -- gives meaning to the last
sentence of RSA 464-A:43, I, and is not inconsistent with our holding.
Nonetheless, because there has been no assertion here that the petitioner filed
the petition in bad faith, we need not decide whether bad faith by a petitioner
would result in liability for the proposed ward’s attorney’s fees, as part of “all
costs of the proceeding.”
5
Neither are we persuaded by the petitioner’s two additional statutory
arguments. The petitioner argues that RSA 464-A:26, I (Supp. 2011), which
provides that “[t]he guardian of the estate shall apply the money and property
for the support, care, and education of the ward,” requires that a ward’s estate
pay a petitioner’s attorney’s fees because the fees are a necessary cost
associated with a benefit to the proposed ward. The petitioner points out that
he hired legal counsel “after repeated pleas from the (then) proposed ward that
he seek to maintain her existing arrangements,” and that the efforts of the legal
counsel he hired “were solely for the benefit of [the ward].” We decline to infer,
however, that “the support, care, and education of the ward” encompasses legal
fees incurred by an unsuccessful petitioner for guardianship, particularly
where the legislature has explicitly provided for appointment of counsel for the
proposed ward.
In his final statutory argument, the petitioner asserts that because
guardianships and conservatorships are similar, and because, pursuant to
RSA 464-A:43, III, a conservatee’s estate bears the costs incurred by the
imposition of a conservatorship, RSA 464-A:43, I, must mean that a proposed
ward is liable for a guardianship petitioner’s attorney’s fees. We are not
persuaded by the petitioner’s analogy. Although there are some similarities
between guardianships and conservatorships, the differences between the
proceedings are too significant to sustain the petitioner’s argument. A
conservatorship proceeding is voluntarily initiated by the conservatee, see RSA
464-A:13, and does not involve adversarial process or counsel other than
counsel appointed for the conservatee. See RSA 464-A:13-:14 (2004). In
contrast, a guardianship proceeding is a potentially adversarial proceeding in
which the petitioner’s counsel may argue, despite the proposed ward’s
objection, that a proposed ward’s incapacity justifies the deprivation of
significant rights and liberties. See, e.g., DeLucca, 121 N.H. at 72; Gamble,
118 N.H. at 775.
The petitioner also argues that the legislative history of RSA 464-A:43
supports his contention that the legislature intended proposed wards to be
liable for petitioners’ attorney’s fees. “When a statute is ambiguous we
consider legislative history to aid our analysis.” AIMCO Props. v. Dziewisz, 152
N.H. 587, 590 (2005). The phrase “fees for the counsel,” standing alone, is
ambiguous; however, the legislative history of the statute provides no guidance
as to the intended meaning of the phrase. Nevertheless, as explained above,
the stated purpose of the statute and the entire statutory scheme support our
holding that the legislature intended the phrase “fees for the counsel” to refer
to a proposed ward’s counsel, not a petitioner’s counsel. See Bernard, 158
N.H. at 44.
As to the petitioner’s public policy argument, he is joined by the New
Hampshire Chapter of the National Academy of Elder Law Attorneys, acting as
6
amicus curiae. They argue that the court’s interpretation creates financial
disincentives for petitioners to file guardianship petitions because they will be
liable for their own attorney’s fees. While we are not unsympathetic to this
concern, “[w]e reserve such matters of public policy for the legislature.” Eng
Khabbaz v. Comm’r., Social Sec. Admin., 155 N.H. 798, 805 (2007).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7