THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2011-909
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MICHAEL CARPENTER NOUCAS
Argued: April 17, 2013
Opinion Issued: July 16, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, senior assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on
the brief and orally, for the defendant.
LYNN, J. Following a jury trial in Superior Court (O’Neill, J.), the
defendant, Michael Carpenter Noucas, appeals his conviction for being an
accomplice to armed robbery. See RSA 636:1 (2007) (robbery); RSA 626:8
(2007) (accomplice liability). On appeal, he argues that the trial court erred
when it: (1) found that sufficient evidence supported his conviction; (2) failed
to instruct the jury on defense of another under RSA 627:4 (Supp. 2012); and
(3) sustained a hearsay objection made by the State. He also argues that the
trial court committed plain error when it admitted testimony that the defendant
invoked his right to counsel following his arrest. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On June 5, 2010, the
defendant told Julie Sallies and Robert Hart that he wanted to rob “some guy”
who was staying at Sarah Longval’s house at 16 Lake Street in Meredith.
Longval was the mother of the defendant’s son, and the defendant had a key to
her house. After a brief discussion, in which the defendant said that the
intended victim had cocaine and cash, Sallies, Hart, and the defendant
prepared to commit the robbery. Hart dressed in dark clothing, Sallies
obtained two orange ski masks, and Hart or Sallies grabbed a baseball bat.
After Sallies drove the defendant and Hart to Meredith, the defendant
instructed her to park in a small gravel area behind Longval’s house. The
defendant and Hart then got out of the car, put on the two orange ski masks,
and went into the tree line behind the house. The defendant soon returned to
the car and collected a knife. Sallies stayed in the car.
Approximately fifteen minutes later, the defendant staggered back to the
car. He was bleeding “everywhere.” His left ear was nearly severed, and he had
a stab wound in his throat, a small wound on the top of his head, and smaller
cuts on his arms and hands. When Hart failed to appear after a few moments,
Sallies drove to the Meredith police station to get help. The police subsequently
found Hart dead in a spare bedroom on the third floor of Longval’s house. He
had sustained approximately a dozen stab wounds to his chest, back, and
head. He was found wearing rubber gloves and a bat was lying on the floor
nearby. The intended victim of the robbery, David Rivera, had cuts on one of
his hands or arms. An orange ski mask and a rubber glove recovered from
inside the spare bedroom on the third floor of the house tested positive for the
defendant’s DNA.
The defendant was subsequently charged with being an accomplice to
armed robbery.1 The indictment charged that the defendant aided Hart in the
commission of armed robbery with the purpose that the offense be committed.
It further charged that the defendant, knowing that Hart was about to commit
armed robbery, agreed to assist Hart and accompanied him to Longval’s
residence while armed with a knife and wearing a mask and rubber gloves.
After a jury convicted the defendant, he appealed.
I. Sufficiency of the Evidence
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in finding that there
was sufficient evidence to support his conviction.
1 The State also charged the defendant with burglary and conspiracy to commit armed robbery.
The jury convicted him of the conspiracy charge, but acquitted him on the burglary charge. The
trial court subsequently granted the defendant’s post-trial motion to set aside the conspiracy
conviction on grounds not material to the issues raised on this appeal.
2
RSA 626:8 provides, in relevant part, that an individual is “legally
accountable for the conduct of another person when . . . [h]e is an accomplice
of such other person in the commission of the offense.” RSA 626:8, II(c); State
v. Formella, 158 N.H. 114, 116 (2008). A person is an accomplice if “[w]ith the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense, he solicits
such other person in committing it, or aids or agrees or attempts to aid such
other person in planning or committing it.” RSA 626:8, III(a); see Formella, 158
N.H. at 116. A person commits robbery if, in the course of committing a theft,
he “[u]ses physical force on the person of another and such person is aware of
such force,” or “[t]hreatens another with or purposely puts him in fear of
immediate use of physical force.” RSA 636:1. A person commits armed
robbery if, while committing robbery, he was: (1) actually armed with a deadly
weapon; (2) reasonably appeared to the victim to be armed with a deadly
weapon; or (3) inflicted or attempted to inflict death or serious injury on the
person of another. RSA 636: I, III; State v. Glanville, 145 N.H. 631, 633 (2000).
The defendant argues that the evidence presented at trial was not
sufficient to support his conviction because it “failed to exclude all rational
conclusions consistent with innocence.” He asserts that the evidence
concerning his “actions in the house was entirely circumstantial,” and that
“[t]he State conceded that its evidence on the accomplice to armed robbery
charge was circumstantial.” He contends that if he “did not accompany Hart to
or into the room, his presence would not have aided Hart in committing an
armed robbery.” He further contends that “a rational conclusion remains that
[he] entered the room to assist Hart but did not assist in Hart’s armed robbery
of Rivera.” Finally, the defendant argues that “RSA 626:8, VI(c) makes lack of
renunciation an element of the offense,” and that the “State was required to
admit sufficient evidence that [he] did not abandon his intent to aid Hart but
[the State] failed to do so.”
To prevail on a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, a defendant
must show that “no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the evidence and all
reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, could
have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v. Langill, 161 N.H. 218,
228 (2010). Where the evidence does not consist solely of circumstantial
evidence, it need not exclude all rational conclusions other than guilt. See
State v. Saunders, 164 N.H. 342, 351 (2012). On the other hand, where the
evidence is solely circumstantial, the inferential chain of circumstances must
be of sufficient strength that guilt is the sole rational conclusion. See id.
As an initial matter, we note that the State disputes that it “conceded
that its evidence on the accomplice to armed robbery charge was
circumstantial.” We agree that the State did not make this concession. The
record establishes that the prosecutor merely informed the court that “plenty of
circumstantial evidence” supported the charges against the defendant. The
3
prosecutor also noted that witness testimony and physical evidence recovered
from Longval’s house supported the charges. See State v. Newcomb, 140 N.H.
72, 80 (1995) (direct evidence includes “the testimony of a person who claims
to have personal knowledge of facts about the crime charged” (quotation
omitted)).
Based upon the evidence presented at trial, we conclude that the
defendant has failed to show that “no rational trier of fact, viewing all of the
evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the
State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Langill, 161 N.H. at
228. Although there was no direct evidence of what transpired inside the
house, the totality of the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, was
sufficient to support a conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt that an armed
robbery occurred and that the defendant aided and agreed to assist Hart in its
commission. Sallies testified that the defendant told Hart and her that he
wanted to commit robbery, traveled with Hart and her to the destination of the
planned robbery, directed her to park behind Longval’s house before
commission of the robbery, and prepared for the robbery by wearing a ski mask
and arming himself with a knife. The defendant also admitted that he was
inside the house during the robbery and used force against Rivera. Moreover,
the State presented evidence that a ski mask and rubber glove recovered from
the scene tested positive for the defendant’s DNA and that Hart was found
wearing rubber gloves with a baseball bat nearby. Viewing all the evidence and
all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to the State, the
jury could have found that the defendant, with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating its commission, aided Hart in committing armed robbery. See RSA
636:1; RSA 626:8.
Insofar as the defendant argues that RSA 626:8, VI(c) makes lack of
renunciation an element of the offense, and that the State was required to
prove that he did not abandon his intent to aid Hart, we conclude that the
defendant failed to preserve this issue for appellate review.2 See State v.
Winward, 161 N.H. 533, 542 (2011). He did not make this argument in his
motion to dismiss for insufficient evidence. Nor did he object to the trial
court’s jury instructions, which did not inform the jury that lack of
renunciation under RSA 626:8 VI(c) is an element of accomplice liability. We
have “consistently held that we will not consider issues raised on appeal that
were not presented in the [trial] court.” State v. Winstead, 150 N.H. 244, 246
(2003) (quotation omitted). “This requirement is designed to discourage parties
unhappy with the trial result to comb the record, endeavoring to find some
alleged error never addressed by the trial judge that could be used to set aside
2 RSA 626:8, VI(c) provides that a person is not an accomplice if he “terminates his complicity
prior to the commission of the offense and wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the commission of
the offense or gives timely warning to the law enforcement authorities or otherwise makes proper
effort to prevent the commission of the offense.” See Formella, 158 N.H. at 116.
4
the verdict.” LaMontagne Builders v. Bowman Brook Purchase Group, 150
N.H. 270, 274 (2003) (quotation omitted).
II. Defense of Another Instruction
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in failing to give an
instruction on defense of another under RSA 627:4.
RSA 627:4, I, provides in pertinent part:
A person is justified in using non-deadly force upon another
person in order to defend himself or a third person from what he
reasonably believes to be the imminent use of unlawful, non-
deadly force by such other person, and he may use a degree of
such force which he reasonably believes to be necessary for such
purpose.
We have held that when there is “some evidence” that the defendant used force
in defense of another, conduct “negating such a defense becomes an element of
the offense that the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt.” State v.
Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 81 (2011); State v. Hast, 133 N.H. 747, 749-50 (1990).
At the close of the fifth day of trial, the trial court reviewed jury
instructions with the parties. Because the defendant had filed a pretrial notice
reserving the right to argue that if he used force against Rivera “he did so in
order to defend himself or a third person,” the court asked defense counsel
whether he was planning to pursue such a defense. Defense counsel
responded that he would pursue such a defense if the defendant testified. The
court then informed the parties that, depending entirely upon whether the
defendant testified, it would instruct the jury regarding self-defense and
defense of another in accordance with relevant sections of the New Hampshire
Bar Association’s Criminal Jury Instructions. See N.H. Bar Assoc. Criminal
Jury Instructions 3.10, 3.13, 3.14 (1985) (hereinafter “model jury
instructions”).
The defendant subsequently testified that he did not participate in an
armed robbery with Hart. He testified that, on the day of the alleged robbery,
Hart asked him to arrange a conversation with Rivera at Longval’s house. The
defendant agreed and traveled with Sallies and Hart from Laconia to Meredith.
The defendant, Hart, and Rivera then spoke at Longval’s house. The
conversation left Hart not “totally happy with [Rivera].” The defendant and
Hart then exited the house and returned to the car. The defendant went to a
neighbor’s house while Hart and Sallies argued. After the defendant returned
from the neighbor’s house, Sallies told him that Hart had gone back inside
Longval’s house to “take care of” Rivera. The defendant followed in pursuit.
5
Upon reaching the third floor of the house, the defendant heard “[Hart] getting
stabbed repeatedly.” He then saw Rivera and Hart struggling over a baseball
bat and Rivera “stabbing [Hart] in the chest.” The defendant attempted to
break up the fight by pushing Rivera against a wall. Rivera, in turn, began
stabbing the defendant. The defendant eventually managed to escape, but not
before sustaining serious injuries.
Based upon the defendant’s testimony, the court and parties revisited
the issue of whether the defendant was entitled to the model jury instructions
on self-defense and defense of another. The State argued that he was not
entitled to the instructions because he was “not charged with assault” and the
jury would not reach “the issue of . . . defense of another” because it had
nothing to do with the charges against the defendant. The defendant
responded that the defense applied to the charge of being an accomplice to
armed robbery because it involved the use of force. He noted that RSA 627:1
(2007) provides that “[c]onduct which is justifiable under this chapter
constitutes a defense to any [offense].” More specifically, he argued that,
because the indictment charging him with being an accomplice to armed
robbery “alleged, if not the use of force, certainly the threat of force,” then “self
defense or defense of another would be a justification for using force” and
would “negate one of the elements of the offense.” (Emphasis added.) The
State responded that to convict the defendant of being an accomplice to armed
robbery the jury only needed “to find that the [d]efendant accompanied [Hart],
that he was wearing a mask, gloves, and had a knife with him.” It further
argued that “it [did]n’t matter if he got up to the room and went into the room
on self defense.” After considering the parties’ arguments, the court ruled that,
although sufficient evidence supported that the defendant acted in self-
defense,3 the defendant was not entitled to jury instructions on self-defense or
defense of another as a matter of law. It informed defense counsel: “I’m going
to deny your request for model instructions [on self-defense and defense of
another], all rights reserved.”
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court’s refusal to instruct
the jury on defense of another was a structural error, requiring reversal of his
conviction. He argues that he was entitled to an instruction on defense of
another because the trial court found that sufficient evidence supported the
defense and because it applies to the offense of being an accomplice to armed
robbery. He contends that “[w]ithout knowing the law about when a person is
3 The trial court informed the parties that sufficient evidence supported that the defendant acted
in self-defense, not defense of another. Nevertheless, we understand the ruling to include a
finding that there was sufficient evidence that the defendant acted in self-defense or defense of
another. Cf. Hast, 133 N.H. at 748-49 (“The court’s chosen words did not include ‘defense of
another’. We are convinced that the court and the defendant intended that the proposed and
adopted objection include the ‘defense of another’ objection under the self-defense objection
rubric.”).
6
entitled to use non-deadly force, the jury was unable to properly judge whether
[the defendant’s] admitted force could be legally justified or could only be used
to determine whether the elements of the offense had been proven.”
Whether a particular jury instruction is necessary, and the scope and
wording of the instruction, are within the sound discretion of the trial court.
State v. Hernandez, 159 N.H. 394, 400 (2009). We review the trial court’s
decisions on these matters for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
“When reviewing jury instructions, we evaluate allegations of error by
interpreting the disputed instructions in their entirety, as a reasonable juror
would have understood them, and in light of all the evidence in the case.”
State v. Davidson, 163 N.H. 462, 472 (2012) (quotation omitted). “We
determine whether the jury instructions adequately and accurately explain
each element of the offense and reverse only if the instructions did not fairly
cover the issues of law in the case.” Id. (quotation omitted).
As an initial matter, we reject the defendant’s argument that the trial
court was required to instruct on defense of another because it found that
there was sufficient evidence that the defendant used force in defense of Hart.
Although we have held that a “trial court must grant a defendant’s requested
instruction on a specific defense if there is some evidence to support a rational
finding in favor of that defense,” State v. Vassar, 154 N.H. 370, 373 (2006), this
requirement presumes that the requested instruction is legally available in
light of the charged offense and the evidence adduced at trial. In other words,
the trial court correctly concluded that it also had to determine whether the
defendant was legally entitled to the instruction. Cf. State v. Furgal, 164 N.H.
430, 435 (2012) (“whether a statute provides a basis for a requested jury
instruction raises a question of statutory interpretation, which we review de
novo”). And although the defendant broadly argues that “the trial court erred
in failing to instruct the jury on defense of another,” we review only whether
the trial court erred in failing to give the jury instructions considered and
discussed at trial. See State v. Perri, 164 N.H. 400, 410 (2012) (refusing to
consider a jury instruction that the defendant did not request); cf. State v.
Blomquist, 153 N.H. 216, 223 (2006) (“Providing the trial court with the
opportunity to correct error is particularly appropriate where an alleged error
involves a jury instruction.” (quotation omitted)).
Our case law distinguishes between what we have called a “theory of
defense” and a “theory of the case.” A trial court must instruct a jury on a
defendant’s “theory of defense,” but not on a “theory of the case.” See State v.
Bruneau, 131 N.H. 104, 117-18 (1988). A “theory of defense” is akin to a “civil
plea of confession and avoidance, by which the defendant admits the
substance of the allegation but points to facts that excuse, exonerate or justify
his actions such that he thereby escapes liability.” Id. (quotation omitted);
State v. Guaraldi, 124 N.H. 93, 97 (1983). It “is a proposition about the legal
7
significance of claimed facts, and it thus falls within the scope of a judge’s
responsibility to instruct the jury on the law.” Bruneau, 131 N.H. at 117-18.
By contrast, a “theory of the case” is “simply the defendant’s position on how
the evidence should be evaluated and interpreted.” Id.; State v. Shannon, 125
N.H. 653, 662 (1984) (defendant was not entitled to requested jury instruction
because he was “not admitting liability and pointing to facts that exonerate,
excuse or justify his conduct, but [was] denying criminal behavior”); State v.
Ramos, 149 N.H. 272, 274-76 (2003) (defendant charged with aggravated
felonious sexual assault was not entitled to instruction on defense of consent
because although he admitted to sexually penetrating the victim, in order for
jury to find, as charged, that he did so through concealment or surprise, jury
necessarily had to find that victim did not consent). In other words, a
defendant is not entitled to a jury instruction on a proffered “defense” when he
simply presents “evidence of a different factual scenario than that presented by
the State, and then argue[s] how the facts and evidence should be evaluated or
interpreted by the jury.” Ramos, 149 N.H. at 274. Such a defense creates a
“credibility contest,” which we have recognized “is not a legal defense to any
charge.” Id.
Here, the defendant did not admit to any of the facts alleged in the
indictment charging him with being an accomplice to armed robbery. Instead
of admitting that he aided Hart in the commission of the crime and pointing to
facts to “excuse, exonerate or justify his actions,” Bruneau, 131 N.H. at 117,
the defendant testified to a “different factual scenario than that presented by
the State.” Ramos, 149 N.H. at 274. In short, the defendant asked the jury to
disbelieve Sallies’ testimony that he planned and committed armed robbery,
and to believe instead his testimony that he and Hart went to Longval’s house
to have a conversation with Rivera, a conversation which led Rivera to stab
Hart and prompted the defendant to use force in defense of Hart. Thus, our
precedents demonstrate that the trial court did not err in failing to instruct the
jury in accordance with the model jury instructions on self-defense and defense
of another.
Nevertheless, the defendant contends that his admitted use of force
against Rivera may have been improperly utilized by the jury to establish the
physical force element of the crime of robbery, see RSA 636:1, or to establish
that the defendant, as charged in the indictment, agreed to provide assistance
to Hart in robbing Rivera. Thus, he appears to argue that the trial court
should have instructed the jury on defense of another under RSA 627:4
because, without such an instruction, the jury may have misunderstood the
legal significance of his admitted use of force and found him guilty of being an
accomplice to armed robbery based upon justifiable conduct under RSA 627:4.
See State v. Gingras, 162 N.H. 633, 639 (2011) (defendant entitled to jury
instruction on legal significance of claimed facts).
8
We need not decide, however, whether the defendant would have been
entitled to a jury instruction narrowly crafted to address this concern. If the
model jury instructions on self-defense and defense of another had been given,
conduct negating the defenses would have become an element of the offense
that the State had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. See Etienne, 163 N.H.
at 81. The jury would have been told, “If you have reasonable doubt as to
whether the defendant acted in self-defense [or in defense of another], you
must find the defendant not guilty.” N.H. Bar Assoc. Criminal Jury
Instructions 3.10. Such an instruction would have been erroneous as a matter
of law because, unlike in a typical self-defense or defense-of-another situation,
here, the defendant could have used force defensively against Rivera and also
have been guilty of being an accomplice to armed robbery. The State presented
evidence independent of the defendant’s admitted use of force that the
defendant or Hart used or threatened physical force in furtherance of robbing
Rivera. The State also presented evidence independent of the defendant’s
admitted use of force that he agreed to provide assistance to Hart in the
commission of the robbery. In short, had the trial court given the model jury
instructions on self-defense and defense of another, the jury would have been
told to acquit the defendant even if it found evidence sufficient to convict him
independent of his admitted use of force. Accordingly, we conclude that the
trial court did not err in refusing to give the model jury instructions on self-
defense and defense of another.
III. Hearsay Objection
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in sustaining a
hearsay objection during his cross-examination of Longval. The following
exchange preceded the objection:
Q: Do you ever remember Pat McIntyre . . . coming over to visit on
[the day of the robbery] at your house?
A: I don’t remember. Pat and his mother both were at my house a
lot. I was friends with both of them.
Q: Do you remember a conversation between yourself, . . . David
Rivera, and Pat McIntyre at your house?
A: I don’t remember.
Q: Okay. Well, do you remember David Rivera telling Pat that he
was planning on trying to get . . . .
At this point, the State objected. At sidebar, the State argued that
defense counsel was “getting into hearsay.” In response, defense counsel made
9
the following offer of proof: “I don’t know what this witness is going to say, but
I have a good faith [belief] . . . based on the statement by Pat McIntyre who said
that David Rivera told him he was planning on robbing [the defendant] for
$20.00.” Defense counsel argued that under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
803(3) “an out of court statement about somebody’s plans and intent to do
something in the future is admissible.” After defense counsel and the
prosecutor briefly discussed the scope of Rule 803(3), the trial court sustained
the objection.
The defendant maintains that the trial court erred because Rivera’s
alleged statement was admissible as “a statement of Rivera’s then existing plan
or intent.” Rule 803(3) provides that an out-of-court statement may be
admitted for the truth of the matter asserted if it is “[a] statement of the
declarant’s then existing state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical
condition (such as intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain, and bodily
health), but not including a statement of memory or belief to prove the fact
remembered or believed.” State v. Hall, 152 N.H. 374, 378 (2005) (quotation
omitted); N.H. R. Ev. 803(3). Thus, according to the defendant, “[w]here the
State offered no direct evidence of what happened in the room and admitted
Rivera’s lack of credibility, and where [the defendant] offered a contrasting
version of what had occurred, consistent with his innocence, the court’s
exclusion of this evidence prejudiced [his] case.” He argues that the excluded
statement “would have corroborated [the defendant’s] testimony that he had
interacted with Rivera before the night in question,” and “may have provided
additional reasonable doubt about the State’s theory of the case.”
“We review challenges to a trial court’s evidentiary rulings under our
unsustainable exercise of discretion standard and reverse only if the rulings
are clearly untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of a party’s case.” State
v. Brooks, 164 N.H. 272, 283 (2012) (quotation omitted). In determining
whether a ruling is a proper exercise of judicial discretion, we consider whether
the record establishes an objective basis sufficient to sustain the discretionary
decision made. State v. McDonald, 163 N.H. 115, 121 (2011). The defendant
bears the burden of demonstrating that the trial court’s ruling was clearly
untenable or unreasonable to the prejudice of his case. See State v. Ruggiero,
163 N.H. 129, 135 (2011).
In order to predicate error on a trial court’s ruling excluding evidence,
the proponent of the evidence bears the burden of making a contemporaneous
offer of proof sufficient to apprise the court of the specific nature of the
excluded evidence. See N.H. R. Ev. 103(b); State v. Saulnier, 132 N.H. 412,
413-14 (1989). “[T]he object [of Rule 103(b)] is to advise the trial judge of a
claim of error [so] that [it] can be addressed before any damage is beyond
correction in the trial court.” Saulnier, 132 N.H. at 414 (quotation omitted).
As in Saulnier, in this case the question asked by defense counsel sought to
10
elicit an out-of-court statement made by Rivera that was presumptively
hearsay. N.H. R. Ev. 801(c) (“‘Hearsay’ is a statement, other than one made by
the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove
the truth of the matter asserted.”). It thus was the defendant’s burden to make
a sufficiently specific offer of proof as to the substance of the expected
testimony to satisfy the trial court that what he sought to elicit did not
constitute inadmissible hearsay. Saulnier, 132 N.H. at 414-15; see Bohan v.
Ritzo, 141 N.H. 210, 218 (1996) (offer of proof must “set[] forth the specific
basis for admissibility of the proffered evidence”); accord United States v.
Adams, 271 F.3d 1236, 1241 (10th Cir. 2001) (“[M]erely telling the court the
content . . . of proposed testimony is not an offer of proof. In order to qualify as
an adequate offer of proof, the proponent must, first, describe the evidence and
what it tends to show, and, second, identify the grounds for admitting the
evidence.” (citations and quotations omitted)); People v. Morrison, 101 P.3d
568, 586 (Cal. 2004) (“Evidence is properly excluded when the proponent fails
to make an adequate offer of proof regarding the relevance or admissibility of
the evidence.”); State v. Sweeney, 151 N.H. 666, 677 (2005) (proponent of
hearsay statement has burden to demonstrate admissibility under applicable
exception). The defendant failed to meet this burden.
Although counsel told the court he had a good faith basis for believing
that Rivera told McIntyre he planned to rob the defendant, conspicuously
absent from the offer of proof was any indication of a basis for believing that
Longval heard Rivera make this statement – as opposed to having been told by
McIntyre that this is what Rivera said, which would make Rivera’s declaration
double hearsay. See Simpkins v. Snow, 139 N.H. 735, 737-38 (1995). At the
time the objection was posed, Longval had already testified that she did not
remember a conversation between herself, Rivera and McIntyre on the day of
the robbery, and had further said that McIntyre was a good friend who was at
her house frequently. In addition, counsel acknowledged that he could not
predict what Longval would say in answer to the question at issue. Given these
circumstances, even if we assume that Rivera’s statement falls within the state
of mind hearsay exception under Rule 803(3), the trial court could sustainably
have found that the defendant failed to establish an objective basis for
concluding that the question would not elicit inadmissible hearsay about what
McIntyre may have told Longval. Id.
In any event, even if we assume that the defendant was entitled to
inquire whether Longval remembered hearing Rivera tell McIntyre that he
planned to rob the defendant, we cannot conclude that the trial court’s ruling
prejudiced the defendant. Based on Longval’s testimony and defense counsel’s
offer of proof, we have no basis for concluding that Longval heard Rivera’s
statement and thus no foundation for determining what her testimony would
have been. See McMullin v. Downing, 135 N.H. 675, 679 (1992) (holding that
we could not “weigh the prejudice suffered” as a result of the exclusion of
11
plaintiff’s testimony because “we ha[d] no way of knowing what the plaintiff’s
testimony would have been“); Saulnier, 132 N.H. at 415 (“Absent an offer of
proof indicating what response, if any, the question sought to elicit, it is
impossible to ascertain what the testimony of the witness would have been.”).
IV. Invocation of Right to Counsel
Finally, the defendant argues that the trial court committed plain error in
admitting testimony that he invoked his right to counsel when he was arrested.
At trial, Detective Corporal John Eichhorn testified without objection:
Q: Did anything happen . . . in transit in the police car on the way
to your police station?
A: Yes. . . . [The defendant] had invoked his right to counsel. So
we did not ask him any questions. During the transport to the jail
he said to me, that he wished he could talk to me. Because what
he had read in the paper was wrong. I didn’t ask him any
questions. I didn’t answer him in any way, and just kept letting
him talk. He then stated to me that what he had read in the paper
was wrong . . . . [I]t said in the paper that he had brought the
knife with him that Rivera had taken away from him. Which he
stated was not true at the time.
The defendant argues that Eichhorn’s testimony that the defendant
invoked his right to counsel violated Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution
and the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments to the Federal Constitution. He
contends that “[a] defendant may invoke [his] right to remain silent by
requesting the presence of a lawyer” and that the “choice to remain silent in the
face of police questioning cannot be used in the State’s case-in-chief to infer
guilt.”4 He argues that the error affected his substantial rights and the fairness
of the trial.
Under the plain error rule, we may consider errors not raised before the
trial court. State v. Russell, 159 N.H. 475, 489 (2009); Sup. Ct. R. 16-A. To
find plain error: “(1) there must be an error; (2) the error must be plain; (3) the
error must affect substantial rights; and (4) the error must seriously affect the
fairness, integrity or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” Randall v.
Abounaja, 164 N.H. 506, 510 (2013). The rule is used sparingly and is limited
to those circumstances in which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise
result. Id. “We have looked to the federal plain error analysis in applying our
plain error rule.” State v. Cassavaugh, 161 N.H. 90, 100 (2010).
4 The record does not establish whether the defendant received Miranda warnings before invoking
his right to counsel. See Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).
12
As an initial matter, we disagree with the defendant’s assertion that the
trial court “admitted” testimony that he invoked his right to counsel when he
was arrested. The trial court did not rule on the admissibility of Eichhorn’s
testimony. Eichhorn’s testimony that the defendant invoked his right to
counsel was a passing reference in response to the prosecutor’s general
question about whether anything happened in the police car on the way to the
police station following the defendant’s arrest. Cf. Cassavaugh, 161 N.H. at 99-
100 (trial court committed plain error when it admitted portion of transcript
and videotaped recording of defendant’s invocation of his right to silence). The
pertinent question is whether the trial court erred in failing sua sponte to
strike or issue a curative instruction with respect to Eichhorn’s testimony that
the defendant invoked his right to counsel. See United States v. Rodriguez,
302 Fed. Appx. 468, 471 (7th Cir. 2008) (reviewing whether the district court’s
“failure to strike [witness testimony] or give a limiting instruction sua sponte”
constituted plain error); United States v. Newton, 326 F.3d 253, 262 (1st Cir.
2003) (reviewing whether trial court committed plain error in failing to instruct
the jury sua sponte to disregard witness statement).
We conclude that the defendant has not demonstrated that the trial
court committed plain error.
Plain is synonymous with clear or, equivalently, obvious. At a
minimum, a court of appeals cannot correct an error . . . unless
the error is clear under current law. Thus, an error is plain if it
was or should have been obvious in the sense that the governing
law was clearly settled to the contrary . . . . Generally, when the
law is not clear at the time of trial, and remains unsettled at the
time of appeal, a decision by the trial court cannot be plain error.
State v. Lopez, 156 N.H. 416, 424 (2007) (quotations and citations omitted).
We have never held that a trial court must sua sponte strike or issue a curative
instruction with respect to witness testimony. Indeed, in another context, we
have suggested that courts should refrain from taking such action. See State
v. King, 146 N.H. 717, 722 (2001) (trial court erred “when it sua sponte
asserted the privilege against self-incrimination on the witness’s behalf”). This
is not a case in which the trial court allowed the prosecutor to engage in
improper questioning of a witness. Lopez, 156 N.H. at 424 (“permitting the
prosecutor to ask the defendant to opine upon the credibility of other witnesses
was error”). Here, the prosecutor did not deliberately elicit that the defendant
invoked his right to counsel or impeach the defendant with his invocation.
We also note that defense counsel may have had strategic reasons for not
objecting to the testimony of the defendant’s invocation of his right to counsel.
In the same answer in which Eichhorn testified that the defendant invoked his
13
right to counsel, he also testified to the defendant’s arguably exculpatory
statements “that he wished he could talk” and that a newspaper account of the
robbery was wrong. Thus, defense counsel may have refrained from objecting
because of fear that the court would strike Eichhorn’s entire answer, including
the defendant’s arguably exculpatory statements. Defense counsel also may
have concluded that the defendant’s statement about the newspaper story
being wrong would take on added credibility if the jury understood that the
defendant was aware he had no obligation to speak to the police. See United
States v. Lin, 101 F.3d 760, 770 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (“We cannot conclude,
however, that it was plain error for the court not to sua sponte strike the
remark or give a curative instruction limiting the effect of the comment.
Defense counsel may have had strategic reasons for not objecting. . . .”);
Massey v. State, 771 P.2d 448, 453 (Alaska Ct. App. 1989) (“[U]nless the record
precludes the possibility that counsel’s actions may have been tactical, a
finding of plain error is rarely appropriate.”); United States v. Smith, 459 F.3d
1276, 1302 (11th Cir. 2006) (Tjoflat, J., concurring) (noting that if an appellate
court were to review evidentiary rulings for plain error without factoring in
counsel’s strategic reasons not to object, the court would thereby provide
counsel with a strategic reason not to object).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
14