THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2009-836
PETER L. GORDON, TRUSTEE OF THE PETER L. GORDON
REVOCABLE TRUST OF 1999 & a.
v.
TOWN OF RYE
Argued: September 23, 2010
Opinion Issued: June 15, 2011
Wadleigh, Starr & Peters, P.L.L.C., of Manchester (Robert E. Murphy, Jr.
on the brief and orally), for the petitioners.
Michael L. Donovan, of Concord, by brief and orally, for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The petitioners, owners of six properties situated on the
Atlantic Ocean lying adjacent to and at the end of Harbor Road in Rye, appeal
an order recommended by a Judicial Referee (Hollman, J.) and approved by the
Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) affirming a decision of the Rye Board of Selectmen
(board) that a portion of the road had not become public by prescription. We
affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
The following facts are supported by the record. The section of Harbor
Road at issue lies south of the jetty marking the entrance to Rye Harbor and
runs approximately 350 feet around a bend and then southerly to a locked gate
erected at the boundary between lot six and lot five (the McLaughlin property).
This section of the road provides the only means of access to the petitioners’
properties from the end of Harbor Road. The parties do not dispute that south
of this gate, Harbor Road is a private road.
At a July 29, 1996 meeting of the board, petitioner Peter L. Gordon and
another Harbor Road resident asked the town to plow the end of Harbor Road.
Subsequently, at its September 9 meeting, the board discussed the question
and noted that a decision needed to be made whether the town would plow the
road and whether it was a town road. The board discussed the issue again at
its December 16 meeting and on January 13, 1997, the board informed Gordon
that “he would be plowed.”
On January 9, 2001, the board directed the public works director to
“plow Harbor Road as far as the McLaughlin property line, as the road is a
town road down to that point.” The town continued to plow the disputed
section of the road until the McLaughlins erected a gate across the private
right-of-way continuing off the end of Harbor Road, making it difficult for the
town to turn its snow removal equipment around. At its November 10, 2005
meeting, the board noted that
[w]ith winter approaching, the question of whether or not the gate
at the entrance to the McLaughlin property at the end of Harbor
Road is still in place must be resolved prior to the first plowing. If
the gate is down, our plows cannot turn around or clear the snow
in front of the gate.
At its December 12 meeting, the selectmen noted that “[a]uthorization has been
received from [the] property owners beyond the McLaughlin gate at the
terminus of Harbor Road for the Town to access their R.O.W.’s in order to plow
and turn around.”
On December 28, 2006, the board conducted a site visit to “review[] the
situation at the end of Harbor Road adjacent to the McLaughlin property.”
McLaughlin had notified the town that its plow trucks would not be able to use
his property or the right-of-way through his property to turn around when
plowing the town portion of Harbor Road, which meant that the town would not
be able to plow approximately the last one hundred feet of Harbor Road.
On November 27, 2007, the town administrator notified the affected
Harbor Road property owners by letter that “State law does not allow a town to
lawfully spend public money to maintain a private road unless the
maintenance is ‘subordinate and incidental’ to the needs of the Town’s own
highways and the benefited persons fully compensate the Town.” In his letter,
2
the administrator stated that the board would defer deciding on the public or
private status of the disputed section of Harbor Road because some of the
affected property owners were away for the winter months. The letter stated
that the town would continue plowing the disputed section of road during the
2007-2008 winter but that this action “should not be construed by any
property owner as a representation by the [town] that the section of Harbor
Road beyond the jetty is a town road.”
On September 19, 2008, the board issued a notice of hearing stating:
[O]n October 20, 2008 at 6:30 p.m. at the Rye Town Hall, the Town
of Rye Board of Selectmen will hold a hearing on whether the
section of Harbor Road between the Rye Harbor south jetty and the
lot owned by Family Harbor Realty Trust (i.e. the “McLaughlin’s
Lot”) is a town road or a private right-of-way.
After the hearing, the Board of Selectmen is expected to make a
decision concerning the legal status of this section of Harbor Road.
If the Board of Selectmen determines that this section of road is a
private right-of[-]way, the Town will discontinue maintenance of it.
As a property owner whose lot is accessed by this section of
Harbor Road, your property rights may be affected by the decision
which the Board of Selectmen makes. You may attend the hearing
and provide the Board of Selectmen with testimony and evidence
relative to the legal status of this section of Harbor Road.
Please be advised that Town Counsel has reviewed the legal
status of this section of Harbor Road and opined that it is a private
right-of-way and not a town road. A copy of Town Counsel’s
opinion and his analysis . . . is appended to this notice. A
notebook containing the deeds and plans of record and other
information reviewed by Town Counsel is available for inspection
and copying at the Selectmen’s Office, Rye Town Hall.
After summarizing the purpose of the hearing, the chairman of the board
opened the October hearing by stating that the hearing would be held under
the provisions of RSA chapter 43. At the hearing, the board considered maps
and aerial photographs, property deeds and written and oral testimony.
On November 17, 2008, the board decided that “due to the lack of
convincing evidence showing this to be a public road, and because the deeds
clearly state that the road is to be maintained by the property owners, that [the
disputed section of Harbor Road] is and has always been a private road.” On
December 1, 2008, the board issued its written decision. The petitioners filed a
3
motion for rehearing, arguing that the board’s decision was unlawful because
the board “lacked subject matter jurisdiction to rule on the issue whether Rye
Harbor Road south of the jetty to the McLaughlin property was a public road
under chapter 43.” The petitioners also argued that “[t]here was no petition to
layout or alter a highway before the Board” and “[t]he sole jurisdiction to
discontinue maintenance of a road is RSA 231:45-a, I. If the road was public
in 1997, the only way it may be discontinued is by legislative action at Town
meeting.” Denying the motion for rehearing, the board stated that the
jurisdiction argument “could have been raised in 2007 when the selectmen first
notified the property owners that it would hold a hearing to determine the
status of this section of Harbor Road” and that RSA 231:45-a, I, does not apply
because “[i]n order for a town meeting to vote to discontinue a town road, the
town road must lawfully exist as a town road. This proceeding was intended to
determine whether or not the section of Harbor Rd. south of the jetty was or
was not a lawfully established town road.”
The petitioners filed a petition for a writ of certiorari, mandamus and
declaratory relief in the superior court, seeking a review of the board’s decision
and a declaration that the disputed section of Harbor Road is a public road. At
the merits hearing, the petitioners argued that RSA chapter 43 does not
provide the board with subject matter jurisdiction to decide whether a road is
public or private. The town argued that the board’s jurisdiction over roads is
conferred by RSA 41:11, which, it argued, gives the board “total authority to
regulate roads without any action by the town meeting.”
The trial court’s order notes that the petitioners and the board agreed
that the standard to be applied by the board would be whether the disputed
portion of Harbor Road became a public road by prescription. The trial court
reviewed the board’s decision on this issue and found it to be lawful.
Regarding the board’s 1997 decision to resume plowing the disputed section of
Harbor Road, the court ruled that it did not qualify as a final decision
subjecting the proceedings to the doctrine of res judicata. Regarding the
board’s subject matter jurisdiction, the court ruled that
RSA Chapter 43 is not merely limited to petitions to layout or alter
a highway, but also applies to a petition for “the purpose of
deciding any question affecting the conflicting rights or claims of
different persons.” Because the Board analyzed whether the
Disputed Road Section is a public road, which is a question
affecting the conflicting rights and claims of both the Town and the
petitioners, the Board properly exercised subject matter
jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 43:1.
(Citation omitted.)
4
The petitioners appealed, arguing that the trial court erred in ruling: (1)
that the board’s 1997 decision that the road was a public road was not a
decision entitled to preclusive effect; (2) that the board’s 1997 decision was
limited to snowplowing; and (3) that the board correctly decided that petitioners
did not establish a public road by prescription. Following oral argument, we
ordered the parties to submit supplemental briefs addressing whether the board
had jurisdiction to decide whether the section of Harbor Road at issue became
public by prescription. The petitioners argue that RSA chapter 43 does not
confer upon the board subject matter jurisdiction to change a roadway’s status
other than by a petition for layout. The town argues that, pursuant to RSA
41:8, the board “has the prudential responsibility for managing town affairs and
for performing the duties prescribed by law” and, accordingly, “[i]f a dispute
arises in a town as to whether a particular street is a public or private street,
then it falls to the board of selectmen to make that determination.”
We disagree with the petitioners that the board’s decision in 1997 to
resume plowing the disputed section of Harbor Road is entitled to preclusive
effect, thereby preventing the board from “reopening the status of the Disputed
Road Section” in 2008. Despite the petitioners’ characterization of the board’s
1997 decision as determining that the disputed section is a town road, a review
of the record supports the trial court’s finding that the board “did not
determine that the road was a public road” but “merely responded to a plowing
request made by petitioner Gordon at its 1997 meeting.” See 74 Cox St. v. City
of Nashua, 156 N.H. 228, 230 (2007) (we will uphold the trial court’s decision
on a certiorari petition unless it is not supported by the evidence or is
erroneous as a matter of law).
We agree, however, that the board lacked subject matter jurisdiction to
determine whether the disputed section of Harbor Road became public by
prescription.
Subject matter jurisdiction is jurisdiction over the nature of the
case and the type of relief sought; the extent to which a court can
rule on the conduct of persons or the status of things. In other
words, it is a tribunal’s authority to adjudicate the type of
controversy involved in the action. A court lacks power to hear or
determine a case concerning subject matters over which it has no
jurisdiction. A party may challenge subject matter jurisdiction at
any time during the proceeding, including on appeal, and may not
waive subject matter jurisdiction.
In the Matter of Gray & Gray, 160 N.H. 62, 65 (2010) (quotations, citations and
brackets omitted); see State v. Demesmin, 159 N.H. 595, 597 (2010) (subject
matter jurisdiction may be raised on appeal by the court sua sponte).
Jurisdiction over the subject matter of a controversy cannot be acquired by
5
agreement of the parties. Burleigh v. Leun, 83 N.H. 115, 117 (1927). Absent
subject matter jurisdiction, a tribunal’s order is void. See Hemenway v.
Hemenway, 159 N.H. 680, 684 (2010). Because subject matter jurisdiction
may be raised at any time, we reject the town’s argument that the petitioners
waived this issue. See Demesmin, 159 N.H. at 597.
Whether the board had subject matter jurisdiction to determine whether
the disputed section of Harbor Road became public by prescription requires
statutory interpretation, which is a question of law that we review de novo. See
Appeal of Thermo-Fisher Scientific, 160 N.H. 670, 672 (2010). “We are the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute
considered as a whole. When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe
the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used.” Petition of Farmington
Teachers Assoc., 158 N.H. 453, 456 (2009) (quotations and citations omitted).
“We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language that the legislature did
not see fit to include. We interpret a statute in the context of the overall
statutory scheme and not in isolation.” Id. (quotation omitted).
A board of selectmen has the responsibility to “manage the prudential
affairs of the town and perform the duties by law prescribed.” RSA 41:8 (2003).
In determining the meaning of the ancient statutory phrase,—‘to
manage all the prudential affairs of the town,’—it is worthy of note
that the nearer we get to the time of the framers of the early
statutes, the more restricted is the view that we find taken of the
powers of selectmen.
Rich v. Errol, 51 N.H. 350, 355 (1871). Selectmen “can only exercise such
powers and perform such duties as are properly incident to the special and
limited authority conferred on them by their office.” Id. at 354 (quotation
omitted).
RSA 41:11 (2003) provides that “the selectmen may regulate the use of
all public highways, sidewalks, and commons in their respective towns and for
this purpose may exercise all the powers conferred on city councils by RSA
47:17, VII, VIII, and XVIII, and by any other provisions of the laws upon the
subject.” RSA 47:17, VII (Supp. 2010) grants the selectmen the authority “[t]o
regulate all streets and public ways, wharves, docks, and squares.” However,
“[t]his statute . . . does not provide towns with the authority to determine the
relative rights of property owners.” Gray v. Seidel, 143 N.H. 327, 330 (1999).
RSA 47:17, VIII (Supp. 2010) governs traffic devices and signals and RSA
47:17, XVIII (Supp. 2010) governs automobile parking controls; thus, neither of
these provisions is applicable to the issue before us.
6
In addition, pursuant to “other provisions of the laws upon the subject,”
RSA 41:11, selectmen have the duty to lay out all class IV highways not
financed with federal aid highway funds, and class V and VI highways. RSA
231:1 (2009). Upon petition, the selectmen “may lay out any new class IV
highway not financed . . . with federal aid highway funds, and class V or VI
highway or alter any such existing highway within their town for which there
shall be occasion.” RSA 231:8 (2009). Unless the selectmen are of the opinion
that the petition ought not be granted, they must give notice and hold a public
hearing on the petitioned highway layout. RSA 231:9 (2009). Upon petition,
the selectmen must, in the absence of written objection, lay out a highway,
subject to gates and bars, in the location in which it previously existed if the
petitioner has no other access to his land by public highway. RSA 231:22
(2009). The selectmen also have authority to make a conditional layout, RSA
231:23 (2009), lay out a road exclusively for winter use, RSA 231:24 (2009),
“reestablish the boundary lines, limits and locations of any class IV, V or VI
highway,” RSA 231:27 (2009), or make a conditional layout for existing private
rights-of-way, RSA 231:28 (2009).
None of these statutory provisions authorizes a board of selectmen to
determine whether a road has become public by prescription. See RSA 229:1
(2009) (defining highways); Polizzo v. Town of Hampton, 126 N.H. 398, 401
(1985) (noting that a public highway may be created through taking of land by
eminent domain and laying out of a highway by some governmental authority,
through the construction of a road on public land, through twenty years of use
by the public, or by dedication and acceptance). The trial court found that the
board had such subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to RSA 43:1. We
disagree.
“RSA chapter 43 delineates rules to be followed when the selectmen are
petitioned to hold a hearing on a question affecting the rights or claims of
individuals.” Kerouac v. Town of Hollis, 139 N.H. 554, 562 (1995). For
example, when the board holds a hearing for laying out a highway, it must
follow the procedures in RSA chapter 43. See RSA 43:1. Or, when the board
conducts a hearing for the removal of a town clerk, as authorized by RSA
41:16-c (Supp. 2010), the hearing must be conducted in accordance with RSA
chapter 43. RSA 41:16-c, IV(a). RSA chapter 43 does not, however, establish
jurisdiction in the board over a matter it is not otherwise statutorily authorized
to hear. Whatever jurisdiction the board may possess pertaining to a “question
affecting the conflicting rights or claims of different persons,” RSA 43:1, must
be derived from the legislature as set forth by statute. Cf. In re Estate of
O’Dwyer, 135 N.H. 323, 324-25 (1992) (probate court not a court of general
jurisdiction; rather, its “powers are limited to those conferred upon it by
statute”), superseded by statute on other grounds, as stated by In re Estate of
Porter, 159 N.H. 212, 214-15 (2009). We note that the town does not argue
that RSA chapter 43 established subject matter jurisdiction in the board over
7
this issue. Rather, the town argues that “[t]he selectmen found their authority
to determine the town’s maintenance responsibility elsewhere” and “used
Chapter 43 only to guide its procedures.”
“[A]s a general rule, since actions involving a claim to an easement by
prescription require a determination of ownership and possessory rights to
realty, the state court with jurisdiction to determine title to the property where
the claimed easement is located will be the appropriate forum.” Larsson,
Causes of Action to Establish Private Easement by Prescription 42 COA2d 111,
217 (2009). In this state, “[t]he legislature has specifically provided that
declaratory judgment actions can be brought in superior court by parties faced
with adverse claims to an interest in real property.” Radkay v. Confalone, 133
N.H. 294, 297 (1990); see RSA 491:22, I (2010) (“any person claiming a present
legal or equitable right or title may maintain a petition [in the superior court]
against any person claiming adversely to such right or title to determine the
question as between the parties”).
We conclude that the board lacked subject matter jurisdiction to
determine whether the disputed section of Harbor Road became public by
prescription. Accordingly, we vacate that portion of the trial court’s order and
remand the case to the trial court for it to decide this issue de novo. See Gray,
143 N.H. at 330 (declaratory judgment action in superior court appropriate to
determine relative property rights of owners when no other provision for
determining such rights has been created by statute).
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8