THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2011-565
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
ANTHONY DILBOY
Argued: February 16, 2012
Opinion Issued: June 29, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. This case is before us pursuant to an order entered by
the United States Supreme Court vacating the judgment in State v. Dilboy, 160
N.H. 135 (2010) (Dilboy I), and remanding for further consideration in light of
Bullcoming v. New Mexico, 131 S. Ct. 2705 (2011). Dilboy v. New Hampshire,
131 S. Ct. 3089 (2011). On remand, we reconsider only our holding on the
Confrontation Clause issue. As to the other five issues, our prior decision in
Dilboy I remains unchanged. In Dilboy I, we affirmed the conviction of the
defendant, Anthony Dilboy, on two counts of manslaughter, see RSA 630:2
(Supp. 2005) (amended 2006), and two alternative counts of negligent
homicide, see RSA 630:3 (2007). Dilboy I, 160 N.H. at 139. After reconsidering
our decision in light of Bullcoming and thoroughly reviewing the record, we
affirm.
The following facts, relevant to the issue before us, are supported by the
record. Additional facts can be found in our opinion in Dilboy I. See Dilboy I,
160 N.H. at 140-42. On March 7, 2006, the defendant drove through a red
light at a high rate of speed and collided with the passenger-side of a Volvo
sedan, killing both the driver and the passenger. After the collision,
paramedics took a blood sample from the defendant and transported him to
Wentworth-Douglass Hospital. At the hospital, four additional blood samples
and one urine sample were taken from the defendant. The six samples were
tested at the State Police Forensics Toxicology Laboratory (State forensic
laboratory), a division of the New Hampshire Department of Safety.
Prior to trial, the defendant filed several motions in limine. In one
motion, entitled “Defendant’s Motion in Limine” (MIL), the defendant sought to
prevent the State from presenting certain evidence related to the forensic
testing of the defendant’s six samples. The defendant “anticipated that the
State may see [sic] to elicit testimony regarding,” among other documents, the
transmittal slips, the reports of the lab examinations sent from the department
of safety to the Dover Police, and blood test results. In the body of the motion,
he explained his objection to the introduction of “blood test results,” stating: “It
is unclear what documentary evidence the state may seek to introduce
regarding the blood test results in this case. . . . [I]t appears ‘raw data’ will be
utilized and the state will seek to introduce not the ‘reported value’ . . . but
rather an interpretation of other, or further, test results.” The defendant
argued that such documents are testimonial and, without live testimony,
inadmissible under the Confrontation Clause.
The State objected to the defendant’s motion and also filed “State’s
Motion in Limine Re: Evidence Relied Upon by Experts” (State’s Motion),
moving to admit evidence relied upon by its expert, Michael Wagner, Ph.D., the
assistant laboratory director of the State forensic laboratory. The Superior
Court (Fauver, J.) held a hearing on December 13, 2007. At the hearing, the
trial court heard arguments from the parties on the defendant’s MIL and the
State’s Motion. The State explained that Wagner would give an opinion at trial
and would be relying upon blood collection forms “that show when and how the
blood samples were collected from the defendant[,] . . . the raw data and the
analyst’s record of [requesting] the tests.” The State also asserted that “defense
counsel has filed many motions that . . . address the same subject from
different angles . . . and . . . it would be very helpful . . . to ask defense counsel
to specify exactly what it is he’s talking about.” The trial court asked the
2
defendant to articulate his position, and the defendant responded, “I want the
ability to cross-examine any evidence that is going to be presented to this jury.”
The trial court inquired further, explaining that “we’re trying to nail it down a
little bit for the State.” The defendant, without elaborating, maintained that all
of the documents described in his MIL are testimonial under State v. O’Maley,
156 N.H. 125 (2007).1 The defendant did not, however, specifically argue that
Wagner’s testimony would violate his right to confrontation.
After the hearing, the trial court ruled “that the transmittal slips, the
blood sample collection forms, and the blood test results are non-testimonial.”
The trial court elaborated that “the blood test results are non-testimonial but
the interpretation of the results is testimonial.” The trial court deferred ruling
with respect to the laboratory reports until trial because “[t]he defendant did
not submit these forms for the court’s review and therefore the court [could
not] make a determination at [the] time [it issued the order].” The court did not
specifically address whether Wagner’s testimony violated the Confrontation
Clause. The parties’ motions were granted in part and denied in part
“consistent with [the court’s] analysis.”
At trial, the State presented the expert testimony of Wagner. He testified
about his job duties, laboratory procedures, and the outcomes of the
laboratory tests on some of the defendant’s samples. He explained that, as
assistant laboratory director, his role is to “review the data[,] . . . the
paperwork[,] . . . [the] comments[,] . . . [and] any issue that’s involved in the
analysis of [a] sample.” Although it is unclear from the record who performed
the tests on the defendant’s samples, Wagner testified that he reviewed the
toxicology tests on “specimens that purported to have come from [the
defendant]” and that the “laboratory issued results from that analysis.” He
also explained that “[the laboratory] render[s] a report that demonstrates what
we . . . found in [a] particular sample.” When asked if he had “also stated some
opinions with respect to interpreting the findings of [the] lab on those samples,”
Wagner replied, “Yes.” While testifying, he stated that he had his “original data
file” with him and reviewed it during his testimony. However, the file was not
admitted into evidence and neither counsel nor the trial court inquired as to
what was contained within the file.
The bulk of Wagner’s testimony focused upon “the uses, dosages, and
possible effects from the use of, or withdrawal from, various drugs.” Wagner
did not offer an opinion about whether the defendant was, in fact, under the
influence of controlled drugs at the time of the collision; nor did he opine as to
any effects the defendant may have actually experienced. He did, however,
testify about specific symptoms other witnesses had attributed to the
1 For the reasons articulated in Dilboy I, 160 N.H. at 151-52, to the extent that portions of the
analysis in O’Maley are inconsistent with Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 129 S. Ct. 2527
(2009), those portions are no longer good law.
3
defendant. He also testified about the tests “purported[ly]” run on the
defendant’s samples. While he did not expressly repeat any out-of-court
statements of other analysts and at no point identified by name any other
analyst from his laboratory, he did testify that certain substances were present
in the defendant’s blood, stating, for example, that in one blood sample, “we”
found trace amounts of Clonazepam and cocaine, as well as a quantifiable
amount of Benzoylecgonine, a metabolite of cocaine. At some point after
Wagner’s testimony, the transmittal slips were admitted into evidence, but the
laboratory report letters conveying the test results to the police were not.
The jury found the defendant guilty of two counts of manslaughter and
two alternative counts of negligent homicide. The defendant appealed his
conviction, arguing six separate errors, including that the Superior Court
(Fauver, J.) erred in admitting evidence of laboratory test results in violation of
the Federal Confrontation Clause. Finding no error, we affirmed.
The defendant then filed a petition for a writ of certiorari with the United
States Supreme Court on the Confrontation Clause issue. The Court granted
certiorari, vacated our decision in Dilboy I, and remanded for further
consideration in light of Bullcoming. In Bullcoming, the Supreme Court relied
upon Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts, 129 S. Ct. 2527 (2009), in holding that
the report of a forensic scientist absent from trial was not admissible through
the “surrogate” testimony of a different scientist.
The relevant issue before us in Dilboy I was whether the admission of
certain evidence at trial violated the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth
Amendment to the United States Constitution. The Sixth Amendment provides
that “[i]n all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right . . . to be
confronted with the witnesses against him.” U.S. CONST. amend. VI. The
“witnesses against” an accused are “those who bear testimony.” Crawford v.
Washington, 541 U.S. 36, 51 (2004) (quotations omitted). The protections of
the Confrontation Clause apply, therefore, whenever “testimonial evidence is at
issue.” Id. at 68. A witness’s testimonial statements are admissible only if the
witness either appears at trial, id. at 60 n.9, or is unavailable for trial and the
defendant has had a prior opportunity to cross-examine the unavailable
witness, id. at 53-54. When the evidence at issue is non-testimonial, however,
the Confrontation Clause has no application. See id. at 68; see also Whorton v.
Bockting, 549 U.S. 406, 420 (2007).
On appeal in Dilboy I, the defendant did not challenge the admission of
the transmittal slips. Rather, he contended that the trial court erred in ruling
that the blood test results were non-testimonial, and, accordingly, that
Wagner’s testimony at trial about the test results violated the Confrontation
Clause. We assumed that the “test results” about which Wagner testified were
4
testimonial, but nonetheless held that his testimony did not violate the
Confrontation Clause because he “generated opinions based upon his review
of” those results, and the defendant had the opportunity to cross-examine him
regarding his opinions. Dilboy I, 160 N.H. at 150. The defendant now argues
that “the facts and holding of Bullcoming compel a finding that” Wagner’s
testimony violated his right to confrontation. The defendant asserts that
Wagner’s testimony “about the test results violated [his] right to confrontation
because it communicated the testimonial statements of declarants who [sic] the
State did not call as witnesses at trial.” The State responds that Bullcoming is
distinguishable and, therefore, is not controlling.
The threshold issue in deciding whether the Confrontation Clause has
been violated is whether any “testimonial statements” of a non-testifying
witness were admitted at trial. See State v. Silva, 158 N.H. 96, 102 (2008).
Although in Dilboy I we assumed, without deciding, that the testimonial
statements of non-testifying witnesses were conveyed through Wagner’s
testimony at trial, in light of Bullcoming, we believe we can no longer make
such an assumption. Accordingly, before we determine whether Wagner’s
testimony about the blood test results violated the Confrontation Clause, we
must address the trial court’s ruling that “the blood test results are non-
testimonial.”
Although the United States Supreme Court has not yet set forth a
comprehensive definition of the phrase “testimonial statements,” the Court has
given some indication of what qualifies as a “testimonial statement.” In
Crawford, the Court listed examples of “testimonial” statements:
ex parte in-court testimony or its functional equivalent —
that is, material such as affidavits, custodial examinations,
prior testimony that the defendant was unable to cross-
examine, or similar pretrial statements that declarants
would reasonably expect to be used prosecutorially;
extrajudicial statements contained in formalized testimonial
materials, such as affidavits, depositions, prior testimony, or
confessions; [and] statements that were made under
circumstances which would lead an objective witness
reasonably to believe that the statement would be available
for use at a later trial.
Crawford, 541 U.S. at 51-52 (quotations and ellipsis omitted). In Melendez-
Diaz, 129 S. Ct. at 2531-32, the Court explained that sworn documents
reporting the results of forensic testing were “functionally identical to live, in-
court testimony, doing precisely what a witness does on direct examination”
and thus fell within the “core class of testimonial statements [described in
5
Crawford].” Most recently, in Bullcoming, 131 S. Ct. at 2717, the Court held
that an unsworn, but signed and certified, forensic report was a testimonial
statement. The Court explained that “[a] document created solely for an
evidentiary purpose, . . . made in aid of a police investigation, ranks as
testimonial.” Id. at 2717 (quotation omitted).
Undoubtedly, if a forensic report created by a non-testifying analyst had
been admitted against the defendant at trial in this case, it would violate the
Confrontation Clause under both Melendez-Diaz and Bullcoming. However, no
such reports were admitted. In fact, the trial court never even ruled on the
reports because they were not submitted at the pre-trial hearing, and the
parties apparently did not revisit the issue at trial. In this case, unlike in
Melendez-Diaz and Bullcoming, the only evidence of forensic testing that came
in was Wagner’s testimony about the “blood test results.”
As explained above, the trial court ruled prior to trial that the “blood test
results are non-testimonial.” In its order, the trial court referred to “blood test
raw data,” “blood and urine test forms,” and “blood test results” – sometimes
interchangeably. The trial court did not, however, elaborate on what
constitutes blood test results or make specific findings underlying its ruling
that the test results are non-testimonial. Moreover, although we review
whether a statement is testimonial de novo, in this case we have no specific
statements to review because the documents, or other evidence, that constitute
the “test results” were never submitted into the record. “In the absence of
specific findings, a court is presumed to have made all findings necessary to
support its [ruling].” Burke v. Pierro, 159 N.H. 504, 510 (2009); see also State
v. Samuel, No. M2009–01192–CCA–R3–CD, 2011 WL 2306034, at *7 (Tenn.
Crim. App. June 7, 2011). Thus here, without the “test results” to review, and
without any specific findings explaining what the “test results” are, we must
assume the trial court made all findings necessary to support its ruling, and
that those findings were supported by sufficient evidence. Burke, 159 N.H. at
510; see State v. Michelson, 160 N.H. 270, 275 (2010); Bullcoming, 131 S. Ct.
at 2722 (Sotomayor, J., concurring) (“[W]e do not decide whether . . . a State
could introduce . . . raw data generated by a machine in conjunction with the
testimony of an expert witness.”); Disharoon v. State, Nos. S11G1880,
S11G1881, 2012 WL 1571549, at *2 (Ga. May 7, 2012) (relying upon Justice
Sotomayor’s concurrence in Bullcoming to find no Confrontation Clause
violation where the testifying witness was the supervisor of the lab, was closely
involved in almost every step of the testing process, and drafted the report).
The lack of a sufficient record similarly precludes our review of Wagner’s
testimony at trial. For example, although we know that Wagner had his
original data file with him, we do not know what the file contained, and
whether his testimony was based upon his own understanding of the tests, or
6
whether he was reading or otherwise conveying the testimonial statements of
others. And, although the defendant now argues that Wagner’s testimony
“conveyed statements from others involved in collecting, transmitting, and
testing [the defendant’s] samples,” he does not actually identify any analysts or
any statements made by such analysts. The admission of Wagner’s statements
would violate the Confrontation Clause only if he recited the statements of a
non-testifying witness, rather than his own opinions or conclusions based
upon his review of the raw data. Indeed, as the State explained at the pretrial
hearing, Wagner’s testimony was an opinion based upon blood collection forms
“that show when and how the blood samples were collected from the
defendant[,] . . . the raw data and the analyst’s record of [requesting] the tests.”
If Wagner’s statements at trial about the “results” of the tests were based
upon his own review of raw data, such as graphic or numerical computer
printouts, his statements may not have been a violation of the Confrontation
Clause under Bullcoming. See Bullcoming, 131 S. Ct. at 2722 (Sotomayor, J.,
concurring). However, if at trial Wagner was merely repeating a non-testifying
analyst’s statement of the “results,” his testimony at trial might have been a
Confrontation Clause violation. See id. at 2717 (determining that a forensic
report, which contained test results and was “‘formalized’ in a signed
document,” contained “more than adequate [formalities] to qualify [it] as
testimonial”).
Ultimately, there is no factual record that supports the defendant’s
theory of relief. See Appeal of Bosselait, 130 N.H. 604, 607 (1988). It is the
defendant’s obligation to state “explicitly the specific ground of objection,” N.H.
R. Ev. 103, and to provide this court with a record sufficient to decide the issue
raised on appeal, State v. Parra, 135 N.H. 306, 309 (1992). To now address
whether Wagner’s testimony conveyed the testimonial statements of others
would require us to either (1) speculate about what documents Wagner’s
testimony was based upon and whether he was testifying based upon his own
interpretation of the raw data or merely repeating the statements of others, or
(2) assume, as we did in Dilboy I, that his testimony conveyed the testimonial
statements of others and then speculate as to whether his involvement was
sufficiently close to justify his testimony, or whether his opinion was
“independent,” consistent with the concurrence in Bullcoming. Under the
circumstances, we see no way to resolve the issue based upon such
speculation, especially on an issue of first impression. Accordingly, because it
was the defendant’s burden to provide us with a record sufficient to decide his
issues, we must affirm.
Finally, although the transmittal slips were admitted into evidence, we
decline to address the defendant’s Confrontation Clause arguments based
upon them because the defendant did not address the issue in his brief in
Dilboy I. Indeed, the defendant did not even brief the issue after the Supreme
7
Court vacated Dilboy I, but rather raises the issue for the first time in a
supplemental brief filed in response to an order issued by this court.
Accordingly, he waived this issue. See State v. Garcia, 162 N.H. 423, 435
(2011). We, therefore, affirm.
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8