THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Compensation Appeals Board
No. 2010-811
APPEAL OF NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS
(New Hampshire Compensation Appeals Board)
Argued: September 22, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 29, 2011
Law Office of Leslie H. Johnson, PLLC, of Center Sandwich (Leslie H.
Johnson on the brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Sulloway & Hollis, P.L.L.C., of Concord (James E. Owers and Matthew J.
Snyder on the brief, and Mr. Owers orally), for the respondents.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondents, New Hampshire Department of
Corrections (DOC) and Liberty Mutual Insurance Company (collectively, the
insurer), appeal the decision of the New Hampshire Compensation Appeals
Board (CAB) that the petitioner, Michael Whitaker (claimant), was entitled to
ongoing temporary total disability indemnity benefits beginning September 17,
2009. We affirm.
The following facts are derived from the record. The claimant first filed a
workers’ compensation claim in January 2008, alleging that he suffered
emotional injuries on August 18, 2007, because of harassment and retaliation
at his DOC job. The insurer denied the claim on January 25, 2008, on the
ground that the claimant’s injuries were not causally related to his
employment. On June 16, 2009, the CAB ruled in the claimant’s favor,
awarding him benefits from October 24, 2007, the date he was deemed unable
to work, through “at least” October 20, 2008, the date of the initial hearing
before a department of labor hearing officer. See RSA 281-A:16 (2010). On
August 14, 2009, in response to the claimant’s motion, the CAB clarified that
he was entitled to benefits at the temporary partial disability rate. See RSA
281-A:31 (2010). On February 2, 2010, in response to the claimant’s second
motion for clarification, the CAB explained that he was entitled to temporary
partial disability benefits “continuing after October 20, 2008.”
The insurer did not appeal the CAB’s June 16, 2009 decision. On
October 2, 2009, the claimant sought to have his benefits increased to the
higher temporary total disability rate beginning September 17, 2009, when he
was hospitalized for “[m]ajor depressive disorder, recurrent, severe, with
psychotic features.” See RSA 281-A:28, :48 (2010). The insurer denied this
request on October 15, 2009, on the ground that the claimant had failed to
demonstrate that his hospitalization was related to his August 2007 work
injury. A department of labor hearing officer ruled in the insurer’s favor in
January 2010; the claimant appealed to the CAB.
On August 26, 2010, the insurer filed a motion in the CAB proceedings
to dismiss the claimant’s request for increased benefits because, in 2008, he
had filed a claim with the New Hampshire Commission for Human Rights,
seeking damages for his allegedly wrongful discharge from DOC employment in
June 2008. The insurer argued that by filing a statutory claim for wrongful
termination, the claimant waived his claim for increased benefits. See RSA
281-A:8, III (2010). On October 6, 2010, the CAB denied the insurer’s motion
to dismiss, deciding that the claimant was entitled to ongoing temporary total
disability indemnity benefits from his September 2009 hospitalization because
he had proved that his hospitalization was related to his original August 2007
work injury. The insurer unsuccessfully moved for reconsideration, and this
appeal followed.
On June 15, 2011, we granted the insurer’s motion to supplement the
record on appeal with a writ the claimant filed in superior court on September
15, 2010, against the State and the DOC, seeking damages for retaliation and
discrimination under state and federal statutes. However, the insurer has not
demonstrated that it preserved any issues related to the writ for our review.
See Appeal of Bosselait, 130 N.H. 604, 606-08 (1988); see also Sup. Ct. R.
10(1)(i). The record on appeal shows that the insurer’s motion to dismiss and
its October 6, 2010 motion for reconsideration were based upon the
administrative claim filed with the human rights commission. The record does
not show that the insurer ever alerted the CAB to the fact of the claimant’s
superior court writ. Accordingly, we decline to consider the parties’ arguments
2
with regard to the claimant’s superior court writ. We, likewise, decline to
consider arguments that the insurer raised for the first time at oral argument,
such as its contention that the claimant’s original work-related injury was for
constructive discharge or that the CAB erred by not requiring the claimant to
dismiss his superior court writ. See Appeal of Savage, 144 N.H. 107, 112
(1999).
Our standard of review is statutory:
[A]ll findings of the [CAB] upon all questions of fact properly before
it shall be deemed to be prima facie lawful and reasonable; and the
order or decision appealed from shall not be set aside or vacated
except for errors of law, unless the court is satisfied, by a clear
preponderance of the evidence before it, that such order is unjust
or unreasonable.
RSA 541:13 (2007). Thus, we review the CAB’s factual findings deferentially.
Appeal of Hartford Ins. Co., 162 N.H. 91, 93 (2011). We review its statutory
interpretation de novo. Id.
On questions of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiter of the
intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of a statute considered as a
whole. Lacasse v. Spaulding Youth Ctr., 154 N.H. 246, 250 (2006). We first
examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language that the legislature did not see fit to include. Appeal of Gamas,
158 N.H. 646, 648 (2009). We construe the Workers’ Compensation Law
liberally to give the broadest reasonable effect to its remedial purpose. Id.
Thus, when construing it, we resolve all reasonable doubts in favor of the
injured worker. Id.
Relying upon the exclusive remedy provision of the Workers’
Compensation Law, RSA 281-A:8 (2010), the insurer first argues that the CAB
erred when it denied the insurer’s motion to dismiss. RSA 281-A:8 provides, in
pertinent part:
I. An employee of an employer subject to this chapter shall be
conclusively presumed to have accepted the provisions of this
chapter and, on behalf of the employee or the employee’s personal
or legal representatives, to have waived all rights of action whether
at common law or by statute or provided under the laws of any
other state or otherwise:
3
(a) Against the employer or the employer’s insurance carrier
. . .
. . . .
III. Nothing in this chapter shall derogate from any rights a former
employee may have under common law or other statute to recover
damages for wrongful termination of, or constructive discharge
from, employment. However, if a former employee makes a claim
under this chapter for compensation for injuries allegedly caused
by such wrongful termination or constructive discharge, the
employee shall be deemed to have elected the remedies of this
chapter, and to have waived rights to recover damages for such
wrongful termination or constructive discharge under common law
or other statute. Similarly, if a former employee brings an action
under common law or other statute to recover damages for such
wrongful termination or constructive discharge, the employee shall
be deemed to have waived claims under this chapter for
compensation allegedly caused by such termination or discharge.
Workers’ compensation is an employee’s exclusive remedy for “all rights of
action whether at common law or by statute . . . [a]gainst the employer or [its]
. . . insurance carrier.” RSA 281-A:8, I (emphasis added); see Tothill v. Estate
of Center, 152 N.H. 389, 394-95 (2005). RSA 281-A:8, III contains a limited
exception to the workers’ compensation exclusivity bar for claims of “wrongful
termination” or “constructive discharge.” See Lacasse, 154 N.H. at 251. Under
RSA 281-A:8, III, an employee may elect to bring a claim for wrongful or
constructive discharge either under the Workers’ Compensation Law or under
some other law, but may not bring such a claim under both the Workers’
Compensation Law and some other law.
The insurer argues that, pursuant to RSA 281-A:8, III, the claimant’s
2008 administrative claim alleging wrongful discharge barred his October 2009
request for increased disability benefits. The insurer contends that having filed
an administrative claim of discrimination alleging wrongful termination, the
claimant waived his claim for increased workers’ compensation benefits. This
argument succeeds only if the claimant attempted to obtain both workers’
compensation benefits and remedies under other laws for his allegedly
wrongful termination. However, our review of the record reveals that the
claimant has not brought a workers’ compensation claim for his allegedly
wrongful termination. Accordingly, the insurer’s argument fails.
There is no evidence in the record that the claimant ever sought workers’
compensation benefits for his June 2008 discharge from DOC employment.
Both of his workers’ compensation claims, the first filed in January 2008 and
4
the second in October 2009, sought benefits related to an August 2007 injury.
In its June 2009 decision, which the insurer did not appeal, the CAB found
that the claimant’s August 2007 injury was legally and medically caused by his
employment, and that from October 2007 until “at least” October 2008, the
claimant “remained disabled” as a result of this initial injury. In its October
2010 decision, the CAB decided that the claimant’s medical condition “was not
cured or stabilized during the almost two years from the [original] date of injury
to the 9/17/09 hospitalization for recurrence of depression.” Thus, the CAB
reasoned, there was no break in the causal connection between the claimant’s
medical condition and the original August 2007 work injury. Accordingly, the
CAB decided that the claimant was still entitled to disability benefits related to
his original work injury.
There is no evidence in the record before us that the CAB has ever been
asked to decide whether the claimant is entitled to workers’ compensation
benefits because of his discharge from employment. Thus, while the claimant
may have sought damages for wrongful termination in his administrative claim
of discrimination, he did not seek such damages in his January 2008 and
October 2009 workers’ compensation claims. Therefore, we hold that RSA 281-
A:8, III does not bar the claimant’s workers’ compensation claims.
The insurer next contends that the claimant in his administrative claim
of discrimination and/or superior court writ has sought statutory or common
law remedies for the retaliation and discrimination he allegedly suffered before
his discharge. Assuming, without deciding, that this is the case, the proper
remedy would not be dismissal of the claimant’s workers’ compensation claim.
As previously explained, workers’ compensation provides the claimant’s
exclusive remedy for all claims against an employer or its insurer except
wrongful or constructive discharge. See id. (workers’ compensation is
employee’s exclusive remedy for negligent supervision claim against employer);
see also Karch v. Baybank FSB, 147 N.H. 525, 529-30 (2002) (workers’
compensation is employee’s exclusive remedy against employer for negligent
and intentional infliction of emotional distress). Whether dismissal of the
superior court writ is required is not properly before us, and we express no
opinion on it. The instant appeal concerns only the CAB’s decision to allow the
claimant’s workers’ compensation claim to go forward. It does not concern
whether the human rights commission should have dismissed the claimant’s
administrative claim of discrimination or whether the superior court should
dismiss his currently pending writ.
Relying upon RSA 281-A:38 (2010) (amended 2011), the insurer next
argues that the CAB erred when it denied the insurer’s motion in limine to
exclude the report and testimony of the claimant’s medical expert, Eric G.
Mart, Ph.D., ABPP. The insurer argues that Dr. Mart’s report and testimony
5
should have been excluded because his qualifications do not satisfy the
requirements of RSA 281-A:38, II.
The insurer’s reliance upon RSA 281-A:38 is misplaced. The statutory
requirements regarding medical expert qualifications apply only to medical
examinations “requested by the employer or ordered by [the CAB].” RSA 281-
A:38, I (emphasis added). They do not apply to medical examinations
conducted by the claimant’s own experts. RSA 281-A:38, I, makes this clear by
explaining that the medical examinations to which it refers must be “paid by
the employer” and conducted “at a time and place reasonably convenient for
the employee.” It further explains that the employee has “the right to have a
health care provider designated and paid by himself or herself present at such
examination” – that is, at the examination conducted at the request of the
employer or ordered by the CAB. RSA 281-A:38, I (emphasis added).
Further, RSA 281-A:38, II refers to medical examinations “requested by
the employer or ordered by [the CAB],” RSA 281-A:38, I, as “independent
medical examinations,” meaning medical examinations that are not conducted
at the claimant’s behest. RSA 281-A:38, II provides that “[a]ny health care
provider conducting independent medical examinations” must meet certain
professional requirements.
Based upon the plain meaning of RSA 281-A:38, read as a whole, we
hold that the CAB did not err when it allowed the claimant to submit the report
and testimony of his own medical expert. Contrary to the insurer’s assertions,
the requirements set forth in RSA 281-A:38, II apply only to health care
providers conducting independent medical examinations.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6