THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2011-028
JO ANNE RAINVILLE & a.
v.
LAKES REGION WATER COMPANY, INC. & a.
Argued: October 19, 2011
Opinion Issued: February 10, 2012
Cooper Cargill Chant, P.A., of North Conway (Christopher T. Meier on the
brief and orally), for the plaintiffs.
Nelson, Kinder, Mosseau & Saturley, PC, of Manchester (Richard C.
Nelson and Adam J. Chandler on the brief, and Mr. Nelson orally), for the
defendants.
DALIANIS, C.J. This is an interlocutory appeal from an order of the
Superior Court (Houran, J.) partially granting and partially denying the
summary judgment motion filed by the defendants, Lakes Region Water
Company and Thomas Mason (collectively, LRWC). See Sup. Ct. R. 8. The
superior court transferred a single question for our review:
Did the superior court err in concluding that the defendants are
not exempt from the Consumer Protection Act pursuant to RSA
358-A:3 to the extent the defendants allegedly misrepresented that
the water they provided was safe for use and consumption?
We answer this question in the affirmative and reverse the trial court’s denial of
partial summary judgment as to the claims of the plaintiffs, Jo Anne Rainville,
Carl Beher, Lisa Mullins d/b/a The Olde Village Store, and approximately fifty
others, under the Consumer Protection Act (CPA) seeking damages for alleged
misrepresentations about the quality of water provided. We remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
We accept the statement of the case and facts as presented in the
interlocutory appeal statement and rely upon the record for additional facts as
necessary. See State v. Hess Corp., 159 N.H. 256, 258 (2009). Defendant
LRWC is a small, privately-owned water company based in Moultonborough,
which owns and operates several public water systems in New Hampshire. Its
sole shareholders are defendant Mason and his wife. LRWC is a public utility
regulated by the New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission (PUC).
In 1995, LRWC purchased the Tamworth Water Works, which supplies
water to Tamworth residents and businesses. In 1998, LRWC installed a
bedrock well to service the Tamworth Water Works system. In 2004, this well,
Well 004, was shut down because its water contained levels of uranium above
the maximum allowed by the New Hampshire Department of Environmental
Services (DES). Subsequently, LRWC replaced Well 004 with a new well, Well
005.
In August 2007, DES employees discovered that Well 004 was active, and
a subsequent test of water from the Tamworth Water Works found uranium
levels greater than those allowed by DES. In September 2007, LRWC severed
the water lines and electrical connections to Well 004. Thereafter, the uranium
levels of the water from the Tamworth Water Works returned to levels that met
DES requirements.
Also in September 2007, PUC staff requested the PUC to formally
investigate, among other things, whether LRWC had the “managerial and
financial capacity to provide safe and adequate service to its customers.” As
part of its investigation, the PUC observed that the New Hampshire Attorney
General was investigating the allegation that LRWC had reconnected Well 004.
Because of the pending investigation by the attorney general, the PUC kept its
investigation open so as to continue to monitor LRWC and protect the interests
of its customers.
In August 2008, the plaintiffs brought suit against LRWC alleging
violations of the CPA, breach of contract and other claims. In August 2009, the
defendants moved for partial summary judgment as to the plaintiffs’ CPA
2
claims, arguing that because they are involved in a “trade or commerce” that
falls within the jurisdiction of the PUC, their conduct is exempt from the CPA.
See RSA 358-A:3, I (2009). The trial court granted the motion as it pertained to
claims that the defendants overcharged for contaminated water because it
found that these claims were related to the PUC’s exclusive jurisdiction over
ratemaking. The trial court denied the motion as to claims that, by failing to
disclose the level of uranium in the water, the defendants misrepresented that
the water was safe for consumption and free from contamination, reasoning
that these claims were not part of the PUC’s exclusive jurisdiction over
ratemaking and, thus, not exempt from the CPA.
The sole issue for our review is whether the plaintiffs’ claim that the
defendants misrepresented that the water was safe for consumption is exempt
from the CPA. Resolving this issue requires statutory construction. The
interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo.
Billewicz v. Ransmeier, 161 N.H. 145, 151 (2010). We determine the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.
Id. When the language of a statute is clear on its face, its meaning is not
subject to modification. Id. Further, we will neither consider what the
legislature might have said nor add words that it did not see fit to include. Id.
Our analysis starts with the plain meaning of the relevant statutes. See
State v. Empire Automotive Group, 163 N.H. ___, ___ (decided December 28,
2011). Under the CPA, it is “unlawful for any person to use any unfair method
of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice in the conduct of any
trade or commerce within this state.” RSA 358-A:2 (2009). “Representing that
goods or services are of a particular standard, quality, or grade, or that goods
are of a particular style or model, if they are of another,” is a form of unfair
competition specifically prohibited by the CPA. RSA 358-A:2, VII. The
plaintiffs have alleged that the defendants violated this provision of the CPA by
knowingly misrepresenting that the water was safe and met DES standards for
uranium.
RSA 358-A:3, I, exempts from the CPA:
Trade or commerce that is subject to the jurisdiction of the bank
commissioner, the director of securities regulation, the insurance
commissioner, the public utilities commission, the financial
institutions and insurance regulators of other states, or federal
banking or securities regulators who possess the authority to
regulate unfair or deceptive trade practices. This paragraph
includes trade or commerce under the jurisdiction of, and
regulated by, the bank commissioner pursuant to RSA 361-A,
relative to retail installment sales of motor vehicles.
3
(Emphases added.) RSA 358-A:1, II (2009) defines “‘[t]rade’” and “‘commerce’”
to “include the advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any services
and property, tangible or intangible, real, personal or mixed, and any other
article, commodity, or thing of value wherever situate, and shall include any
trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the people of this state.”
Thus, the CPA does not apply to claims of unfair competition or deceptive
practices in selling or distributing a service that is subject to the PUC’s
jurisdiction.
The term “jurisdiction” is not defined in the CPA, but its plain meaning
is: “the legal power, right, or authority to hear and determine a cause,” “legal
power to interpret and administer the law,” or “[the] power or right to exercise
authority: CONTROL.” Webster's Third New International Dictionary 1227
(unabridged ed. 2002). Accordingly, to determine when offering for sale or
distributing a service is “subject to the jurisdiction of” the PUC, we examine the
statutes that define the PUC’s powers and authority.
The PUC has “general supervision of all public utilities and the plants
owned, operated or controlled by the same.” RSA 374:3 (2009); see Appeal of
Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. 18, 33 (2010). Generally, any entity that
owns or operates a water system or part thereof is deemed a “public utility.”
Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. at 33 (quotation omitted); see
RSA 362:2, I (2009) (defining “public utilities” generally); RSA 362:4 (2009)
(explaining when water company is public utility). Here, it is undisputed that
LRWC, which sells and distributes water to the public, is a “public utility”
subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction. Thus, the trade or commerce in which LRWC
is engaged – selling and distributing water to the public – is subject to the
jurisdiction of the PUC.
Moreover, the plaintiffs have alleged that the defendants engaged in
deceptive practices in conducting this very trade or commerce. They allege that
the water LRWC sold and distributed to the public was unsafe, and that LRWC
misrepresented that the water was, in fact, safe. These allegations concern the
very trade or commerce that is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction – selling and
distributing water. See Empire Automotive Group, 163 N.H. at ____.
Accordingly, the plaintiffs’ claim may not be brought under the CPA because it
concerns trade or commerce that is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction and is
exempt from the CPA.
The plaintiffs argue, and the trial court ruled, that the CPA exempts only
trade or commerce related to the PUC’s jurisdiction over public utility rate-
setting. See Bacher v. Public Serv. Co. of N.H., 119 N.H. 356, 357 (1979)
(“Except in narrowly defined instances, the ratemaking power of the [PUC] is
plenary.”). This interpretation of RSA 358-A:3, I, reads into the statute a
limitation that does not exist. The CPA exempts any “[t]rade or commerce” that
4
is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction. RSA 358-A:3, I. It does not exempt only
that which involves setting consumer rates. We will not read a limitation into
the statute that the legislature did not see fit to include. See Ransmeier, 161
N.H. at 151.
The plaintiffs also argue that the PUC’s jurisdiction does not extend to
deceptive practices related to water quality. This frames the issue incorrectly.
The issue is not whether a party’s deceptive practice is subject to the PUC’s
jurisdiction, but whether the practice occurred in the conduct of “[t]rade or
commerce” that is subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction. RSA 385-A:3, I (emphasis
added). The CPA exempts from its purview all “[t]rade or commerce” that is
subject to the jurisdiction of certain state and federal agencies and officers,
including the PUC. Id. This means that if a party engages in an unfair method
of competition or unfair or deceptive practice in the conduct of “[t]rade or
commerce” that is subject to the jurisdiction of one of these agencies or
officers, the CPA does not apply.
The plaintiffs’ argument may be based upon an assumption that our
cases interpreting a prior version of the CPA still apply. The prior version of
the CPA did not exempt any particular profession or occupation from its
purview; it excluded only “[t]rade or commerce otherwise permitted under laws
as administered by any regulatory board or officer acting under statutory
authority of this state or of the United States.” RSA 358-A:3, I (1995)
(amended 2002, 2004); see Averill v. Cox, 145 N.H. 328, 331 (2000). In Averill,
we decided that this exemption applied to trade or commerce subject to a
regulatory board or officer authorized by statute. Averill, 145 N.H. at 331,
332-33. We also explained that for regulation to fall within the purview of RSA
358-A:3, I, it had to be comprehensive and had to protect consumers from the
same fraud and unfair practices as the CPA. Id. at 332-33.
After we decided Averill, the legislature amended RSA 358-A:3, I. Now,
RSA 358-A:3, I, exempts any trade or commerce that is subject to the
jurisdiction of only a few specified agencies and officers: the bank
commissioner, the director of securities regulation, the insurance
commissioner, the PUC, the financial institutions and insurance regulators of
other states, and federal banking and security regulators who possess the
authority to regulate unfair and deceptive trade practices. Thus, Averill does
not govern our construction of the CPA exemption at issue.
Moreover, contrary to the plaintiffs’ assertions, concerns about water
quality fall squarely within the PUC’s jurisdiction. Before any entity may
operate as a public utility in New Hampshire, it must first obtain the PUC’s
permission and approval. Appeal of Pennichuck Water Works, 160 N.H. at 33;
see RSA 374:22, I (2009). Water companies may not obtain such permission
and approval “without first satisfying any requirements of [DES] concerning the
5
suitability and availability of water for the applicant’s proposed water utility.”
RSA 374:22, III (2009). Once a water company obtains the PUC’s permission
and approval to become a “public utility,” it must “furnish such service and
facilities as shall be reasonably safe and adequate and in all other respects just
and reasonable.” RSA 374:1 (2009) (emphasis added).
If the PUC determines that the water company “has declined or
unreasonably failed to render service” or has rendered inadequate service, the
PUC, either on its own motion or on the motion of “any interested party,” may
“withdraw[ ] from a public utility its authority to engage in business.” RSA
374:28 (2009). The PUC may also direct the attorney general to bring an action
against a public utility if the PUC is “of opinion that a public utility is failing or
omitting, or about to fail or omit, to do anything required of it by law or by
order of the [PUC], or is doing anything, or about to do anything . . . contrary
to, or in violation of, law or any order of the [PUC].” RSA 374:41 (2009).
Additionally, “whenever the [PUC] finds that a public utility . . . having gross
annual revenues of less than $2,000,000 is failing to provide adequate and
reasonable service to its customers,” and that this failure poses “a serious and
imminent threat to the health and welfare” of the utility’s customers, the PUC
may appoint a receiver or direct its staff “to take such temporary action as is
necessary to assure continued service.” RSA 374:47-a (2009).
Further, pursuant to RSA chapter 365, “[a]ny person” may file a petition
with the PUC setting forth “any thing or act claimed to have been done or to
have been omitted by any public utility in violation of any provision of law.”
RSA 365:1 (2009). If the public utility does not make reparation for any alleged
injury and does not cease its illegal activities, and the PUC finds that there are
“reasonable grounds” for the complaint, the PUC must investigate the
complaint and “take such action within its powers as the facts justify.” RSA
365:4 (2009). The PUC may also inquire on its own motion “as . . . to any act
or thing having been done or having been omitted or proposed by any [public]
utility in violation of any provision of law.” RSA 365:5 (2009). RSA 365:41
(2009) allows the PUC to impose a civil penalty against “[a]ny public utility”
that violates “any provisions of [Title XXXIV: Public Utilities], or fails, omits or
neglects to obey, observe or comply with” any PUC order, “not to exceed
$250,000 or 2.5 percent of the annual gross revenue that the utility received
from sales in the state, whichever is lower.”
Thus, contrary to the plaintiffs’ assertions, the PUC has jurisdiction over
the quality of water provided by a public utility. The PUC cannot allow a water
company to operate as a public utility unless the company satisfies DES’s
requirements for providing safe water. See RSA 374:22, III. If the PUC
determines that the water company has provided the public with inadequate
water service, the PUC may withdraw its permission that allows the water
company to operate as a public utility. See RSA 374:28. And, if the PUC is of
6
the opinion that the public utility has violated any law, including those
regarding providing safe water, it may direct the attorney general to bring an
action against the public utility. See RSA 374:41. For certain water
companies, if the PUC determines that a water company has failed to provide
“adequate and reasonable service” to its customers and that this failure has
posed “a serious and imminent threat to the health and welfare” of the utility’s
customers, the PUC may also appoint a receiver or direct its staff to take “such
temporary action as is necessary” to assure continued service to the water
company’s customers. RSA 374:47-a. The PUC may also initiate an inquiry
into any alleged unlawful activity by a public utility, and may assess a civil
penalty against the utility. See RSA 365:5, :41.
Our recent decision in Empire Automotive Group, 163 N.H. at ___, is
factually distinguishable from this case. The defendant in that case was
licensed by the New Hampshire Banking Department as a seller of motor
vehicles subject to retail installment sales contracts. Empire Automotive
Group, 163 N.H. at ____. The defendant was indicted by a grand jury for
violating the CPA by placing inspection stickers on vehicles sold to consumers
under installment sales contracts, knowing that the vehicles had not actually
passed inspection. Id. The defendant argued that because it was licensed
under RSA chapter 361-A, and subject to the jurisdiction of the bank
commissioner, its conduct was exempt from the CPA. Id. We disagreed. Id.
We observed that the “[t]rade or commerce” subject to the jurisdiction of
the bank commissioner under RSA chapter 361-A involved only the sale of
motor vehicles pursuant to retail installment sales contracts. Id.; see RSA
358-A:3, I (exempting from the CPA “[t]rade or commerce that is . . . under the
jurisdiction of, and regulated by the bank commissioner pursuant to RSA
361-A, relative to retail installment sales of motor vehicles”). We implied that
the “[t]rade or commerce” that is subject to the bank commissioner’s
jurisdiction is the financing of vehicles pursuant to retail sales installment
contracts. Empire Automotive Group, 163 N.H. at __; see also RSA 361-A:2, I
(2009) (“No person shall engage in the business of a sales finance company or
retail seller in this state” without first obtaining a license to do so from the
bank commissioner), :3, I-a (c), (h) (Supp. 2011) (bank commissioner may
suspend or revoke license of person selling motor vehicles to buyers under
retail sales installment contracts for fraudulently misrepresenting certain
borrowing terms or for engaging in dishonest or unethical practices in making
or collecting on retail installment contracts), :7 (2009) (setting forth the
requirements and prohibitions relative to retail installment sales contracts).
In Empire Automotive Group, “the fact that the two motor vehicles in
question may have been sold under retail installment contracts ha[d] nothing
whatsoever to do with the fraudulent conduct alleged in the indictment”; thus,
the conduct was unrelated to the financing terms under which the vehicles
7
were sold. Empire Automotive Group, 163 N.H. at ___. We ruled, therefore,
that the trade or commerce at issue was the sale of motor vehicles generally,
not their financing under retail sales installment contracts. See id. Because
the bank commissioner did not have jurisdiction over the sale of motor vehicles
generally, and because this was the trade or commerce at issue, we held that
the exemption did not apply. Id.
In this case, by contrast, providing water to the public, which is the trade
or commerce subject to the PUC’s jurisdiction, is related to the alleged
fraudulent conduct. The alleged fraud concerned the delivery of safe water.
Moreover, while in Empire Automotive Group, the bank commissioner had no
authority over the trade or commerce at issue (the sale of motor vehicles,
generally), here, the PUC has express authority over selling or distributing
water to the public.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we reverse the trial court’s denial
of partial summary judgment as to the plaintiffs’ claims under the CPA that
sought damages for the defendants’ alleged misrepresentations about the
quality of the water provided and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8