THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-770
PREMIUM RESEARCH SERVICES
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & a.
Argued: October 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 29, 2011
Douglas, Leonard & Garvey, P.C., of Concord (Benjamin T. King on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Lynmarie C. Cusack, assistant
attorney general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the respondents.
DALIANIS, C.J. The petitioner, Premium Research Services, appeals the
dismissal by the Superior Court (McNamara, J.) of its petition under the Right-
to-Know Law, RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp. 2010), for disclosure of documents
relating to disbursements from the second injury fund. See RSA 281-A:21-b
(2010). We affirm.
The following facts either appear in the petitioner’s petition or are taken
from the appellate record. “The second injury fund was created to encourage
employers to hire or retain employees with permanent physical or mental
impairments of any origin by reducing the employer’s liability for workers’
compensation claims.” Appeal of Hartford Ins. Co., 162 N.H. 91, 93 (2011)
(quotation omitted). The fund reimburses employers or their workers’
compensation insurance carriers when workers’ compensation benefits have
been paid to “an employee who has a permanent physical or mental
impairment . . . from any cause or origin” who “incurs a subsequent disability”
from a work-related injury that results in a greater workers’ compensation
liability “by reason of the combined effects of the preexisting impairment than
. . . would have resulted from the subsequent injury alone.” RSA 281-A:54, I
(2010).
The petitioner seeks information related to reimbursements from the
second injury fund so that it can know whether a carrier has reported the
reimbursement to the National Council on Compensation Insurers (NCCI). If
the carrier has reported the reimbursement to the NCCI, as NCCI regulations
require, then NCCI will take the reimbursement into account when setting the
employer’s “experience modification” or “experience mod.” The carrier will
then, in turn, reduce the employer’s premium. Conversely, if the carrier does
not report its reimbursement from the second injury fund to NCCI, NCCI will
not adjust the employer’s experience mod, and the carrier will not reduce the
employer’s insurance premium. The petitioner seeks to monitor this process to
ensure that employers are not being overcharged for workers’ compensation
insurance.
To obtain information about when the second injury fund has
reimbursed carriers, the petitioner submitted an information request to
respondent New Hampshire Department of Labor (DOL) on November 9, 2009.
For each claim from the fund, the petitioner sought: (1) the employer’s name;
(2) the name of the insurance carrier filing for reimbursement from the fund;
(3) the amount of reimbursement; (4) the accident date; (5) the date on which
the second injury fund agreed to reimburse the employer/carrier; (6) the claim
number; and (7) the employee’s name, if possible. Relying upon RSA 281-A:21-
b, which exempts from the Right-to-Know Law “[p]roceedings and records of
the [DOL] with respect to workers’ compensation claims,” DOL declined to
comply with the request. In response, the petitioner revised its request so that
it no longer requested the employee’s name and insurer claim number. DOL
again declined to comply with the petitioner’s request.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed its petition against DOL and respondent
New Hampshire Treasury, seeking disclosure of “all documents relating to
disbursements from the Second Injury Fund occurring in 2005, 2006, 2007,
2008 and 2009 . . . with all employee names and insurer claim numbers
redacted.” At the hearing on the respondents’ motion to dismiss the petition,
the petitioner agreed to limit its request further to certain information available
2
on two forms kept by DOL, the “WCSIF-2A”, which is a schedule of
reimbursable payments, and the “9WCA,” which is an application for
reimbursement of disability payments. At the hearing, the petitioner agreed
that employee names, social security numbers, home addresses and average
weekly wages could be redacted from these forms. The information the
petitioner sought was limited to: the identity of the employer, the identity of
the insurance carrier, the date of injury, the amount the second injury fund
paid to the carrier, and the date on which the second injury fund agreed to
reimburse the carrier. The trial court dismissed the petition, and this appeal
followed.
Resolving the issues on appeal requires that we interpret the Right–to–
Know Law, which is a question of law that we review de novo. ATV Watch v.
N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 161 N.H. 746, 752 (2011). When interpreting a statute,
including the Right-to-Know Law, we first look to the plain meaning of the
words used and will consider legislative history only if the statutory language is
ambiguous. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add language that the
legislature did not see fit to include. Lambert v. Belknap County Convention,
157 N.H. 375, 378 (2008). We also interpret a statute in the context of the
overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id. We resolve questions
regarding the Right-to-Know Law with a view to providing the utmost
information in order to best effectuate the statutory and constitutional
objective of facilitating access to all public documents. ATV Watch, 161 N.H. at
752. Therefore, we construe provisions favoring disclosure broadly, while
construing exemptions narrowly. Hampton Police Assoc. v. Town of Hampton,
162 N.H. 7, 11 (2011).
RSA 281-A:21-b provides:
Confidentiality of Workers’ Compensation Claims.
Proceedings and records of the department of labor with respect to
workers’ compensation claims under RSA 281-A shall be exempt
from RSA 91-A [, the Right-to-Know Law]. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit the department of labor from releasing information
on a person’s claim or claims to the person, the person’s legal
representative, attorney, health care providers, employer, the
employer’s workers’ compensation insurer, the attorneys for the
employer or employer’s insurer, or state and federal agencies with
relevant jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, information relating to a person’s claim or claims may be
released to other parties only with the prior written permission of
the claimant.
3
Under the plain meaning of RSA 281-A:21-b, the records sought are
exempt from disclosure under the Right-to-Know Law. The petitioner contends
that, despite the plain meaning of RSA 281-A:21-b, the legislature actually
intended that it apply only to DOL injury reports containing personal employee
information. “[W]e must honor the expressed intent of the legislature as
expressed in the statute itself.” Union Leader Corp. v. Fenniman, 136 N.H.
624, 627 (1993). As written, the statute applies to all DOL records that pertain
to workers’ compensation claims, not only to DOL injury reports containing
personal employee information. As there is no ambiguity in RSA 281-A:21-b
with respect to the records to which it pertains, the petitioner’s resort to
legislative history is to no avail. Although the petitioner argues that our
construction leads to an absurd result, on the record before us, we are not
persuaded that this is the case.
While the petitioner also contends that the trial court’s construction of
RSA 281-A:21-b violated the State Constitution, as the petitioner concedes,
this issue was not raised in the trial court. Thus, we decline to review it. See
State v. Dellorfano, 128 N.H. 628, 632 (1986).
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
4