THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2011-0318, Lebanon Hangar Associates, Ltd. v.
City of Lebanon, the court on July 13, 2012, issued the following
order:
Having considered the City’s motion to reconsider and the response
thereto, the court modifies the slip opinion dated June 12, 2012, by amending
footnote 3, which appears on page 5 of the slip opinion. Footnote 3 is amended
by adding a new third paragraph, so that footnote 3, as amended, shall state as
follows:
3 We note here that the City’s brief misquotes both letters. The City
quotes its own June 2008 letter to LHA as stating that the issue was
“whether LHA is liable for taxes on the leased land based on the terms of
the lease.” (Emphasis in original.) In fact, that letter states that the City
intended to argue, more generally, that “the lease agreement requires
[LHA] to pay all taxes . . . on the leased premises and property it owns.”
Similarly, the City quotes the September 2008 letter from LHA to the City
as formulating the issue as “whether, under the terms of the lease, the
parties agreed that the City could assess and impose upon LHA real
estate taxes for the City land leased to LHA.” (Emphasis in original.) In
fact, that letter states the issue, more generally, as “whether the City is
permitted under the Lease to impose real estate taxes on the value of the
land LHA leases from the City.”
These erroneous references to the record are troubling because they
go to the very heart of the issue in this case – the scope of the arbitrator’s
authority. The language in the misquoted versions arguably implies that
the scope of the issue was limited to the terms contained within the four
corners of the lease, rather than the lease agreement.
In a motion for reconsideration filed with this court after this opinion
was issued, counsel for the City represents that these erroneous
quotations were done inadvertently and without any intent to mislead.
Based on the fact that the City accurately described the content of the
letters elsewhere in its brief and provided accurate copies of the letters in
its appendix, we accept this representation. We hope that this
occurrence will serve to highlight the importance of ensuring that factual
references to the record are accurate.
In all other respects the motion for reconsideration is denied.
Slip opinion modified;
reconsideration otherwise
denied.
Dalianis, C.J., and Conboy and Lynn, JJ., concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk
2