THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
10th Circuit Court – Brentwood Family Division
No. 2011-856
IN THE MATTER OF KIMBERLY J. NICHOLSON AND JOHN P. NICHOLSON
Argued: June 7, 2012
Opinion Issued: August 21, 2012
Marshall Law Office PLLC, of East Kingston (Keri J. Marshall on the brief,
and Brian D. Kenyon orally), for the petitioner.
Law Office of Leslie H. Johnson, PLLC, of Center Sandwich (Leslie H.
Johnson on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
CONBOY, J. This is an appeal from an order of the 10th Circuit Court –
Brentwood Family Division (Hurd, J.) finding the respondent, John P.
Nicholson (Father), to be $28,556, plus interest, in arrears on child support
obligations to the petitioner, Kimberly J. Nicholson (Mother). We reverse and
remand.
The following facts are drawn from the record. The Mother and the
Father were married and had three children. The parties divorced in 2000, at
which time all of their children were minors. The terms of the divorce were set
out in the parties’ permanent stipulation, which was approved and ordered by
the court. The stipulation incorporates a “Uniform Support Order” (USO), and
provides that the Father is to pay $244 per week in child support.
In April 2011, the Mother filed a motion for contempt arguing, among
other things, that the Father had unilaterally reduced the amount of support
when their oldest child graduated from high school in May 2007 and that he
has paid no support at all since April 16, 2009. The Father objected and
argued that the final decree entitled him to reduce his child support payments
as each child became emancipated because the decree states that child
support “shall continue until the children reach the age of 18 or graduates [sic]
from high school, whichever shall last occur.” He argued that “[t]he parties
understood this to mean that the child support would be reduced by $82.00 as
each child graduated from high school or reached age 18 years, whichever was
later.” The Father also argued that the petitioner had agreed to this reduction.
The court held a hearing on the matter and issued an order on August
30, 2011. The court noted that paragraph SO-4B of the Standing Order (SO)
included with the USO states that “[t]he amount of child support shall be
recalculated in accordance with the guidelines whenever there is a change in
the number of children for whom support is ordered, effective the date of the
change.” The court observed that “at no time was there a recalculation of
support . . . nor was there any agreement or pleading presented to the court
requesting a reduction.” It found, rather, that the Father had “reduced the
amount paid by 1/3 as each child emancipated.”
The court did not decide whether there was an agreement between the
parties to reduce support payments. Instead, it concluded that even if there
had been such an agreement, it would not be enforceable because, pursuant to
In the Matter of Laura & Scott, 161 N.H. 333 (2010), parties may not modify
child support orders through private agreement. The trial court found the
Father to be in arrears, and calculated the amount due without making
adjustments for the emancipation of the two older children. It did
acknowledge, however, that the Husband’s support obligation terminated upon
the emancipation of the youngest child on July 11, 2011.
On appeal, the Father argues that the trial court’s calculation of the
arrearage should have accounted for the two older children’s emancipation
even though neither party obtained an order reducing the child support
obligation at any time.
We will not disturb the trial court’s rulings regarding child support
absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law. In the Matter
of Scott & Pierce, 160 N.H. 354, 358 (2010). At the outset, we agree with the
trial court that any alleged agreement between the parties outside of the
approved stipulation regarding child support payments is not enforceable. As
we stated in In the Matter of Laura & Scott, 161 N.H. at 336, “the child support
award is a standing order from the trial court. Parties may not modify orders
of the court through private agreement.”
2
This, however, does not end our analysis. The question here is whether
the terms of the divorce decree and controlling statute mandate a retrospective
recalculation of support.
At the time the parties divorced, RSA 458:35-c (1992) governed this
situation. It has since been amended and recodified as RSA 461-A:14, IV
(Supp. 2011). See In the Matter of Johnson & Johnson, 158 N.H. 555, 559
(2009). However, the amended version is not applicable here, for it “has
prospective application only, and does not apply to post-enactment
modifications of orders that were issued prior to the change in legislation.” Id.
Thus, the version of RSA 458:35-c in effect at the time of the parties’ divorce is
controlling. It provided, in relevant part:
Unless the court . . . specifies differently, the amount of a child
support obligation stated in the order for support shall remain as
stated in the order until all dependent children for whom support
is provided in the order shall terminate their high school education
or reach the age of 18 years, whichever is later, or become married,
or become a member of the armed forces, at which time the child
support obligation terminates without further legal action. This
amount shall remain as specified unless a legal order expressly
allocates the payments on a per child basis.
(Emphasis added.) Thus, unless the court “specified differently,” the amount of
the support ordered would remain unchanged until all children were
emancipated as described. Accordingly, we look to the terms of the final decree
to determine whether the court “specified differently.”
In interpreting the meaning of a divorce decree, we review the decree de
novo. Sommers v. Sommers, 143 N.H. 686, 692 (1999). We consider the intent
of the parties as expressed in the language of the stipulation. Id. Paragraph
SO-4A of the SO, incorporated in the stipulation, states:
Child support shall terminate when the youngest child terminates
his/her high school education or reaches the age of 18 years,
whichever is later; gets married; or becomes a member of the
armed forces.
Paragraph SO-3B states that “[e]xcept as otherwise provided in this order, the
effective date of any modification shall be no earlier than the date the petition
is filed.” Paragraph SO-4B of the SO does “provide otherwise,” for it instructs
that “child support shall be recalculated in accordance with the guidelines
whenever there is a change in the number of children for whom support is
ordered, effective the date of the change.” (Emphasis added.) Thus, pursuant
3
to the plain language of the SO, in calculating the support arrearage, the trial
court was obligated to retrospectively recalculate child support as of the dates
upon which each of the two older children became emancipated. That the
parents failed to obtain a court order modifying the support obligation when
each child’s status changed is of no consequence; RSA 458:35-c permits the
trial court’s order to specify differently, and it did so.
Accordingly, we reverse the trial court’s arrearage calculation and
remand for a calculation of the arrearage consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4