THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Public Employee Labor Relations Board
No. 2011-012
APPEAL OF MICHAEL SILVERSTEIN
(New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board)
Argued: October 19, 2011
Opinion Issued: January 13, 2012
Heather G. Silverstein, of Concord, on the brief and orally, for the
plaintiff.
Upton & Hatfield, LLP, of Concord (John F. Teague and James A.
O’Shaughnessy on the brief, and Mr. Teague orally), for the defendant.
Theodore E. Comstock and Barrett M. Christina, of Concord, by brief, for
New Hampshire School Boards Association, as amicus curiae.
James F. Allmendinger, of Concord, by brief, for NEA-New Hampshire, as
amicus curiae.
LYNN, J. The plaintiff, Michael Silverstein, appeals the decision of the
New Hampshire Public Employee Labor Relations Board (PELRB) declining to
exercise jurisdiction over his unfair labor practice complaint against the
defendant, the Andover School Board (School). We affirm.
I
In May 2010, the plaintiff, a physical education teacher at the Andover
Elementary/Middle School, signed an employment contract that reduced him
from a full-time (five days per week) employee to a four days per week
employee, cut his salary by approximately $7000, and increased his costs for
health insurance. Later, pursuant to a three-step grievance process in the
collective bargaining agreement (CBA) governing his employment, the plaintiff
initiated a grievance against his employer arising out of the reduction. That
process affords employees three opportunities to be heard: the first before the
school principal; the second before the superintendent; and a “final and
binding” hearing before the school board. While the second step of that
process was still underway, the plaintiff filed an unfair labor practice complaint
against the School with the PELRB, apparently out of concern that the statute
of limitations would run on those claims if he failed to file at that time. See
RSA 273-A:6, VII (2010) (providing that PELRB shall “summarily dismiss any
complaint of an alleged violation of RSA 273-A:5 which occurred more than 6
months prior to the filing of the complaint with the body having original
jurisdiction of that complaint”). The PELRB, however, concluded that it lacked
jurisdiction “to interpret the Andover CBA and decide the merits of Mr.
Silverstein’s complaint during the grievance proceedings and after the
grievance proceedings are completed.” Subsequently, the PELRB denied the
plaintiff’s motion for a rehearing, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the plaintiff argues that: (1) the PELRB has jurisdiction, as a
matter of law, over unfair labor practice complaints whenever the CBA does not
provide for final and binding arbitration; (2) the PELRB’s interpretation of the
CBA violates the State and Federal Constitutions; and (3) the CBA’s grievance
procedure is not “workable” as required by RSA 273-A:4 (Supp. 2011) and
otherwise violates public policy. We address each argument in turn.
II
The plaintiff first argues that the PELRB erred in concluding that the
terms of the CBA deprived it of jurisdiction over his unfair labor practice
complaint against the School. He contends that he is entitled to a de novo
evidentiary hearing before the PELRB because that body “is only robbed of its
jurisdiction over unfair labor practice disputes if the parties to a collective
bargaining agreement have explicitly agreed to final and binding arbitration.”
2
The School argues that the PELRB correctly declined jurisdiction over the
plaintiff’s case in light of the three-step grievance procedure in the CBA stating
that the school board’s decision on the grievance is “final and binding.”
We begin by examining the language of the CBA, as it reflects the parties’
intent. Appeal of N.H. Div. of State Police, 160 N.H. 588, 591 (2010). This
intent is determined from the agreement taken as a whole, and by construing
its terms according to the common meaning of their words and phrases. Id.
We interpret a CBA de novo, id., and we will set aside the decision of the
PELRB if it was based upon an erroneous interpretation of law. See Appeal of
State Employees’ Assoc. of N.H., 156 N.H. 507, 508 (2007).
The CBA’s three-step grievance process, in relevant part, provides as
follows:
Step One: In the event a mutually acceptable resolution of
the problem is not reached . . . , a grievance may be submitted to
the Principal for formal consideration. . . .
Step Two: If the grievant is dissatisfied with the decision
rendered by the Principal a written request for a hearing may be
submitted to the Superintendent. . . . The Superintendent shall
schedule a hearing . . . and shall render a decision in writing
within 10 school days of the hearing. . . .
Step Three: If the grievant is dissatisfied with the decision of
the Superintendent, the grievant may request a hearing before the
School Board. . . . [A] hearing shall be scheduled before the full
Board . . . and a decision of the full Board will be made within 10
school days of the hearing. The Board’s decision will be final and
binding.
This language was specifically negotiated and agreed upon by the parties, and,
therefore, it is binding upon both the public employee and the public employer.
See Appeal of Berlin Board of Education, 120 N.H. 226, 230 (1980). Absent
some indication that the legislature intended the PELRB to have the power to
conduct a de novo evidentiary hearing regardless of whether the CBA contains
a final and binding grievance process, we will honor the plain language of the
parties’ agreement.
The Public Employee Labor Relations Act was enacted in 1975 to “foster
harmonious and cooperative relations between public employers and their
employees . . . .” Laws 1975, 490:1. “To achieve this goal, the Act granted
public employees the right to organize and engage in collective bargaining with
their employers, mandated that public employers negotiate in good faith with
3
employee organizations, and established the PELRB to assist in resolving
disputes between government and its employees.” Appeal of House Legislative
Facilities Subcom., 141 N.H. 443, 446 (1996). RSA chapter 273-A:6 (2010)
bestows on the PELRB “primary jurisdiction” over all unfair labor practices of
public employers. Breaching a collective bargaining agreement is one of the
enumerated unfair labor practices contained in RSA 273-A:5, I(h) (2010).
The plaintiff argues that the PELRB has the power to review the merits of
his unfair labor practice dispute, as a matter of law, “absent final and binding
arbitration with a neutral third-party, whereby public employees have
‘explicitly’ waived their statutory rights to the PELRB’s review.” We have never
held, however, that a provision for final and binding arbitration is a necessary
precondition to a union bargaining away its members’ right to de novo PELRB
review; such a holding would unduly restrict the bargaining power of both
unions and public employers to negotiate terms of the employment contract.
In fact, in identifying the proper limits of the PELRB’s authority, our precedents
have been careful to respect the bargaining process between public employers
and employees. For example, in Appeal of City of Manchester, 153 N.H. 289,
293 (2006), we noted that the PELRB is empowered to interpret a CBA, as a
threshold matter, to determine whether a specific dispute falls within the scope
of the CBA “[a]bsent specific language to the contrary in the CBA.” (Emphasis
added.) Similarly, in Appeal of Berlin Board of Education, 120 N.H. at 230, we
emphasized that grievance language specifically negotiated and agreed upon is
binding on both public employees and the public employer. Even in our cases
upholding the PELRB’s power to interpret the terms of a CBA or conduct a
hearing on the merits of an unfair labor practice dispute, we have emphasized
that the parties to a CBA are free to establish their own means of resolving
disputes through negotiated contractual terms. In Appeal of Hooksett School
District, 126 N.H. 202 (1985), we rejected a school board’s argument that,
because the CBA contained a four-step grievance procedure, the PELRB lacked
authority to review the union’s unfair labor practice complaint. Noting that the
CBA in that case did not provide for “final or binding arbitration or other final
disposition that is binding on the parties,” id. at 204 (emphasis added), we
held:
Absent a provision for binding arbitration following the grievance
procedure, and with no explicit or implicit language in the contract
stating that step four of the grievance procedure is final and
binding on the parties, the PELRB, in the context of an unfair labor
practice charge, has jurisdiction as a matter of law to interpret the
contract . . . .
Id. (emphasis added). Similarly, in Appeal of Campton School District, 138
N.H. 267, 270 (1994), we determined that the fact that a CBA’s grievance
procedure allowed for advisory arbitration did not by implication make the
4
public employer’s rejection of the arbitrator’s decision final and binding on the
parties. Reiterating the holding in Appeal of Hooksett, we explained that “with
no explicit or implicit language in the contract stating that the last step of the
grievance procedure is final and binding on the parties,” the PELRB had
jurisdiction to hear the employee’s unfair labor practice complaint. Appeal of
Campton School Dist., 138 N.H. at 270 (quotation and brackets omitted). And,
in Appeal of State Employees’ Association, 139 N.H. 441, 444 (1995), where the
grievance procedure allowed for advisory arbitration and provided that the
public employer’s decision was “final” but not “binding,” we concluded that
PELRB review followed implicitly.
The above decisions reflect the structural role of the PELRB in
adjudicating labor disputes between parties who otherwise are free to negotiate
the details of their employment relationship. “A CBA is a contract between a
public employer and a union over the terms and conditions of employment.”
Appeal of City of Manchester, 153 N.H. at 293 (quotation omitted). “When
parties enter into a CBA, they are obligated to adhere to its terms, which are
the product of their collective bargaining.” Id. The collective bargaining
process itself “is meant to be the result of negotiations between an employer
and all employees, collectively.” Appeal of State of N.H., 147 N.H. 106, 109
(2001). The purpose of creating the PELRB was not to upset the legitimate
expectations of contracting parties as expressed in the terms of their
agreements, but to “foster harmonious and cooperative relations between
public employers and their employees,” and to “assist in resolving disputes
between government and its employees.” Appeal of City of Manchester, 153
N.H. at 295-96; see also Laws 1975, 490:1, III.
Admittedly, one of our cases arguably suggests that a CBA provision for
final and binding arbitration is necessary to remove the PELRB’s authority to
adjudicate a labor dispute de novo. In Appeal of State of New Hampshire, 147
N.H. at 108, we quoted Appeal of Campton School District for the proposition
that: “[A]bsent a grievance process in a CBA, of which the last step implicitly
or expressly mandates final and binding arbitration, the PELRB, in the context
of an unfair labor practice charge, has jurisdiction as a matter of law to
interpret the CBA.” (Quotation and brackets omitted.) However, as noted
above, the full quotation in Appeal of Campton School District, which itself
quoted Appeal of Hooksett School District, makes it clear that, in addition to
binding arbitration, another exception to the jurisdiction of the PELRB to
interpret the CBA in the context of an unfair labor practice complaint is where,
as here, there is “‘explicit or implicit language in the contract stating that the
last step of the grievance procedure is final and binding on the parties.’”
Appeal of Campton School Dist., 138 N.H. at 270 (brackets omitted). Although
we did not recite fully the relevant language from the Campton and Hooksett
cases, nothing in Appeal of State of New Hampshire suggests that we intended
to depart from the reasoning of those cases, and we now explicitly reiterate that
5
the PELRB has no authority to interpret a CBA or review the merits of a
grievance when the CBA to which the parties are subject includes a final and
binding grievance process internal to the employer. Thus, we reject the
plaintiff’s argument that the doctrine of stare decisis compels the conclusion
that, in the absence of a CBA provision for binding arbitration, the PELRB has
authority to review the merits of his grievance. When the parties include a
final and binding grievance procedure in their labor contract, as they have
here, they choose to have disputes resolved through that process, and each
party must hold up its end of the bargain. Cf. W.R. Grace & Co. v. Rubber
Workers, 461 U.S. 757, 764 (1983); Pitt v. Dept. of Corrections, 954 A.2d 978,
983 (D.C. 2008) (“Where the government employees are covered by a collective
bargaining agreement that includes exclusive grievance procedures, those
procedures may supersede otherwise available statutory provisions for
. . . review.”).1
III
Next, the plaintiff argues that the PELRB’s interpretation of the CBA
violates his due process rights under the State and Federal Constitutions
because he has been deprived of a neutral government tribunal. We cannot
agree, however, that the only constitutionally acceptable procedure for
adjudicating his unfair labor practice complaint is a de novo hearing before the
PELRB. The plaintiff’s due process argument overlooks the fact that the CBA is
a binding agreement subjecting both parties to its provisions. To the extent
that the ordinary procedural requirements of a judicial-type hearing between
adversarial parties were lacking, the CBA’s three-step grievance procedure
operates as a waiver of those typical guarantees. Although a union may not
waive its members’ statutory rights in certain contexts, see, e.g., NLRB v.
Magnavox Co., 415 U.S. 322, 324 (1974) (union may not waive members’ rights
to distribute union literature or solicit union membership during nonworking
time, where employer’s ban on such activities “might seriously dilute [the
statutory right to form, join, or assist labor organizations]”), a union may waive
its members’ customary procedural rights, such as de novo judicial review, by
way of the ordinary bargaining process. See, e.g., Gilmer v. Interstate/Johnson
Lane Corp., 500 U.S. 20, 26 (1991); Metropolitan Edison Co. v. NLRB, 460 U.S.
693, 705, 708 (1983) (noting that Supreme Court “long has recognized that a
1 Because the plaintiff’s unfair labor practice complaint involved only the claims that (1) the
School violated the CBA by reducing the plaintiff’s hours, salary and benefits and (2) the CBA’s
grievance procedures were unworkable, we have no occasion to address the School’s assertion
that, at the conclusion of the grievance process established by the CBA, the PELRB would have
jurisdiction to review the plaintiff’s allegations that the School did not conduct the grievance
process fairly. Because the fairness of the hearing actually conducted by the School and the
outcome thereof are not at issue in this appeal, in reaching our decision we have not relied on any
information beyond the record of the proceedings before the PELRB. For this reason, the
plaintiff’s motion to strike certain statements in and attachments to the School’s brief and his
motion to supplement the record are both denied as moot.
6
union may waive a member’s statutorily protected rights” as long as waiver is
clear and unmistakable).
Furthermore, even putting aside the waiver issue, the plaintiff has not
cited any authority, nor are we aware of any, holding that a public school
teacher has a constitutionally-based due process right to a termination hearing
before a third party, such as an arbitrator or the PELRB, rather than before the
school board. See Batagiannis v. West Lafayette Community School, 454 F.3d
738, 741-42 (7th Cir. 2006) (rejecting school superintendent’s due process
challenge to termination hearing held by school board which had previously
suspended her because it lost confidence in her leadership, and explaining that
“the requirement of an opportunity for a hearing must be implemented in a way
that allows the politically responsible office-holders to achieve their aims”);
Vanelli v. Reynolds School Dist. No. 7, 667 F.2d 773, 779-80 (9th Cir. 1982)
(Kennedy, Circuit Judge) (due process not violated by school board conducting
post-termination hearing even though board had previously made the decision
to terminate teacher); see also Hortonville Joint School Dist. No. 1 v.
Hortonville Ed. Assn., 426 U.S. 482, 496-97 (1976) (no due process violation in
school board making decision to fire striking teachers even though board
participated in failed collective bargaining that led to strike); Appeal of
Hopkinton Sch. Dist., 151 N.H. 478, 480-81 (2004) (mere fact that school
board played some role in decision to non-renew teacher did not preclude
board from affording teacher a hearing that fully comports with due process).
IV
Next, the plaintiff argues that the PELRB’s decision violates his right to a
remedy at law under Part I, Article 14 of the State Constitution, which states:
Every subject of this state is entitled to a certain remedy, by having
recourse to the laws, for all injuries he may receive in his person,
property, or character; to obtain right and justice freely, without being
obligated to purchase it; completely, and without any denial; promptly,
and without delay; conformably to the laws.
This article “is basically an equal protection clause in that it implies that all
litigants similarly situated may appeal to the courts both for relief and for
defense under like conditions and with like protection and without
discrimination.” State v. Basinow, 117 N.H. 176, 177 (1977) (quotation
omitted). Its purpose is to make civil remedies readily available, and to guard
against arbitrary and discriminatory infringements on access to the courts.
Opinion of the Justices, Limitation on Civil Actions, 137 N.H. 260, 265 (1993).
The plaintiff has cited no authority, however, and we have found none, to
7
support his desired outcome in this case – a de novo hearing before the PELRB
to resolve his unfair labor practice complaint despite the existence of a final
and binding three-step grievance process internal to the public employer.
Freely negotiated labor contracts binding on public employees and employers
alike are not the kinds of “imaginary barriers of form” contemplated by those
cases allowing plaintiffs to have their day in court despite a lack of strict
compliance with technical rules. See Roberts v. General Motors Corp., 140
N.H. 723, 729 (1996) (allowing lawsuit to proceed despite “formal error of
plaintiff’s counsel”).
V
Finally, the plaintiff contends that the CBA’s grievance procedure is not
“workable” pursuant to RSA 273-A:4, and violates public policy. We disagree.
RSA 273-A:4 provides that “[e]very agreement negotiated under the terms
of this chapter shall be reduced to writing and shall contain workable grievance
procedures.” The plaintiff argues that “permitting one party to an agreement
. . . to be the only ‘judge’ as to whether it breached a collective bargaining
agreement” violates the policy behind RSA chapter 273-A, and, thus, is
unworkable. We have previously held, however, that “the final determination
under the grievance procedure need not rest with a decision-maker other than
the public employer to make the grievance procedure workable.” Appeal of
State Employees’ Assoc., 139 N.H. at 444; see Appeal of Campton School Dist.,
138 N.H. at 270. As those decisions are not in doubt, we cannot conclude that
the CBA’s grievance procedure is not workable under RSA 273-A:4.
The plaintiff argues further that the CBA’s grievance procedure runs
contrary to public policy because it “permit[s] a public employer to have
unlimited power with regard to the terms of a collective bargaining agreement.”
However, giving effect to the terms of the grievance procedure advances an
independent set of policy interests underpinning the Public Employee Labor
Relations Act: respect for the bargaining process between labor unions and
public employers, “harmonious and cooperative relations between public
employers and their employees,” and the “uninterrupted operation of
government.” Laws 1975, 490:1. The parties’ bargaining process produced an
employment contract; presumably, union members received some benefit in
exchange for agreeing to the procedure giving the School Board final and
binding authority to adjudicate disputes. Even were we to agree that the
grievance procedure vests in the school board disproportionate power over
employees, we will not invalidate a contract, from all appearances freely and
fairly negotiated, that contains express terms governing the adjudication of
employee complaints. “Parties generally are bound by the terms of an
agreement freely and openly entered into, and courts cannot make better
8
agreements than the parties themselves have entered into or rewrite contracts
merely because they might operate harshly or inequitably.” Mills v. Nashua
Fed. Sav’s and Loan Assoc., 121 N.H. 722, 726 (1981).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9