THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2009-892
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
TODD PETERS
Argued: April 13, 2011
Opinion Issued: May 12, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, Todd Peters, appeals his convictions on
two counts of first-degree murder following a jury trial in Superior Court
(Abramson, J.). See RSA 630:1-a, I(a) (2007). On appeal, he argues that the
Trial Court (O’Neill, J.) erred when it denied his motions in limine to introduce
evidence of alternative perpetrators and to exclude the testimony of the keeper
of the records for Cellco Partnership d/b/a Verizon Wireless. We affirm
because we conclude that even if the trial court erred in these respects, the
State has met its burden of proving that these errors were harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
I. Background
A. Murders
The jury could have found the following facts. The victims were Edith
Riley and Timothy King, who lived together with their children on Valley Street
in Manchester, approximately one block from Annemarie Peters, the
defendant’s ex-wife and the mother of his then eleven-year-old son. Riley’s
then twelve-year-old daughter knew the defendant and his son from a local
football league in which the son played and for which she was a cheerleader.
The victims were murdered in the early morning of October 11, 2008.
On the night before the murders, the defendant had been drinking enough
alcohol that he was “probably drunk” and had been arguing with his girlfriend,
Delane Demers, with whom he lived in Weare. Their argument escalated, and
the police were called. Although the police determined that no crime had
occurred, they separated the two; Delane remained in the couple’s apartment,
and the police drove the defendant to Concord.
Delane’s brother, Dwayne, arrived just as the police were escorting the
defendant from the apartment. Dwayne remained with Delane until the
defendant returned, approximately two or three hours later. Soon after
returning to Weare, the defendant, along with Dwayne, drove in Delane’s SUV
to Annemarie’s Manchester apartment. When they arrived, the defendant went
to his son’s room, woke him up, and asked him why he quit the football team.
His son explained and then told the defendant about problems he was having
in the neighborhood with the victims and with Jennifer Tardiff, the victims’
neighbor. The defendant’s son told him that the victims were threatening him
and that King threw a rock, which hit him in the leg. He also said that earlier
that day, as Tardiff and Riley drove by, Tardiff threw a water bottle at one of
the defendant’s son’s friends, leaving a red mark on his face. The defendant’s
son and his friends went inside the victims’ and Tardiff’s apartment building
but left when Tardiff came outside with a metal pole, screaming. A friend, who
was sleeping over, confirmed the defendant’s son’s account of the encounters
with the victims and Tardiff.
When the defendant emerged from his son’s room, he appeared “visibly
angry.” Armed with a baseball bat, he went to the victims’ apartment where
the victims were asleep on their sofa. Shortly thereafter, Riley’s daughter woke
up to Riley’s screams. She got out of bed and, when she reached the kitchen,
saw a white man in his mid-thirties, whom she recognized as the defendant,
walking out of the living room, carrying a bat. Riley’s daughter later identified
the defendant in a photo array containing six photographs, telling the police
that she was “sure” that the photograph was of the man whom she saw in her
apartment on the morning of the murders.
2
The defendant walked past Riley’s daughter and exited the apartment,
still holding the bat. Riley’s daughter found both bloodied victims in the living
room and called 911. The police arrived about one minute later, at
approximately four o’clock in the morning.
When they interviewed her at the scene, Riley’s daughter told the police
that she had been asleep and had been awakened by the sound of her mother
screaming very loudly. She immediately jumped out of bed, walked out of her
bedroom, and saw the defendant standing “where the living room meets the
kitchen,” holding a baseball bat. She gave a detailed description of the man’s
appearance and then said that she was “seventy-five percent sure” that he was
the defendant, whom she knew from cheerleading practice.
Meanwhile, when Dwayne realized that the defendant had left
Annemarie’s apartment, he went outside to look for him. As Dwayne made his
way toward a nearby alley, the defendant came running out of it and told
Dwayne “to run and get the F out of there.” They ran to Delane’s SUV, which
the defendant had parked in front of Annemarie’s apartment. The defendant
started the SUV and said, “I think I just killed someone.” He explained,
“[T]here was a guy and a girl, and I think one of them’s dead.” Dwayne looked
in the back seat and saw a baseball bat on the seat. With “a white-knuckled
grip on the steering wheel,” the defendant then drove off.
The defendant first drove to an ex-girlfriend’s apartment in Manchester,
but soon drove back past the victims’ apartment where rescue personnel and
police vehicles had arrived. The defendant next drove to Weare, past the
apartment he shared with Delane. Seeing her SUV pass by and thinking that it
had been stolen, Delane called the police.
The defendant then drove the SUV past his Weare apartment again,
turned onto a paved road near Drew Pond and parked in front of the pond.
Dwayne exited the vehicle while the defendant “took off walking to the rear of
the vehicle.” When Dwayne returned to the SUV, he noticed that the bat had
been removed.
When the defendant returned to the SUV, he drove to a Walgreen Drug
Store in Concord. The defendant parked the vehicle, Dwayne exited again, and
when he returned, the defendant was in the driver’s seat. The defendant said
that he could not drive anymore and “just . . . needed to sit there.” Dwayne
offered to drive, and the two switched places; Dwayne drove back to the
defendant’s Weare apartment.
The videotape from a surveillance camera in the Walgreen parking lot
confirmed Dwayne’s account. The video shows a four-door SUV with two
occupants driving into the parking lot at approximately 5:13 a.m. After the
vehicle parked, one of the occupants exited for a short period of time. When
3
this person returned, the two occupants switched places, and the SUV left the
parking lot.
When Dwayne and the defendant arrived at the defendant’s apartment,
Dwayne saw his sister, Delane, outside on the balcony. She and the defendant
exchanged words about him taking her SUV, at which point Dwayne left for
home, and the defendant walked into the apartment. A few minutes later, the
police arrived at the defendant’s apartment, responding to Delane’s earlier call
about her stolen SUV. They asked Delane to speak to them outside, and then
asked to enter the apartment. Once inside, the police searched for the
defendant, but could not find him. As they searched, Delane received a text
message from the defendant saying, “I will be at the dam until [the] shit clears
out.” Delane showed the message to the police, and, at their request, called the
defendant to tell him that he was not under arrest and that the police wanted
to speak with him. The defendant sent a text message in reply, “Don’t BS me.”
Eventually, the defendant returned to the apartment and was arrested.
After his arrest, the defendant telephoned Delane and told her that
Dwayne had picked him up in Concord on the evening of October 10 and was
with him during the early morning hours of October 11, and that he was never
in Manchester during those hours. A couple of weeks later, he called his son
and father. The defendant told his son that he was not in Manchester when
the murders occurred. The defendant’s conversation with his son was, in part,
as follows:
[Defendant]: Ok. I am sorry I am here buddy but I didn’t do this,
okay?
[Son]: Yep.
[Defendant]: All right? I didn’t do this.
[Son]: I know.
[Defendant]: I wasn’t even there that night.
[Son]: Oh-I seen you leave.
[Defendant]: Huh?
[Son]: I said I seen you leave.
[Defendant]: No you didn’t.
[Son]: That’s when I, I woke up -- when you left.
[Defendant]: No you didn’t. You didn’t see me buddy, ok?
[Son]: I know that.
[Defendant]: Alright I love you.
[Son]: I love you too.
When the defendant spoke with his father, he denied this conversation took
place.
On October 11, as part of their investigation of the murders, the police
spoke to Dwayne, who told them about the bat. Although the police were
4
unable to find the bat in Drew Pond when they first looked for it, a fish and
game conservation officer saw it floating in the pond four days later. The
officer contacted the police, who retrieved it.
Autopsies performed on the victims’ bodies confirmed that their deaths
were homicides by blunt injuries to the head that resulted in fractures of the
skull and injuries to the brain. The medical examiner who conducted the
autopsy of King’s body testified that it “would [have] take[n] a lot of force” to
cause the extent of his injuries. The medical examiner who conducted the
autopsy of Riley’s body testified that the force used to cause her injuries “was
enough to tear the skin and lift off a flap off the surface of the skull.” The
medical examiners testified that the injuries were consistent with being struck
by a baseball bat.
B. Motions in Limine
Before trial, the defendant moved in limine to introduce evidence related
to aggressive, hostile or illegal behavior involving the victims and various
neighbors. For instance, the defendant sought to introduce evidence that
approximately two months before the murders, King “was in a fight with Victor
Archibault over $5.00,” and that approximately one month before the murders,
he fought with “Paul Frederick,” spreading a rumor that Frederick was a
pedophile. The defendant also sought to introduce evidence about incidents
that occurred closer in time to the murders, such as that on the day before the
murders, Annemarie tried to run Riley off the road and later said, “You’ll get
yours, wait till tonight.” The defendant argued: “Evidence that the victims
engaged in a pattern of violent, threatening and illegal behavior towards other
persons supports the defense because it makes it likely that another person
was provoked to kill them.” The State contended that the evidence was
inadmissible because it did not directly connect any of the other alleged
perpetrators to the victims’ murders. See generally McCord, “But Perry Mason
Made It Look So Easy!”: The Admissibility Of Evidence Offered By A Criminal
Defendant to Suggest That Someone Else Is Guilty, 63 Tenn. L. Rev. 917 (1995-
1996).
The trial court ruled that the evidence was inadmissible to show that
other people had a motive to kill the victims, but that the defendant could use
some of the evidence to cross-examine witnesses about their biases and
motives to lie. The evidence was not admitted at trial, however, because the
State did not call any of the people whom the defendant alleged were possible
perpetrators and, thus, did not give the defense an opportunity to use the
evidence to impeach.
The defendant also moved in limine to exclude the testimony of the
keeper of the records for Cellco Partnership d/b/a Verizon Wireless. The State
indicated that it intended to call this witness to testify about “call detail
5
records” relating to phone calls allegedly made from the defendant’s and
Dwayne’s cell phones. The State contended that the call detail records showed
that the defendant placed a call at 3:35 a.m., approximately twenty minutes
before the murders, and that the call was transmitted by way of a cell phone
tower located at 650 Elm Street in Manchester, approximately one-half mile
from the homicide scene.
The defendant argued that the call detail records were scientific in nature
and admissible only through expert witness testimony. See Wilder v. State,
991 A.2d 172, 198 (Md. Ct. Spec. App.), cert. denied, 415 Md. 43 (2010). He
also argued that the records should be excluded as unreliable because the
technology upon which they are based does not meet the Daubert standard of
reliability. See Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579
(1993); Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-Rand, 148 N.H. 609, 614 (2002)
(adopting Daubert standard).
The State countered that the keeper of the records need not be an expert,
but could offer lay testimony about the cell phone detail records. See Perez v.
State, 980 So. 2d 1126, 1130-32 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2008). The State further
contended that the Daubert standard did not apply to the cell phone detail
records themselves. See State v. Robinson, 724 N.W.2d 35, 68-69 (Neb. 2006),
abrogated on other grounds by State v. Thorpe, 783 N.W.2d 749 (Neb. 2010).
The trial court ruled that the cell phone records were admissible under
the business records exception set forth in New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
803(6). The trial court further ruled that expert witness testimony was not
required and that a Daubert hearing was unnecessary. At trial, the call detail
records were received into evidence, and the keeper of the cell phone records
testified that an outgoing call was placed from the defendant’s cell phone at
3:35 a.m. on October 11 and that the call connected through a tower located at
650 Elm Street in Manchester.
The jury convicted the defendant on two first-degree murder charges.
This appeal followed.
II. Harmless Error
The defendant argues that the trial court erred when it barred him from
presenting evidence that would have substantiated his claim that someone else
killed the victims and when it allowed the State to introduce the call detail
records and testimony of the keeper of those records. The State counters that
even if the trial court erred in these respects, any error was harmless.
Assuming, arguendo, that the trial court erred by excluding the other
perpetrator evidence and admitting the cell phone evidence, after reviewing the
record, we conclude that the State has satisfied its burden of proving that
these errors were harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.
6
To establish that an error was harmless, the State must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the error did not affect the verdict. State v. Etienne, 146
N.H. 115, 118 (2001). This standard applies to both the erroneous admission
and exclusion of evidence. See id. (excluding evidence); State v. Gordon, 161
N.H. 410, 416-17 (2011) (admitting evidence). An error may be harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt if the alternative evidence of the defendant’s guilt is
of an overwhelming nature, quantity, or weight, and if the evidence that was
improperly admitted or excluded is merely cumulative or inconsequential in
relation to the strength of the State’s evidence of guilt. See Gordon, 161 N.H.
at 416-17. In making this determination, we consider the alternative evidence
presented at trial as well as the character of the erroneously admitted or
excluded evidence itself. See id. at 416.
For the jury to convict the defendant of the first-degree murder charges,
the State had to prove, beyond a reasonable doubt, that he purposely caused
the victims’ deaths. See RSA 630:1-a, I(a), II (2007). The alternative evidence
of the defendant’s guilt included the testimony of four witnesses (Dwayne, the
defendant’s son and his friend, and another person at Annemarie’s apartment)
that the defendant was in Manchester, approximately one block from the
murders, near the time of the murders.
It also included the testimony of Riley’s daughter that she was “a
hundred percent” sure that the defendant was in the victims’ apartment
immediately after the murders were committed. Riley’s daughter testified that
on the night of the murders, she saw the defendant, holding a bat while he
walked out of the living room where the victims lay covered in blood. She
immediately recognized the defendant because she knew him from cheerleading
practice. She identified him again in a photographic array and in court.
The alternative evidence also included testimony that the defendant had
a motive for killing the victims. Shortly before the murders took place, the
defendant’s son told him that King had pelted him with a rock and Tardiff had
hit his friend in the face with a water bottle. Upon hearing this, the defendant
left his son’s room looking “agitated,” “upset,” and “visibly angry.” He then left
Annemarie’s apartment.
The alternative evidence also included the defendant’s confession.
Shortly after the defendant was seen in the victims’ apartment, Dwayne saw
him running from the apartment’s direction and heard him yell, “run and get
the F out of here.” The defendant then confessed: “I think I just killed
someone. . . . [T]here was a guy and a girl, and I think one of them’s dead.”
Further, the alternative evidence included evidence linking the defendant
to the murder weapon. Riley’s daughter saw the defendant in the victims’
apartment holding a silver and black baseball bat. Shortly after the murders
were committed, Dwyane saw an aluminum bat in the backseat of Delane’s
7
SUV. When they arrived at Drew Pond, Dwayne exited the vehicle while the
defendant “took off walking to the rear of the vehicle.” When Dwayne returned
to the vehicle, he noticed that the bat was no longer there. An aluminum bat
was discovered floating in the pond approximately four days later.
Finally, the alternative evidence included evidence showing that the
defendant was conscious of his guilt. For several hours after the murders, he
and Dwayne drove to Manchester, Weare, Concord, and then back to Weare,
where the defendant was eventually arrested, after having hidden from the
police at a dam near his apartment. See State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 335
(2005) (consciousness of guilt may be evidenced by flight). After he was
arrested, the defendant telephoned his girlfriend and his son, insisting to both
that he was not in Manchester on the night of the murders. See State v.
Evans, 150 N.H. 416, 420 (2003) (consciousness of guilt may be evidenced by
exculpatory statements later discovered to be false). He told his son, in
response to the son’s statement that he had seen the defendant the night of the
murders: “No you didn’t. You didn’t see me buddy, ok?” See Nguyen v. State,
543 S.E.2d 5, 12 (Ga. 2001) (defendant’s attempt to influence witness is
evidence of consciousness of guilt).
Against this evidence, the cell phone evidence was merely cumulative.
Even if it had not been admitted, there was ample evidence that the defendant
was at or near the crime scene around the time of the murders. In addition,
compared to the evidence of the defendant’s motive and opportunity to commit
the murders, the alternative perpetrator evidence the defendant proferred in
his motion in limine was inconsequential. Whereas there was evidence that the
defendant was at the crime scene around the time of the murders, confessed to
killing at least one person, and was seen with the murder weapon, there was
no such evidence about any of the alleged alternative perpetrators. In fact, one
of the alleged perpetrators was elsewhere in Manchester when the murders
occurred. Another was in her apartment with others when the murders were
committed. Based upon our review of the record, we conclude that the State
has met its burden of proving that any error was harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
Affirmed.
DUGGAN, HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8