THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-613
DAVID ELLIS
v.
CANDIA TRAILERS AND SNOW EQUIPMENT, INC. & a.
Argued: October 11, 2012
Opinion Issued: December 21, 2012
Orr & Reno, P.A., of Concord (James F. Laboe and Robert S. Carey on the
brief, and Mr. Laboe orally), for the petitioner.
Emile R. Bussiere, Jr., of Manchester, by brief and orally, for the
respondents.
LYNN, J. The petitioner, David Ellis,1 appeals an order of the Superior
Court (McNamara, J.) rescinding a non-compete agreement and ordering
partial restitution as a remedy, and finding the New Hampshire Consumer
1 Although Precision Truck and Body Equipment, Inc. (Precision Truck) is also named as a
petitioner in the underlying action, Ellis admits that all claims in this appeal “accrue solely to the
benefit of David Ellis and, therefore, David Ellis is the only party to this appeal.”
Protection Act (CPA), RSA ch. 358-A (2009), inapplicable to the respondents’
conduct. The respondents, Candia Trailers and Snow Equipment, Inc.2 and its
principals, Jeffrey Goff (Goff) and Suzanne Goff, cross-appeal the rescission of
the non-compete agreement. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
The trial court found the following facts. Since the 1980s, the Goffs
owned and Goff operated Precision Truck, a business which sold and installed
truck bed parts, bed linings, and various accessories. In 2006, the Goffs sold
Precision Truck to Ellis, memorializing the agreement in three documents: an
Asset Purchase Agreement (APA), a Non-Compete Agreement (NCA), and an
Inventory Purchase Agreement (IPA).
Ellis signed the APA on February 22, 2006, agreeing to pay $20,000 for
Precision Truck’s assets, including its good will, i.e., the business’s name,
telephone numbers, customer lists, working agreements, advertising materials,
etc. The APA also contained a consulting agreement and tenancy agreement,
which provided that Ellis would operate Precision Truck at its existing premises
for ninety days after the closing, during which time Goff would work there as a
full-time consultant. The APA specified that Ellis’s obligations were
conditioned on the Goffs executing the NCA and IPA.
On March 23, 2006, the Goffs executed the NCA, agreeing not to compete
with Ellis in his operation of Precision Truck and, among other things, “not [to]
solicit, divert or take away, the business or patronage of any of the customers
of [Precision Truck] with whom [it] has had a relationship prior to the execution
of the [APA].” The NCA provided that, under the terms of the APA, Ellis agreed
to purchase the business assets of Precision Truck, including the company’s
good will, and that Ellis “would not acquire the business without Goffs’
covenant not to compete.” Each party acknowledged that the other “would
suffer irreparable harm and would not have adequate remedy at law for the
material breach of [the NCA], even though some damages may be provable.”
The parties agreed that equitable remedies, including injunctive relief, would be
available in case of breach. Ellis paid $340,000 to the Goffs for executing the
NCA.
Although the NCA was to remain in effect for seven years, it would expire
much sooner – on June 1, 2007 – if Ellis breached the third agreement, the
IPA. The IPA obligated Ellis to buy Precision Truck’s remaining inventory at
cost by June 1, 2007, and “[i]f [Ellis] fails to fulfill this covenant, . . . Jeffrey
Goff shall be relieved of [his] obligations under the Non-Compete Agreement.”
2 Candia Trailers and Snow Equipment, Inc. is the name given to the business which Jeffrey Goff
retained after selling Precision Truck to Ellis. Although named as a respondent, it plays no role in
the facts or analysis relevant to this appeal.
2
Within a few weeks of signing the NCA, and in violation of its terms, Goff
began competing with Precision Truck. Ellis thereafter failed to purchase all of
Precision Truck’s inventory by June 1, 2007.
Ellis sued the respondents for breach of contract and violation of the
CPA, asking the court, among other things, to rescind the NCA. Although he
had initially included a claim for damages, Ellis ultimately opted to proceed to
trial only on his claims seeking rescission and restitution for breach of the NCA
and violation of the CPA.
The trial court found that the NCA, IPA, and APA were three separate
agreements, each with its own terms, obligations, and remedies for breach.
The court also found that Goff breached the NCA and that Ellis breached the
IPA. Because Ellis failed to purchase Precision Truck’s remaining inventory by
June 1, 2007, the trial court ruled that the NCA remained in effect only until
that date. Nevertheless, because the court found that Goff materially breached
the NCA almost immediately after signing it and acted as though the NCA did
not exist, it rescinded the NCA and awarded Ellis partial restitution.
Having found that the NCA was severable from the IPA and APA, the
court calculated a restitution award for breach of the NCA by dividing its total
value, $340,000, by its intended duration of seven years, or eighty-four
months. Multiplying the monthly value by the number of months during which
Goff owed Ellis an obligation not to compete, i.e., until June 2007, the court
awarded Ellis the resulting amount, $60,714.28. The court rejected Ellis’s CPA
claim, finding the statute inapplicable because the sale of Precision Truck to
Ellis was an isolated sale. This appeal and cross-appeal followed.
Both parties argue that the trial court unsustainably exercised its
discretion when it rescinded the NCA and awarded partial restitution to Ellis.
The respondents argue that: (1) the evidence presented to the court was
insufficient to support a finding of material breach justifying rescission; and (2)
rescinding the NCA alone was improper because the NCA was not severable
from the IPA and APA. Ellis, on the other hand, argues that partial restitution
did not go far enough to return him to the status quo because Goff was allowed
to retain the bulk of the consideration he received for the agreement (the NCA)
he breached. Ellis also argues that the trial court erred when it found the CPA
inapplicable. Because we conclude that the trial court erred when it found the
NCA, APA, and IPA to be severable, we reverse its order rescinding the NCA
alone and ordering partial restitution.
“Rescission is an equitable remedy the granting of which is always a
matter within the sound discretion of the trial court, depending upon the
circumstances of each particular case.” Mooney v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co.,
3
149 N.H. 355, 357 (2003) (quotation omitted). Equitable rescission, with
restitution, is a remedy that restores the injured party to the position occupied
before the transaction, id., and “rests upon the relative equities of the parties
as determined by the trial court.” Derouin v. Granite State Realty, Inc., 123
N.H. 145, 147-48 (1983). If the status quo cannot be restored, a party cannot
obtain rescission and must seek damages instead. 12A C.J.S. Cancellation of
Instruments; Rescission § 80, at 558 (2004).
If a contract is part of a larger agreement, it may be rescinded only if it is
severable from that larger agreement; if it is not, the entire agreement must be
rescinded.
The general rule undoubtedly is that a right to rescind applies to
the whole of the contract and cannot be exercised as to a part only.
. . . .
Usually where partial rescission is allowed it is founded on the
proposition that the contract is severable and for rescission
purposes is to be regarded as embracing two or more contracts.
Annotation, Partial Rescission of Contract, 148 A.L.R. 417, 418, 423 (1944); cf.
Pearson v. Baldwin, 81 N.H. 247, 249 (1924) (“[A]n entire, indivisible contract
. . . must . . . stand or fall in its entirety.”).
The trial court found the APA, IPA, and NCA to be severable and
rescinded the NCA alone. “[Severability] requires that the parties’ promises and
considerations be capable of apportionment, so that each promise and its
corresponding consideration is analogous to a separate contract.” Technical
Aid Corp. v. Allen, 134 N.H. 1, 18 (1991).
[Whether a contract is severable or indivisible] depends upon the
intention of the parties as shown by the terms and formal
character of the documents which they used to express their
intention, when read in the light of the circumstances under which
the documents were made. In other words, the court is called
upon to interpret the documents. This is a question of law, the
decision of which is reviewable in this court.
Kidd v. Traction Co., 74 N.H. 160, 170 (1907) (citation omitted). We review
questions of law de novo. In the Matter of Taber-McCarthy & McCarthy, 160
N.H. 112, 115 (2010).
4
We conclude that the NCA is not severable from the IPA and APA
because, by their terms, the agreements are interdependent.
As an aid to ascertaining the intention of the parties [to treat the
contract as severable], it is proper to consider whether the contract
is to be performed only as a whole and whether each and all of its
parts are interdependent and common to one another and to the
consideration, or whether it is susceptible of division and
apportionment.
77A C.J.S. Sales § 157, at 224 (2008); cf. Allen, 134 N.H. at 18. Although the
parties structured the sale of Precision Truck as three separate agreements,
the APA made Ellis’s obligations under it contingent upon the Goffs executing
the NCA and Ellis executing the IPA. The NCA referenced the APA and stated
that Ellis would not buy Precision Truck’s assets unless the Goffs signed the
NCA. In addition, the duration of the NCA was contingent upon Ellis’s
performance under the IPA: if he failed to purchase Precision Truck’s inventory
by a fixed date, Goff’s obligations under the NCA would terminate seven years
earlier than if Ellis completed the inventory purchase. Because, in one way or
another, each agreement was contingent on the other two, they “resulted from
a single assent to the whole matter” and “were part of one single undertaking.”
Maloney v. Company, 98 N.H. 78, 83 (1953).
The trial court correctly noted that each agreement is, on its face,
supported by separate consideration. This, however, is not dispositive of
whether the agreements are severable.
Where the agreements of parties relate to the whole of the
consideration on both sides, the promises are dependent, and one
of them is a condition precedent to the other; but if the agreements
refer to a part only of the consideration on both sides, and a
breach may be paid for in damages, the promises may be regarded
as independent.
Gilman v. Berry, 59 N.H. 62, 64 (1879); see Robinson v. Crowninshield, 1 N.H.
76, 79-80 (1817) (“[W]here mutual contracts go only to a part of the
consideration, and a breach of that part may be paid for in damages, the
defendant shall not set it up as a condition precedent, and the covenants in
such case are . . . independent.” (citation omitted)).
The primary asset transferred to Ellis under the APA was Precision
Truck’s good will, in exchange for $20,000. To protect that good will, Ellis
5
required the Goffs to sign the NCA and paid them $340,000, the bulk of the
consideration paid for the sale of the business.3 On the surface, the IPA had
the least amount of consideration in support of it, given that it merely required
Ellis to purchase inventory at cost. However, the effect of the IPA stripped
Precision Truck’s good will of the protections stemming from the NCA in one
year instead of seven in case of Ellis’s breach. As a result, all three
agreements, in one way or another, “relate to the whole of the consideration on
both sides,” i.e., the protection of Precision Truck’s good will by obligating the
Goffs not to compete and incentivizing Ellis to keep the NCA intact. Cf.
Carleton v. Woods, 28 N.H. 290, 294-95 (1854) (“The sale and delivery of each
article formed the consideration, in this case, for the promise to pay the price of
it. The contract was divisible.”).
Furthermore, both Goff and Ellis testified that they perceived the APA,
IPA, and NCA as one agreement. Ellis agreed that the APA “was all part of one
bundle” and that “[n]ot one of these agreements meant much of anything
without the others.” Goff testified that he too “always looked at it as one
complete agreement.” “[R]ead in the light of the circumstances under which
the documents were made,” the APA, IPA, and NCA were intended as an entire,
indivisible agreement. Kidd, 74 N.H. at 170; see Robinson, 1 N.H. at 79
(“[Whether all parts of an agreement are dependent and inseparable] is to be
determined by the intent of the parties, as evinced by the language and nature
of the whole contract.” (citation omitted)); Piper v. Boston & Railroad, 75 N.H.
435, 439 (1910); see also MacLeod v. Chalet Susse Int’l. Inc., 119 N.H. 238,
243 (1979) (“Intent . . . should be determined not only in light of the
instrument itself, but also in view of all the surrounding circumstances.”
(quotation omitted)).
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court erred as a matter of law when it
ruled that the IPA, APA, and NCA were severable. Kidd, 74 N.H. at 170.
Because the NCA was not severable from the IPA and APA, it could not be
rescinded without rescinding the IPA and APA as well. Annotation, supra, 148
A.L.R. at 418, 423.
Given that the three agreements were interdependent and that it
therefore was improper to grant rescission of the NCA alone, we reverse the
3 The disproportional allocation of consideration may also reflect the parties’ intent to treat the
agreements as indivisible.
If the part to be performed by one party consists of several distinct and separate
items, and the price to be paid by the other is proportional to each item to be
performed, . . .such a contract will generally be held to be severable. But
if the consideration to be paid is single and entire, the contract must be held to
be entire, although the subject of the contract may consist of several distinct
and independent items.
Hale v. Brown, 59 N.H. 551, 557 (1880) (quotations omitted; emphasis added).
6
award of $60,714.28 in restitution and remand to the trial court to determine
what remedies, if any, are available.
Turning to Ellis’s CPA claim, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of this
claim. RSA 358-A:2 (2009) declares it “unlawful for any person to use any
unfair method of competition or any unfair or deceptive act or practice in the
conduct of any trade or commerce within this state.” The CPA broadly defines
trade and commerce as “the advertising, offering for sale, sale, or distribution
of any services and any property, tangible or intangible, real, personal or
mixed, and any other article, commodity, or thing of value wherever situate,
and shall include any trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the
people of this state.” RSA 358-A:1, II. We have held that the scope of the CPA
is narrower than its broad language may suggest, and that it does not
encompass isolated sales or contracts that are not undertaken in the ordinary
course of a trade or business. See Hughes v. DiSalvo, 143 N.H. 576, 578
(1999).
To determine whether the Consumer Protection Act applies to a
particular transaction, we analyze the activity involved, the nature
of the transaction, and the parties to determine whether a
transaction is a personal or business transaction. . . . Remedies
under the Consumer Protection Act are not available where the
transaction is strictly private in nature, and is in no way
undertaken in the ordinary course of a trade or business. . . .
Similarly, isolated sales of property by an owner are not subject to
the Consumer Protection Act. The purpose of the Act is to ensure
an equitable relationship between consumers and persons engaged
in business.
Id. (quotations and citations omitted); accord Milliken & Co. v. Duro Textiles,
LLC, 887 N.E.2d 244, 259 (Mass. 2008) (“[A]nalysis of the applicability of [the
Massachusetts CPA] requires a dual inquiry whether there was a commercial
transaction between a person engaged in trade or commerce and another
person engaged in trade or commerce, such that they were acting in a
‘business context.’”).
Ellis concedes that the sale of Precision Truck “was an isolated, one time
transaction for both parties.” The CPA, therefore, does not apply because
involvement in a single transaction is insufficient to constitute engagement in
trade or commerce. Chase v. Dorais, 122 N.H. 600, 601-02 (1982); cf. Frost v.
Comm’r, N.H. Banking Dep’t, 163 N.H. 365, 376 (2012). We agree with the
trial court that “Goff was not in the business of selling his business and the
parties were on equal footing at the sale.” The sale of Precision Truck
constituted an “isolated sale[] of property by an owner” and was “in no way
7
undertaken in the ordinary course of [the respondents’] trade or business” of
selling and installing truck bed parts, bed linings, etc. Hughes, 143 N.H. at
578.
Ellis argues that Goff’s conduct after the sale of the business, rather
than the sale itself, violated the CPA. He asserts that by competing with
Precision Truck, Goff breached what was the cornerstone of the entire
transaction, and argues that, together, the NCA and the sale of Precision Truck
constituted an “ongoing business relationship.” We are not persuaded. As was
the case with the lease-purchase agreement between the parties that was the
subject of the CPA claim in Hughes, the mere fact that the business sale here
at issue contemplated performance by the parties over a period of time is not
sufficient to bring it within the ambit of the CPA where the overall transaction
remained a single, isolated event rather than an on-going course of trade or
commerce. See id. (a lease-purchase agreement was an isolated transaction
outside the CPA notwithstanding the ongoing landlord-tenant relationship
between the parties).
Finally, we address the respondents’ argument on cross-appeal that the
evidence presented to the court was insufficient to support a finding that Goff’s
breach of the NCA was material and thus justified rescission and restitution.
See Patch v. Arsenault, 139 N.H. 313, 318 (1995) (rescission and restitution
may only be awarded if the breach is material). We conclude that the trial
court had sufficient evidence to support its finding that Goff materially
breached the NCA.
Whether a breach of contract is material is a question of fact, see Fitz v.
Coutinho, 136 N.H. 721, 725 (1993), and we will uphold the trial court’s
findings of fact and rulings of law unless they lack evidentiary support or
constitute a clear error of law, see McNeal v. Lebel, 157 N.H. 458, 461 (2008).
We defer to the trial court’s judgment on such issues as resolving conflicts in
testimony, assessing the credibility of witnesses, and determining the weight of
the evidence. Cook v. Sullivan, 149 N.H. 774, 780 (2003). Our standard of
review is not whether we would rule differently, but whether a reasonable
person could have reached the same decision as the trial court based upon the
same evidence. Id.
The respondents argue that the court lacked evidence to find that Goff’s
breach of the NCA was material because the petitioners did not present any
evidence of damages at trial. In effect, the respondents argue that the
materiality of a breach cannot be proved without evidence of damages. We
disagree.
[F]or a breach of contract to be material, it must “go to the root” or
“essence” of the agreement between the parties, or be “one which
8
touches the fundamental purpose of the contract and defeats the
object of the parties in entering into the contract.” A breach is
“material” if a party fails to perform a substantial part of the
contract or one or more of its essential terms or conditions, the
breach substantially defeats the contract's purpose, or the breach
is such that upon a reasonable interpretation of the contract, the
parties considered the breach as vital to the existence of the
contract.
23 Williston on Contracts § 63:3, at 438-39 (4th ed.) (footnotes omitted;
emphasis added). The absence of proof of damages is not dispositive of
whether a breach is material.
In many cases, a material breach of contract is proved by the
established amount of the monetary damages flowing from the
breach; however, proof of a specific amount of monetary damages
is not required when the evidence establishes that the breach was
so central to the parties’ agreement that it defeated the essential
purpose of the contract.
Id. at 439 (emphasis added).
The NCA contained the following provision: “Buyer would not acquire the
business without Goff’s covenant not to compete, as set forth herein.” Because
the NCA itself makes it clear that the promise not to compete is vital to the
existence of the contract, the trial court had sufficient basis to find Goff’s
breach material, notwithstanding the absence of proof of damages.
We also reject the respondents’ argument that the evidence does not
support a finding of material breach justifying restitution because the trial
court found “only 8 breaches of the Non-Compete Agreement” and did not
address the significance of these breaches.
Although the relationship between the monetary loss to the injured
party as a result of the failure and the contract price may be
significant, no simple rule based on the ratio of the one to the
other can be laid down, and here, . . . all relevant circumstances
must be considered [when determining whether a breach is
material].
Restatement (Second) of Contracts § 241 (b), at 238-39 (1981). The relevant
circumstances which the trial court considered included Goff’s
acknowledgement that he proceeded as though the NCA were void as early as
May 2006, and that he competed with Precision Truck within weeks of signing
9
the NCA. The evidence supports the court’s finding that, regardless of the
number of breaches, Goff’s actions went to the heart of the transaction and
constituted a material breach. See Patch, 139 N.H. at 318.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
10