THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2010-290
ERIC LEE KNIGHT
v.
CHERYL ANN MAHER
Submitted: March 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 14, 2011
Eric Lee Knight, by brief, pro se.
Cheryl Ann Maher, by brief, pro se.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Cheryl Ann Maher, appeals an order of the
Derry Family Division (Moore, J.) granting a final domestic violence protective
order to the plaintiff, Eric Lee Knight. See RSA 173-B:5, I(a) (Supp. 2010). We
reverse.
The relevant facts follow. The parties are former spouses who together
have three children: twin sixteen-year-old daughters and a ten-year-old son. In
October 2009, the parties entered into an agreement wherein the plaintiff
assumed primary residential responsibility for the parties’ children. The
defendant maintains visitation with the children.
On March 18, 2010, the plaintiff, who is a physician, filed a domestic
violence petition seeking an order of protection from the defendant. In his
petition, the plaintiff asserted that the defendant sent numerous threatening
and harassing emails and text messages to him, made false accusations
against him in the local and national news with the intent to harm him
personally and professionally, and filed false reports against him with police
departments, the New Hampshire Board of Medicine (NHBM), and the New
Hampshire Division for Children, Youth, and Families (DCYF). The plaintiff
asserted that “[g]iven [the defendant’s] mental state and the social circles she is
in” he had “concerns for [the] safety of [his] person and property,” as well as
concerns about the financial impact the defendant’s actions could have upon
him.
The trial court held a hearing on the plaintiff’s petition on April 19, 2010,
at which both parties were present. The plaintiff submitted a number of
exhibits to the trial court, including emails and text messages that he received
from the defendant, which he alleged to be threatening in nature. He also
submitted news articles in which the defendant was quoted as stating that the
plaintiff had been an abusive husband, that he arranged for “hush money”
payments to her from a man she later accused of sexual assault, and that he
had caused harm to their children. The plaintiff testified as follows:
My concern about risk to property and person is not so much
directly from Cheryl. It’s because she’s going around telling a lot of
people all this stuff and, you know, making me out to be this
monster with all these things that are absolutely untrue. And the
crowd that she hangs out with are basically the ones over there at
the Friendship Center. It includes a lot of people who have
criminal records. And my concern has been, with all of these
bizarre things that she’s saying – and it evolves over time – it
becomes worse over time – that someone who considers – who
believes her – someone who doesn’t know the whole story and
doesn’t know the other side of the issue – might take it upon
themselves to try to get justice when she claims that she’s not
getting justice through any of the proper things.
. . . .
And through any of the proper channels. And so my concern is for
my safety and safety of property, not so much directly from what
she may do, as a result of all this stuff that she’s doing in media,
in talking to people and describing things – making things up the
way she’s doing.
The defendant admitted to sending the plaintiff the emails and text
messages in question, and further admitted to contacting news media and
making statements that she understood would negatively affect the defendant’s
livelihood as a physician and his reputation in the community. Nevertheless,
2
the defendant denied that any of her statements to news outlets about the
plaintiff were false or that she made them to cause him harm. She testified
that her numerous communications with the plaintiff were her attempt to force
him into taking her to court because she believes he does not “listen to [her]
when it comes to [the] children and their needs.” She further testified that she
believed the plaintiff’s position as a doctor and member of the Mormon Church
has given him credibility and that, in fact, it is the plaintiff who has caused
harm to her and their children.
After the hearing, the trial court granted the plaintiff’s request for a
protective order. The trial court concluded as follows:
This Court is entering a specific finding that based upon the intent
behind the Defendant’s actions and her acknowledgement that her
purpose in engaging [in] said contact was to force the Plaintiff to
“take her back to Court” that her continuation with that course of
conduct despite the Plaintiff’s numerous requests to cease and
desist constitutes harassment under RSA 644:4 and that the
Defendant’s acknowledgement that her continued involvement in
[the] aforementioned campaign would negatively affect the
Plaintiff’s emotional and psychological state as well as his
professional reputation demonstrates to this Court that the
[Defendant’s] purpose in the above referenced course of conduct
was to annoy or alarm the Plaintiff without a lawful purpose or
constitutional right to do so. The Court, based on the totality of
the circumstances surrounding the Defendant[’]s aforementioned
course of conduct finds the Plaintiff’s statement that:
Given her mental state and the social circles she is in
this has raised concerns for [the] safety of my person
and property, as well as causing me to lose income by
missing work to deal with all of this[,]
to be a reasonable concern of the Plaintiff warranting Court
intervention.
The sole issue on appeal is whether the evidence supports the trial
court’s findings that the defendant committed one of the acts enumerated in
RSA chapter 173-B, and that this conduct constituted a credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety.
RSA chapter 173-B governs the protection of persons from domestic
violence. The purpose of this chapter “is to preserve and protect the safety of
the family unit for all family members by entitling victims of domestic violence
to immediate and effective police protection and judicial relief.” Walker v.
Walker, 158 N.H. 602, 605 (2009) (quotation and ellipsis omitted).
3
Pursuant to RSA 173-B:3, I (Supp. 2010), “[a]ny person may seek relief
. . . by filing a petition, in the county or district where the plaintiff or defendant
resides, alleging abuse by the defendant.” “A finding of abuse shall mean the
defendant represents a credible threat to the safety of the plaintiff.” RSA 173-
B:5, I (Supp. 2010). “Upon a showing of abuse of the plaintiff by a
preponderance of the evidence, the court shall grant such relief as is necessary
to bring about a cessation of abuse.” Id. “Abuse,” as defined in RSA chapter
173-B, means “the commission or attempted commission” of certain
enumerated acts, such as harassment, by a spouse or former spouse, “where
such conduct constitutes a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety.” RSA 173-
B:1, I (Supp. 2010).
The defendant does not dispute that the petition alleges one of the acts
enumerated in RSA 173-B:1, I – harassment. Nevertheless, she argues that the
protective order should not have been granted because all of the requirements
of RSA chapter 173-B and RSA 644:4 (Supp. 2010) were not met. Assuming,
without deciding, that the defendant’s conduct met the criteria for harassment
under RSA 644:4, we hold that the evidence fails to support the trial court’s
finding that the defendant’s conduct constituted a credible threat to the
plaintiff’s safety.
“[W]e review sufficiency of the evidence claims as a matter of law, and
uphold the findings and rulings of the trial court unless they are lacking in
evidential support or tainted by error of law.” Fillmore v. Fillmore, 147 N.H.
283, 284 (2001) (quotation omitted); see RSA 173-B:3, VI (Supp. 2010). When
performing this review, “[w]e accord considerable weight to the trial court’s
judgments on the credibility of witnesses and the weight to be given testimony.”
Fillmore, 147 N.H. at 285.
Domestic violence protective orders are to be utilized when a victim has
shown a need for protection from an ongoing, credible threat to his or her
safety. RSA 173-B:5, I; Walker, 158 N.H. at 605. Given this statutory
objective, we have required a plaintiff to show more than a generalized fear for
personal safety based upon non-violent harassment to support a finding that a
credible threat to his safety exists. In the Matter of Alexander and Evans, 147
N.H. 441, 441-43 (2002) (holding that while unwanted telephone calls and rude
gestures made by the defendant to the plaintiff were enough to support a
finding of harassment, they were insufficient to support a finding that the
defendant’s conduct constituted a credible threat to the plaintiff’s safety).
Here, while there may have been substantial evidence that the
defendant’s conduct negatively affected the plaintiff’s emotional or financial
well-being at the time he filed his domestic violence petition, there was
insufficient evidence to support a finding that the defendant represented an
ongoing, credible threat to the plaintiff’s physical safety, and that therefore he
4
was in need of protection. Indeed, the plaintiff conceded that he did not feel
the defendant herself posed a risk to his safety, and he presented no evidence
that the defendant had in any way threatened his safety at any time. The
plaintiff’s concern for his safety was based upon his speculation that as a
result of the defendant’s statements about him, unknown persons might take it
upon themselves to harm him. We conclude that the evidence in this case does
not support a finding that the defendant’s conduct posed a credible threat to
the plaintiff’s safety. Accordingly, it was error for the trial court to enter a final
domestic violence protective order against the defendant.
Reversed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
5