THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
10th Circuit Court – Derry Family Division
No. 2011-736
IN THE MATTER OF GABRIELLE MULLER AND WILLIAM MULLER
Argued: September 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: January 11, 2013
Primmer Piper Eggleston & Cramer, PC, of Manchester (Doreen F.
Connor on the brief and orally), for the respondent.
Bossie & Wilson, PLLC, of Manchester (Andrew K. Wilson on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
CONBOY, J. In this appeal from a final divorce decree issued by the
10th Circuit Court – Derry Family Division (Moore, J.), the respondent, William
Muller, appeals the trial court’s rulings apportioning the equity in the marital
home and imputing $68,000 in annual income to him for child support
purposes. We affirm in part, vacate in part, and remand.
The following facts are drawn from the record. The petitioner, Gabrielle
Muller (Wife), and William Muller (Husband) married in October 2006 and have
one minor child, born in July 2007. The parties purchased a home in Auburn
in November 2006 with funds from a mortgage loan in the amount of $200,000
from Bank of America, N.A. and $186,332.23 in cash from the Husband’s
parents. The marital home is in the Husband’s name. The parties agreed that
at the time of trial the home was worth $340,000.
At trial, the parties disagreed as to whether the $186,332.23 from the
Husband’s parents was a loan or a gift: the Husband asserted that the money
was lent by his parents pursuant to an oral agreement; the Wife understood
the money to be a gift, and asserted that the Husband’s parents never
indicated that they expected to be repaid. At the time the home was
purchased, no second mortgage was filed with the registry of deeds.
In August 2009, nearly three years after the purchase of the marital
home, the Husband executed a promissory note to his parents in the amount of
$186,332.23, which was signed by the Husband and his father. The
typewritten date on the note was November 22, 2006, but the Husband did not
actually sign the note until August 18, 2009. Approximately one month later,
in September 2009, the Wife filed for divorce. On October 14, 2009, the
Husband filed with the registry of deeds an undated mortgage deed to his
parents, which referenced a November 22, 2006 promissory note. Only the
Husband signed the mortgage deed. The deed was attested to by a notary who
did not indicate when the Husband signed it.
Eleven months before trial, the Husband was terminated from his job for
poor job performance after multiple warnings. He remained unemployed up to
the time of trial.
After a final evidentiary hearing, the trial court awarded the Wife a fault-
based divorce pursuant to RSA 458:7, V (2004) (fault based on treatment so as
to seriously injure health or endanger reason). In allocating the marital debt,
the trial court ruled that the Husband was to be “solely responsible for any
obligation due his parents relative to the marital residence.” The court ordered
that the residence “shall immediately be placed on the market for sale . . . at a
reasonably competitive price,” which the court expected would “maximize[ ] the
net proceeds after payment of the first mortgage, taxes, and standard closing
costs.” (Emphasis added.) The court ordered “the net proceeds of the property”
to be “divided equally between the parties.” It continued: “In entering the
aforementioned order, this Court is entering a specific finding that it does not
find the [Husband’s] representations that the parties agreed to [a] $180,000
loan from the [Husband’s] parents to be credible.” After marshaling the factual
bases for its opinion that the Husband and his parents drafted the promissory
note and second mortgage in “an attempt to divest the [Wife] of any interest in
the marital residence,” the trial court ruled that the note and mortgage did not
“evidence a valid debt.” The court concluded its order evenly dividing the
equity in the marital residence by noting:
Due to the fact that this Court is entering a finding that [the
Husband’s parents’] contribution to the marital residence is not
recognized as a debt this Court is left with no other option than to
2
determine that it was initially a gift to the [Husband] and as such
has no bearing on the disposition/division of the equity in the
marital residence.
The court also found the Husband voluntarily unemployed/underemployed
(hereinafter “unemployed”), and, in calculating child support, imputed $68,000
in annual income to him.
On appeal, the Husband argues that: (1) the trial court erred as a matter
of law by effectively ordering the parties to disregard the $186,332.23
promissory note and mortgage deed to the Husband’s parents; (2) the trial
court unsustainably exercised its discretion by failing to award the Husband
the $186,332.23 payment from the Husband’s parents in view of the fact that
the court characterized it as a gift; (3) the trial court unsustainably exercised
its discretion in awarding the Wife fifty percent of the equity in the marital
home; and (4) the trial court’s finding that the Husband was voluntarily
unemployed and its decision to impute $68,000 in annual income to him were
legally erroneous and unsupported by the record.
We first address the Husband’s argument that the trial court erred as a
matter of law by disregarding the Husband’s parents’ interest in the marital
residence. He asserts that: (1) the family division lacked subject matter
jurisdiction to effectively invalidate the parents’ mortgage deed and promissory
note, since disputed claims to marital real estate asserted by third parties must
be brought in the superior court in the first instance; (2) the court’s order,
effectively abolishing the Husband’s parents’ interest, is not binding upon the
parents, since they were necessary parties to the proceeding, but did not
participate (nor could they have, since the family division lacks jurisdiction
over them); (3) the order vitiating the Husband’s parents’ property interest in
the marital residence was entered without due process of law, in violation of
their fundamental rights; and (4) the court’s order that the marital home be
sold cannot be effectuated as a practical matter since clear title could not be
conveyed while the Husband’s parents continue to hold a mortgage on the
property.
The Wife responds that the trial court did not err when it ordered the
sale of the marital residence and distribution of the resulting equity without
regard to the Husband’s parents’ interest because “the property was clearly an
asset of the marriage, however encumbered, and clearly available for
disposition as entered by the trial [c]ourt.” She agrees with the Husband that
the trial court “invalidated” the Husband’s parents’ promissory note and
mortgage deed, but contends that the recorded instruments “should not
operate to invalidate the trial [c]ourt’s [o]rder to sell the marital home,” because
the court determined that she did not agree to any obligation to the Husband’s
parents, and found that the recorded mortgage constituted fraud.
3
We note first that the Wife’s argument that the recorded mortgage posed
no impediment to the court’s disposition of the property is unavailing. “The
equitable interest of a non-owner spouse in marital property does not
super[s]ede the rights of creditors of the owner spouse during the pendency of
the couple’s divorce proceeding.” In re Skorich, 332 B.R. 77, 84 (Bankr. D.N.H.
2005); cf. In the Matter of Jasper-O’Neil & O’Neil, 149 N.H. 87, 89 (2003)
(despite parties’ stipulated division of marital property, residence remained
subject to bank’s pre-divorce attachment). Both parties’ arguments therefore
require us to analyze the family division’s jurisdiction to effectively invalidate a
third party’s mortgage interest in real property. “A court lacks power to hear or
determine a case concerning subject matters over which it has no jurisdiction.”
Daine v. Daine, 157 N.H. 426, 428 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted).
“The ultimate determination as to whether the trial court has jurisdiction in
this case is a question of law subject to de novo review.” In the Matter of O’Neil
& O’Neil, 159 N.H. 615, 622 (2010).
“The family division is a court of limited jurisdiction, with exclusive
power conferred by statute to decide cases in certain discrete areas, including
petitions for divorce.” Id. (quotation omitted). Because the powers and
jurisdiction of the family division are limited to those conferred by statute, see
In the Matter of Mallett & Mallett, 163 N.H. 202, 207 (2012), we look to the
relevant statutes to determine whether the family division had subject matter
jurisdiction to determine the validity of the Husband’s parents’ mortgage
interest, or whether, as the Husband argues, that claim must be addressed in
the superior court in the first instance. Neither party argues that the superior
court would lack jurisdiction over this dispute; the question before us is
whether the family division has jurisdiction, either exclusive or concurrent with
that of the superior court, to resolve questions of a third party’s claim of
interest in marital property.
“When undertaking statutory interpretation, we first examine the
language found in the statute and where possible, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meanings to words used.” In the Matter of Gray & Gray, 160 N.H. 62,
65 (2010) (quotation and brackets omitted). When a statute’s language is plain
and unambiguous, we need not look beyond it for further indications of
legislative intent. Id. “Courts can neither ignore the plain language of the
legislation nor add words which the lawmakers did not see fit to include.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “We interpret statutes not in isolation, but in the context
of the overall statutory scheme.” Id. (quotation omitted).
The legislature created the judicial branch family division to provide
“prompt and fair resolution of family issues by justices and marital masters
specially selected and trained to deal effectively with such issues,” and to
assign “all family matters of a single family to one family division justice or
4
marital master located in a family division court that is geographically
accessible to the family.” RSA 490-D:1 (2010) (amended 2012). To this end,
the statute provides that jurisdiction over, inter alia, “[p]etitions for divorce,
nullity of marriage, alimony, custody of children, support, and to establish
paternity,” are “exclusively exercised through the judicial branch family
division as procedurally jurisdiction was previously exercised in the superior
. . . court[ ].” RSA 490-D:2, I (2010). “Accordingly, in this state, original
jurisdiction is granted to the judicial branch family division regarding divorce
matters.” Daine, 157 N.H. at 427.
Although RSA chapter 490-D expressly defines the family division’s
jurisdiction as encompassing “divorce” generally, the overall scheme of the
relevant divorce statutes governs issues of, among other things, the division of
property and orders of support. Mallett, 163 N.H. at 209. Under these
statutes, the family division has the authority to value and divide marital
property, including in cases where the value or ownership of the assets may be
complex. See, e.g., In the Matter of Cottrell & El-Sherif, 163 N.H. 747, 748-49
(2012) (upholding family division’s valuation of divorcing party’s dental
practice). Further, the legislature’s recognition that the need to render
equitable orders is inherent in the resolution of divorce matters is reflected in
RSA 490-D:3 (2010), which provides that “the judicial branch family division
shall have the powers of a court of equity in cases where subject matter
jurisdiction lies with the judicial branch family division.”
However, RSA 458:16-a (2004) allows the family division to distribute
only property that belongs to the divorcing parties. See RSA 458:16-a, I
(“Property shall include all tangible and intangible property and assets, real or
personal, belonging to either or both parties, whether title to the property is
held in the name of either or both parties.” (emphasis added)); In the Matter of
Chamberlin & Chamberlin, 155 N.H. 13, 17 (2007) (holding that, because trust
corpus “was not an asset belonging to either or both of the parties at the time
of their divorce, the trial court did not commit legal error by excluding [it] from
the marital estate”). RSA 458:16-a, II also allows the family division to
distribute marital property only to the divorcing parties themselves. RSA
458:16-a, II (“When a dissolution of a marriage is decreed, the court may order
an equitable division of property between the parties.”); In the Matter of Beal &
Beal, 153 N.H. 349, 350 (2006) (“The plain language of [RSA 458:16-a, II]
authorizes trial courts to distribute marital property ‘between the parties.’
Nothing in the statute authorizes trial courts to order a sale of the parties’
marital assets to pay their creditors.”). “‘We believe it is sound policy to adopt
a rule which will not require creditors to intervene in contested dissolution
actions in order to litigate their claims. To do otherwise would be to turn a
dissolution action into a creditor’s proceeding.’” Id. at 351 (quoting Lee v. Lee,
649 P.2d 997, 1003 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1982)).
5
Because the mortgage interest at issue here belongs to a third party, the
family division lacked the jurisdiction to invalidate it. Our holding today does
not imply that the family division lacks jurisdiction to divide an encumbered
asset; the division of the net equity in a marital home subject to a mortgage, for
example, is within the statutory purview of the family division, as is the
division of marital debt. See, e.g., In the Matter of Costa & Costa, 156 N.H.
323, 327 (2007) (family division’s award to one party of bulk of divisible marital
assets and debt was sustainable exercise of discretion when supported by
factors set forth in RSA 458:16-a). However, when dividing such property
pursuant to RSA 458:16-a, the family division does not have the jurisdiction to
disregard or invalidate a third party’s claim of interest in marital property.
Our reading of the powers granted the family division under the current
statutory scheme is supported by canons of statutory interpretation. Neither
RSA chapter 490-D nor RSA chapter 458 reflects an intent on the part of the
legislature to grant the family division jurisdiction, either exclusive or
concurrent with the superior court, to invalidate the property interest of a non-
divorcing party. In the absence of express legislative authorization, the family
division has no jurisdiction to determine the validity of a third party’s interest
in the parties’ marital property. See Daine, 157 N.H. at 427 (“Because divorce
is statutory, the court has only such power in that field as is granted by
statute.”). Had the legislature intended to grant the family division jurisdiction
to determine the validity of third parties’ asserted interests in real property, it
could have done so.
This interpretation is also supported by the development of the law in the
probate court context. In the absence of an explicit legislative grant of probate
court jurisdiction over real property disputes, we held in O’Dwyer that the
superior court was the proper forum for such a dispute, and the probate court
lacked such jurisdiction. See In re Estate of O’Dwyer, 135 N.H. 323, 324
(1992) (holding that a statute conferring upon the probate court jurisdiction
over all matters and things of probate jurisdiction relating to the sale,
settlement, and final distribution of estates of deceased persons did not grant
the court jurisdiction to determine title to real estate in order to establish
whether it was an asset of the estate). After our decision in O’Dwyer, “the
legislature effectively expanded the probate court’s jurisdiction to encompass
disputes concerning the real estate of a decedent through the Omnibus Justice
Act of 1993,” which expressly granted the probate court “jurisdiction to resolve
issues involving real estate of the decedent if the property is in the estate of the
decedent.” In re Estate of Porter, 159 N.H. 212, 214-15 (2009) (quotations
omitted); see also RSA 547:3 (2007 & Supp. 2012) (probate court jurisdiction);
RSA 547:11-b (2007) (granting probate court jurisdiction over declaratory
judgment actions regarding title to real or personal property in decedent’s
estate); RSA 547:11-c (2007) (granting probate court jurisdiction over quiet title
actions regarding real or personal property in decedent’s estate).
6
Because “[w]e interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and
will not consider what the legislature might have said or add words that the
legislature did not include,” Beal, 153 N.H. at 350, we do not read the current
versions of RSA 490-D:2 or RSA 458:16-a to confer jurisdiction on the family
division to invalidate a non-divorcing party’s claim of interest in a marital
asset. Accordingly, we vacate the trial court’s order for the sale of, and
distribution of the equity in, the marital home, and remand for proceedings
consistent with this opinion. Any final ruling by the trial court concerning
distribution of the equity in the marital home must account for the exclusive
jurisdiction of the superior court to determine the validity of the Husband’s
parents’ claim of interest in the marital home. Given our ruling on this issue,
we do not address the Husband’s other claims of error related to the division of
equity in the marital home or the Husband’s parents’ contribution thereto.
Finally, the Husband asserts that the record does not support the trial
court’s finding that he was voluntarily unemployed and its imputation to him
of $68,000 in annual income for child support purposes. Specifically, the
Husband advances four claims. First, he maintains that the trial court erred
by finding him voluntarily unemployed in its final order because the court had
earlier found that he was not voluntarily unemployed. Second, he contends
that, because testimony at the final hearing reflected that he had been
involuntarily terminated from his employment, the trial court’s finding of
voluntary unemployment constituted legal error. Third, he argues that the trial
court erred by imputing income only to him and not to the Wife, even though
she was also unemployed. Fourth, he contends that the trial court erred by
imputing income to him at his highest previous income level. We disagree with
all four contentions.
As to his first claim of error, the Husband relies on two October 2010
temporary orders, which, according to the Husband, preclude an ultimate
finding of voluntary unemployment. In an October 6, 2010 temporary order,
the trial court granted the Husband’s request for reduction of his child support
obligation to reflect his employment termination. However, the court made no
ruling as to whether the Husband was voluntarily unemployed. Moreover, the
court expressly stated that its order was “subject to modification upon the
completion of discovery, [and] subject to recapture at the parties’ final hearing.”
In its subsequent temporary order of October 25, 2010, the court again made
no ruling as to whether the Husband was voluntarily unemployed. Because
the temporary orders were subject to modification at the final hearing, we reject
this claim of error.
The Husband next argues that because he had been involuntarily
terminated from his employment eleven months before trial, the trial court
erred in finding that he was voluntarily unemployed. Because trial courts are
7
in the best position to determine the parties’ respective needs and their
respective abilities to meet them, see In the Matter of Donovan & Donovan, 152
N.H. 55, 59 (2005), we will not disturb the trial court’s rulings regarding child
support absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion or an error of law. In
the Matter of Scott & Pierce, 160 N.H. 354, 358 (2010).
In calculating gross income for child support purposes, a trial court has
the discretion to consider “the difference between the amount a parent is
earning and the amount a parent has earned in cases where the parent
voluntarily becomes unemployed or underemployed, unless the parent is
physically or mentally incapacitated.” RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) (2004). Whether a
party is voluntarily unemployed is a question for the fact finder, whose decision
will not be disturbed on appeal if supported by evidence in the record. In the
Matter of Stall & Stall, 153 N.H. 163, 167 (2005).
Our case law regarding a trial court’s consideration of the circumstances
of a parent’s departure from employment has evolved over the past twenty
years. Prior to the enactment of RSA chapter 458-C, we held that a parent who
was terminated from employment because of his own wrongdoing was not
eligible for a reduction in support payments due to his reduced ability to pay.
Noddin v. Noddin, 123 N.H. 73, 76 (1983). After the enactment of RSA chapter
458-C, however, we ruled that RSA 458-C:2, IV(a) supersedes our decision in
Noddin. In the Matter of Rossino & Rossino, 153 N.H. 367, 370 (2006). In
light of Rossino, we subsequently vacated a trial court’s finding of voluntary
underemployment “to the extent that the trial court found the [parent] to be
voluntarily underemployed because he lost his job(s) due to his own
wrongdoing.” In the Matter of Sarvela & Sarvela, 154 N.H. 426, 436 (2006).
However, the holding in Sarvela does not preclude a trial court from
considering facts and circumstances bearing on a parent’s intent to avoid
payment of child support, including the facts and circumstances surrounding
the parent’s termination from employment. See id. at 434-36. In fact, in the
same year we decided Sarvela, we recognized the relevance of a party’s intent to
avoid child support on the question of voluntary unemployment. See In the
Matter of Bazemore & Jack, 153 N.H. 351, 353 (2006) (noting a voluntarily
unemployed parent did not terminate employment “with the intent of avoiding
his child support obligation or thwarting [the other parent’s] ability to receive
child support in an appropriate amount”); see also In the Matter of Lynn &
Lynn, 158 N.H. 615, 616, 618 (2009) (affirming the trial court’s decision not to
impute income despite a finding of voluntary underemployment where the
record failed to support that a parent reduced income to circumvent child
support guidelines).
Here, the record supports the trial court’s finding that the Husband was
voluntarily unemployed. The trial court noted that the circumstances of the
8
Husband’s termination were “suspect,” but it primarily focused on the
Husband’s actions during the eleven months between the time that he lost his
job through the commencement of trial, and found that the Husband had the
ability to become employed. The trial court did not find credible the Husband’s
assertion that he was looking for work “all the time.” At the final hearing, the
Husband testified that his efforts to seek employment consisted mainly of
checking a website, jobsnh.com, every day. Cf. Stall, 153 N.H. at 167 (evidence
that parent had been looking for employment did not necessarily preclude a
finding of voluntary unemployment). Further, the trial court characterized the
Husband’s failure to pay his share of the child support as “a weapon” with a
“well documented history.” For example, the Husband testified that he paid for
a $5,000 motorcycle repair rather than paying his child support arrearage of
more than $7,000. Moreover, there was no evidence that the Husband was
physically or mentally incapacitated. On this record, we find no error in the
court’s conclusion that the Husband was voluntarily unemployed.
Nor does the trial court’s decision to impute income only to the Husband
and not to the Wife support reversal. The Husband alleges simply that the
Wife, like the Husband, is unemployed, and that in a temporary order, the trial
court suggested that she seek employment by the time of the final hearing.
The trial court found, and the record reflects, that the Wife is the primary
caregiver to the parties’ child. Although the court also stated that it
anticipated that the Wife would be “gaining full-time employment in the very
near future,” we do not conclude that the Husband has met his burden of
establishing that the court’s imputation of income only to him was an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. See Donovan, 152 N.H. at 59.
If a trial court determines that a parent is voluntarily unemployed or
underemployed, the court “may consider as gross income the difference
between the amount that parent is earning and the amount that parent has
earned.” RSA 458-C:2, IV(a). When he was terminated from his employment
eleven months prior to trial, the Husband was earning an annual salary of
approximately $68,000. Under all the circumstances, we find no error in the
trial court’s imputation of $68,000 in annual earnings to the Husband for
purposes of calculating child support.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
9