THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Exeter District Court
No. 2010-672
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
NICHOLAS R. GARDNER
Submitted: September 15, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 2, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Diana E. Fenton, assistant
attorney general, on the brief), for the State.
Samdperil & Welsh, PLLC, of Exeter (Richard E. Samdperil on the brief),
for the defendant.
LYNN, J. The defendant, Nicholas R. Gardner, pleaded guilty to driving
while intoxicated (DWI) in the Exeter District Court (Cullen, J.). See RSA 265-
A:2 (Supp. 2010). On the date of the offense, he was nineteen years old. As
part of his sentence, the defendant requested that his driver’s license be
revoked for twelve months but that he be allowed to seek suspension of six
months of the revocation period provided he entered an impaired driver
intervention program (IDIP) within 45 days after his conviction. The court
denied the defendant’s request, ruling that it did not have the authority to
impose such a sentence. The defendant appeals. We affirm.
On appeal, the defendant argues that RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(4) (Supp. 2010),
which allows courts to suspend six months of the nine-month mandatory
minimum license revocation period for DWI defendants who are twenty-one
years of age or older, applies equally to the twelve-month minimum revocation
period specified in RSA 265-A:18, III (Supp. 2010) for DWI defendants under
the age of twenty-one. We disagree.
Because a trial court’s sentencing authority is statutory, we determine
whether there was error by engaging in statutory interpretation. State v.
Pandelena, 161 N.H. 326, 329 (2010). The interpretation of a statute is a
question of law, which we review de novo. State v. Kousounadis, 159 N.H. 413,
423 (2009). We are the final arbiters of the intent of the legislature as
expressed in the words of a statute considered as a whole. State v. Gallagher,
157 N.H. 421, 422 (2008). We first examine the language of the statute, and,
where possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used.
Kenison v. Dubois, 152 N.H. 448, 451 (2005). When the language of a statute
is clear on its face, its meaning is not subject to modification. Dalton Hydro v.
Town of Dalton, 153 N.H. 75, 78 (2005). Further, we interpret legislative intent
from the statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might
have said or add language it did not see fit to include. State v. Hynes, 159 N.H.
187, 193 (2009). If, however, statutory language is ambiguous and subject to
more than one reasonable interpretation, we may consult its legislative history
to determine the legislature’s intent. See Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 424.
Finally, we interpret a statute in the context of the overall statutory scheme
and not in isolation. Id. at 423. “Our goal is to apply statutes in light of the
legislature’s intent in enacting them and in light of the policy sought to be
advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” Fichtner v. Pittsley, 146 N.H. 512,
514 (2001).
RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(1)-(6) establish the penalties for a DWI first offense.
RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(4), the subparagraph of the statute addressing loss of the
offender’s driver’s license, provides:
The person’s driver’s license or privilege to drive
shall be revoked for not less than 9 months and, at the
discretion of the court, such revocation may be
extended for a period not to exceed 2 years. The court
may suspend up to 6 months of this sentence,
provided that the person has entered into the relevant
driver intervention program required by subparagraph
(3) within 45 days after conviction, or as soon
thereafter as any extenuating circumstances approved
2
by the department of health and human services
allow[.]
However, for those who commit such an offense when under twenty-one
years of age, the applicable provision of the statute is RSA 265-A:18, III, which
states:
Any person who is convicted of an offense under
RSA 265-A:2, I, RSA 265-A:3, or RSA 630:3, II and the
offense occurred while the person was under the age of
21 shall be sentenced according to the provisions of
this section, except that in all cases the person’s
driver’s license or privilege to drive shall be revoked for
not less than one year.
Relying on the “shall be sentenced in accordance with this section”
language, the defendant contends that paragraph III simply replaces the nine-
month license revocation period specified in subparagraph I(a)(4) with a one-
year period when the offender is under the age of twenty-one at the time of the
offense. This view finds some support in the fact that, although the first
sentence of subparagraph I(a)(4) is written in terms that suggest nine months
is a minimum mandatory revocation period (“license . . . shall be revoked for
not less than 9 months”) in the same way that paragraph III indicates one year
is a minimum mandatory period for offenders under the age of twenty-one
(“license . . . shall be revoked for not less than one year”), the second sentence
of subparagraph I(a)(4) specifically allows up to six months of even this
minimum mandatory revocation period to be suspended if a defendant seeks
prompt enrollment in an IDIP. If, as paragraph III indicates, an offender under
twenty-one is to be sentenced “in accordance with this section [i.e., RSA 265-
A:18],” except for the increased minimum mandatory revocation period, the
second sentence of subparagraph I(a)(4) should also apply to such offender,
permitting the court to suspend up to six months of the one-year minimum
revocation period if the offender enters an IDIP within 45 days of conviction.
This argument, however, fails to take into account the phrase “in all
cases” contained in the proviso clause of RSA 265-A:18, III. What is now RSA
265-A:18, III was first enacted in 2001; it was amended in 2004 in a manner
not relevant to this appeal. See Laws 2000, 143:1; Laws 2003, 37:1 (former
RSA 265:82-b, I-b (2004)). When this law was enacted, what is now RSA 265-
A:18, I(a)(4) simply provided for a mandatory minimum revocation period of
ninety days. See RSA 265:82-b, I(a)(3) (2000) (repealed 2006). Thus, when
paragraph III first became law the phrase “in all cases” appears to have been
superfluous language. That is, because there was no provision allowing for the
suspension of any minimum mandatory revocation period, the proviso clause of
paragraph III would have had the same meaning whether it read: “except that
3
in all cases the person’s driver’s license or privilege to drive shall be revoked for
not less than one year”; or instead stated, “except that the person’s driver’s
license or privilege to drive shall be revoked for not less than one year.” In
other words, whether the “in all cases” language was included or not, the one-
year minimum mandatory license revocation period would have applied to all
DWI offenders under the age of twenty-one.
However, the situation changed when the legislature enacted Laws 2003,
chapter 243. This legislation, which became effective on January 1, 2004,
extended the minimum mandatory revocation period to nine months for
offenders age twenty-one and older, and added the second sentence to what is
now RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(4), permitting suspension of six months of the
revocation period upon prompt entry into an IDIP. Significantly, Laws 2003,
chapter 243 made no change to the language of what is now paragraph III of
the statute. Because the addition of the second sentence of subparagraph
I(a)(4) created the possibility of a reduction of the mandatory minimum
revocation period under certain circumstances, the effect of this amendment
was to create an ambiguity regarding the meaning of paragraph III of the
statute. On the one hand, the language indicating that a paragraph III offender
“shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of this section” could be
interpreted to mean that an offender under twenty-one is entitled to the benefit
of subparagraph I(a)(4)’s suspension provision of the otherwise mandatory one-
year license revocation, just as an offender age twenty-one or older is entitled
to the benefit of the suspension provision of the otherwise mandatory nine-
month revocation applicable to that offender. On the other hand, the “in all
cases” language, the existence of which the legislature is presumed to have
been aware when it amended subparagraph I(a)(4), see 1A N. Singer, Statutes
and Statutory Construction § 22.29 (7th ed. 2009), could be interpreted to
mean that, notwithstanding that some offenders are now eligible for a six-
month suspension of their minimum revocation period, in no case shall an
offender under the age of twenty-one receive less than a one-year license
suspension. Because both interpretations are reasonable, we examine
legislative history to discern legislative intent. Kousounadis, 159 N.H. at 424.
The legislative history of Laws 2003, chapter 243 reveals that the
legislature did not intend the option of a six-month suspension of the one-year
minimum mandatory revocation for early treatment to apply to offenders under
the age of twenty-one. The bill that became Laws 2003, chapter 243 was
introduced in the House of Representatives as HB 521. In testimony before the
Senate Judiciary Committee, Representative John Tholl, the primary sponsor of
the bill, explained its purpose:
This bill is basically an attempt by members of the
study committee that lasted over two years in length to
entice people into treatment. It provides a carrot and
4
a stick. Basically, what it does is extend the
revocation period of your license for a period of time.
However, if you go into treatment in the early parts of
your sentence and complete it within a certain time
period, you can get the extended period dropped back
to what it is currently now. In other words, your
sentence would be no longer than the current
penalties if you get into treatment early. If you don’t,
you can get an extended period of loss of license for
not getting into treatment.
Senate Comm. on Judiciary, Hearing on HB 521-FN (April 28, 2003) at 1-2
(Testimony of Rep. John E. Tholl, Jr.); see also id. at 4 (“So, we realize the
Senate is very reluctant to cut back on suspension time. We provided a carrot
by increasing penalties and then taking the increase away. None of these
penalties, removal of penalties, decreases the time now on the books in any
way. It just takes back the increase that we provided in the bill. If you don’t go
to treatment within forty-five days and you don’t have a good reason that is
convincing to Health and Human Services, then you have to have your license
suspended for another six months.”) (testimony of Rep. Susan Almy); id. at 9 (“I
think what we are trying to do here is all realize that we need to make sure
treatment is available . . . . If we can get more folks into treatment quicker, I
think that helps. But, we want to make sure from a safety standpoint and
from law enforcement that we are not in any way modifying these penalties or
minimizing them or lessening them in any way.”) (testimony of Assistant
Comm. of Safety John Stephen).
As the above testimony makes clear, the purpose of the legislation was to
increase the minimum mandatory revocation period for offenders twenty-one
and older by six months, while at the same time providing an option to have
this additional six months suspended (so that the minimum revocation would
revert to ninety days, as under the prior law) if the offender obtained early
treatment. The sponsors and supporters of the bill emphasized time and again
that there was no intent to reduce the minimum mandatory revocation period
below what it was before the amendment was enacted. However, if, as the
defendant argues, the suspension provision of RSA 265-A:18, I(a)(4) were
applied to offenders under the age of twenty-one, the result would be to
decrease the minimum suspension period under paragraph III of the statute
from one year – as it was before the amendment – to six months. This result
stems from the fact that the legislation did not increase the mandatory one-
year revocation period for offenders under twenty-one. Nothing in the
legislative history indicates that the legislature contemplated the possibility
that the six-month suspension period would be applied so as to reduce the
mandatory revocation period for offenders under age twenty-one to a period of
less than one year, and given the specifically articulated “carrot and stick”
5
approach of the amendment, it is unlikely that the legislature intended it to
apply to offenders under twenty-one in the absence of a “stick” provision
increasing the mandatory revocation period for such offenders by six months.
Rather, in light of the legislative history, we conclude that the legislature
intended the “in all cases” language of paragraph III to insure that the six-
month suspension for early treatment option would not apply to the mandatory
one-year license revocation period for offenders under the age of twenty-one.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6