THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-661
ROBERT SURPRENANT
v.
DEBORAH MULCRONE
Submitted: April 5, 2012
Opinion Issued: April 20, 2012
Robert Surprenant, by brief, pro se.
Preti, Flaherty, Beliveau, & Pachios, PLLP, of Concord (William C.
Saturley and Mark H. Puffer on the brief), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiff, Robert Surprenant, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Brown, J.) dismissing his claims against the defendant,
Deborah Mulcrone, under the doctrine of absolute quasi-judicial immunity.
We affirm.
The following facts derive from the record. The defendant was the
guardian ad litem (GAL) for the plaintiff’s son in a contested case between the
plaintiff and the son’s mother. The defendant was appointed to investigate how
the plaintiff and his son’s mother should divide parenting time and residential
responsibility for their son. In her final report to the court, submitted in
January 2011, the defendant observed that while the plaintiff originally
disclosed a prior conviction for driving while under the influence, he failed to
disclose his entire criminal history. The defendant noted that the plaintiff had
“a history of charges and/or convictions which occurred in NH and FL, such as
sexual assault, criminal restraint, resisting arrest or detention, disorderly
conduct, simple assault, theft of services, criminal trespassing, kidnapping
[and] larceny.” The defendant stated in her report that although it was
“commendable” that the plaintiff had had no similar criminal charges since
1994, his failure to disclose his prior charges was “troubling.”
In June 2011, the plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit against the
defendant, alleging that the statements in her final report were negligently
made and breached an implied contract with the plaintiff to observe
“reasonable standards of care and fair dealing.” The defendant moved to
dismiss, arguing that because the actions about which the plaintiff complains
were all taken in her capacity as a court-appointed GAL, she was immune from
liability under the doctrine of absolute quasi-judicial immunity. The trial court
agreed and granted the motion to dismiss. This appeal followed.
The sole issue for our review is whether the trial court erred when it
ruled that the defendant was entitled to absolute quasi-judicial immunity. In
reviewing a motion to dismiss, our standard of review is whether the allegations
in the plaintiff’s pleadings are reasonably susceptible of a construction that
would permit recovery. McNamara v. Hersh, 157 N.H. 72, 73 (2008). We
assume the plaintiff’s allegations to be true and construe all reasonable
inferences in the light most favorable to him. See id. We need not, however,
accept allegations in the writ that are merely conclusions of law. Beane v.
Dana S. Beane & Co., 160 N.H. 708, 711 (2010). We then engage in a
threshold inquiry, testing the facts alleged in the pleadings against the
applicable law. Id. We will uphold the trial court’s grant of a motion to dismiss
if the facts pleaded do not constitute a basis for legal relief. Id.
“The doctrine of quasi-judicial immunity has long been recognized in this
State, and has been explained as the rule of public policy which protects
judicial officers and those exercising judicial functions from liability in actions
of tort for wrongs committed by them when acting in that capacity.” Gould v.
Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 138 N.H. 343, 346 (1994) (quotation and
ellipsis omitted). “It has been repeatedly decided in this state that when an
officer or a board is called upon to pass upon evidence and decide, their
conclusion cannot be collaterally attacked, and that they are not liable to
answer in a suit for their action. The reason given in the cases is that such
action is judicial.” Id. (quotation omitted). “Where immunity applies we do not
2
look to the motives of the immune official – the immunity applies even when
the [official] is accused of acting maliciously and corruptly.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
In this case, the plaintiff alleges that the defendant acted unlawfully
when she made certain statements in her final GAL report to the court. “A
GAL, by virtue of being appointed by a judge and acting in the service of the
court, acts as a government official when performing those duties delegated to
the GAL by the court.” Hall v. Markiewicz, No. 08-cv-494-PB, 2009 WL
2447648, at *2 (D.N.H. Aug. 9, 2009); cf. System-Wide GAL Application,
Certification and Practice Rules 2.2(b) (GAL serves as an officer of the court).
“Absolute judicial immunity attaches when a GAL performs certain delegated
duties because of the intimate relationship between the GAL and the court in
the judicial process.” Marr v. Maine Dept. of Human Services, 215 F. Supp. 2d
261, 268 (D. Me. 2002). “In essence, the judicial immunity applicable to the
appointing judge extends to the acts of the GAL thereby providing the GAL with
what is called quasi-judicial immunity, a form of absolute immunity.” Id. To
determine whether a GAL’s conduct is protected by absolute immunity, courts
analyze the nature of the duties performed and whether they are “closely
associated with the judicial process.” Id. (quotation omitted); see Cok v.
Cosentino, 876 F.2d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 1989). “Conduct intimately related to the
judicial process justifies the extension of quasi-judicial immunity.” Marr, 215
F. Supp. 2d at 268.
Judicial immunity has been extended to protect the GAL’s acts of
investigating, meeting with children, making reports and recommendations to
the court, and testifying in court. Id. In Cok, the First Circuit Court of Appeals
ruled that a GAL, responsible for gathering information, preparing a report,
and making a recommendation to the court, functioned as an agent of the
court and, therefore, was entitled to absolute immunity for these acts. Id. at
269; see Cok, 876 F.2d at 3.
The same holds true here. See Marr, 215 F. Supp. 2d at 269. The
plaintiff alleges that the defendant was appointed to be the child’s GAL and, in
that capacity, investigated and issued a final report to the court. In performing
these duties, the defendant carried out a function that was “integral to the
judicial process,” and she is entitled to absolute quasi-judicial immunity for the
plaintiff’s claims that she performed these duties negligently and in violation of
the covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Id. (quotation omitted).
Contrary to the plaintiff’s assertions, the fact that the defendant is also
an attorney does not warrant a different result. To determine the scope of
immunity to be afforded in a specific situation, we examine the act complained
3
of, not merely the title of the actor. Gould, 138 N.H. at 346. Here, the
defendant performed all of the acts about which the plaintiff complains in her
role as a GAL.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we uphold the trial court’s
dismissal of the plaintiff’s lawsuit.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4