THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2009-109
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MARILYN DEMOND-SURACE
Argued: February 17, 2011
Opinion Issued: May 12, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Diana E. Fenton, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Robert A. Stein & Associates, PLLC, of Concord (Robert A. Stein on the
brief and orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The defendant, Marilyn Demond-Surace, appeals her
conviction on two counts of vehicular assault, see RSA 265:79-a (2004),
following a jury trial in the Superior Court (Tucker, J.). We reverse and
remand.
The jury could have found the following facts. The defendant’s
convictions stem from a 2005 motor vehicle accident that killed two people
riding on a motorcycle. The accident occurred on July 26, 2005, which was a
clear night, at approximately 9:45 p.m. at the intersection of Route 12 and Old
Claremont Road in Charlestown.
The defendant was driving home from dinner at her sister’s house and
traveling south on Route 12. As she approached the intersection at Old
Claremont Road, she turned on her left signal and moved into the left turn lane
on Route 12. She later told police that she came to a complete stop, looked for
traffic in the opposite direction and did not see any headlights coming toward
her. The defendant was familiar with the intersection, which she considered
dangerous, and indicated that she always came to a complete stop prior to
turning. Local police officers also considered this intersection to be dangerous
because the grade of the road made it difficult for southbound drivers to see
northbound traffic.
The victims, Justin Aiken and Robin Flaig, were riding together on a
motorcycle and traveling on Route 12 in the opposite direction. They were
traveling in a group that included Michael Corcoran and Pat Dezaffra, who
each carried a passenger, and Timothy Chapin, who rode alone. As they
headed north on Route 12, Aiken and Corcoran initially rode side-by-side, but
Corcoran dropped back after realizing that Chapin had stopped to retrieve a
glove he had dropped. Chapin retrieved his glove and eventually passed
Corcoran. Corcoran was driving fifty-five miles per hour and Chapin sixty-five
miles per hour in a fifty mile-per-hour zone, and both were gaining ground on
Aiken. Corcoran estimated that Aiken was traveling under fifty-five miles per
hour and Chapin estimated that Aiken was traveling about fifty miles per hour.
As Chapin approached a hill on Route 12, he saw Aiken’s brake light
illuminate at the top of the hill and then lost sight of him for “a brief second.”
When he crested the hill, he saw smoke and debris. He observed Aiken lying
next to a Jeep Cherokee, entangled in the motorcycle and Flaig lying in the
middle of the road. As Corcoran crested the hill, he saw the Jeep and Flaig
lying in the road and had to swerve into the left lane to avoid hitting her.
Shortly thereafter, Chapin heard the defendant say, “I never saw him.” The
defendant also repeatedly told Corcoran that she never saw Aiken.
Corporal Aaron Reichert and Officer Todd Lyles of the Charlestown Police
Department arrived at the scene. Reichert briefly spoke with the defendant,
who appeared dazed. The defendant told police that she heard a crash, the
airbags in her Jeep deployed and she hit her brakes. Then, upon exiting her
vehicle, she saw a motorcycle and a woman lying in the road. Lyles also briefly
spoke with her and noticed a slight odor of alcohol. Lyles then asked Reichert
to speak with her to see if he could detect an odor of alcohol. Reichert also
detected a faint odor of alcohol. The defendant told Reichert that she had one
glass of wine at her sister’s. Reichert did not observe any signs of alcohol
impairment and the defendant’s speech was clear.
2
Lyles then accompanied the defendant to the hospital, and while at the
hospital, he detected a strong odor of alcohol. Officer Greg Belisle of the
Claremont Police Department arrived at the hospital nearly two hours after the
accident at 11:30 p.m. and immediately detected a strong odor of alcohol. He
also noticed the defendant’s speech was slurred as she spoke on the phone.
The defendant did not object to any of this testimony, nor did she renew her
pre-trial motion to preclude all evidence regarding her alcohol consumption.
Five months after the accident, the defendant was indicted on two counts
of Class A felony aggravated negligent homicide, see RSA 630:3, II (2007), and
two counts of Class B felony negligent homicide, see RSA 630:3, I (2007). The
trial court subsequently granted the defendant’s motion to exclude all evidence
related to blood alcohol tests because the tests were taken without the
defendant’s consent. We affirmed that ruling. See State v. Demond-Surace,
No. 2007-422 (N.H. May 20, 2008). The State then nol prossed those
indictments and filed two informations charging her with vehicular assault.
See RSA 265:79-a.
As noted above, prior to trial, the trial court denied the defendant’s
motion in limine to preclude the State from introducing evidence regarding her
alcohol consumption. The court agreed with the State that evidence of alcohol
consumption was relevant on the issue of whether she was criminally
negligent. The court also denied the defendant’s request to instruct the jury
that “it is not illegal or improper to drive a motor vehicle after the consumption
of a small amount of alcohol.” During the motion hearing, the State
represented that it did not have any witnesses that would testify that the
defendant was impaired or showed any signs of impairment. The court, in
part, based its decision to allow evidence of the defendant’s consumption of one
glass of wine upon this representation. Specifically, the court told the State
that “as far as the jury is going to know, she was sober. She wasn’t impaired.”
Additionally, during the trial, the court again re-emphasized that the State
could not argue or elicit testimony that the defendant was impaired:
My understanding when we had the hearing on [the] motion in
limine, my understanding was that the State was not going to
suggest impairment for obvious reasons.
. . . .
And you were limiting -- you simply wanted the jury to know
that she had consumed alcohol. And you said I think at the
hearing, that you would ask the jury to find that from the fact that
she said that she had one glass of wine and that people smelled
alcohol about her.
3
The court then specifically told the State that “you can’t infer or have the
officer infer or suggest that [the defendant] was wrong about the number of
drinks she had.” Finally, the court again stated:
And the whole basis of my admitting the evidence was -- your
argument was it was not relevant to the question of impairment; it
was relevant to the question of negligence in conjunction with all
the other circumstances in the case. So whether or not she was
impaired in terms of whether she was negligent isn’t . . . relevant
and arguably would work against the suppression order that was
handed down in the earlier charge.
So I mean I don’t -- I think you have to stay away from
impairment. The basis of your introducing that evidence or
wanting to introduce that evidence was simply that there was an
odor of alcohol; a statement about consumption of alcohol, one
glass of wine; and arguing the fact of alcohol consumption, period,
without regard to impairment.
The jury subsequently convicted the defendant on both counts and this appeal
followed.
On appeal, the defendant’s arguments largely focus upon the court’s
order that the State had to “stay away from impairment.” The defendant
contends that the trial court impermissibly allowed the State to “use alcohol as
the core of its criminal negligence claim . . . and allowed the State to imply the
defendant was impaired.” Specifically, she argues that the trial court erred by
failing to grant a mistrial for statements made by the prosecutor in her closing
argument regarding the defendant’s alcohol consumption and admitting
evidence that she consumed one glass of wine.
She also assigns error to the trial court’s: (1) denial of her motion to
dismiss the informations against her because they did not properly allege the
elements of criminally negligent vehicular assault; (2) denial of her motion to
dismiss for insufficiency of the evidence; (3) instruction to the jury on criminal
negligence; (4) permitting Trooper Daniel Brow to testify as an expert witness;
and (5) failure to grant a mistrial for statements made by the prosecutor during
her closing argument regarding the defendant’s actions immediately following
the accident.
I
We begin with the defendant’s arguments that the trial court improperly
allowed the State to use evidence regarding her alcohol consumption given its
earlier order. In this regard, the defendant makes two arguments, both of
which are based upon her contention that the State’s use of alcohol evidence in
4
contravention of this order unfairly prejudiced her. She first argues that
evidence that she consumed one glass of wine prior to the accident was
inadmissible because it was irrelevant and unfairly prejudicial. She also
contends that the trial court unsustainably exercised its discretion in refusing
to grant a mistrial because the prosecutor impermissibly implied during her
closing argument that the defendant lied about having only one glass of wine
prior to the accident. Because we conclude that the court erred in its ruling on
the motion for a mistrial, we begin with her latter argument and need not
address her first argument.
During her closing argument, the prosecutor told the jury that the
defendant admitted to consuming one glass of wine and that Officer Reichert
testified that a faint odor of alcohol was consistent with her claim. However,
the prosecutor continued, “But the evidence here is that some three hours later
at the hospital there was a strong odor of alcohol. And that was observed by
two officers . . . .” Then, toward the end of her closing argument, the
prosecutor told the jury, “There was an odor of alcohol. She said she had one
glass of wine, but there was a strong odor three hours later. But then she also
said she looked.” The defendant did not immediately object to either argument,
but moved for a mistrial immediately following the closing argument and asked
for a cautionary jury instruction regarding her alcohol consumption. The court
denied the motion for a mistrial because it found that the prosecutor’s
argument regarding the defendant’s alcohol consumption was a fair response
to testimony elicited by the defendant on cross-examination. The court also
refused to give the cautionary instruction regarding alcohol consumption.
The trial court is in the best position to gauge any prejudicial effect that
the prosecutor’s conduct had on the jury and has broad discretion to decide
whether a mistrial is warranted. State v. Ainsworth, 151 N.H. 691, 698 (2005).
We will not overturn the trial court’s ruling on whether a mistrial or other
remedial action is warranted absent an unsustainable exercise of discretion.
Id. In examining claims of prosecutorial misconduct during closing argument,
we must balance “a prosecutor’s broad license to fashion argument with the
need to ensure that a defendant’s rights are not compromised in the process.”
State v. Boetti, 142 N.H. 255, 260 (1997).
The defendant asserts that the argument was improper in light of the
court’s earlier ruling that the State could not imply that the defendant was
lying regarding the number of drinks she had consumed. She argues that the
prosecutor’s argument was contrary to the State’s prior representations
regarding the purpose of admitting evidence of her alcohol consumption and in
disregard of the trial court’s ruling. She further argues that the “suggestions of
alcohol impairment, dishonesty, and callousness were likely to provoke in the
jury a desire to punish the defendant and cause it to base its decision on
matters that were not supported by the evidence.”
5
The court did not make clear why it chose to exclude evidence regarding
whether the defendant exhibited signs of impairment. We can infer that the
court was concerned with the prior order requiring the exclusion of all evidence
related to the defendant’s blood alcohol tests. Because of this order, the State
could not prove criminal negligence by making reference to those tests.
Nothing in the order excluding the blood alcohol tests necessarily precluded the
State from introducing other evidence relevant to whether the defendant drove
negligently, including whether she exhibited any signs of alcohol impairment.
Nonetheless, the court excluded all evidence regarding alcohol impairment.
In allowing evidence that the defendant consumed alcohol despite having
excluded all evidence that the defendant was impaired by alcohol, the court
made a distinction unsupported by our case law. See State v. Taylor, 132 N.H.
314, 316 (1989) (explaining that an individual can be impaired without proof of
a specific blood alcohol content, so long as the State proves “impairment to any
degree”); State v. Ebinger, 135 N.H. 264, 267 (1992) (evidence of defendant’s
alcohol consumption was relevant to charge of criminally negligent vehicular
homicide even if the evidence was insufficient to convict him of causing the
death of another while driving under the influence of alcohol). We recognize
the difficulties both parties faced in complying with this directive. However, the
State was still required to abide by the court’s order, which made unmistakably
clear that the State could not “suggest” that the defendant lied about having
only one drink.
Despite the trial court’s order, the State still contends that the
prosecutor’s argument was a permissible response to defense counsel’s closing
argument and testimony elicited by the defendant throughout the trial. In
particular, defense counsel argued in his closing argument that:
The State makes a big deal about the odor. The odor is consistent
with one drink of wine, which is what my client said she had on
the night in question. But everyone was asked about the odor, if it
was strong, if it was weak, where was it or how was it . . . . There is
no proof of what the odor has to do with this accident. We know
from the evidence . . . that my client admitted to a glass of wine
with dinner . . . . There is nothing illegal about having a glass of
wine with dinner.
While a prosecutor may ordinarily use a closing argument to respond to
defense counsel’s closing arguments and to urge the jury to draw inferences of
guilt from the evidence, see Ainsworth, 151 N.H. at 698-99; State v. Cote, 143
N.H. 368, 374 (1999), the court’s order in this case specifically prohibited the
prosecutor’s argument. Accordingly, in light of that order, the State’s closing
argument was improper.
6
Having concluded that the prosecutor’s argument was impermissible, we
must next determine whether the error requires reversal of the verdict. State v.
Mussey, 153 N.H. 272, 280 (2006). In doing so, we balance the following
factors: (1) whether the prosecutor’s improper argument was deliberate; (2)
whether the trial court gave a strong and explicit cautionary instruction; and
(3) whether any prejudice surviving the court’s instruction likely could have
affected the outcome of the case. Id.
As for the first factor, the record does not reflect that the prosecutor
intentionally ignored the court’s instructions. As already noted, the court
sought to differentiate between alcohol consumption and impairment, which
created difficulties for both parties. While the prosecutor should have abided
by the court’s instructions, we cannot say that her conduct was deliberate
given the unique circumstances of this case.
The second factor is whether the court gave an adequate curative
instruction to the jury. Id. The State argues that this issue is not preserved
because the defendant did not specifically request a curative instruction.
Generally, a contemporaneous objection is required to preserve a jury
instruction issue for appellate review. State v. Dowdle, 148 N.H. 345, 347
(2002). We first note that while the defendant did not specifically request an
instruction to cure the alleged error, she did repeat an earlier request for a
cautionary instruction to clarify the purpose of evidence regarding her alcohol
consumption. Additionally, following the defendant’s objection to the
prosecutor’s argument, the court concluded that granting a mistrial or
providing a curative instruction was unnecessary because the argument was
permissible. At that point it was apparent that the court had “conclusively
decided” that there was no error to cure and the defendant was not required to
seek a curative instruction. Cf. id. at 348 (explaining that objection to the trial
court’s proposed curative instruction was unnecessary where the defendant
had already requested a differing instruction because the court was aware “of
the substance of defense counsel’s request”). Accordingly, this factor weighs
heavily in favor of the defendant because the court did not give a curative
instruction.
Finally, we consider whether there was any prejudice that may have
affected the outcome of the case. Mussey, 153 N.H. at 280. At the outset, we
note that the defendant faced a higher likelihood of prejudice because the court
did not give a curative instruction. See id. (“A trial court’s immediate curative
instruction bears the weight of judicial disapproval.” (quotation and brackets
omitted)). Additionally, in analyzing prejudice, we have previously focused
upon the strength of the evidence against the defendant. State v. Ellsworth,
151 N.H. 152, 157-58 (2004). Here, the evidence against the defendant was
not overwhelming, and, indeed, the defendant’s alcohol consumption may well
have been critical to obtaining a conviction. Compare State v. Shepard, 158
N.H. 743, 747 (2009) (explaining that a defendant’s act of crossing a double
7
yellow line was not caused by, inter alia, alcohol consumption) with Ebinger,
135 N.H. at 267 (explaining that jury was properly permitted to consider the
defendant’s alcohol intake and its effect upon his behavior). While the State
did produce some evidence, arguably in violation of the court’s order, tending
to show that the defendant consumed more than one glass of wine, the
prosecutor’s improper argument then highlighted this for the jury in direct
contravention of that order.
Moreover, the unique circumstances present in this case heightened the
prejudice to the defendant, who likely prepared her trial strategy based upon
the court’s order. Because the defendant knew that the trial court had
eliminated the issue of alcohol impairment from the trial, she did not have a
full opportunity to call witnesses or present evidence to establish that she was
not impaired. Additionally, the State had the final opportunity to argue its case
to the jury and the defendant could not rebut the prosecutor’s impermissible
argument.
We again emphasize that “a prosecutor may draw reasonable inferences
from the facts proven and has great latitude in closing argument to both
summarize and discuss the evidence presented to the jury and to urge them to
draw inferences of guilt from the evidence.” State v. Sanchez, 152 N.H. 625,
628 (2005) (quotation omitted). However, in this case, the court ordered the
State not to present evidence that the defendant was impaired and, moreover,
specifically prohibited the State from suggesting that the defendant lied about
having only one glass of wine. Thus, the prosecutor’s comment struck at the
heart of the court’s order. In light of this, we are convinced that the
prosecutor’s failure to abide by the order and the court’s subsequent failure to
grant a mistrial or issue a limiting instruction prejudiced the defendant and
likely affected the case’s outcome.
Based upon our ruling that the prosecutor’s improper argument and the
court’s subsequent failure to take remedial action require a new trial, we need
not address the defendant’s argument that the admission of evidence that she
consumed one glass of wine was irrelevant and unfairly prejudicial. As we
have already explained, the prior order excluding the results of the defendant’s
blood alcohol tests only required the exclusion of evidence specifically related
to those tests. Any unfair prejudice to the defendant resulted from the
inconsistent enforcement of the court’s instruction that the State had to “stay
away from impairment.” Accordingly, any evidence regarding whether the
defendant was impaired, e.g., consumption or post-arrest observations, other
than the previously suppressed results of the blood alcohol tests, should be
admissible on retrial unless the trial court finds other grounds rendering such
evidence inadmissible.
8
II
The defendant argues that the State’s informations were insufficient
because they did not allege any acts amounting to criminal negligence or that
her alcohol consumption contributed to her negligence. The informations,
which were identical other than the names of the victims, alleged that the
defendant:
did commit the crime of Vehicular Assault in that [the defendant]
did negligently cause serious bodily injury to [the victims] while
driving a propelled vehicle, to wit: a 1994 Jeep Grand Cherokee on
Claremont Road in Charlestown, New Hampshire in that [the
defendant] failed to yield the right of way to a motorcycle
approaching from the opposite direction which was so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard and as a result of her unlawful
operation of her propelled vehicle, [the defendant] caused or
materially contributed to a collision with a motorcycle being driven
by Justin Aiken and caused [the victims] to sustain serious bodily
injury, to wit: severe trauma resulting in death.
Part I, Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides that “[n]o
subject shall be held to answer for any crime, or offense, until the same is fully
and plainly, substantially and formally, described to him.” An information is
constitutionally sufficient provided that it informs a defendant of the charge
with adequate specificity to allow the defendant to prepare for trial and to be
protected against double jeopardy. Cf. State v. Pittera, 139 N.H. 257, 259
(1994) (stating that indictment is sufficient under same circumstances). Once
a crime has been identified with factual specificity, acts by which the defendant
may have committed the crime need not be identified. Id.
In order to obtain a vehicular assault conviction, the State must allege
and prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted negligently as
defined in RSA 626:2, II(d) (2007). Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746.
A person acts negligently with respect to a material element of an
offense when [she] fails to become aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result
from [her] conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree
that [her] failure to become aware of it constitutes a gross deviation
from conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the
situation.
RSA 626:2, II(d).
The defendant contends that when a crime charged requires proof of a
particular mental state, the State must plead the specific acts satisfying the
9
elements of that mental state. However, we have previously explained that
mens rea standards are now defined by statute, see Laws 1971, 518:1; RSA
626:2, II (delineating the four culpable mental states), and an information need
not specify an overt act that satisfies the crime’s requisite mental state. See
State v. Pelky, 131 N.H. 715, 720 (1989). Here, the informations alleged that
the defendant acted negligently in addition to all of the other elements of the
vehicular assault statute. See State v. Davis, 149 N.H. 698, 704 (2003)
(charging document generally sufficient if it recites the language of the relevant
statutes). They also provided the date of the offense, the names of the victims
and some of the acts that were alleged to constitute the defendant’s negligence.
Accordingly, the informations provided the defendant with notice of the
allegations she had to meet at trial, and they did not need to allege “other
specific acts of the defendant or circumstances that would constitute a failure
to become aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk.” Pittera, 139 N.H. at
260.
III
Finally, the defendant argues that the evidence was insufficient as a
matter of law to permit the jury to find criminal negligence. She contends that
the evidence was insufficient because the State did not prove that her conduct
was wrongful or a gross deviation from the conduct of a reasonable person.
The court denied her motion to dismiss for insufficient evidence both at the
close of the State’s case and prior to closing arguments. To succeed on her
motion to dismiss:
The defendant had to establish that the evidence viewed in its
entirety, giving the State the benefit of all reasonable inferences,
was insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that [she] was
guilty of the crime charged. When reviewing the trial court’s denial
of a motion to dismiss, we view the evidence and reasonable
inferences arising therefrom in the manner most favorable to the
State. We review the entire trial record because, even though the
defendant is not required to present a case, if [she] chooses to do
so, [she] takes the chance that evidence presented in [her] case
may assist in proving the State’s case.
State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 349-50 (2005) (quotation and brackets
omitted).
Further:
To prevail on [her] challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, the
defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable
10
doubt. When the evidence is solely circumstantial, it must exclude
all rational conclusions except guilt. Under this standard,
however, we still consider the evidence in the light most favorable
to the State and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation.
Id. at 350 (quotation omitted). We also note that in reviewing a sufficiency of
the evidence claim, we consider all evidence, including evidence that we have
concluded was erroneously admitted. State v. Horak, 159 N.H. 576, 582
(2010).
In Shepard, we emphasized that “[t]he carelessness required for criminal
negligence is appreciably more serious than that for ordinary civil negligence,
and its seriousness must be apparent to anyone who shares the community’s
general sense of right and wrong.” Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746 (quotation,
brackets and ellipsis omitted). We held that criminal negligence requires both
a “failure to perceive a more than ordinary risk” and “some serious
blameworthiness in the conduct that caused it.” Id. (quotation omitted). In
doing so, we explained that in our prior cases, the evidence established that
the defendants’ wrongful conduct caused their failure to perceive a risk. Id. at
747; see also, e.g., Littlefield, 152 N.H. at 353 (defendant was intoxicated,
inattentive and traveling at excessive speed); Pittera, 139 N.H. at 261
(defendant was driving boat at excessive speed and too close to a swimming
area); Ebinger, 135 N.H. at 266-67 (defendant was intoxicated and traveling in
a breakdown lane). We overturned Shepard’s conviction because the evidence
showed only that the defendant inexplicably drifted over the double yellow line
for two seconds. Shepard, 158 N.H. at 747.
Here, the jury could have found that a reasonable person, in the
defendant’s place, would have seen Aiken’s motorcycle and avoided hitting it.
The accident occurred on a clear July night and the victims were riding on a
motorcycle equipped with a “Screaming Eagle” muffler, which made the
motorcycle louder than normal. The motorcycle’s headlight and running lights
were also on and working on the night of the crash. Additionally, one officer
determined the defendant’s line of sight from her position in the left turn lane
on Route 12 to be approximately 3,800 feet and a second officer measured it at
1,043 feet. While the defendant seeks to characterize her behavior as a poorly
timed left turn not rising to the level of criminal negligence, it is clear that she
“fail[ed] to perceive a more than ordinary risk.” Id. at 746.
Nonetheless, the defendant argues that just as in Shepard, the State did
not present any evidence of wrongful conduct. However, we specifically noted
in Shepard that there was no evidence that the defendant had consumed
alcohol or was speeding. Id. at 747. In this case, the jury could have
combined the defendant’s significant failure to perceive the motorcycle with
evidence that she consumed alcohol and still emanated a strong odor of alcohol
11
several hours after the accident to conclude that her conduct wrongfully
caused the accident.
The State presented evidence that the defendant still smelled of alcohol
several hours after the accident and had slurred speech. Thus, the jury was
free to weigh and draw inferences from all of this evidence and could factor it
into its decision that the defendant was criminally negligent. See Ebinger, 135
N.H. at 267. Alcohol consumption was one factor, among many, for the jury to
consider, see id., and it could have determined that her alcohol consumption
constituted “blameworthy conduct creating or contributing to a substantial and
unjustifiable risk of death or serious bodily injury.” Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746
(quotation and brackets omitted).
Because we reverse and remand for a new trial, we need not reach the
defendant’s remaining arguments.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
12