THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-786
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
LYNN DION
Argued: October 17, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 8, 2013
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Susan P. McGinnis, senior
assistant attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Wescott, Dyer, Fitzgerald & Nichols, P.A., of Laconia (Allison M. Ambrose
on the brief and orally), for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, Lynn Dion, appeals her conviction for
negligent homicide following a jury trial in Superior Court (Brown, J.). See RSA
630:3 (2007). On appeal, she argues: (1) that using a cellular telephone while
driving does not constitute the requisite wrongful or blameworthy conduct to
establish the culpable mental state for criminal negligence and, therefore, that
the evidence was insufficient to support her conviction; and (2) that the trial
court erred in denying her motion in limine to exclude certain of her cell phone
records. We affirm.
The jury could have found the following facts. On June 28, 2009, the
victim, Genny Bassett, and her friend, Elsa Gonnella, were at Bassett’s home in
Franklin. Shortly before 9:00 p.m., they began walking to Gonnella’s home.
They walked slowly, and Gonnella, who was about sixty years old, used an
umbrella for support while she walked. After crossing the bridge on Central
Street, they stopped at a crosswalk, which had recently been repainted white,
was well lit by streetlights, and was marked with a yellow and black pedestrian
crossing sign. After checking both ways for oncoming traffic, they began to
cross Central Street.
In the meantime, the defendant was driving from Sutton to her home in
Franklin. As she turned the corner of North Main Street onto Central Street in
the eastbound lane at the west end of the bridge, Bassett and Gonnella were
just stepping off the curb on Central Street at the other end of the bridge in the
westbound lane. The bridge was level, with no trees or leaves obstructing the
view of the crosswalk from the traffic on the bridge. They walked about fifty-
four feet, crossing the westbound lane of Central Street and most of the
eastbound lane. Gonnella then heard a “bang” and “went down.” When she
regained consciousness a few minutes later, she saw the defendant on the
sidewalk with a cell phone in her hand. Gonnella discovered Bassett, who was
wearing white pants and a light-colored denim jacket, in the road nearby,
unresponsive. Bassett had been hit by the right front bumper of the
defendant’s car, resulting in a fatal brain injury.
When Sergeant Richard Carlson of the Franklin Police Department
arrived at the scene, the street lights were on, though the sky was not
completely dark. The defendant told Carlson that she did not see Bassett and
Gonnella in the crosswalk. She stated that just before reaching the end of the
bridge, she heard a loud “pop” and felt glass coming into her car. Although
admitting that she made several calls on her cell phone throughout her trip,
the defendant said that she made the last call while passing Benson’s Auto,
which is on North Main Street at the west end of the bridge. She denied that
she was on the phone at the time of the collision.
Law enforcement officers conducted reconstruction analysis of the
collision. The skid marks on the road, the distance that the victim was thrown
forward, and the statement of the defendant all supported the conclusion that
at the time of the collision, the defendant’s vehicle was travelling at 30 miles
per hour. Based upon an average walking speed of four feet per second, the
officers concluded that 13.5 seconds elapsed from the time that Bassett and
Gonnella stepped off the curb until the impact. They also determined that it
would have taken the defendant 1.5 seconds, at most, to react to someone in
the road ahead, either by applying her brakes or by turning her steering wheel.
Based upon these findings, the officers’ accident report reflected their
conclusion that, rather than experiencing a momentary distraction such as
2
may be caused by “a sneeze” or “changing of the radio station,” the defendant
had “a large amount of time and distance to see the pedestrian[s] and bring her
vehicle to a stop” and, therefore, the defendant failed to exercise due care in
avoiding the collision, negligently causing Bassett’s death.
Prior to opening statements, the jury travelled by bus to view the
accident scene. The prosecutor instructed the jury to pay particular attention
to the lighting in the area, to note whether there were any obstacles to
visibility, and to “take a look down Central Street and pay attention to the
things that you would pay attention to as the driver in a vehicle.”
At trial, over the defendant’s objection, the State introduced the
defendant’s cell phone records for the time that she drove from Sutton to
Franklin. The records revealed that during the thirty-seven minute trip, she
made and received a number of calls, sometimes using the “call waiting”
feature to switch back and forth between conversations. Following calls to
other people, the defendant called Judy McIntire, who did not answer. At
9:04:17 p.m., McIntire’s voice mail picked up the call. The defendant hung up
four seconds later, without leaving a message. McIntire testified that it was
unusual for the defendant to call her and fail to leave a message. The next call
that the defendant placed was to the Franklin police at 9:05:52 – one and one-
half minutes later.
At the close of the State’s case, the defendant moved to dismiss, arguing
that the only blameworthy conduct the jury could attribute to her was the use
of her cell phone while she was driving and that such use is not illegal. The
trial court denied the motion. The defense then called its sole witness, the
defendant. She testified that she was “probably an eighth to a quarter of a mile
from the bridge” when she called McIntire and that the phone was on the
passenger seat when she turned onto the bridge. She stated that she crossed
the bridge, did not see anybody walking, saw a “flash of blue” out of the corner
of her eye, and heard the windshield pop. When she looked in the mirror and
realized there was “somebody in the street,” she stopped, got out of the car with
the phone in her hand, and called the police.
The jury returned a verdict of guilty. The defendant moved to set aside
the verdict, arguing that the evidence was insufficient to support a finding of
guilt. The trial court denied the motion. This appeal followed.
The defendant first argues that the trial court erred in denying her
motion to dismiss and motion to set aside the verdict because there was
insufficient evidence of any wrongful or blameworthy conduct. She contends
that using a cell phone while driving is not illegal in New Hampshire and, in
and of itself, does not rise to the level of blameworthy conduct required to
establish criminal negligence.
3
The issue on appeal as to both the motion to dismiss and the motion to
set aside the verdict is the sufficiency of the evidence. State v. Shepard, 158
N.H. 743, 745 (2009). We review the entire trial record because, even though
the defendant is not required to present a case, if she chooses to do so, she
takes the chance that evidence presented in her case may assist in proving the
State’s case. State v. Littlefield, 152 N.H. 331, 350 (2005) (quotation omitted).
To prevail, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of fact, viewing all of
the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most favorable to
the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Shepard, 158
N.H. at 746.
The negligent homicide statute, RSA 630:3, I, states: “A person is guilty
of a class B felony when he causes the death of another negligently.” The
Criminal Code further provides that:
[a] person acts negligently with respect to a material element of an
offense when he fails to become aware of a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result
from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and degree
that his failure to become aware of it constitutes a gross deviation
from the conduct that a reasonable person would observe in the
situation.
RSA 626:2, II(d) (2007).
“[A] person charged with criminal negligence may not be convicted on
evidence that establishes only ordinary negligence.” Littlefield, 152 N.H. at
350. “[T]he carelessness required for criminal negligence is appreciably more
serious than that for ordinary civil negligence, and . . . must be such that its
seriousness would be apparent to anyone who shares the community’s general
sense of right and wrong.” Id. (quotation omitted). As we have clarified,
“[c]riminal negligence requires not only the failure to perceive a more than
ordinary risk, but also some serious blameworthiness in the conduct that
caused it.” Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746 (quotation omitted).
Citing RSA 265:105-a (Supp. 2012), which prohibits “text messaging”
while driving, the defendant asserts that talking on a cell phone while driving is
not prohibited and, therefore, cannot constitute the requisite blameworthy
conduct. Indeed, that statute specifically excludes from its prohibition
“read[ing], select[ing], or enter[ing] a phone number or name in a wireless
communications device for the purpose of making a phone call.” Id. Contrary
to the defendant’s argument, however, conduct that is, itself, not prohibited,
including use of a cell phone while driving, may constitute the requisite
blameworthy conduct when such use results in inattention or distraction.
4
Indeed, “the state had no burden to show that driving while using a cell phone
is always risky or dangerous, or that it, of itself, creates a substantial and
unjustifiable risk, only that [the defendant’s] use of a cell phone in this case
created a substantial and unjustifiable risk because it interfered with her
ability to maintain a proper lookout for [pedestrians].” Montgomery v. State,
369 S.W.3d 188, 194 (Tex. Crim. App. 2012).
The issue here is not whether cell phone use while driving is per se
blameworthy. Rather, the issue is whether inattention caused by cell phone
use or any other “legal” activity, resulting in the failure to avoid a pedestrian in
a crosswalk, demonstrates a level of carelessness the seriousness of which
should be “apparent to anyone who shares the community’s general sense of
right and wrong.” Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746 (quotation omitted). Here, the
jury, whose judgment best reflects “the prevalent sense of the community,”
Cloutier v. A. & P. Tea Co., Inc., 121 N.H. 915, 924 (1981) (quotation omitted),
unanimously determined that the defendant’s conduct constituted criminal
negligence.
Under New Hampshire law, a driver must “yield the right of way, slowing
down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway
within a crosswalk.” RSA 265:35 (2004). Bassett and Gonnella were crossing
the street in a well lit, newly painted crosswalk that was marked with a
pedestrian crossing sign. Bassett was wearing white pants that would have
been “very visible at night time.” The defendant had 13.5 seconds of clear
visibility as she drove across the bridge, during which time Bassett and
Gonnella crossed the entire westbound lane and most of the eastbound lane,
passing directly in front of the defendant before the front passenger side of her
car struck Bassett. The jury, which had taken a view of the accident scene,
could have inferred that the defendant’s inattention to the road in front of her
demonstrated that she failed to “exercise that degree of care, diligence and
safety that an ordinarily prudent person would exercise under similar
circumstances.” Com. v. McGrath, 805 N.E. 2d 508, 513 (Mass. App. Ct. 2004)
(quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that this case is controlled by Shepard. To the
contrary, we find the facts here readily distinguishable. In Shepard, the
defendant’s car “inexplicably drifted over the double yellow line and into
oncoming traffic for no more than two seconds.” Id. at 747. We concluded that
the defendant’s two-second failure to keep his car in its lane did not constitute
criminal negligence as a matter of law. Id. Here, by contrast, the defendant
had 13.5 seconds in which to see Bassett and Gonnella in the crosswalk as she
drove across the bridge, her view was unobstructed, and it would have taken
her, at most, 1.5 seconds to react upon seeing the women. Nevertheless, at no
time before striking Bassett did the defendant slow down, apply her brakes, or
swerve, indicating that the defendant had completely failed to see them. This
5
evidence was sufficient to support a conclusion that the defendant’s inattention
was “a gross deviation from the conduct that a reasonable person would
observe in the situation.” RSA 626:2, II(d).
“[A]lthough talking on a [cell] phone would not establish negligence as a
matter of law, it is at least some evidence from which a jury could infer that the
driver was not devoting [her] full time and attention to [her] driving, i.e., that
she was not exercising reasonable care under the circumstances.” Butts v.
United States, 822 A.2d 407, 419 (D.C. 2003) (quotation and brackets omitted).
Under all the circumstances of this case, we conclude that a reasonable jury,
viewing the evidence and all reasonable inferences from it in the light most
favorable to the State, could have found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. See
Shepard, 158 N.H. at 746.
The defendant next argues that the trial court erred in denying her
motion in limine to exclude “prior phone records” – that is, records of her cell
phone calls during the thirty-seven minutes prior to the collision. She asserts
that such records were irrelevant, more prejudicial than probative, and used as
impermissible character evidence under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence
404(b). We note at the outset that the defendant never filed a motion in limine
seeking to exclude the phone records. Nor did she object when the State
referenced the records in its opening statement. Rather, the defendant waited
until the second day of trial to raise the issue for the first time. The trial court
noted that it had “some significant concerns . . . as to the timeliness of this
motion.” See State v. Guay, 130 N.H. 413, 419 (1988) (clarifying that objection
to prosecutor’s opening statement should be made immediately after State’s
opening). Although stating that it did not “appreciate issues like this that arise
in the middle of trial,” the trial court nonetheless considered the motion, and
ultimately concluded that the cell phone records were admissible under Rule
404(b) as circumstantial evidence of the defendant’s state of mind leading up to
the point of impact.
Although the defendant sought to exclude the records under Rule 404(b),
we conclude that they do not constitute evidence of “other crimes, wrongs or
acts” subject to Rule 404(b) but, rather, constitute evidence of conduct that is
“inextricably intertwined” with evidence of the crime charged. State v.
Nightingale, 160 N.H. 569, 574 (2010) (quotation omitted).
The proper test to apply in deciding the admissibility of
“similar acts” or “other acts” evidence depends upon whether the
evidence in question is “intrinsic” or “extrinsic” evidence. “Other
act” evidence is “intrinsic” when the evidence of the other act and
the evidence of the crime charged are “inextricably intertwined” or
both acts are part of a “single criminal episode” or the other acts
were “necessary preliminaries” to the crime charged.
6
United States v. Williams, 900 F.2d 823, 825 (5th Cir. 1990); see State v.
Farrell, 145 N.H. 733, 741-42 (2001) (reversing trial court ruling that specific
instances of defendant’s conduct in days prior to shooting were not evidence of
“other crimes, wrongs, or acts”). The State’s contention at trial was that the
defendant was so distracted by her cell phone use on the drive from Sutton to
Franklin that she “failed to pay due attention and failed to avoid Genny Bassett
walking in the road ahead,” and that such failure resulted in the collision and
Bassett’s death. Thus, the cell phone records were evidence of acts intrinsic to
the conduct charged in the indictment and, consequently, Rule 404(b) is not
implicated. See Williams, 900 F.2d at 825. Rather, the applicable test for
admissibility of the cell phone records is found in Rule 403. Nightingale, 160
N.H. at 574.
Under Rule 403, relevant evidence “may be excluded if its probative value
is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of the
issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of
time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence.” N.H. R. Ev. 403. The
prejudice required to establish reversible error is an undue tendency to induce
a decision against the defendant on some improper basis, commonly one that
is emotionally charged. Id. Here, the defendant contends that the records of
her cell phone use were introduced “to outrage the jury, confuse the issues and
cause the jury to base its decision on its anger and frustration of present day
drivers [who] talk on the cell phone.” We disagree. Sergeant Carlson testified
that the defendant admitted to him that she “had made phone calls throughout
her trip.” Further, the records of the calls bore directly on the issue of the
defendant’s attentiveness in the minutes leading up to the collision. Thus, to
the extent the jury considered the phone records in its determination, such
consideration was not improper. Under the circumstances, any danger of
unfair prejudice resulting from the admission of the cell phone records did not
substantially outweigh their probative value.
We note that the trial court applied Rule 404(b) in concluding that the
defendant’s cell phone records were admissible. Although the proper test for
admissibility was Rule 403, we nevertheless uphold the court’s determination.
“[W]here the trial court reaches the correct result on mistaken grounds, we will
affirm if valid alternative grounds support the decision.” Id. at 575-76
(quotation omitted); cf. State v. Trainor, 130 N.H. 371, 375 (1988) (noting that
Rule 403 analysis is part of analysis under Rule 404(b)).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7