THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Carroll
No. 2010-812
ALFRED R. MARSHALL, JR. & a.
v.
JAMES J. BURKE, JR. & a.
Argued: June 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: October 12, 2011
Cooper, Cargill & Chant, P.A. of North Conway (Randall F. Cooper on the
brief and orally) for the plaintiffs.
Orr & Reno, P.A. of Concord (Jeremy D. Eggleton on the brief and orally)
for the defendants.
LYNN, J. The plaintiffs, Alfred and Susan Marshall, appeal an order of
the Superior Court (Houran, J.) granting summary judgment in favor of the
defendants1 on the plaintiffs’ claim to a prescriptive easement over defendants’
1
The defendants are James J. Burke and Patricia M. Burke, Thomas E. Williams, G. Thomas Jensen
and Beverly Ann Jensen, Joan C. Picard, and the Deer Cove Shorefront Owners Association.
beach front property (the “Beach Lot”) on Lake Ossipee. We reverse and
remand.
The summary judgment record reveals the following pertinent facts. The
Beach Lot is located to the west of Lake Ossipee between the lake and Deer
Cove Road. To the west of Deer Cove Road are the properties of the individual
defendants. To the west of the lots of these defendants is Benson Road, and to
the west of Benson Road is the plaintiffs’ property.
The plaintiffs’ and the defendants’ lots were originally part of a parcel
acquired by Francis H. Lord in 1871. Lord sold several beachfront lots (but not
the Beach Lot) during his lifetime. After Lord’s death, his heirs continued to
sell parcels from his land, including several non-waterfront back lots. Title to
the Beach Lot ultimately passed through Lord’s heirs to the University of New
Hampshire, which conveyed the Beach Lot to Charles Banfill in 1955. The
Town of Ossipee (Town) acquired title to the Beach Lot by a tax collector’s deed
dated December 13, 1987. The Town conveyed the Beach Lot to Florence
Banfill by quitclaim deed dated September 1, 1993. Banfill in turn conveyed
the Beach Lot to the Deer Cove Shorefront Owners’ Association (DCSOA). In
1998, DCSOA conveyed to each of the individual defendants that portion of the
Beach Lot that is located across Deer Cove Road from his or her lot.
In June 2010, the plaintiffs filed this action seeking a court
determination that they hold prescriptive rights to use Blanchard Road2 and
the Beach Lot. The plaintiffs claimed that, prior to the Town’s acquisition of
the Beach Lot by tax deed in 1987, they and their predecessors had made more
than twenty years of open, adverse, continuous and uninterrupted use of the
Beach Lot to access Lake Ossipee, thus giving them a prescriptive easement
over that lot. The defendants challenged the plaintiffs’ claim on five grounds,
one being that any prescriptive easement to use the Beach Lot, which may
have existed prior to 1987, was extinguished by the Town’s acquisition of the
property by tax deed in that year. The trial court agreed with the defendants
on this point and therefore did not address their other arguments. Without
deciding whether the plaintiffs actually had an easement prior to 1987, the
court held that even assuming such easement existed, the tax deed cut off even
ripened prescriptive rights as a matter of law. This appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Big League Entm’t v. Brox
2 Blanchard Road runs from Benson Road to Deer Cove Road over the Burke lot (Lot 68) and provides
plaintiffs’ means of access to the Beach Lot. Although plaintiffs’ suit claimed an easement to use Blanchard
Road as well as the Beach Lot, the trial court’s summary judgment order did not address the alleged
Blanchard Road easement and therefore it is not before this court in the instant appeal.
2
Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). If our review of that evidence discloses no
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
On appeal, the plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred in determining
that our decision in Burke v. Pierro, 159 N.H. 504 (2009), compelled the
conclusion that any easement the plaintiffs might have had prior to the tax
deed was extinguished by that deed. The defendants dispute this, arguing that
the trial court properly construed Burke. We agree with the plaintiffs.
In Burke, we considered a prescriptive easement claim made by different
back lot owners (the Pierros) to the same Beach Lot involved in this case.
Unlike the plaintiffs here, the Pierros did not claim that they had made adverse
use of the Beach Lot for twenty years before the date the Town acquired title to
the lot.3 Instead, they argued that the tax deed was invalid and therefore “was
irrelevant to their asserted twenty years of uninterrupted beach usage . . . .”
Id. at 512. We held that the Pierros’ challenge to the tax sale was untimely
because it was asserted more than ten years after the tax deed was recorded.
See RSA 80:39 (2003). Because the Pierros’ total claimed adverse use exceeded
twenty years, even if the time during which the Beach Lot was owned by the
Town was excluded, we were then required to decide the effect of the Town’s
ownership; that is, whether it merely interrupted the running of the adverse
possession period, as we had held in Kellison v. McIsaac, 131 N.H. 675, 681
(1989), or whether it started that period running anew. We concluded that it
had the latter effect, holding that “a municipality’s title to land through tax
foreclosure proceedings extinguishes the prescriptive period accumulated prior
to a tax sale.” Burke, 159 N.H. at 512.
The trial court recognized that Burke was distinguishable from this case
in that it did not involve a claim to a ripened prescriptive easement that existed
before the tax sale. The court also acknowledged that in Gowen v. Swain, 90
N.H. 383 (1939), we held that a tax sale did not divest an easement over
property that had existed for at least thirty-five years prior to the tax sale.
However, relying on language we quoted from an ALR Annotation that “‘the title
conveyed by a [tax sale] is . . . a new and paramount title to the land in fee
simple absolute, . . . free from all equities and encumbrances existing prior to
the sale,’” Burke, 159 N.H. at 512-13 (quoting Annotation, Quantum of Estate
Acquired by Purchaser at Tax sale of Property Which is Subject to Successive
Estates or Different Interests, 75 A.L.R. 416, 417 (1931)), the trial court found
that “Burke is wholly inconsistent with Gowen” and “conclude[d], therefore,
that Gowen ha[d] been overruled sub silencio . . . .” As additional support for
3 To establish an easement by prescription, the claimant must prove, by a preponderance of the evidence,
twenty years of adverse, continuous and uninterrupted use of the land. See, e.g., Flanagan v. Prudhomme,
138 N.H. 561, 571-72 (1994).
3
this conclusion, the trial court noted that in adopting the majority in rem view
of the effect of a tax sale, Burke cited approvingly the decision in Harrison v.
Everett, 308 P.2d 216 (1957), a case in which the Colorado Supreme Court
held that a tax deed extinguished even a ripened claim of title by adverse
possession. See Burke, 159 N.H. at 514. We hold that Burke did not overrule
Gowen and that a tax sale does not extinguish prescriptive easements that
have ripened into vested property rights prior to recording of the tax deed.
Our opinion in Burke did not cite or reference Gowen in any way, and
while, like the trial court, we acknowledge the reality that a case may be
overruled sub silencio, see Central Virginia Community College v. Katz, 546
U.S. 356, 382 (2006) (Thomas, J., dissenting), such a conclusion should not be
reached except on inescapable grounds, as to do otherwise is inconsistent with
settled principles of stare decisis. See id. at 363 (opinion for the Court by
Stevens, J.) (“we are not bound to follow our dicta in a prior case in which the
point now at issue was not fully debated”); 20 Am Jur 2d, Courts § 134 (2005)
(“a case is not binding precedent on a point of law where the holding is only
implicit or assumed in the decision but is not announced”); see also Agostini v.
Felton, 521 U.S. 203, 237 (1997) (“If a precedent of this Court has direct
application in a case, yet appears to rest on reasons rejected in some other line
of decisions, the [lower courts] should follow the case which directly controls,
leaving to this Court the prerogative of overruling its own decisions.” (quotation
and brackets omitted)). The defendants argue that “[t]here is no reason why a
tax sale should be an in rem proceeding that creates a virgin title when an
adverse possession has not ripened, and an in personam proceeding that
transfers only the title held by the person assessed when an adverse
possession has ripened.” We do not retreat from the view that tax sales are in
rem proceedings in the sense that collection of the taxes due is limited to
recovery from the property itself rather than from its owners, but assigning
them this designation does not answer the question of what consequences flow
from the designation. And while we acknowledge the existence of some tension
between Gowen’s holding and certain language in Burke describing a tax deed
as creating a “new and paramount title,”4 the two decisions are not
fundamentally at odds. The important distinguishing feature between the
cases is that Gowen dealt with a vested right, while Burke involved the mere
possibility that continued adverse use for the remainder of the limitations
period would ripen into a prescriptive easement. It is one thing to rule, as we
did in Burke, that a tax sale extinguishes budding but as yet unripened
prescriptive rights accruing prior to the tax sale, and quite another to hold, as
4 We observe that there is a similar tension between defendants’ argument that a tax sale should be
regarded as a purely in rem proceeding, on the one hand, and its support of the holding in Buchholz v.
Waterville Estates Assoc., 156 N.H.172 (2007), that a tax sale does not extinguish condominium covenants,
on the other. If by “in rem proceeding” defendants mean a proceeding that results in issuance of a tax deed
that extinguishes all interests aside from the fee ownership of the tax sale purchaser, then our decision in
Buchholz could not stand.
4
we refused to do in Gowen, that a tax sale extinguishes prescriptive rights that
already exist at the time the tax sale occurs.
The defendants next argue5 that, even if Burke did not implicitly overrule
Gowen, we should now do so explicitly. Relying on the factors we cited in Kalil
v. Town of Dummer Zoning Board of Adjustment, 159 N.H. 725 (2010), for
determining whether to overrule precedent, the defendants argue that these
factors weigh in favor of overruling Gowen. The factors in question are whether:
(1) the rule has proven to be intolerable simply in defying practical workability;
(2) the rule is subject to a kind of reliance that would lend special hardship to
the consequences of overruling; (3) related principles of law have so far
developed as to have left the old rule no more than a remnant of abandoned
doctrine; and (4) facts have so changed, or come to be seen so differently, as to
have robbed the old rule of significant application or justification. Kalil, 159
N.H. at 731. We disagree that these factors warrant overruling Gowen.
Regarding the first factor, the defendants argue that sound public policy
dictates overruling Gowen because it is impractical for tax assessors to
ascertain the existence of prescriptive easements that have not been reduced to
judgment and recorded in the land records. The short answer to this argument
is that any such burden is more theoretical than real because, under Gowen,
properties sold for taxes are sold subject to ripened prescriptive easements,
and while assessors are presumed to take account of the impact of easements
on the value of properties, the practical reality is that the actual burden of
insuring that this occurs is placed on the property owner through the tax
abatement process. See Gowen, 90 N.H. at 387; see also RSA 76:16, I (Supp.
2010) (“[s]electmen or assessors, for good cause shown, may abate any tax
assessed” (emphasis added)); Porter v. Town of Sanbornton, 150 N.H. 363, 367
(2003) (taxpayer bears the burden of proof in abatement proceedings).
We recognize that, in addition to Harrison, a number of other courts
which have adopted the in rem view of tax sales have relied on the rationale of
facilitating the marketability of tax titles as the basis for holding that such
sales extinguish not just accruing prescriptive claims but also ripened
prescriptive rights. However, most of these cases, including Harrison itself,
involved claims of a fee interest acquired by adverse possession rather than, as
here, a claim to an appurtenant easement. See Killon v. Meeks, 777 N.E.2d
1007, 1011-12 (Ill. App. Ct. 2002); Lippert v. Jung, 783 A.2d 206, 219 (Md.
2001); Overstreet v. City of Raleigh, 330 S.E.2d 643, 645 (N.C. Ct. App. 1985);
Congregation Yetev Lev D’Satmar, Inc. v. County of Sullivan, 452 N.E.2d 1207,
5 In their brief, the defendants assert that the plaintiffs knew or should have known of prior proceedings
(including the Burke case) involving the Beach Lot, did not join those proceedings, and that the result of those
proceedings “should have rendered the Appellees’ titles to the Beach Lot unassailable.” Because the trial
court did not reach any of these issues and the defendants did not cross-appeal, we do not address these
issues either and leave them for the trial court on remand.
5
1212-13 (N.Y. 1983); Leciejewski v. Sedlak, 342 N.W.2d 734, 739 (Wisc. 1984).
But see Wolfson v. Heins, 6 So.2d 858, 860-61 (Fla. 1942) (holding that tax
sale extinguishes even recorded appurtenant easement); Nedderman v. City of
Des Moines, 268 N.W. 36, 37-38 (Iowa 1936) (holding that tax sale
extinguished recorded restrictive covenant).
In the tax sale context, there is a crucial distinction between a claim to a
fee interest and a claim to an appurtenant easement. In the case of a fee
interest, the value of that interest to the holder – and the value subject to
taxation – is reflected in the property itself. Accordingly, where one claiming
entitlement to the benefit of that value through adverse possession has not
paid the taxes due on the property, depending upon the facts, there may be no
unfairness in holding that a sale of the property by the taxing authority
extinguishes the interest. See Congregation Yetev Lev D’Satmar, Inc., 452
N.E.2d at 1211 (“[s]tatutes taxing real property are universal and property
owners [including those claiming ownership by adverse possession] are
chargeable with knowledge that taxes will be levied against the property
regularly and that a default may result in forfeiture of the land”). With an
appurtenant prescriptive easement, however, the value of that interest is
deemed to be reflected in the property that is benefitted by the easement (the
dominant estate), and, conversely, the easement is regarded as diminishing the
value to the servient estate (here the Beach Lot). Where the taxes have been
paid on the dominant estate, it is at least unfair – and arguably would
constitute a taking or deprivation of property without due process of law, see
Hayes v. Gibbs, 169 P.2d 781, 786 (Utah 1946) – to the owner of the dominant
estate to extinguish the easement simply because the taxes were not paid on
the (reduced) value of the servient property. This is not only the precise
reasoning we adopted in Gowen, see Gowen, 90 N.H. at 387-88, but also is the
rationale which supports the majority view that a tax sale does not extinguish
an appurtenant easement. See Alvin v Johnson, 63 N.W.2d 22, 26 (Minn.
1954) (“An easement which lies upon one lot but is appurtenant to another lot
is really part of the latter. It is carved out of the former. So it would appear
that, when the servient lot is sold for taxes not paid upon it, the easement
ought not to pass to the purchaser; the lot should pass subject to the
easement, or, to express it another way, the lot less the easement should pass.”
(quotation omitted)); Restatement (Third) of Property (Servitudes) § 7.9, at 391
(2000) (“The majority of courts that have considered the question have
concluded that tax-foreclosure sales do not result in extinguishment of some
servitudes.”); accord Buchholz, 156 N.H. at 175; see also Annotation,
Easement, Servitude, or Covenant as Affected by Sale for Taxes, 7 A.L.R. 5th
187 (1992); Annotation, Easement or Servitude or Restrictive Covenant as
Affected by Sale for Taxes, 168 A.L.R. 529 (1947). And while it might be
possible to distinguish between recorded and unrecorded appurtenant
easements, extending protection from tax sales only to the former, given our
law’s long history of recognizing unrecorded prescriptive easements as a valid
6
property right, we agree with the Minnesota Supreme Court that “the
arguments which support survival of a recorded easement from a tax deed are
equally weighty and pertinent when considering the survival of an easement by
prescription.” Alvin, 63 N.W.2d at 28; see also Helle v. Markotan, 137 N.E.2d
715 (Ohio Com. Pl. 1955) (holding that tax sale did not extinguish pre-existing
easement by implication).
The defendants next argue that there are no significant reliance interests
that would be adversely affected by overruling Gowen. Again, we disagree.
While it is true that if we limited such a ruling strictly to unrecorded
easements, such as the prescriptive easement at issue here, the decision would
cast no doubt on the validity of recorded easements or restrictive covenants
such as those at issue in Buchholz, even such a narrow decision would upset
settled expectations of property rights under existing New Hampshire law.
Under the holding of Gowen, it has been the law of this state for more than
seventy years that property owners holding a ripened prescriptive easement
appurtenant do not lose this property right when the servient estate is sold for
taxes. Based on this holding, it is reasonable to assume that such property
owners have felt no particular need to pay attention to the tax status of
adjoining or neighborhood properties burdened by the easements from which
their properties benefit. If a decision overruling Gowen were applied
retroactively, there would be a real risk that some owners who relied on the
protection offered by that case would find themselves deprived of their property
– a prospect that would raise obvious constitutional concerns. Cf. Crespon v.
McCullough, 2008 WL 4767060, at *10-14 (Tenn. Ct. App. Oct. 29, 2008)
(holding that due process would be violated by applying a Tennessee Supreme
Court decision that effectively overruled prior precedent retroactively where to
do so would extinguish plaintiffs’ vested rights); Opinion of the Justices, 131
N.H. 645, 651 (1989) (declining to apply decision in White v. Wolfeboro, 131
N.H. 1 (1988) retroactively where it “upset customary tax sale practices,” “was
not foreshadowed clearly by any cases which came before it,” and “inequities
would result . . . [to p]roperty owners, whose titles contain a tax deed and who
previously had believed their titles to be marketable and unencumbered, [but]
now face unmarketable and clouded titles”). But even if Gowen were overruled
only prospectively, the result would still require fundamental change in the
behavior of property owners and would create the potential for widespread
hardship for those unable to or unaware of the need to adjust to such change.
See Hayes, 169 P.2d at 788 (rejecting argument that efficiency of tax collection
process required that easements be extinguished by tax sale because “[t]o
follow such a theory would create a great insecurity of titles by placing
unreasonable burdens upon landowners by putting them in the precarious
position of seeing that . . . their . . . neighbors are properly assessed and their
taxes paid, in order to protect their property from the loss of [appurtenant
easements]”).
7
The defendants contend that the third and fourth Kalil factors also
warrant overruling Gowen. Specifically, they argue that Gowen “reflects an era
when tax titles in American jurisdictions were generally more vulnerable to
challenge, and [that] the modern trend in both statutory and case law is to
make tax titles less contestable.” In response to this argument, we note first
that, with respect to statutory law, the defendants have not brought to our
attention any substantive changes in the New Hampshire statutory scheme
regarding property taxation since Gowen was decided that would warrant our
revisiting the holding of that case. More importantly, while we are fully
cognizant of the strong public interest in insuring the ready marketability of
tax titles, we have been made aware of no information suggesting that, in the
seventy plus years Gowen has been the law, the survivability of ripened
prescriptive easements following a tax sale has proved to be an impediment to
New Hampshire municipalities in the collection of property taxes. Indeed, if
Gowen were a significant problem in this regard, we expect the legislature
would long ago have taken action to remedy the situation, and, subject to
constitutional limitations, it retains the ability to do so if it disagrees with
today’s decision.
Finally, the defendants attempt to distinguish Gowen on the grounds
that the prescriptive easement in Gowen was “open and obvious” (as evidenced
by wheel tracks leading over the servient property and gaps in the stone walls
at either end of the property), whereas the easement claimed by the plaintiffs is
not. Although the defendants have accurately described the easement as
recited in Gowen, the problem with this argument is that there is no indication
in the opinion that the open and obvious character of the easement played any
role in the court’s decision. Rather, as noted previously, the court simply
presumed that tax assessors take account of easements, and then observed
that if this assumption was incorrect, the remedy lay in an abatement
proceeding. Gowen, 90 N.H. at 387.
For the reasons stated above, the superior court’s order granting
summary judgment in favor of the defendants is reversed and the case is
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
8