THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2011-162
DANA CHATMAN
v.
STRAFFORD COUNTY & a.
Argued: February 15, 2012
Opinion Issued: March 9, 2012
Bussiere & Bussiere, P.A., of Manchester (John P. Fagan on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Getman, Schulthess & Steere, P.A., of Bedford (Andrew R. Schulman on
the brief and orally), for the defendants.
DALIANIS, C.J. The plaintiff, Dana Chatman, appeals the order of the
Superior Court (Brown, J.) dismissing his negligence claim against defendant
Paul Giampa and his respondeat superior claim against defendants Strafford
County (County) and Strafford County Department of Corrections (Corrections
Department), pursuant to RSA 507-B:2 (2010). The plaintiff argues either that
RSA 507-B:2 allows his claims because they arose out of the ownership,
occupation, maintenance or operation of a motor vehicle or that RSA 507-B:2
violates his rights under the State Constitution to equal protection and to a
remedy, see N.H. CONST. pt. I, arts. 2, 14. Because we conclude that the
plaintiff’s claims arose out of the operation of a motor vehicle, we hold that RSA
507-B:2 permits them. Therefore, we reverse the trial court’s decision.
We accept the following allegations contained in the plaintiff’s writ as
true for the purposes of this appeal. See Chatman v. Brady, 162 N.H. 362, 363
(2011). On September 9, 2007, the plaintiff was participating in a work
program under the control of the Corrections Department. Id. That day, he
was assigned to assist in cleaning the site of the Lee County Fair under the
supervision of Giampa, a Corrections Department employee. See id. Giampa
directed the plaintiff and others to load numerous tables and chairs onto a
trailer owned by James Brady. The trailer was not yet hitched to another
vehicle and was located on uneven, soft ground. See id. After the trailer was
fully loaded with tables and chairs, Giampa directed the plaintiff and others to
lift it and hitch it to a pickup truck also owned by Brady. While the plaintiff
and others were trying to hitch the trailer to the pickup truck, a weld on the
trailer jack and/or the hitch failed, causing the trailer to fall on the plaintiff’s
left leg and ankle. See id. As a result, the plaintiff sustained permanent injury
to his left leg and ankle. See id.
On September 7, 2010, the plaintiff sued the defendants, alleging that
Giampa had been negligent and that the County and Corrections Department
were vicariously liable for his negligence under the doctrine of respondeat
superior. The defendants moved to dismiss the plaintiff’s claims on the ground
that they were barred by RSA 507-B:2 because they did not “aris[e] out of [the
County’s] ownership, occupation, maintenance or operation of [a] motor
vehicle[ ].” RSA 507-B:2. The plaintiff objected, arguing in the alternative that
either his claims arose out of the County’s “operation of” the truck (“[a] motor
vehicle”), RSA 507-B:2, or that RSA 507-B:2 was unconstitutional. The trial
court agreed with the defendants that the plaintiff’s claims did not fall within
the scope of RSA 507-B:2 and declined to find that RSA 507-B:2 was
unconstitutional. This appeal followed.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss on appeal, we examine whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s writ are reasonably susceptible of a construction
that would permit recovery. J & M Lumber & Constr. Co. v. Smyjunas, 161
N.H. 714, 724 (2011). We assume the plaintiff’s factual allegations to be true
and construe all reasonable inferences to be drawn from them in the light most
favorable to him. Id. We need not, however, assume the truth of statements
that are merely conclusions of law. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry
that tests the facts in the writ against the applicable law and will affirm the
trial court’s dismissal if the writ’s allegations do not constitute a basis for legal
relief. Id.
Because we decide cases on constitutional grounds only when necessary,
see Buzzard v. F.F. Enters., 161 N.H. 28, 29 (2010), the first issue for our
2
review is whether RSA 507-B:2 bars the plaintiff’s claims. Resolving this issue
requires us to interpret RSA 507-B:2 and related statutes. The interpretation
of a statute is a question of law, which we review de novo. Billewicz v.
Ransmeier, 161 N.H. 145, 151 (2010). We are the final arbiter of the intent of
the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a whole.
Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. 659, 662 (2011). We first examine the language of
the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to the words used. Id.
We interpret legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language the legislature did not see
fit to include. Id. Furthermore, we interpret statutes in the context of the
overall statutory scheme and not in isolation. Id. “In so doing, we are better
able to discern the legislature’s intent, and therefore better able to understand
the statutory language in light of the policy sought to be advanced by the entire
statutory scheme.” Id. (quotation omitted).
RSA chapter 507-B (2010) governs “BODILY INJURY ACTIONS AGAINST
GOVERNMENTAL UNITS.” Under RSA 507-B:1, a governmental unit means
“any political subdivision within the state, including any county . . . or
departments . . . thereof.” RSA 507-B:2 provides, in pertinent part: “A
governmental unit may be held liable for damages in an action to recover for
bodily injury, personal injury or property damage caused by its fault or by fault
attributable to it, arising out of ownership, occupation, maintenance or
operation of all motor vehicles, and all premises.”
We have previously explained that the plain meaning of the phrase
“operation of all motor vehicles” is: “the operating of or putting and
maintaining in action of something (as a machine or an industry) <careful
[operation] of a motor car> <problems in the [operation] of a railroad>.” Farm
Family Casualty Ins. Co. v. Town of Rollinsford, 155 N.H. 669, 674 (2007)
(quotation omitted); see Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1581
(unabridged ed. 2002). In Farm Family Casualty Insurance Company, we
explained:
Farm Family’s preferred definitions all lack a direct object; they
speak of operation, not the operation of something. But RSA
507-B:2 allows suits against governmental units for certain
damages “arising out of . . . operation of all [motor vehicles, and]
all premises.” (Emphasis added.) Of the definitions of “operation”
that appear in Webster’s Dictionary, the ones that pertain to the
operation of something are these: “the whole process of planning
for and operating a business or other organized unit < the
[operation] of a large household> <the [operation] of a steel mill>
. . . the operating of or putting and maintaining in action of
something (as a machine or an industry) <careful [operation] of a
motor car> <problems in the [operation] of a railroad>.”
3
Farm Family Casualty Ins. Co., 155 N.H. at 673-74 (ellipsis omitted); see
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, supra at 1581; see also Com. v.
Ginnetti, 508 N.E.2d 603, 604-05 (Mass. 1987) (observing that under
Massachusetts statute, person operates motor vehicle “when, in the vehicle, he
intentionally does any act or makes use of any mechanical or electrical agency
which alone or in sequence will set in motion the motive power of the vehicle.
The words of the statute include the setting in motion of the operative
machinery of that vehicle as well as the driving of the vehicle under the power
of the motor machinery.” (quotation and ellipsis omitted)); Karnes v. Ace Cab
Company, 287 S.W.2d 378, 380 (Mo. Ct. App. 1956) (“operating” a motor
vehicle “encompass[es] all acts necessary to be performed in the movement of a
motor vehicle from one place to another or fairly incidental to the ordinary
course of its operation, including not only the act of stopping en route for
purposes reasonably associated with the transit but also all acts which, in
point of time and circumstance, are reasonably connected with entering the
vehicle at the point of departure and alighting therefrom at destination”).
RSA 507-B:2 also states that the “bodily injury, personal injury or
property damage” must “aris[e] out of” the operation of a motor vehicle. In the
insurance context, we have interpreted similar language “to mean that the
injury must originate from, grow out of, or flow from” the operation or use of
the vehicle. Concord Gen. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Doe, 161 N.H. 73, 76 (2010). In
other words, a “causal connection must exist between the resulting harm and
the [operation or] use of the vehicle.” Id. (quotation omitted). In the insurance
context, we have held that, although proximate causation is not required, “a
tenuous connection with an automobile is not sufficient.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
For instance, “when a vehicle acts as merely the situs of an injury, the
causal connection between the injury and the use of the vehicle is too tenuous
to support coverage.” Id.; see Akerley v. Hartford Ins. Group, 136 N.H. 433,
440 (1992). Thus, in Akerley, we ruled that a police officer’s insurer had no
obligation to provide insurance coverage to the officer for injuries he sustained
while removing an uninsured motorist from a vehicle because the vehicle was
only the situs of the officer’s injuries. Akerley, 136 N.H. at 440; cf. Lebroke v.
U.S. Fid. & Guar. Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 249, 249-51 (2001) (no coverage for
injuries sustained when intervenor was bitten by dog while loading brochures
into automobile when automobile was merely situs of injury).
By contrast, when the injuries stem from an act that is part of using a
motor vehicle, the causal connection is established. See Concord Gen. Mut.
Ins. Co, 161 N.H. at 76. For instance, in Wilson v. Progressive Northern
Insurance Co., 151 N.H. 782, 783, 792 (2005), we held that when a taxi cab
driver closed the cab’s door on the passenger’s dog’s tail, causing the dog to
4
bite the passenger’s face, the injury arose out of the use of a motor vehicle. We
decided that the act of “closing the car door . . . is part of using [an]
automobile.” Wilson, 151 N.H. at 792.
Although the above cases concerned the meaning of the phrase “arising
out of the use of a motor vehicle,” and although the words “use” and
“operation” are not synonymous, see DeJarnette v. Federal Kember Ins. Co.,
475 A.2d 454, 458 (Md. 1984); Protective Fire and Casualty Company v.
Cornelius, 125 N.W.2d 179, 184 (Neb. 1963); 8 L. Russ & T. Segalla, Couch on
Insurance 3d § 111:31, at 111-56 to 111-57 (2005), we find these cases
instructive as to the plain meaning of the phrase “arising out of . . . operation
of all motor vehicles” in RSA 507-B:2.
We also find instructive cases from other jurisdictions addressing
whether loading a truck constitutes operation of a motor vehicle. Compare
Melchert v. Melchert, 519 N.W.2d 223, 226 (Minn. Ct. App. 1994) (loading and
unloading truck is part of its operation), and Lukaszewicz v. Concrete
Research, Inc., 168 N.W.2d 581, 586 (Wis. 1969) (same), with Glens Falls
Insurance Co. v. Consolidated Freightways, 51 Cal. Rptr. 789, 797 (Dist. Ct.
App. 1966) (loading truck is not part of its operation).
For instance, the plaintiff in Melchert was hurt while transporting wet
hay bales to his home. Melchert, 519 N.W.2d at 225. The wet hay bales were
on a hay wagon. Id. The plaintiff, his son and his son’s friend transferred
them from the wagon to a trailer, which was hitched to a truck. Id. The
plaintiff was injured when he got into the trailer and wound “up the jack on
which the trailer tongue had been resting before it was attached to the pickup
truck.” Id. While the plaintiff was doing this, his son began tossing wet bales
of hay from the hay wagon onto the trailer, and one of the bales hit the
plaintiff, injuring him. Id.
The issue in the case was whether the plaintiff’s injuries arose out of the
operation of the pickup truck. Id. The court held “that the entire range of
activities inherent in the loading and unloading process must be considered to
determine whether a vehicle was being operated” and that “[o]peration includes
participation in loading and unloading activities.” Id. at 226; see Lukaszewicz,
168 N.W.2d at 586.
The court decided that when the plaintiff was injured, the pickup truck
was being “operated” because its operation included loading the trailer which
was attached to it. Melchert, 519 N.W.2d at 226. “The trailer and the pickup
truck were being operated as a unit.” Id. The plaintiff, therefore, “was involved
in the loading operation when he raised the jack after the truck and trailer
were hitched together.” Id.
5
In Glens Falls, a California court reached the opposite conclusion. See
Glens Falls, 51 Cal. Rptr. at 797. In Glens Falls, a Consolidated Freightways
(CF) employee drove a truck owned by CF to another company to pick up a load
of concrete beams. Id. at 791. While at the other company, the CF employee
was injured when he struck his head against a steel hook that was suspended
from the forklift that the other company’s employee was using to help load the
beams. Id. The issue in the case was whether the other company’s employee
could be deemed to have been operating CF’s truck because he was helping the
CF employee load the concrete beams. Id. at 791-92. In holding that the other
company’s employee did not operate CF’s truck, the court observed: “Loading a
truck is not operating it, as any teamster knows.” Id. at 797.
We find the reasoning of the Melchert court more persuasive and more in
line with our insurance cases, and, therefore, adopt it. Accordingly, like the
Melchert court, we hold “that the entire range of activities inherent in the
loading and unloading process must be considered to determine whether a
vehicle was being operated” and that “[o]peration includes participation in
loading and unloading activities.” Melchert, 519 N.W.2d at 226.
We also conclude that the plaintiff in this case, like the plaintiff in
Melchert, was involved in the loading operation when he lifted the fully-loaded
trailer and attempted to hitch it to the truck. Operating the truck in this case
included attempting to hitch the trailer to the truck. “When we view the
loading operation as a whole, we discern that the pickup truck was being
operated at the time [the plaintiff] was injured.” Id.
Because it is not disputed that a truck is a “motor vehicle” within the
meaning of RSA 507-B:2, we hold that the plaintiff’s claims “aris[e] out of [the
County’s] . . . operation of [a] motor vehicle[ ],” and, thus, fall within the scope
of RSA 507-B:2.
In light of our decision, we need not address the plaintiff’s alternative
argument that RSA 507-B:2 is unconstitutional.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6