THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2011-262
STEVEN FORD
v.
NEW HAMPSHIRE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION & a.
Argued: January 18, 2012
Opinion Issued: February 24, 2012
D’Angelo & Hashem, LLC of Boston, Massachusetts (Stephen L. D’Angelo
and Jay M. Wolman on the brief, and Mr. D’Angelo orally), and Cossingham
Law Office, P.C., of Andover, Massachusetts (Thomas C. LaPorte on the brief),
for the plaintiff.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Kevin H. O’Neill, assistant attorney
general, and Mark P. Hodgdon, senior assistant attorney general, on the
memorandum of law, and Mr. O’Neill orally), for defendant New Hampshire
Department of Transportation.
Devine, Millimet & Branch, P.A., of Manchester (Robert C. Dewhirst on
the brief and orally), for defendant Town of Windham.
CONBOY, J. The plaintiff, Steven Ford, appeals orders of the Superior
Court (Nadeau, J.) dismissing his negligence claims against the defendants,
Town of Windham (Town) and the New Hampshire Department of
Transportation (DOT). We affirm.
For the purposes of this appeal, we accept the following allegations from
the plaintiff’s writ as true. At approximately 11:30 p.m. on December 12,
2008, the vehicle in which the plaintiff was a passenger was struck by another
vehicle at the intersection of Routes 111 and 28 in Windham. Earlier, a severe
ice storm had caused a power outage that had rendered the street and crossing
lights at this intersection inoperable.
Several hours before the accident occurred, both DOT and the Town had
received notice that the intersection’s lights were inoperable because of the ice
storm. At approximately 6:42 a.m., Windham police notified DOT of a traffic
hazard in the area. At approximately 1:08 p.m., a motor vehicle accident at the
same intersection was reported to Windham police, who later reported that
there were “[n]o working lights at this intersection due to ice storm power
outages.”
The accident caused the plaintiff to suffer severe injuries, and he sued
the Town and DOT for negligence. Both defendants moved to dismiss. In its
motion, the Town averred that both Route 111 and Route 28 were state
highways, which the Town neither owned nor had a duty to maintain. See RSA
231:93 (2009) (“Municipalities shall not be deemed to have any duty of care
whatsoever with respect to the construction, maintenance or repair of class I,
III, III-a or VI highways, or state maintained portions of class II highways.”).
The Town asserted that at the point where the two highways intersect in
Windham, Route 111 is classified as a class II highway, and Route 28 is
classified as a class I highway. See RSA 229:5 (2009) (defining classification of
highways). Because the accident occurred on these state highways, the Town
argued that it owed no duty to the plaintiff to warn of any hazardous condition
that might have existed on them because of the December 2008 ice storm. See
Trull v. Town of Conway, 140 N.H. 579, 582 (1995); see also RSA 231:93.
In its motion, DOT contended, among other things, that it had
discretionary function immunity to decide how best to allocate its resources in
a “severe widespread winter weather emergency.” See Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of
Transp., 159 N.H. 72, 74-75 (2009). The trial court granted both motions, and
this appeal followed.
In reviewing a motion to dismiss on appeal, we examine whether the
allegations in the plaintiff’s writ are reasonably susceptible of a construction
that would permit recovery. J & M Lumber & Constr. Co. v. Smyjunas, 161
N.H. 714, 724 (2011). We assume the plaintiff’s factual allegations to be true
2
and construe all reasonable inferences to be drawn from them in the light most
favorable to him. Id. We need not, however, assume the truth of statements
that are merely conclusions of law. Id. We then engage in a threshold inquiry
that tests the facts in the writ against the applicable law and will affirm the
trial court’s dismissal if the writ’s allegations do not constitute a basis for legal
relief. Id.
Before addressing the parties’ arguments, we note that the parties
appear to assume that warning motorists about inoperable traffic lights is part
of a governmental entity’s duty to maintain a road. For the purposes of
deciding this appeal only, we will accept that assumption.
I. Negligence Claim Against Town
A. Trull
We first address the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s claim against
the Town. The trial court decided that our decision in Trull required dismissal
of the plaintiff’s claim. In Trull, we ruled that a town could not be held liable in
negligence for an accident occurring on Route 113, a class II highway, because
the town had no control over the road, no duty to repair and maintain it, and,
therefore, no duty to warn of icy conditions on it. Trull, 140 N.H. at 581, 582;
see RSA 231:93. Trull is consistent with an earlier case, Hartman v. Town of
Hooksett, 125 N.H. 34 (1984), in which we held that neither a municipality nor
its police force had a duty to warn travelers about a defect in a class I state
highway. In Hartman, we reasoned that “[i]n certain circumstances, a town
may be liable for injuries occurring on roads under its control, but not for
injuries on roads over which it exercises no control.” Hartman, 125 N.H. at 37.
Contrary to the plaintiff’s assertions, Trull is directly on point. Like the
plaintiff in this case, the Trull plaintiffs argued that the town had a duty to
warn of a dangerous condition of which it had actual knowledge. Trull, 140
N.H. at 581. In Trull, before the accident occurred, a town police officer
observed that a vehicle had slid on Route 113 because of black ice. Id. at 580-
81. Shortly after the officer left the area, one of the plaintiffs lost control of his
vehicle, which slid across the center line and into another vehicle driven by the
other plaintiff. Id. at 581. We disagreed with the Trull plaintiffs’ argument,
ruling that the fact that Route 113 is a class II highway was dispositive:
“Under the common law of this State and the statutory scheme in existence at
the time of the accident, we conclude that the town had no duty to warn of icy
conditions on a road over which it had no control and no duty to repair and
maintain.” Id. at 582.
Similarly here, the Town has averred, and the plaintiff has not disputed,
that where they intersect in Windham, Routes 111 and 28 are class II and
3
class I state highways, respectively, which the Town does not own and has no
duty to maintain. Accordingly, because the Town had no duty to maintain
Routes 111 and 28, it also had no duty to warn motorists that the lights at the
intersection of these two state highways were inoperable. See id.; see also RSA
231:93. As we concluded in Trull: “Where there is no duty to correct a
condition[,] there is no actionable duty to warn users of a highway that the
condition has not been corrected.” Trull, 140 N.H. at 582. And, “[w]hen there
is no legal duty, there can be no breach of duty, and no finding of negligence.”
Id. (quotation omitted).
The plaintiff’s attempts to distinguish Trull from the instant case are
unavailing. He asserts, for instance, that Trull is distinguishable because in
Trull, nature directly caused the icy conditions, while in this case, the traffic
lights were rendered inoperable because of a power outage caused by an ice
storm. We do not find this distinction to be meaningful.
Because the plaintiff views Trull as distinguishable from this case, he
revives two arguments that we rejected in Trull. First, he argues that
municipal police officers had a duty to “act,” knowing that the lights at the
intersection were inoperable and that the intersection was “heavily travelled.”
At oral argument, he explained further that because the Town’s police officers
travel and regulate traffic on Routes 111 and 28, they had a duty to warn
motorists of the dangerous condition caused by the inoperable lights. The Trull
plaintiffs made a similar argument, which we rejected. As we explained in
Trull, “Merely because the town’s police officers travel and regulate traffic upon
[these] State highway[s] . . . does not create a duty to warn the public” about a
dangerous condition on a state highway. Id. at 582.
Relying upon Restatement (Second) of Torts § 323 (1965), the plaintiff
next argues that the Town had a duty to warn motorists because it voluntarily
assumed a duty to motorists on Routes 111 and 28 by “render[ing] services to
the public.” We rejected a comparable claim in Trull, explaining that while
“[t]his court has recognized the general tort principle that one who voluntarily
assumes a duty thereafter has a duty to act with reasonable care,” the facts
alleged by the plaintiffs did not allow us to conclude that the town undertook
the task of warning motorists about the icy condition. Trull, 140 N.H. at 583
(quotation omitted); see Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra § 323, at 135.
Likewise, here, on the facts alleged by the plaintiff, we cannot conclude that the
Town undertook the task of warning motorists on Routes 111 and 28 of the
inoperable traffic lights. Trull, 140 N.H. at 583; see Hartman, 125 N.H. at 37.
Alternatively, the plaintiff urges us to overrule Trull. “The doctrine of
stare decisis demands respect in a society governed by the rule of law, for when
governing legal standards are open to revision in every case, deciding cases
becomes a mere exercise of judicial will with arbitrary and unpredictable
4
results.” Jacobs v. Director, N.H. Div. of Motor Vehicles, 149 N.H. 502, 504
(2003) (quotations omitted). “[W]hen asked to reconsider a holding, the
question is not whether we would decide the issue differently de novo, but
whether the ruling has come to be seen so clearly as error that its enforcement
was for that very reason doomed.” State v. Quintero, 162 N.H. 526, 539 (2011)
(quotation omitted). Thus, we will overturn a decision only after considering:
(1) whether the rule has proven to be intolerable simply by defying practical
workability; (2) whether the rule is subject to a kind of reliance that would lend
a special hardship to the consequence of overruling; (3) whether related
principles of law have so far developed as to have left the old rule no more than
a remnant of abandoned doctrine; and (4) whether facts have so changed, or
come to be seen so differently, as to have robbed the old rule of significant
application or justification. Id. at 532-33. Although these factors guide our
judgment, no single factor is wholly determinative, because the doctrine of
stare decisis is not one to be either rigidly applied or blindly followed. Id. at
533.
The plaintiff’s sole argument as to why we should overrule Trull is that,
in his opinion, it is badly reasoned. Even if we were to agree with the plaintiff,
which we do not, merely because an opinion is poorly reasoned does not, in
and of itself, justify overruling it. See id. at 538-40. “[P]rincipled application of
stare decisis requires a court to adhere even to poorly reasoned precedent in
the absence of some special reason over and above the belief that a prior case
was wrongly decided.” Id. at 539 (quotation omitted). The determination that
an opinion was poorly reasoned is merely the starting point for a stare decisis
analysis. Id. Upon concluding that a case was poorly reasoned, the court then
invokes the four stare decisis factors to decide whether to adhere to the
precedent or overrule it, but the “well-reasoned” inquiry is not itself part of the
analysis. Id.
Having failed to brief any of the four stare decisis factors, the plaintiff
has not persuaded us that our decision in Trull must be overruled. Cf. Rallis v.
Demoulas Super Markets, 159 N.H. 95, 103 (2009). We, therefore, decline his
invitation to do so.
B. Statutory Bases for Duty to Warn
The plaintiff argues that notwithstanding Trull, the Town had a statutory
duty imposed by RSA 507-B:2 (2010), RSA 231:90 to :93 (2009), and/or by
RSA 21-P:44 (Supp. 2011) to warn motorists about the inoperable lights. He is
mistaken on all three counts.
The interpretation of a statute is a question of law, which we review de
novo. Billewicz v. Ransmeier, 161 N.H. 145, 151 (2010). We are the final
arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of the statute
5
considered as a whole. Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. 659, 662 (2011). We first
examine the language of the statute and ascribe the plain and ordinary
meanings to the words used. Id. We interpret legislative intent from the
statute as written and will not consider what the legislature might have said or
add language the legislature did not see fit to include. Id. Furthermore, we
interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id. “In so doing, we are better able to discern the legislature’s intent,
and therefore better able to understand the statutory language in light of the
policy sought to be advanced by the entire statutory scheme.” Id. (quotation
omitted).
1. RSA 507-B:2
RSA 507-B:2 provides:
A governmental unit may be held liable for damages in an
action to recover for bodily injury, personal injury or property
damage caused by its fault or by fault attributable to it, arising out
of ownership, occupation, maintenance or operation of all motor
vehicles, and all premises; provided, however, that the liability of
any governmental unit with respect to its sidewalks, streets, and
highways shall be limited as provided in RSA 231 and the liability
of any governmental unit with respect to publicly owned airport
runways and taxiways shall be limited as set forth in RSA 422.
(Emphasis added.)
The plaintiff contends that “the Town . . . owed him a duty under RSA
507-B:2 . . . for operating and occupying the intersection in question.” He
argues that “[i]n policing the intersection and the roads, [the Town] both
occupied and operated them.” By its express terms, however, RSA 507-B:2
does not, alone, govern the Town’s liability “with respect to its sidewalks,
streets, and highways”; rather, RSA 507-B:2 must be read in conjunction with
the limits on governmental liability set forth in RSA chapter 231. See Richard
v. Pembroke Sch. Dist., 151 N.H. 455 (2004). Accordingly, RSA 507-B:2 does
not, as the plaintiff contends, in and of itself, impose any duty upon the Town
with respect to Routes 111 and 28.
2. RSA chapter 231
Nothing in RSA chapter 231 imposes such a duty upon the Town, either.
The liability of municipalities with respect to “sidewalks, streets, and highways”
is set forth in RSA 231:90 through RSA 231:93. RSA 231:93 expressly
provides that municipalities do not “have any duty of care whatsoever with
respect to the construction, maintenance or repair of class I, III, III-a or VI
6
highways, or state maintained portions of class II highways.” A municipality’s
duty of care with respect to the construction, maintenance or repair of class IV
and V highways is set forth in RSA 231:90, :91, :92, and :92-a. However, even
with respect to class IV and V highways:
a municipality or school district shall not be held liable for
damages arising from insufficiencies or hazards on public
highways, bridges, or sidewalks, even if it has actual notice or
knowledge of them, when such hazards are caused solely by snow,
ice, or other inclement weather, and the municipality’s or school
district’s failure or delay in removing or mitigating such hazards is
the result of its implementation, absent gross negligence or
reckless disregard of the hazard, of a winter or inclement weather
maintenance policy or set of priorities adopted in good faith by the
officials responsible for such policy; and all municipal or school
district employees and officials shall be presumed to be acting
pursuant to such a policy or set of priorities, in the absence of
proof to the contrary.
RSA 231:92-a.
The plaintiff argues that RSA 231:91 and RSA 231:92 impose a duty
upon the Town with respect to Routes 111 and 28 because RSA 231:91 and
RSA 231:92, unlike RSA 231:90, do not refer explicitly to class IV and V
highways. RSA 231:90, I, begins, “Whenever any class IV or class V highway or
bridge or sidewalk thereon in any municipality shall be insufficient, any person
may give written notice of such insufficiency to one of the selectmen or highway
agents of the town, or the mayor or street commissioners of the city, and a copy
of said notice to the town or city clerk.” (Emphasis added.)
RSA 231:91, I, then provides:
Upon receipt of such notice of insufficiency, and unless the
highway agents or street commissioners determine in good faith
that no such insufficiency exists, the municipality shall
immediately cause proper danger signals to be placed to warn
persons by day or night of such insufficiency, and shall, within 72
hours thereafter, develop a plan for repairing such highway,
bridge, or sidewalk and shall implement such plan in good faith
and with reasonable dispatch until the highway, bridge, or
sidewalk is no longer insufficient, as defined by RSA 231:90, II.
(Emphases added.)
7
RSA 231:92 likewise does not expressly refer to class IV and V highways.
Rather, it provides, in pertinent part, that “[a] municipality shall not be held
liable for damages in an action to recover for personal injury or property
damage arising out of its construction, maintenance, or repair of public
highways and sidewalks constructed thereupon unless such injury or damage
was caused by an insufficiency, as defined by RSA 231:90,” and certain
conditions are met. RSA 231:92, I.
The plaintiff argues that because RSA 231:91 and RSA 231:92 do not
refer to class IV and V highways, they, unlike RSA 231:90, apply “to all
highways in [a] municipality.” However, we cannot read these statutes in
isolation, but must read them in context. See Appeal of Wilson, 161 N.H. at
662. Thus, in RSA 231:91, the reference to “such insufficiency” and, in RSA
231:92, to “an insufficiency” are references to the insufficiencies described in
RSA 231:90, which, by the plaintiff’s own admission, apply only to
insufficiencies in class IV and V highways. Similarly, the reference in RSA
231:91 to “such highway” is a reference to the highways, which are
“insufficient, as defined by RSA 231:90, II.” Moreover, the plaintiff’s
interpretation runs afoul of RSA 231:93, which provides that a municipality
has no duty of care whatsoever with respect to highway classes other than
classes IV and V and town-maintained portions of class II highways.
3. RSA 21-P:44
The plaintiff contends that under RSA 21-P:44, the Town had a duty to
respond to the emergency situation created by the ice storm of December 2008
by warning motorists of the inoperable traffic lights. RSA 21-P:44 provides:
In carrying out the provisions [related to “Homeland Security
and Emergency Management”], the governor, executive heads of
state agencies, and local executive officers of the political
subdivisions of the state shall utilize the services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments, offices, and
agencies of the state and its political subdivisions to the maximum
extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such
departments, offices, and agencies are directed to cooperate with
and extend such services and facilities to the governor and to the
emergency management organizations of the state upon request.
The plaintiff observes that RSA 21-P:44 is part of a statutory scheme that
“create[s] structures to enable response to an emergency situation.” He argues:
“The statute [RSA 21-P:44] uses the mandatory phrase ‘shall’ and imposes the
broadest requirements of acting ‘to the maximum extent practicable.’” He
contends that because “[i]t was practicable for the Town to earlier address the
inoperable signal[s],” RSA 21-P:44 required it do so. In his reply brief, the
8
plaintiff changes this argument somewhat by asserting that the Town violated
RSA 21-P:44 by failing to use the State’s “services, equipment, supplies and
facilities” to warn motorists about the inoperable traffic lights.
We need not decide whether the plaintiff’s interpretation of RSA 21-P:44
is correct, for even if it is, it is a well-settled rule that to the extent two statutes
conflict, the more specific statute, here RSA 231:93, controls over the general
statute, RSA 21-P:44. See In the Matter of Heinrich & Curotto, 160 N.H. 650,
654–55 (2010). Although RSA 21-P:44 and other provisions in RSA chapter 21-
P governing “Homeland Security and Emergency Management” refer generally
to the power, duty and authority of political subdivisions when the State has
experienced certain “natural and human-caused disasters,” RSA 21-P:34
(Supp. 2011), RSA 231:93 specifically provides that a municipality owes no
duty of care with respect to class I and State-maintained portions of class II
state highways.
II. Negligence Claim Against DOT
We now turn to the trial court’s dismissal of the plaintiff’s claim against
DOT. The plaintiff argues that the trial court erred when it found that his
claim concerns DOT’s discretionary function and, on that basis, ruled that
DOT was immune from liability. We disagree.
Under discretionary function immunity, the State and its agencies are
immune from liability for conduct that involves “the exercise or performance or
the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary executive or planning function
or duty on the part of the state or any state agency or a state officer, employee,
or official acting within the scope of his office or employment.” RSA 541-B:19,
I(c) (2007). The existence of immunity for discretionary functions is
fundamental to our system of separation of powers. Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of
Transp., 159 N.H. at 74. “Discretionary function immunity is premised upon
the notion that certain essential, fundamental activities of government must
remain immune from tort liability so that our government can govern.” Id.
(quotation omitted). “[I]t seeks to limit judicial interference with legislative and
executive decision-making because to accept a jury’s verdict as to the
reasonableness and safety of a plan of governmental services and prefer it over
the judgment of the governmental body which originally considered and passed
on the matter would be to obstruct normal governmental operations.” Tarbell
Adm’r, Inc. v. City of Concord, 157 N.H. 678, 684 (2008) (quotations, citation
and brackets omitted).
“In resolving discretionary immunity questions, we distinguish between
planning or discretionary functions and functions that are purely ministerial.”
Appeal of N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 159 N.H. at 74 (quotation omitted). “When the
particular conduct which caused the injury is one characterized by the high
9
degree of discretion and judgment involved in weighing alternatives and
making choices with respect to public policy and planning, governmental
entities should remain immune from liability.” Id. (quotation omitted); see also
Everitt v. Gen. Elec. Co., 156 N.H. 202, 220 (2007) (discretionary functions
falling within the protection of the discretionary function immunity doctrine
“are limited to discretionary decisions involving . . . policy-making or
planning.”).
DOT argues that deciding how best to plan and allocate limited State
resources in response to widespread power outages caused by a severe ice
storm is a discretionary function entitled to immunity. We agree. As DOT
explains: “Decisions regarding the setting of priorities and alternatives to
responding to severe winter weather . . . require numerous planning and policy
choices and alternatives, involving safety, economic, equipment, debris and
personnel factors.” Such decisions “rest on the exercise of judgment and
discretion and represent planning and policymaking. They fit squarely within
the category of discretionary functions entitled to . . . immunity.” Sorenson v.
City of Manchester, 136 N.H. 692, 694 (1993).
Our conclusion is consistent with our cases on this issue. See Appeal of
N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 159 N.H. at 75 (DOT’s detour plan protected by
discretionary function immunity because it involved weighing alternatives and
making choices with respect to public policy); Bergeron v. City of Manchester,
140 N.H. 417, 422 (1995) (State’s decision as to whether to install flashing
beacon at certain intersection is discretionary function entitled to immunity);
Sorenson, 136 N.H. at 694 (decisions regarding traffic control and parking
regulations are discretionary functions entitled to immunity); DiFruscia v. N.H.
Dept. of Pub. Works & Highways, 136 N.H. 202, 205 (1992) (“We do not doubt
that the decision to place or not to place a guardrail on a roadway is conduct
characterized by the high degree of discretion and judgment involved in
weighing alternatives and making choices with respect to public policy and
planning.” (quotation omitted)).
The plaintiff argues that the negligence he alleges concerns DOT’s failure
to carry out a ministerial act, not a discretionary function. He contends that
DOT was required to abide by section 4D.02D of the 2003 edition of the Federal
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), see Fed. Highway
Admin., U.S. Dep’t of Transp., Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, at
page 4D-1 (2003) available at
http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/pdfs/2003r1r2/coverintrotoc.pdf, and that its
failure to do so constitutes a failure to implement State policy. See Everitt, 156
N.H. at 211 (explaining that in assessing whether discretionary function
immunity applies, we distinguish between policy decisions involving the
consideration of competing economic, social, and political factors, and
operational or ministerial decisions required to implement policy decisions).
10
Assuming, without deciding, that section 4D.02D of the MUTCD even applies
when traffic lights are rendered inoperable by an ice storm, we disagree that
this provision established a mandatory duty.
The MUTCD is published by the United States Department of
Transportation’s Federal Highway Administration under 23 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 655, Section F and has been adopted by the DOT. See State
v. Downs, 157 N.H. 695, 696-97 (2008). Section 4D.02 of the 2003 edition of
the MUTCD provides, in pertinent part:
Section 4D.02 Responsibility for Operation and Maintenance
Guidance:
Prior to installing any traffic control signal, the responsibility
for the maintenance of the signal and all of the appurtenances,
hardware, software, and the timing plan(s) should be clearly
established. The responsible agency should provide for the
maintenance of the traffic control signal and all of its
appurtenances in a competent manner.
To this end the agency should:
. . .
D. Provide for alternate operation of the traffic control signal
during a period of failure, using flashing mode or manual control,
or manual traffic direction by proper authorities as might be
required by traffic volumes or congestion, or by erecting other
traffic control devices.
MUTCD, supra at 4D-1 (emphases added).
The plain language of this section does not create a mandatory duty.
“[W]hile the word ‘shall’ establishes a mandatory duty, the word ‘should’
requires [DOT] to use its discretion and . . . judgment.” Dunlap v. W.L. Logan
Trucking, Co., 829 N.E.2d 356, 361 (Ohio Ct. App. 2005) (interpreting Ohio’s
state manual); Lawton v. City of Pocatello, 886 P.2d 330, 337-38 (Idaho 1994)
(interpreting earlier version of MUTCD). As the introduction to the MUTCD
explains, those portions of the manual that are termed “Guidance” refer to “a
statement of recommended, but not mandatory, practice in typical situations
. . . .” MUTCD, supra at I-3. By contrast, those portions of the manual that
are designated “Standards” refer to “a statement of required, mandatory, or
specifically prohibitive practice regarding a traffic control device.” Id. at I-2; see
Johnson v. Agency of Transp., 904 A.2d 1060, 1063 (Vt. 2006) (only MUTCD
11
“Standards” are binding on Vermont’s Agency of Transportation). The MUTCD
provision upon which the plaintiff relies is “Guidance,” and is, “therefore only a
recommended practice, not a mandate upon government decision makers.”
Dane County v. O’Malley, No. 2008AP59, 2008 WL 2468666, at *2 (Wis. Ct.
App. June 19, 2008).
We rejected a similar argument in Bergeron, 140 N.H. at 422-23. In
Bergeron, the manual at issue was a State publication setting forth traffic
control standards, statutes and policies. Bergeron, 140 N.H. at 419. Although
the manual suggested that a flashing beacon is warranted when three
accidents occur at a particular intersection during a one-year period, the State
elected not to install a flashing beacon at the intersection at issue even though
four accidents occurred at the intersection between December 1985 and
December 1986. Id. at 419-20. The trial court concluded that DOT was not
entitled to discretionary function immunity because the plaintiffs did not
challenge the adoption of the DOT’s policy regarding installing flashing
beacons, but rather challenged DOT’s implementation of this policy. Id. at 421.
We disagreed, in part, because the manual in Bergeron “provide[d] guidelines
rather than mandates.” Id. at 422. It “[did] not eliminate the DOT’s discretion
with regard to traffic control,” but rather “invit[ed] . . . the DOT to exercise
discretion.” Id. Similarly here, the MUTCD does not eliminate DOT’s discretion
with regard to responding to traffic lights rendered inoperable because of
severe, winter weather-related widespread power outages.
For all of these reasons, therefore, we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of
the plaintiff’s negligence claims.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, J., concurred; LYNN, J., concurred
specially.
LYNN, J., concurring specially. While I have a different view from the
majority concerning the factors that may be considered in determining whether
to overrule precedent, see State v. Quintero, 162 N.H. 526, 543-47 (2011)
(Lynn, J., concurring specially), I agree that in this case there are no sound
reasons for failing to adhere to our decision in Trull v. Town of Conway, 140
N.H. 579 (1995). With this caveat, I join the opinion of the court.
12