THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Sullivan
No. 2011-227
MICHAEL O’HEARNE & a.
v.
JAMES MCCLAMMER, JR.
JAMES U. MCCLAMMER, JR., TRUSTEE OF THE PROFIT SHARING PLAN OF
CONNECTICUT VALLEY ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES, INC.
v.
MICHAEL W. O’HEARNE & a.
Submitted: March 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: March 23, 2012
Buckley and Zopf, of Claremont (Anthony F. DiPadova, Jr. on the brief),
for Michael W. O’Hearne and Marie E. O’Hearne.
Clauson & Atwood, of Hanover (Bradford T. Atwood on the brief), for
James U. McClammer, Jr., individually and as Trustee of the Profit Sharing
Plan of Connecticut Valley Environmental Services, Inc.
HICKS, J. James U. McClammer, Jr., Trustee of the Profit Sharing Plan of
the Connecticut Valley Environmental Services, Inc., appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Wageling, J.), following a bench trial on the merits, ruling in
favor of Michael W. O’Hearne and Marie E. O’Hearne on the parties’ cross-
petitions to quiet title and for injunctive relief. We affirm.
The parties own adjoining lots in the vicinity of the Little Sugar River in
North Charlestown; McClammer owns the southerly lot, while the O’Hearnes own
the lot to the north. Historically, both lots were part of a larger parcel bisected by
the river, which generally runs in an east-west direction at that point. In 1790,
the larger parcel was subdivided by a deed conveying “all that part or parcel of
land being and lying on the North side of Little Sugar River . . . [e]xcept three
quarters of an acre of land that will best accommodate a Mill Spot.” Title to the
O’Hearne lot is, ultimately, derived from this conveyance, while the McClammer
lot was included in the land retained by the grantor of the 1790 deed.
Prior to 1929, deeds within McClammer’s chain of title referenced the river
in describing the northern bound of his parcel. For instance, an 1872 deed
contained the following legal description of the McClammer lot:
beginning near the south end of the South Bridge on Little Sugar
River and running southwesterly on the highway . . . to land of said
P & M Howard thence northerly on land of said Howard to the south
bank of said river, thence easterly on said river to the place of
beginning . . . .
A 1907 deed within the McClammer chain, however, described the parcel’s
northern bound as running “Easterly on said river and land of one Woodward.”
(Emphasis added.) “[L]and of one Woodward” included the O’Hearne lot.
In 1929, a deed to the McClammer parcel did not reference the river at all
in describing the boundaries, and for the first time described the parcel by
courses and distances between artificial monuments. Three of the monuments
were located south of the river, at what McClammer described as “the edge of the
river’s flood plain” along the northern portion of the parcel. Two of the
monuments currently exist, while the easternmost monument, described in the
deed as “ten (10) feet eight (8) inches from the southwesterly end of” the same
bridge referenced in the 1872 deed, was removed by the New Hampshire
Department of Transportation (DOT) when it replaced the bridge in the early
1980s.
Although early deeds within the O’Hearne chain of title also appear to have
referenced the river in describing the property, an 1882 deed described the
2
southern boundary as running “Easterly on . . . land [owned by McClammer’s
predecessors] to the Highway” without mentioning the river at all. Since 1936,
the deeds within the O’Hearne chain describe the southern boundary of the
parcel as running “on land now or formerly of [McClammer’s predecessor] to the
highway (easterly),” also without mentioning the river.
McClammer acquired title to his lot in 1999 from the estate of Louise
Hinchliffe, who had acquired her title upon the intestate deaths, in 1944 and
1957, of the grantees of the 1929 deed. The property description in
McClammer’s deed was identical to the description in the 1929 deed. The
present dispute arose when McClammer began removing trees from the strip of
land lying to the north of the monuments and to the south of the river.
The O’Hearnes filed a petition to enjoin McClammer from trespassing on
their land, asserting that the parties’ common boundary was established by the
monuments. McClammer, in turn, filed his own petition to quiet title, claiming
that his title ran either to the “so-called thread or center of the river,” or to its low
water mark on “the south side of [its] main northerly channel.” Thereafter,
McClammer amended his petition, asserting that his title extended to the high
water mark on the northern bank of the river, and included a 0.15 acre piece of
land to the north of the river where, he claimed, the “mill spot” referenced in the
1790 deed was located. In their answers to McClammer’s petition and amended
petition, the O’Hearnes claimed not only that they had record title to the areas in
dispute, but that they had also acquired title by adverse possession and the
doctrine of boundary by acquiescence.
The trial court consolidated the matters, and following a trial on the merits,
ruled in favor of the O’Hearnes. In its narrative order, the trial court declined to
interpret the parties’ deeds, but instead ruled that McClammer’s claims were
barred by the twenty-year statute of limitations set forth in RSA 508:2 (2010),
which the court determined had been triggered either by the legal description of
the O’Hearne lot in the 1882 deed, or by the description in the 1929 deed to
McClammer’s predecessors. Alternatively, the trial court ruled that the
O’Hearnes had acquired title to the disputed areas through adverse possession.
With respect to adverse possession, the trial court found that “two very
important factors speak in [the] O’Hearne[s’] favor.” First, the trial court noted
that the O’Hearnes asserted ownership pursuant to “a long-standing sequence of
recorded deeds, which support [their] position that the boundary is defined by
markers.” Both the O’Hearne and McClammer chains of title, according to the
trial court, had described the parties’ boundary with reference to the monuments
since 1936. Second, the trial court found that McClammer’s predecessor-in-title
had actual notice that the disputed property was possessed by the O’Hearnes.
3
Specifically, the trial court noted: (1) McClammer’s predecessor, Louise
Hinchliffe, repeatedly walked the boundary claimed by the O’Hearnes with
Michael O’Hearne (Michael), and otherwise “acted in a way consistent with [the]
O’Hearne[s’] assertion that she did not consider the thread of the river to be the
boundary”; (2) Hinchliffe wrote a letter to the DOT in 1983 in connection with its
replacement of the bridge that was consistent with the O’Hearnes’ claims
concerning the boundary; and (3) Michael had, at Hinchliffe’s request,
maintained “No Trespassing” signs on the portion of land under dispute, and cut
down a tree in the disputed area that was overhanging Hinchliffe’s property.
These facts, according to the trial court, established that “McClammer’s
predecessor in interest abided by the exclusive boundary, as defined by the
markers, and did so for over 20 years.” As to the so-called “mill spot,” the trial
court found no evidence that McClammer or Hinchliffe ever used it, and that the
O’Hearnes in fact used and improved it over a period exceeding twenty years.
In addition to its narrative order, the trial court ruled on the parties’
detailed requests for findings of fact and rulings of law. Relying upon
Mastroianni v. Wercinski, 158 N.H. 380, 383 (2009), and Rautenberg v. Munnis,
108 N.H. 20, 23 (1967), the trial court ruled that a boundary may be established
by acquiescence and prevail over contrary descriptions in deeds to the extent that
the parties recognize the boundary as true for twenty years, and occupy their lots
accordingly. The trial court then found and ruled that: (1) “Hinchliffe clearly
acquiesced, for a period in excess of 20 years, that the boundary line separating
the parties’ property is the line claimed by the [O’Hearnes]”; and (2) the
O’Hearnes had established title “by adverse possession both due to the
acquiescence of the claimed boundary by Louise Hinchliffe and by their
continuous use and possession of the land in question.”
McClammer moved for reconsideration, arguing that the trial court had
improperly raised the statute of limitations sua sponte. Additionally, he
challenged the trial court’s rulings on the merits, arguing that it had erroneously
found that the O’Hearne chain of title referenced the monuments, that it
improperly construed the relevant deeds, and that it ignored other evidence
inconsistent with a finding of adverse possession. The trial court denied the
motion, concluding that the O’Hearnes had sufficiently raised the statute of
limitations by pleading adverse possession, and that, because McClammer’s
claim was time-barred, he “lack[ed] standing to challenge [its] findings with
respect to [the O’Hearnes’] ownership of the disputed strip.”
This appeal followed. On appeal, McClammer argues that the trial court
erred by: (1) ruling that his petition to quiet title was time-barred under RSA
508:2, and not allowing him a rehearing to submit evidence rebutting the ruling;
4
(2) finding that the O’Hearnes acquired title to the property in dispute by adverse
possession or acquiescence; (3) relying upon the 1929 deed, which McClammer
claims is ambiguous, to support its finding as to the location of the boundary;
and (4) not finding that he had title to the “thread,” or center, of the river.
At the outset, we note that the trial court relied upon RSA 508:2, adverse
possession, and boundary by acquiescence as alternative grounds for ruling in
favor of the O’Hearnes. While McClammer claims he “was prejudiced by the trial
court’s sua sponte ruling [that he was time-barred] as he was not provided an
opportunity to present evidence on adverse possession,” the record reflects that
the O’Hearnes raised adverse possession and boundary by acquiescence in their
pleadings, that the parties presented evidence at trial relative to those theories,
and that McClammer himself, in his request for rulings of law, sought a ruling
that the O’Hearnes had “fail[ed] to satisfy the legal elements . . . [of] either
adverse possession or boundary by acquiescence.” Even if the trial court erred
by applying RSA 508:2, and by ruling, on reconsideration, that McClammer
lacked standing to challenge its findings on adverse possession and boundary by
acquiescence, we conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s ruling that
the O’Hearnes acquired title through Hinchliffe’s acquiescence in the boundary.
Accordingly, we need not address whether the trial court erred by applying RSA
508:2 or ruling that McClammer lacked standing to challenge its findings. See
Kessler v. Gleich, 156 N.H. 488, 494 (2007) (trial court will be upheld where error
does not affect outcome, or where we can determine that no injury occurred).
We also note that the parties in their briefs, and the trial court in ruling
that the O’Hearnes acquired title “by adverse possession . . . due to the
acquiescence of the claimed boundary by Louise Hinchliffe,” appear to conflate
the theories of adverse possession and boundary by acquiescence. “To acquire
title to real property by adverse possession, the possessor must show twenty
years of adverse, continuous, exclusive and uninterrupted use of the land
claimed so as to give notice to the owner that an adverse claim is being made.”
Mastroianni, 158 N.H. at 382. Absent actual notice by the dispossessed party of
the adverse possession of his or her land, “[t]he law requires more than
occasional, trespassory maintenance [of another’s property] in order to perfect
adverse title; the use must be sufficiently notorious to justify a presumption that
the owner was notified of [the claim].” Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. A & T
Forest Prods., 155 N.H. 29, 34 (2007); see Mastroianni, 158 N.H. at 383-84.
By contrast, “[a]cquiescence may establish a boundary where the parties
for twenty years or more have recognized a certain boundary as being the true
one and have occupied their respective lots accordingly.” Rautenberg, 108 N.H.
at 23; see Mastroianni, 158 N.H. at 383. “The bound thus acquiesced in will
prevail even over the description in the deeds.” Rautenberg, 108 N.H. at 23. To
5
establish a boundary by acquiescence, a party generally must prove that: (1) the
parties are adjoining landowners; (2) who have occupied their respective lots up
to a certain boundary; (3) which they have recognized as the true boundary
separating the lots; and (4) have done so for at least twenty years. See id.; 9 R.
Powell, Powell on Real Property § 68.05[2], at 68-24 (Michael Allan Wolf ed.,
2011). A boundary established by acquiescence is conclusive upon successors in
title. Lakeview Farm, Inc. v. Enman, 689 A.2d 1089, 1092 (Vt. 1997).
Although these doctrines, in practical application, may be similar, they are
distinct theories that have developed independently from each other both in New
Hampshire and elsewhere. See, e.g., Spilinek v. Spilinek, 337 N.W.2d 122, 124
(Neb. 1983); Walters v. Snyder, 570 N.W.2d 301, 303 (Mich. Ct. App. 1997); see
also 9 R. Powell, supra § 68.05[3] (distinguishing boundary by acquiescence from
doctrines of estoppel, adverse possession and post-conveyance agreement).
While “adverse possession developed from the statutes of limitation on actions for
the recovery of land,” Hewes v. Bruno, 121 N.H. 32, 33 (1981), we long ago
explained that boundary by acquiescence is grounded “upon principles of public
policy, [that preclude a party] from setting up or insisting upon a boundary line
in opposition to one which has been steadily adhered to, upon both sides, for
more than twenty years,” Richardson v. Chickering, 41 N.H. 380, 384 (1860).
In this case, although the parties and the trial court may not have carefully
delineated the doctrines of adverse possession and boundary by acquiescence,
the trial court correctly noted that a boundary may be established by the parties’
mutual recognition of the boundary as correct, and consistent occupation of their
lots, for twenty years. In context, we construe the trial court’s determinations
that Hinchliffe “acquiesced, for a period in excess of 20 years,” in the boundary
claimed by the O’Hearnes, and that the O’Hearnes established title to the land in
dispute through Hinchliffe’s acquiescence, as a ruling that the O’Hearnes
satisfied the requirements of boundary by acquiescence. “We review the trial
court’s legal rulings de novo, but defer to its findings of fact if supported by the
record.” Mastroianni, 158 N.H. at 382 (citation omitted).
The testimony at trial supports this ruling. Michael, who had lived on the
O’Hearne lot for sixty-eight years at the time of trial, testified that as a child, his
father and predecessor-in-title, Walter O’Hearne (Walter), would take him across
the river and point out the boundary and boundary markers to him. Michael
further testified that he and Hinchliffe, who had sole title to the McClammer lot
from 1957 until her death in 1997, walked the boundary line together on
multiple occasions throughout the years and identified the boundary markers.
According to Michael, Hinchliffe herself told him that the monuments were
“boundary” markers. Based upon this testimony, the trial court supportably
6
found that Michael and Hinchliffe “walked the boundary line as [Michael] claims
it to exist . . . many times over a period of time . . . exceed[ing] twenty years,” and
that they “identified the markers now identified on [Michael’s] survey and . . .
recognized the boundary shown in [his] survey as being the true boundary
between the respective properties.”
Consistent with this testimony, the record reflects that in 1983, Hinchliffe
wrote the DOT and advised it of her intention “to meet [with Walter] and have a
marker placed 10 ft. 8 inches from the concrete end of the bridge over Little
Sugar River.” Ten feet, eight inches from the end of the bridge is consistent with
the location identified in the 1929 deed of the monument removed by the DOT in
connection with its replacement of the bridge. Also in connection with the bridge
replacement, both Hinchliffe and Walter deeded small portions of their land to
the State in 1983; the deed from Walter included 0.02 acres of land both north
and south of the river, bounded to the south “by land . . . of . . . Hinchliffe,” while
Hinchliffe deeded 0.01 acres of land extending “[n]ortherly to land . . . of Walter.”
The DOT’s survey of the bridge identifies the boundary between the McClammer
and O’Hearne lots as being south of the river. The trial court sustainably found
this evidence to establish that both the O’Hearnes and Hinchliffe recognized “that
the true location of the now disputed boundary is consistent with the” boundary
claimed by the O’Hearnes.
In addition to testimony establishing Hinchliffe’s recognition of the
monuments as boundary markers, the O’Hearnes presented other testimony
demonstrating their occupation of the area in dispute, and recognition of their
occupation by McClammer’s predecessors. For instance, Michael testified that in
the early 1950s, Charles Elie, Hinchliffe’s brother and a grantee of the 1929 deed,
requested permission from Walter to run an irrigation line from the river and
between two of the markers in order to irrigate strawberry beds on the
McClammer lot. Michael also testified that Hinchliffe asked him to keep the area
south of the river and north of the markers free of debris to prevent flooding onto
her property, and that he would comply with her request by cutting wood in that
area and clearing it of debris. He further testified that he removed a tree from the
disputed area, again at Hinchliffe’s request, because she was concerned that it
would damage a garage on her property. Finally, Michael testified that he
installed “no trespassing” signs in the disputed area in 1970, at Hinchliffe’s
specific request, because she was concerned that trespassers accessing the
southern bank of the river in the area north of the monuments were encroaching
upon her land to do so. Those signs remained there until McClammer removed
them in approximately 2005. According to Michael, there had never been any
kind of boundary dispute between his family and owners of the McClammer lot
until McClammer acquired it.
7
We conclude that there was more than ample support for the trial court to
have found that the O’Hearnes, their predecessors, and McClammer’s
predecessors mutually recognized the boundary marked by the monuments as
the true boundary between the adjoining lots, and occupied the lots accordingly
for a period in excess of twenty years. Rautenberg, 108 N.H. at 23; see Lakeview
Farm, Inc., 689 A.2d at 1092 (boundary by acquiescence established where at
least two generations of neighboring landowners accepted a fenced and blazed
line as the common boundary, walked the fence line to confirm the boundary,
and used their lots consistent with the boundary over a period exceeding
requisite time frame under Vermont law). While the trial court may also have
found that the O’Hearnes’ use of the property south of the river was “occasional”
and “shared” with Hinchliffe, these findings are not inconsistent, under the
circumstances of this case, with establishment of the boundary by acquiescence.
See Marja Corp. v. Allain, 622 A.2d 1182, 1185 (Me. 1993) (acquiring title by
acquiescence does not require continuous or exclusive occupation but only
occupation sufficient to provide notice of claim). Upon this record, we cannot
conclude that the trial court’s ruling that the O’Hearnes acquired title to the area
in dispute due to Hinchliffe’s acquiescence in the boundary claimed by the
O’Hearnes was either unsupported by the evidence or erroneous as a matter of
law. See Mastroianni, 158 N.H. at 382.
To the extent the trial court incorrectly found that the O’Hearne chain of
title referenced the monuments, this finding cannot have affected the outcome of
the case since the trial court’s findings and rulings relative to Hinchliffe’s
acquiescence in the boundary are supported by the record and compel the result
reached by the trial court. See Kessler, 156 N.H. at 494. Similarly, any error in
the trial court’s purported “reliance” upon the 1929 deed is harmless. See id.
Finally, to the extent McClammer claims that the boundary found by the
trial court is the high water mark of the river and, thus, that he has title to the
“thread” of the river, see Sheldon v. Sevigny, 110 N.H. 419, 422-23 (1970), the
only part of the record that he cites in his brief to establish that he preserved this
issue, see Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b), is a response he filed to an objection to his motion
for reconsideration. While in his initial petition to quiet title McClammer claimed
that his title extended to the thread of the river, he did so on the basis that the
river, and not the artificial monuments, marked his boundary. Indeed, he
claimed that the monuments were “at the edge of the river’s flood plain,” that the
O’Hearnes wrongly claimed title to the “upland lying in the flood plain along the
south side of the [river] between [the] river and [his] land,” and that, over time,
the river had “gradually migrated northward, accreting land onto the south bank”
and entitling him to the accretions. Nowhere in the petition or amended petition
did McClammer allege that the monuments established his boundary at the high
water mark of the river, entitling him to the disputed land as part of the river
8
itself. In the response to the objection to his motion for reconsideration, however,
McClammer asserted that the monuments in fact were located at “the ordinary
high water line of the [river],” an assertion inconsistent with the testimony of his
expert, who claimed that they were not at the high water mark of the river, but at
its “flood mark.”
“Issues must be raised at the earliest possible time, because trial forums
should have a full opportunity to come to sound conclusions and to correct
claimed errors in the first instance.” SNCR Corp. v. Greene, 152 N.H. 223, 224
(2005) (quotation and brackets omitted). Here, we conclude that McClammer did
not timely raise this claim in a post-trial response to an objection to a motion for
reconsideration. Even if he had timely raised the claim, however, the evidence at
trial does not compel a finding that the boundary markers are located at the high
water mark of the river.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9