THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-756
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
MOHAMED OUAHMAN
Argued: October 18, 2012
Opinion Issued: December 7, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Brianna M. Sinon, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. After a jury trial in Superior Court (Garfunkel, J.), the
defendant, Mohamed Ouahman, was convicted of two counts of kidnapping,
see RSA 633:1, I(d) (2007), and two counts of robbery, see RSA 636:1 (2007).
On appeal, he argues that the trial court erred by overruling his objection to
the State’s use of its peremptory challenges to strike male jurors. We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record or are otherwise
undisputed. The defendant was indicted for the kidnapping and robbery of two
men. During jury selection, the trial court began by reading to the venire a list
of witnesses and asking a series of questions for purposes of preliminary voir
dire. The venire consisted of twenty-nine potential jurors: sixteen women and
thirteen men.
The court clerk then randomly drew names from a box containing the
names of all twenty-nine potential jurors. As each name was drawn, the juror
indicated whether the juror had a “yes” answer to any of the court’s
preliminary questions. If the juror answered negatively, the juror was seated in
the jury box. If the juror answered affirmatively, the juror was questioned
further by the court. The parties were also given the opportunity to challenge
the juror for cause. If found qualified by the court, the juror was then seated.
This process continued until fourteen jurors were seated in the jury box. At
that point, the jury panel consisted of six women and eight men.
The parties then took turns exercising their three peremptory challenges
privately at the clerk’s bench. See RSA 606:3, III (2001); RSA 606:4, III (2001).
As each juror was stricken, the court clerk randomly selected the name of
another potential juror from the venire. If found qualified, that juror replaced
the challenged juror; if not found qualified, another name was drawn. The
State ultimately struck three men, one of whom the State had been
unsuccessful in striking for cause. That juror had indicated that he might be
more skeptical of a police officer’s testimony than the testimony of other
witnesses.
Following the State’s third peremptory strike, the defendant raised a
“Batson challenge,” arguing that the State was improperly striking jurors based
on gender. See Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986) (Equal Protection Clause
forbids State from challenging juror solely on account of race), overruled in part
by Powers v. Ohio, 499 U.S. 400 (1991); J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T. B., 511
U.S. 127, 130-31 (1994) (forbidding peremptory challenges based on gender).
The prosecutor responded that she had not noticed that she had stricken only
male jurors. She also stated, “I based my challenges on the responses they’ve
given and the information in their questionnaire[s].” The trial court then
overruled the defendant’s objection without explanation. The final jury panel
consisted of nine women and five men. The defendant was convicted of all
counts, and this appeal followed.
On appeal, the defendant contends that the trial court erred by denying
his Batson challenge to the State’s use of peremptory challenges to strike only
male jurors. He argues that this denial violated his equal protection rights.
Notably, he does not specify whether he relies on the State Constitution, the
Federal Constitution, or both. Accordingly, we construe his argument as
predicated on federal law only. See State v. Hartford, 132 N.H. 580, 583
(1989).
2
“[T]he State’s privilege to strike individual jurors through peremptory
challenges[] is subject to the commands of the Equal Protection Clause.”
Batson, 476 U.S. at 89. When a defendant objects on the basis of gender
discrimination under Batson, courts employ a three-step inquiry:
Once the opponent of a peremptory challenge has made out a
prima facie case of gender-based discrimination (step 1), the
burden of production shifts to the proponent of the strike to come
forward with a gender-neutral explanation (step 2). If a gender-
neutral explanation is tendered, the trial court must then decide
(step 3) whether the opponent of the strike has proved purposeful
gender-based discrimination.
State v. Taylor, 142 N.H. 6, 9-10 (1997) (quotation and brackets omitted). “[A]
party alleging gender discrimination must make a prima facie showing of
intentional discrimination before the party exercising the challenge is required
to explain the basis for the strike.” Id. at 10 (quotation omitted).
The defendant argues that he established a prima facie case of gender
discrimination and that the State failed to come forward with a gender-neutral
explanation for its strikes. He further maintains that the trial court
erroneously and prematurely ended the Batson inquiry despite his prima facie
showing. We acknowledge that the trial court did not require the State to
provide a gender-neutral explanation for its strikes; instead, the court simply
denied the defendant’s challenge without further explanation. We interpret the
trial court’s action as an implicit determination that the defendant failed to
make a prima facie showing of discrimination, see United States v. Girouard,
521 F.3d 110, 115 (1st Cir. 2008), which we will uphold unless it is clearly
erroneous, Taylor, 142 N.H. at 10.
In order to establish a prima facie case of gender discrimination under
Batson, “a defendant must point to facts and circumstances that raise an
inference of impermissible discrimination.” Id. “[T]he trial court should
consider all relevant circumstances in determining whether a defendant has
made the necessary prima facie showing.” Id. (quotation omitted). Under this
inquiry, “the prosecutor’s pattern of peremptory strikes is significant[,] as are
the prosecutor’s questions and statements during voir dire examination and in
exercising his challenges.” Lark v. Pennsylvania Dept. of Corrections, 645 F.3d
596, 620 (3d Cir. 2011) (quotation omitted) (challenges based on race).
Additional factors include the number of potential jurors in the protected
category, the nature of the crime, and whether the defendant or the victim is a
member of the protected category. See id.
3
Here, the defendant argues that the State’s use of all of its allotted
peremptory strikes to remove men from the jury supports at least an inference
of gender discrimination. We disagree.
To support his argument, the defendant observes that of the twenty
qualified members of the venire, eleven were women and nine were men. He
maintains that because the qualified venire members contained more women
than men, the probability of the State striking three men for non-
discriminatory reasons is low. However, the selection process utilized by the
trial court resulted in the seating of only fourteen jurors against whom the
peremptory challenges could be exercised. That panel consisted of six women
and eight men. Thus, there was actually a higher likelihood that the State
would strike male jurors. See United States v. Martinez, 621 F.3d 101, 110-11
(2d Cir. 2010), cert. denied sub nom. Paris v. United States, 131 S. Ct. 1622
(2011).
Nor is the sole fact that the State used all three of its peremptory
challenges to strike male jurors sufficient to require an inference of gender
discrimination. “Although an inference of discrimination may arise from the
number of peremptory strikes that the prosecutor directs at members of a
cognizable group, such an inference does not automatically spring from the
prosecution’s use of a limited number of peremptory challenges removing group
members.” Taylor, 142 N.H. at 10 (citations omitted). “A defendant who
advances a Batson argument ordinarily should come forward with facts, not
just numbers alone.” Id. at 11 (quotation omitted).
Furthermore, here, two other relevant factors weigh against an inference
of gender-based discrimination. First, prior to exercising its peremptory
challenges, the State unsuccessfully requested that one of the three stricken
male jurors be excused for cause because he agreed, on voir dire, that it was
possible he would be more skeptical of a police officer’s testimony than the
testimony of other witnesses. Striking that juror does not reflect gender-based
animus; instead, it reflects a concern for the “juror’s ability to reach a fair and
impartial verdict.” United States v. Bergodere, 40 F.3d 512, 516 (1st Cir.
1994). Also, the defendant, a male, was charged with robbing and kidnapping
two men. Under these circumstances, the striking of only male jurors does not
support an inference of discrimination. See State v. Rosa-Re, 200 P.3d 670,
673 (Utah Ct. App. 2008) (Batson challenge to the striking of male jurors was
undercut where both the defendant and the alleged victim were males). Thus,
we conclude that the trial court’s implicit determination that the defendant
failed to establish a prima facie case of gender discrimination was not clearly
erroneous.
Accordingly, we hold that the trial court did not err in denying the
defendant’s Batson challenge. We note, however, that the trial court provided
4
no explanation for its ruling. “Because of the importance of [a defendant’s
equal protection rights], as well as the societal and judicial interests
implicated, we . . . direct [the] trial courts to carefully follow each of Batson’s
three steps.” People v. Knight, 701 N.W.2d 715, 724 (Mich. 2005). “[W]e
further urge the courts to clearly articulate their findings and conclusions with
respect to each step on the record.” Id.
All other issues the defendant raised in his notice of appeal, but did not
brief, are deemed waived. State v. King, 162 N.H. 629, 633 (2011).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5