THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2010-303
YVETTE BOUFFARD
v.
STATE FARM FIRE & CASUALTY COMPANY
Argued: June 9, 2011
Opinion Issued: August 11, 2011
Bernstein Shur, P.A., of Manchester (Andru H. Volinsky and Christopher
G. Aslin on the brief, and Mr. Aslin orally), for the plaintiff.
Wiggin & Nourie, P.A., of Manchester (Gordon A. Rehnborg, Jr. and Mary
Ann Dempsey on the brief, and Mr. Rehnborg orally), for the defendant.
DUGGAN, J. The plaintiff, Yvette Bouffard, appeals the Trial Court’s
(Smukler, J.) denial of her request for a declaratory judgment that she is
entitled to uninsured motorist (UM) coverage under her umbrella insurance
policy issued by the defendant, State Farm Fire & Casualty Company (insurer).
The insurer cross-appeals, alleging that the Trial Court (Conboy, J.) erred in
denying its earlier motion for summary judgment. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The plaintiff and her husband,
Percy Bouffard, have been married for forty-eight years. From 1995 to 2005,
they obtained their family insurance policies from Cyr and Rogers Agency.
During this time, they would either go to Cyr and Rogers together to handle
insurance transactions or the husband would go alone and the plaintiff would
review the policies he had purchased. They had an umbrella policy through
Cyr and Rogers that included $1 million in UM coverage.
In late 2004, the Bouffards decided to switch insurance providers. On
January 11, 2005, they went together to the Concord office of Yacyshyn State
Farm Insurance (the insurance agency) to transfer their homeowners,
automobile, and umbrella insurance policies to State Farm. When they
arrived, they discovered that the building did not have wheelchair access. As a
result, the plaintiff, who suffers from multiple sclerosis and was confined to a
wheelchair, could not enter. They agreed that the plaintiff would remain in the
car while the husband entered the insurance agency to complete the necessary
paperwork. The plaintiff authorized her husband to “get it done.” She later
testified that this meant that he should complete the necessary paperwork to
obtain the insurance policies.
Once inside, the husband met with a customer service representative
and completed applications for automobile, homeowners, and umbrella
insurance policies. The umbrella policy application included a provision that
stated: “In keeping with the laws of my state, I have been offered the
opportunity to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motor Vehicle Coverage, and
I reject the opportunity to purchase this option as part of this application.” If
the applicant chose to reject UM coverage, he could then check a box to either
reject it for all vehicles or for recreational vehicles only.
The representative discussed these UM coverage options with the
husband and asked him to sign in the space below the UM provision. At the
hearing, the husband testified that he told the representative that he wished to
reject UM coverage only for recreational vehicles and that the representative
mistakenly checked the box rejecting UM coverage on all vehicles. He also
testified that when he signed the UM provision, he could not read the small
print and believed that the representative followed his request to reject UM
coverage for recreational vehicles only. The representative testified that while
she could not specifically recall her interaction with the husband, her normal
practice was to explain UM coverage to the applicant and ask the applicant
whether he wished to reject such coverage.
The representative then informed the husband that she needed to speak
with the plaintiff and obtain her signature. Inside the Bouffards’ truck, the
representative showed the plaintiff all three applications and provided her the
opportunity to read all three, including the umbrella application. The plaintiff
testified that her husband’s signature was on the umbrella application when
she read it. She also testified that she had the opportunity to review the
2
application and did not point out any mistakes on it. However, the
representative never asked her to sign it.
The insurer subsequently issued the Bouffards an automobile policy, a
homeowners policy, and an umbrella policy, which were delivered to their
home. The plaintiff testified that she read the umbrella policy when it arrived
and believed that it included UM coverage.
On August 4, 2006, the Bouffards were involved in an automobile
accident and the plaintiff suffered bodily injuries. She recovered a total of
$250,000 from the tortfeasor’s insurer and her UM coverage under her
personal automobile policy. Because her damages exceeded this sum, the
plaintiff sought UM coverage under the umbrella policy. The insurer, however,
denied the claim pursuant to RSA 264:15 (2004) (amended 2007 & 2009)
because UM coverage was rejected on the application.
The plaintiff then brought a declaratory judgment action seeking a
declaration that she was entitled to UM coverage under the umbrella policy
because she did not personally reject such coverage. The parties filed cross-
motions for summary judgment. The trial court ruled that the husband’s
rejection of UM coverage on the application was ineffective as a matter of law to
reject it for the plaintiff. The court concluded that the insurer was obligated to
provide the plaintiff with UM coverage unless it could prove that she personally
rejected such coverage. The court, however, denied both motions for summary
judgment because factual issues remained as to whether the husband acted as
the plaintiff’s agent and whether the plaintiff later ratified his acts.
The trial court subsequently held a hearing and determined that the
defendant sustained its burden to prove the factual elements of agency. The
court found that the plaintiff authorized her husband to go into the insurance
agency and purchase insurance for both of them and that the husband agreed
to do so. The court also determined that the plaintiff exerted some control over
her husband’s actions and ratified his decision when she failed to object after
reviewing the application in the car or after the policy arrived by mail.
Therefore, the court concluded, the defendant met its burden to prove “that it
was within the scope of Mr. Bouffard’s agency to make decisions about the
insurance application, including whether or not to reject [UM] coverage.” The
plaintiff then appealed that decision and the defendant cross-appealed the trial
court’s initial summary judgment ruling.
The plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in interpreting and
applying RSA 264:15, which, in pertinent part, provides:
No policy shall be issued under the provisions of RSA 264:14, with
respect to a vehicle registered or principally garaged in this state
unless coverage is provided therein or supplemental thereto at
3
least in amounts or limits prescribed for bodily injury or death for
a liability policy under this chapter, for the protection of persons
insured thereunder who are legally entitled to recover damages
from owners or drivers of uninsured motor vehicles, and hit-and-
run vehicles because of bodily injury, sickness or disease,
including death resulting therefrom. . . . For the purposes of this
paragraph umbrella or excess policies that provide excess limits to
policies described in RSA 259:61, shall also provide uninsured
motorist coverage equal to the limits of liability purchased, unless
the named insured rejects such coverage.
(Emphasis added.)
The plaintiff argues that because RSA 264:15 expressly provides that the
named insured must reject such coverage, an agent may only reject UM
coverage if the principal expressly and knowingly authorizes such rejection.
While the existence of an agency relationship is ordinarily a question of fact,
see Herman v. Monadnock PR-24 Training Council, 147 N.H. 754, 758 (2002),
the plaintiff argues that the trial court erred as a matter of law because she
contends that “a general agency relationship alone is not legally sufficient to
show a knowing rejection of [UM] coverage.” Thus, before determining whether
the trial court correctly ruled as a factual matter that the husband acted as the
plaintiff’s agent, we first decide whether the trial court applied the correct law
regarding an agent’s ability to reject UM coverage on behalf of his principal.
See ACAS Acquisitions v. Hobert, 155 N.H. 381, 400 (2007) (“while we defer to
the trial court’s factual findings, provided there is evidence in the record to
support them, we review its application of the law to the facts de novo”).
Relying upon Shirley v. Centennial Insurance Co., 829 So. 2d 593 (La.
Ct. App. 2002), and Braden v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co.,
637 N.E.2d 109 (Ohio Ct. App. 1994), the plaintiff argues that common law
principles of agency and contract do not apply to UM coverage. In Shirley, the
board of trustees of a charitable organization delegated authority to the trust’s
plan administrator to sign the required documents to purchase an automobile
insurance policy. Shirley, 829 So. 2d at 595. The administrator ultimately
selected a lower UM coverage limit than the policy’s bodily injury limit. Id.
While an insurance broker initially proposed to the board a policy that provided
for only the minimum UM coverage limits permitted by law, the broker did not
expressly discuss rejection of full UM coverage with the board. Id. Thus, the
court determined that the plan administrator’s selection of a lower UM limit
was not binding on the board because the board did not have the opportunity
to make “a meaningful and informed selection” of UM coverage. Id. at 597.
However, the court did not conclude that a principal could never
authorize his agent to reject UM coverage. Rather, it decided, based upon the
facts before it, that the board had not authorized the plan administrator’s acts.
4
Id. Indeed, in an earlier case, the same court concluded that either an implied
or apparent agency status existed between a mother and her son, so that the
mother’s rejection of UM coverage was binding upon the son. Demolle v.
Horace Mann Ins. Co., 491 So. 2d 695, 699 (La. Ct. App. 1986); see also
Freeman v. National Automotive Ins. Co., 916 So. 2d 279, 283 (La. Ct. App.
2005) (recognizing that an agent may have apparent authority to reject UM
coverage but declining to make such a finding where there was no evidence
that the daughter had any authority to sign a UM rejection form on behalf of
her father). Accordingly, we disagree with the plaintiff that Shirley rejected the
application of common law agency principles to UM coverage.
We are also unpersuaded by the plaintiff’s reliance upon Braden. In that
case, the named insured obtained an automobile policy with the assistance of
her mother and was subsequently injured in an accident. Braden, 637 N.E.2d
at 110. The mother discussed different insurance options in the daughter’s
presence and then signed the insurance application and a document reducing
UM coverage from the policy limit to a lesser amount. Id. The agent never
explained the policy or the UM document to the daughter and the daughter did
not sign the application. Id. The court determined that only an expressly
authorized agent could reject UM coverage on behalf of the insured. Id. at 111.
While the insurer also argued that the daughter ratified the mother’s act by
paying the policy premiums, the court concluded that any ratification of an
agent’s rejection of UM coverage must be knowing and express. Id.
However, after determining that implied or apparent authority was
insufficient to reject UM coverage in Braden, see id., the same court reached a
contrary conclusion in a later case when it considered whether an agent was
impliedly authorized to reject UM coverage or created an appearance of
authority to “justify an agency by estoppel,” Owens v. State Farm Mut. Auto.
Ins. Co., 678 N.E.2d 281, 284 (Ohio Ct. App. 1996). While the court ultimately
concluded that the facts did not support an implied agency or agency by
estoppel, it nonetheless recognized that UM coverage could be rejected by an
agent based upon a non-express agency relationship. See id. In light of this
contradictory case law, we do not find the plaintiff’s reliance upon Braden to be
persuasive.
We see no reason why settled principles of agency law should not apply
to the rejection of UM coverage. The plaintiff is correct that the legislature has
provided a statutory right to UM coverage unless rejected by the “named
insured.” However, RSA 264:15 does not clearly indicate any legislative intent
to alter common law agency principles. See State v. Demesmin, 159 N.H. 595,
599 (2010) (“we will not interpret a statute to abrogate the common law unless
the statute clearly expresses that intent” (quotation omitted)). Moreover, we
decline to allow a principal to accept the benefits of an insurance policy as
negotiated by an agent on the one hand, but at the same time claim that one
unbeneficial aspect of the policy should not apply. See Messerly v. State Farm
5
Mut. Auto. Ins., 662 N.E.2d 148, 151 (Ill. Ct. App. 1996). Such a result “would
permit [a principal] to accept the benefit of the bargain her [agent] made on her
behalf but not the burden.” Id. Accordingly, we conclude that an agent may
waive UM coverage on behalf of a principal so long as the insurer proves the
existence of an agency relationship, whether actual or apparent. See State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Noble, 854 N.E.2d 925, 932 (Ind. Ct. App. 2006);
Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Prioleau, 597 S.E.2d 165, 168 (S.C. Ct. App. 2004);
Goode v. Daugherty, 694 S.W.2d 314, 317 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1985).
Having concluded that an agent may waive UM coverage on behalf of the
principal, we next review the trial court’s finding of an agency relationship
between the plaintiff and her husband. As noted, the existence of an agency
relationship is a question of fact. Dent v. Exeter Hosp., 155 N.H. 787, 792
(2007). We will not disturb the trial court’s findings unless they are
unsupported by evidence or are erroneous as a matter of law. See
Demetracopoulos v. Strafford Guidance Ctr., 130 N.H. 209, 213 (1987). The
trial court’s findings are supported by the evidence if a reasonable person could
have reached the same decision based upon the evidence before it. See id.
“[T]he necessary factual elements to establish agency involve: (1)
authorization from the principal that the agent shall act for him or her; (2) the
agent’s consent to so act; and (3) the understanding that the principal is to
exert some control over the agent’s actions.” Dent, 155 N.H. at 792 (quotation
omitted). The trial court determined that the insurer met its burden of proving
these three elements, and, thus, concluded that the plaintiff granted her
husband actual authority to reject UM coverage on her behalf.
“The granting of actual authority and consent to act with such authority
may be either express or implied from the parties’ conduct or other evidence of
intent.” Id. “Express authority arises when the principal . . . explicitly
manifests its authorization of the actions of its agent.” Demetracopoulos, 130
N.H. at 213; see also Restatement (Second) of Agency § 7, comments a-c, § 26,
comments a-c (1958). Implied authority, on the other hand, follows as a
reasonable incident or construction of the terms of express authority, or results
from acquiescence by the principal in a course of dealing by the agent.
Demetracopoulos, 130 N.H. at 215. Such authority can arise from words used,
from customs, or from the relations of the parties. See Restatement (Second) of
Agency § 7, comment c; see also Noble, 854 N.E.2d at 932.
We hold that the record supports the trial court’s findings of an agency
relationship based upon implied actual authority. With regard to the first
element, the trial court found that the plaintiff authorized her husband to
acquire insurance on her behalf by telling him to “get it done.” The plaintiff
testified that this statement reflected her intent that her husband should
purchase insurance for both of them. Additionally, in the past, the plaintiff
and her husband had discussed the insurance coverage they wished to
6
purchase and the husband had then obtained the policy on behalf of both
parties. See Noble, 854 N.E.2d at 932 (determining that where the husband
had previously purchased insurance on the wife’s behalf, a reasonable
inference could be drawn that he had implied authority to reject UM coverage
on her behalf).
The record also supports the trial court’s finding that the husband
consented to act as the wife’s agent. He entered the insurance agency with the
expectation that he would purchase insurance on his wife’s behalf. He then
completed the insurance application, including the section rejecting UM
coverage. While the plaintiff contends that her husband told the representative
that he only wanted to reject UM coverage for recreational vehicles, the trial
court found that:
The court is not persuaded by [the husband’s] testimony that he
merely intended to reject [UM] coverage on recreational vehicles
because [the representative] testified that it was her practice to
explain [UM] coverage, and there is no dispute that [the husband]
was provided with an opportunity to review the application before
he signed it.
The trier of fact is in the best position to judge the credibility of witnesses, and
the trial court was well within its discretion to reject the husband’s testimony.
See Certain Underwriters at Lloyd’s London v. Home Ins. Co., 146 N.H. 740,
744 (2001); see also Drucker’s Case, 133 N.H. 326, 331 (1990) (explaining that
the trier of fact “may accept or reject in whole or in part any testimony of any
witness or party” (quotation omitted)). Accordingly, we uphold the trial court’s
finding that the husband consented to obtain insurance on the plaintiff’s
behalf.
Finally, the record supports the trial court’s finding that the insurer met
its burden of proving that there was an understanding that the plaintiff would
exert some control over the husband’s actions. “Control by the principal does
not mean actual or physical control at every moment; rather, it turns upon the
principal manifesting some continuous prescription of what the agent shall or
shall not do.” Dent, 155 N.H. at 792. Here, the trial court found that the
plaintiff and her husband discussed the coverage they wanted to purchase
prior to arriving at the agency. While the plaintiff contends that she only
authorized her husband to obtain the same UM coverage they had in their prior
umbrella policy, the trial court chose not to rely upon this testimony. See In re
Guardianship of Luong, 157 N.H. 429, 439 (2008) (“the trier of fact is in the
best position to measure the persuasiveness and credibility of evidence and is
not compelled to believe even uncontroverted evidence” (quotation and brackets
omitted)). Rather, it found that the plaintiff authorized her husband to make
decisions regarding the insurance application and that her husband acted
within the scope of his agency in rejecting UM coverage.
7
Moreover, the plaintiff had an opportunity to review the policy both
inside her vehicle immediately after her husband completed it and again when
it was mailed to her home. The plaintiff argues that a principal’s ratification of
an agent’s rejection of UM coverage must be express and knowing. Even if we
were to agree with the plaintiff that her actions did not constitute ratification,
implied authority may be conferred by acquiescence of the principal in the
actions of the agent. See Demetracopoulos, 130 N.H. at 215; see also Noble,
854 N.E.2d at 932 (explaining that a reasonable inference of conferring implied
authority could be drawn where the wife failed to complain upon receiving an
insurance declarations page in the mail that did not include UM coverage).
Accordingly, we conclude that the evidence supports the trial court’s finding of
an agency relationship.
Finally, the plaintiff argues that the trial court improperly placed the
burden of proof on her rather than the insurer. See Colony Ins. Co. v. Dover
Indoor Climbing Gym, 158 N.H. 628, 630 (2009) (“The burden of proving that
no insurance coverage exists rests squarely with the insurer.”). The trial
court’s order directly contradicts the plaintiff’s assertion. Indeed, the trial
court explicitly found that “State Farm has sustained its burden of proving the
necessary factual elements of agency.” Additionally, the plaintiff assigns error
to the trial court’s reliance upon her failure to notify the insurer that the policy
contained an error after she reviewed it. However, the court’s use of such
evidence does not constitute an improper shift of the burden of proof. Rather,
the court considered this evidence, along with all of the other evidence
presented by the insurer, in determining that the insurer met its burden of
proving an agency relationship. Accordingly, the plaintiff’s argument is without
merit.
Because we conclude that the record supports the trial court’s
conclusion that the husband acted as his wife’s agent in rejecting UM coverage,
we need not determine whether the trial court erred in denying the insurer’s
initial motion for summary judgment.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and LYNN, J., concurred.
8