THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Cheshire
No. 2010-167
GOLF COURSE INVESTORS OF NH, LLC
v.
TOWN OF JAFFREY & a.
Argued: November 10, 2010
Opinion Issued: April 12, 2011
William S. Gannon PLLC, of Manchester (William S. Gannon on the brief
and orally), for Golf Course Investors of NH, LLC.
Bragdon & Berkson, P.C., of Keene (Kelly E. Dowd on the brief and
orally), for the Town of Jaffrey and Town of Jaffrey Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
CONBOY, J. The Town of Jaffrey (Town) and the Town of Jaffrey Zoning
Board of Adjustment (ZBA) appeal the order of the Superior Court (Arnold, J.)
vacating the ZBA’s decision granting the appeal of certain residents of the Town
from decisions of the Town of Jaffrey Planning Board (planning board). The
trial court ruled that the residents lacked standing to appeal the planning
board’s decisions granting major subdivision and site plan approvals to Golf
Course Investors of NH, LLC (GCI). We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. With the planning board’s
approval, GCI subdivided its single 9.13 acre parcel into two lots, one
consisting of 7.39 acres, and the other of 1.75 acres (Lot 8.9) containing the
building at issue. The approval of the subdivision was not appealed. GCI
subsequently submitted a major subdivision application, seeking to convert the
building on Lot 8.9, the Shattuck Inn Annex, into a four-unit condominium. It
also submitted a site plan application, proposing the condominium conversion
with two detached garages. The planning board voted that a special exception
was not required to allow the proposed four-unit condominium. It accepted the
major subdivision and site plan applications and conducted a public hearing.
Planning board member Don MacIsaac recused himself from
participating in the board’s review of the applications. He is identified in the
minutes as an abutter, and the certified record demonstrates that the Town
sent notice of the public hearing to “MacIsaac Trust c/o Donald & Patricia
MacIsaac.” During the hearing, Mr. MacIsaac expressed some road safety
concerns, and Mrs. MacIsaac asked questions about the proposed use of an
existing driveway, as well as the intended access to a nearby golf course “by
maintenance people on carts.” The minutes reflect that GCI’s plan was to
restore the existing Annex building, which apparently has historical value, by
extending the front porch, constructing two porches in the back with “similar
character” to existing back porches, and painting the exterior cedar with solid
stain. The plan also included constructing two detached garages. The
planning board approved the major subdivision and site plan applications with
conditions.
Seven residents — Richard and Heather Ames, James and Sara Bacon,
Allon and William Blackwell, and Patricia MacIsaac — appealed the planning
board’s decisions to the ZBA. They stated:
[W]e believe the Planning Board erred in its interpretation of the
zoning regulations regarding the lot size for a major subdivision
and in its decision that the plan did not need to come before the
[ZBA] for Special Exceptions. Under RSA Chapter 675, we
therefore appeal the Planning Board’s April 11, 2006 decision –
allowing four dwelling units in the Mountain Zone on a plot of only
1.75 acres – to the [ZBA].
The residents contended that “[s]tandard zoning in the Rural District and
Mountain Zone requires at least 6 acres for four units with town water, or at
least 4.8 acres for an Open Space Development Plan for four units with town
water,” and that “[i]f the Shattuck Annex were a standard ownership project in
the Mountain Zone, it would require Special Exceptions for a major
development and for a multi-family dwelling and approval for an Open Space
Development Plan (OSDP), which is the only way to allow multi-family housing
2
in the Mountain Zone.” They requested that the ZBA overturn the planning
board decisions and direct it to rehear the case, asserting that, “Upon
rehearing, we believe that a revised proposal on at least 4.8 acres of platted
land could be readily approved by the Planning Board as an Open Space
Development Plan, assuming prior Planning Board referral to and approval by
the Board of Adjustment of the necessary Special Exceptions for a major
subdivision and multi-family dwelling in the Mountain Zone.” They also stated,
“We are pleased that the Shattuck Inn Annex, gutted and unused for many
years, has been proposed by [GCI] to be redeveloped into attractive housing,”
and “We believe the resulting redevelopment of the Shattuck Annex as four
dwelling units on a plot of at least 4.8 acres will be a very good reuse of this
historic 1912 building, which is an example of Shingle Style Architecture.”
Under a section in their appeal document entitled “AGGRIEVED
PERSONS,” the residents identified their respective properties’ location in
relation to the mountain zone and Lot 8.9. They stated that the Ames’ property
“abuts land in the Mountain Zone and [its] northwest property boundary is
approximately 900 feet from Lot 8.9”; the Bacons’ property fronts “the same
side of Dublin Road as Lot 8.9 about 2400 feet from Lot 8.9”; and the
Blackwells’ property is located in the mountain zone and “is about 1200 feet
from Lot 8.9 fronting on the opposite side of Dublin Road.” With respect to
Patricia MacIsaac, the appeal document states that she “was identified by the
Planning Board as an abutter” and her property “is located across Dublin Road
. . . approximately 450 feet from Lot 8.9.”
On June 6, 2006, the ZBA held a public hearing on the residents’ appeal.
GCI raised the issue of whether the residents had standing to appeal the
planning board’s decisions as “persons aggrieved.” See RSA 676:5, I (Supp.
2010). It asserted that living close to the project or having a general interest in
the proper enforcement of town ordinances and regulations is not enough to be
“aggrieved,” and pointed out that the residents stated that they actually favored
the project. With respect to the issue of standing, Town counsel noted that, of
the residents, only Patricia MacIsaac attended and participated in the planning
board proceedings. The minutes of the hearing also state the following:
[Town counsel] read RSA 672:3 which defines an abutter. To his
knowledge none of the four properties adjoin or are directly across
the street or stream from the land under consideration. Another
consideration would be do they have a direct issue; whether they
can demonstrate that their land will be directly affected by the
proposal under consideration. In the petition they identify
themselves as aggrieved and they stop – they do not go on to say
how their properties are affected by this. They do say however that
they like the proposal itself.
3
During the hearing, the residents related their concern that the planning board
erroneously allowed “too much housing, being four condominium units, on too
little land, being 1.75 acres, within the rural/mountain zone.” The ZBA closed
the public hearing, expecting to begin deliberations on June 20.
At the commencement of its June 20 deliberative session, the ZBA
addressed the issue of standing. The minutes of that session state the
following:
The board reviewed the State’s definition of abutter. Chairman
Dumont did not feel that any of the appellants qualified as an
abutter. Member Weber commented that the State has regional
impact going as far as Marlborough. The appellants are closer
than Marlborough.
Member Dodge asked [Town counsel] for an explanation on who
can and cannot appeal a decision. [Town counsel] explained that
the definition of abutter is for notice purposes and you do not have
to be an abutter to be an aggrieved party. The issue here is
whether or not the parties who issued the appeal are aggrieved.
Chairman Dumont noted that three of the four appellants did not
attend the Planning Board public hearing and asked how aggrieved
could they be? There are two choices. The board can either deny
the appeal and go with what the Planning Board said was correct
or the appeal can be granted and returned to the Planning Board.
If the second option takes place it will most likely generate an
application for a special exception.
Without any further discussion described in the minutes, the ZBA voted
that the residents were “aggrieved.” It also voted to grant the appeal “on the
basis that a special exception to allow a multi-family use is required.” GCI
unsuccessfully sought a rehearing from the ZBA, and then appealed to the
superior court. The trial court bifurcated the matter, first addressing the
jurisdictional issue of standing. It ruled that the residents lacked standing to
bring their appeal before the ZBA, and vacated the ZBA’s decision granting the
appeal and reversing the planning board’s decision. This appeal followed.
As a preliminary matter, we will assume, without deciding, for purposes
of this appeal that the Town has standing to challenge the trial court’s decision
regarding the standing of the residents and therefore we address the Town’s
arguments on the merits. See S. N.H. Med. Ctr. v. Hayes, 159 N.H. 711, 715
(2010); Stuart v. State, 134 N.H. 702, 704 (1991).
4
The Town argues that the trial court erred “in finding that standing is a
legal conclusion rather than a factual judgment,” “in substituting its judgment
for that of the ZBA,” and “in failing to accord the presumption of validity to the
determination of the ZBA.” It further contends that “the record is clear that the
determination of the ZBA was reasonable and in accordance with existing New
Hampshire case law.” It points out that one of the residents, Patricia
MacIsaac, was cited as an abutter by the planning board for notice purposes,
that two residents live within 1,000 feet and the others live within 2,400 feet
from Lot 8.9, that the proposed change “was the creation of a major
subdivision on a 1.75 acre lot,” and that at least one of the residents
participated in the planning board proceedings.
GCI argues that the trial court properly found that the ZBA’s ruling on
standing was not supported by the record and that, based upon the
undisputed facts, the residents lacked standing as a matter of law. It contends
that the Town identifies in its brief certain facts that are not part of the
certified record, and that “[n]owhere in the Zoning Appeal [do the residents]
claim or even hint that converting the Annex to four (4) single-family residential
condominiums will affect their health, general welfare, safety, the value of their
properties, impose any other pecuniary damage not shared by all persons in
the community or impact some other direct definite and immediate interest in
the outcome.” (Quotations omitted.) According to GCI, the residents’ appeal
was based only upon “an academic debate regarding the interpretation of the
ordinance and regulations,” and that at “most” their appeal asserted that
“conversion of an existing building into 4 single-family residential
condominium units, without any expansion, would be ‘too much housing’ in
the ‘mountain zone . . . designed to protect and preserve the rural and scenic
beauty of Mount Monadnock and the associated highlands.’”
To have standing to appeal to the ZBA, the residents must have been
“aggrieved” by the planning board’s decisions approving the major subdivision
and site plan applications without requiring GCI to obtain a special exception.
See RSA 676:5, I; Goldstein v. Town of Bedford, 154 N.H. 393, 395 (2006).
“Persons aggrieved” include any person “directly affected” by the challenged
administrative action or proceeding. RSA 677:2 (Supp. 2010); RSA 677:4
(Supp. 2010); see Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395. The appealing party must show
some direct, definite interest in the outcome of the action or proceeding.
Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395. To determine whether a non-abutter has a
sufficient direct, definite interest to confer standing, the trier of fact may
consider factors such as the proximity of the challenging party’s property to the
site for which approval is sought, the type of change proposed, the immediacy
of the injury claimed, and the challenging party’s participation in the
administrative hearings. Weeks Restaurant Corp. v. City of Dover, 119 N.H.
541, 544-45 (1979); Johnson v. Town of Wolfeboro Planning Bd., 157 N.H. 94,
99 (2008).
5
Whether a person’s interest in the challenged administrative action is
sufficient to confer standing is a factual determination to be undertaken on a
case by case basis. See Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395-96. While the factual
findings of the ZBA regarding standing are deemed prima facie lawful and
reasonable, see RSA 677:6 (2008), the decision on standing may be subject to
de novo review when the underlying facts are not in dispute. See Johnson, 157
N.H. at 96; Joyce v. Town of Weare, 156 N.H. 526, 529 (2007). Further, when
the issue of standing is raised, the party challenging the administrative action
cannot rest on unsubstantiated allegations, but must sufficiently demonstrate
his or her right to claim relief. Joyce, 156 N.H. at 529. Standing will not be
extended to “all persons in the community who might feel that they are hurt
by” the administrative action. Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395 (quotation omitted).
Our review of the trial court’s decision regarding the ZBA’s ruling on
standing is limited; we will uphold it unless it is unsupported by the evidence
or legally erroneous. Fox v. Town of Greenland, 151 N.H. 600, 603 (2004);
Feins v. Town of Wilmot, 154 N.H. 715, 717 (2007). We are mindful that the
party who seeks to have the trial court set aside the ZBA decision bears the
burden of showing that such decision is unlawful or unreasonable. See RSA
677:6; Feins, 154 N.H. at 717. Further, in the appeal to the trial court, “[a]ll
findings of the zoning board of adjustment . . . upon all questions of fact
properly before the court shall be prima facie lawful and reasonable.” RSA
677:6. The trial court is precluded from setting aside or vacating a zoning
board decision “except for errors of law, unless the court is persuaded by the
balance of probabilities, on the evidence before it, that said order or decision is
unreasonable.” Id.
Here, the trial court, while aware of its obligation to accept the ZBA’s
factual findings as prima facie lawful and reasonable, determined that
the ZBA did not make any factual findings regarding standing,
because the facts relevant to this determination were not in
dispute. There was no dispute that most of the residents who were
appealing the planning board decision had not attended the
board’s meetings. Nor was there a dispute regarding the proximity
of the residents’ properties to the proposed development site.
There was no allegation of any injury to the residents, let alone a
dispute regarding the nature or extent of such injury. Instead of
making factual findings, the ZBA simply concluded that the
residents were aggrieved. It appears the ZBA made this ruling so
that it could render a decision on the merits of the appeal.
Thus, the trial court decided, it was “not obligated to defer to the ZBA’s
erroneous conclusion of law.”
6
It also determined that the ZBA’s ruling that the residents were “persons
aggrieved” was not supported by the record. After review of the certified record,
the trial court remarked that “all of the residents involved in the appeal lived
within approximately 2,400 feet of the lot [GCI] sought to subdivide,” the
residents “did not identify any injury they would face as a result of the
planning board’s approvals,” and only one of the residents attended the
planning board hearing. Ultimately, it concluded, “It seems the residents’
interest in this case was limited to a general interest in preventing the planning
board from approving plans that would violate the town’s zoning ordinance,”
and ruled that this general interest is not sufficient to confer standing.
We discern no error in the trial court’s decision to overturn the ZBA’s
determination. See Malachy Glen Assocs. v. Town of Chichester, 155 N.H. 102,
109 (2007). In concluding that the residents were aggrieved by the planning
board’s decisions, the ZBA neither rendered factual findings nor resolved any
factual disputes, either implicitly or explicitly. Rather, the residents’ appeal
document and the ZBA minutes reflect undisputed facts regarding the
proximity of the residents’ property to that of GCI, the size of GCI’s lot 8.9, the
proposed changes to the Annex building, and the extent of the residents’
participation in the planning board hearing. The residents neither asserted,
nor presented evidence supporting, particularized harm to them that would
result from this project. Although standing is typically a factual question
resolved on a case by case basis, see Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395-96, and ZBA
findings are afforded deference, see RSA 677:6, the trial court is not compelled
to defer to a legally erroneous conclusion. See RSA 677:6 (trial court can set
aside a ZBA decision for “errors of law”). We conclude that the trial court did
not err when it conducted a de novo review to determine as a matter of law
whether the undisputed facts in the record could support a finding that the
residents were aggrieved by the planning board’s decisions. See Johnson, 157
N.H. at 96; Joyce, 156 N.H. at 529. Further, assessing the record in light of
the factors identified in Weeks, 119 N.H. at 545, we conclude that the trial
court did not err in determining that the ZBA’s conclusion that the residents
were aggrieved is not supported by the record.
Regarding proximity, the residents’ respective properties are located
between approximately 450 feet and 2,400 feet from the project site. While the
Town points out that Patricia MacIsaac was cited as an abutter for notice
purposes in the proceeding before the planning board, it does not contend that
she actually was one. Indeed, the residents’ appeal document itself recognizes
that she is not an actual abutter by describing her property as located across
Dublin Road approximately 450 feet from Lot 8.9. Further, the ZBA minutes
reflect that the ZBA chair “did not feel any of the appellants qualified as an
abutter,” and nothing in the minutes suggests that the ZBA afforded her
standing as an abutter.
7
We disagree with the Town’s contention that we held in Towle v. Nashua
that “an adjoining land owner had standing to appeal whether or not he or she
was an abutter for notice purposes, based on the presumption of a direct
pecuniary interest in land use changes by neighbors.” In Towle, we held that
city residents had standing to appeal the validity of an amending ordinance
which rezoned a residential district to that of general business. Towle v.
Nashua, 106 N.H. 394, 396 (1965). We rejected the contention that because
the residents did not live within the geographical parameters of the rezoned
district as set forth under former RSA 675:5, they lacked standing to appeal;
we considered the residents’ physical proximity to the redistricted area. See id.
(“Persons entitled to protest by reason of ownership of property in, or adjoining,
or across from, an area sought to be rezoned may be thought to have a direct
pecuniary interest in the change.”). However, we did not adopt a bright line
rule identifying whether and to what extent physical proximity establishes
direct interest sufficient to confer standing. Id. In Weeks, decided fourteen
years after Towle, we set forth factors to be considered in determining whether
a non-abutter has demonstrated a direct, definite interest sufficient to confer
standing to appeal a planning board or zoning board decision. Weeks, 119
N.H. at 544-45. Physical proximity is but one of those factors. See id. at 545.
Therefore, while close proximity is relevant, we reject the notion suggested by
the Town that a non-abutter necessarily establishes a direct, definite interest
by close proximity alone. See id.
Regarding the type of change proposed, the record indicates that GCI
does not intend to dramatically alter the footprint of the existing Annex
building or its visual character. Indeed, in the appeal document, the residents
expressed their approval of the intended improvements to the existing Annex
building, and the proposed conversion of the Annex building to a four-unit
condominium. Their objection exclusively focused upon allowing such
conversion to occur on a smaller parcel than allegedly required by the zoning
regulations. Further, with respect to the immediacy of the injury claimed, the
trial court correctly concluded that the residents “did not identify any injury
they would face as a result of the planning board’s approvals.” They identified
no injury that their particular properties would incur in the event the project is
completed on the 1.75 acre lot rather than on a 4.8-acre lot. Rather, the
residents essentially sought to generally protect open space in the mountain
zone through what they saw as proper application of the zoning regulations.
In its brief, the Town asserts:
The [residents] argued that the subdivision proposed is an
unprecedented development apparently set up to “game” the
Jaffrey Land Use Plan, which is intended to encourage Open Space
Development in the Mountain Zone. The [residents] suggest that
approval of the project without additional land set aside as open
8
space would result in overcrowding and over-commercialization of
the Mountain Zone. Presumably, the injury to the [residents]
would be the impacts of noise and traffic and potential diminution
of property values due to overdevelopment.
On this record, these assertions amount to unsubstantiated suppositions. See
Joyce, 156 N.H. at 529 (party challenging an administrative action cannot rest
on unsubstantiated allegations to establish standing). Converting the existing
building into a four-unit condominium presumably will cause some increase in
traffic and noise. However, in the face of their express approval of this
converted use, the residents did not allege, much less identify, any harm to
them which would result from increased traffic and noise. Additionally, while
allowing a four-unit dwelling on a parcel smaller than otherwise allegedly
required could affect the preservation of open space, there is nothing in the
certified record evidencing that the residents demonstrated to the ZBA that the
project on a 1.75 acre lot, rather than a 4.8 acre lot, would result in
overcrowding, or increased traffic and noise, causing direct, definite injury to
them. In short, the trial court correctly determined that there was a complete
lack of evidence concerning the nature and extent of any injury to the
residents’ respective properties, and that the residents alleged no more than a
general interest in preventing the planning board from approving plans that
would violate the Town’s zoning ordinance. See Goldstein, 154 N.H. at 395
(standing not extended to “all persons in the community who might feel that
they are hurt by” the administrative action).
Finally, aside from Patricia MacIsaac, none of the residents participated
in the planning board proceedings, and MacIsaac’s involvement was de
minimis. The minutes reflect that she questioned only the intended use of an
existing driveway and the intended access to a nearby golf course by
“maintenance people on carts.”
Considering all of the Weeks factors, we conclude that the Town has
failed to demonstrate that the trial court’s decision is unsupported by the
evidence or legally erroneous. Cf. Price v. Planning Board, 120 N.H. 481, 484
(1980) (non-abutters had standing where they participated in planning board
proceedings and the proposed project was located across the street, constituted
a significant change in use from undeveloped open space to subdivision with
single-family dwellings and interfered with non-abutter’s use of right of way);
Thomas v. Town of Hooksett, 153 N.H. 717, 719-21 (2006) (non-abutters had
standing where they owned a gas station within one thousand feet of proposed
gas station and within conservation district and had extensively participated in
zoning board proceedings); Johnson, 157 N.H. at 96-100 (non-abutters had
standing where proposed project constituted a significant change to
dimensions and use of existing structure in a protected district, planning board
had repeatedly denied applications to construct much less significant
9
structures in the protected district, and non-abutters lived within two hundred
feet of the proposed project, participated actively at the planning board
hearing, and alleged that new structure would interfere with the use and
enjoyment of their property).
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
10