THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough–northern judicial district
No. 2009-469
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
WILLIAM PLOOF
Argued: April 7, 2011
Opinion Issued: November 2, 2011
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Thomas E. Bocian, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Christopher M. Johnson, chief appellate defender, of Concord, on the
brief and orally, for the defendant.
CONBOY, J. The defendant, William Ploof, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (Abramson, J.) committing him to the custody of the New
Hampshire Department of Corrections as a sexually violent predator pursuant
to RSA 135-E:13 (Supp. 2010). He argues that, on its face, the statute violates
his right to procedural due process, the State Constitution’s separation of
powers provision, and his right to equal protection. We affirm.
In 1998, the defendant pleaded guilty to one count of aggravated
felonious sexual assault and one count of sexual assault. The court sentenced
him to concurrent terms of four to ten years at the state prison and twelve
months at the house of corrections. In March 2007, as the defendant
approached the end of his prison term, the Hillsborough County Attorney
initiated the process established under RSA chapter 135-E for the involuntary
commitment of sexually violent predators. In May 2007, a multidisciplinary
team issued a report concluding that the defendant was a sexually violent
predator within the meaning of the statute, after which the county attorney
petitioned the superior court to commit him.
Prior to trial, the defendant moved to dismiss the petition, arguing that
RSA chapter 135-E violates his state and federal constitutional rights to equal
protection and due process of law. The trial court denied the motion.
Subsequently, the defendant asked the trial court to find RSA 135-E:10, I,
unconstitutional as a violation of the Separation of Powers Clause of the State
Constitution. The trial court denied the motion. Following a seven-day trial,
the jury unanimously found that the defendant is a sexually violent predator
and the trial court entered an order committing him to the custody of the
department of corrections for a period of five years.
The defendant has raised a facial challenge to RSA chapter 135-E. “A
facial challenge to a legislative Act is, of course, the most difficult challenge to
mount successfully, since the challenger must establish that no set of
circumstances exists under which the Act would be valid.” State v. Furgal, 161
N.H. 206, 210 (2010) (quotation omitted). For the reasons stated herein, we
conclude that the defendant has not succeeded in carrying this heavy burden.
We review the trial court’s interpretation of the statute de novo. See
State v. Matthews, 157 N.H. 415, 417 (2008). When reviewing a legislative act,
“we presume it to be constitutional and will not declare it invalid except upon
inescapable grounds. In other words, we will not hold a statute to be
unconstitutional unless a clear and substantial conflict exists between it and
the constitution.” State v. Hynes, 159 N.H. 187, 199-200 (2009) (citations
omitted). “When doubts exist as to the constitutionality of a statute, those
doubts must be resolved in favor of its constitutionality.” Bd. of Trustees, N.H.
Judicial Ret. Plan v. Sec’y of State, 161 N.H. 49, 53 (2010). The party
challenging a statute’s constitutionality bears the burden of proof. New
Hampshire Health Care Assoc. v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 385 (2011)
(quotation omitted).
In matters of statutory interpretation, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
whole. First Berkshire Bus. Trust v. Comm’r, N.H. Dep’t of Revenue Admin.,
161 N.H. 176, 179 (2010). When examining the language of a statute we
ascribe the plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. at 180. We read
words or phrases not in isolation, but in the context of the entire statute and
2
the entire statutory scheme. Id. When the language of a statute is plain and
unambiguous, we do not look beyond it for further indications of legislative
intent. Id.
I. RSA Chapter 135-E
The process for civil commitment of sexually violent predators begins
several months before a person who has committed a sexually violent offense is
to be released from prison. RSA 135-E:3, II. A sexually violent predator is any
person who “[h]as been convicted of a sexually violent offense” and “[s]uffers
from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that makes the person likely
to engage in acts of sexual violence if not confined in a secure facility for long-
term control, care, and treatment.” RSA 135-E:2, XII. The term “[m]ental
abnormality” is defined as “a mental condition affecting a person’s emotional or
volitional capacity which predisposes the person to commit sexually violent
offenses.” RSA 135-E:2, VII. The term “[l]ikely to engage in acts of sexual
violence” means that “the person’s propensity to commit acts of sexual violence
is of such a degree that the person has serious difficulty in controlling his or
her behavior as to pose a potentially serious likelihood of danger to others.”
RSA 135-E:2, VI.
The agency with custody of the inmate is required to give notice of his
impending release to either the county attorney or the attorney general. Id. If
either the county attorney or the attorney general has “an articulable basis to
believe that the person is likely to engage in acts of sexual violence,” he or she
may, within forty-five days of receipt of such notice, request an assessment of
the individual by a multidisciplinary team to determine whether the person is a
sexually dangerous predator. RSA 135-E:3, III. The multidisciplinary team
“shall include, but is not limited to, 2 licensed psychiatrists or psychologists or
one licensed psychiatrist and one licensed psychologist each of whom has
specialized training or experience in the area of treatment and diagnosis of sex
offenders.” RSA 135-E:3, I. “[T]he court shall appoint legal counsel to
represent the person before any interview or personal examination of the
person is conducted by the multidisciplinary team.” Id. If the person is unable
to pay for counsel, the court shall appoint counsel pursuant to RSA 604-A:2.
Id.
The multidisciplinary team assesses and evaluates the person, including
“a review of the person’s institutional history and treatment record, if any, the
person’s criminal background, and any other factor that is relevant to the
determination of whether such person is a sexually violent predator.” RSA
135-E:3, V(a). The person being evaluated must be offered a personal
interview. RSA 135-E:3, V(c). Within four months after receiving the request
for an assessment and evaluation, the multidisciplinary team’s written report
3
containing its findings must be provided to the county attorney or attorney
general. Id.
If the multidisciplinary team finds that the person meets the definition of
a sexually violent predator, within fourteen days of receiving the team’s report,
the county attorney or attorney general may file a petition with the superior
court “alleging that the person is a sexually violent predator and stating facts
sufficient to support such allegation.” RSA 135-E:6. A copy of the petition
must also be sent to the person who is the subject of the petition. Id. Within
ten days of the filing of the petition, “the court shall determine whether
probable cause exists to believe that the person named in the petition is a
sexually violent predator.” RSA 135-E:7. If the court so finds, it must order
that the person remain in custody in an appropriate secure facility for further
proceedings. Id.
Within sixty days after the trial court’s initial determination of probable
cause, or, in cases where a jury trial has been elected, within sixty days after
election of a jury trial, the court must conduct a trial “to determine whether the
person is a sexually violent predator.” RSA 135-E:9, II. Either side may
demand a jury trial. RSA 135-E:9, I. The person may retain experts or mental
health professionals to perform an examination. RSA 135-E:9, IV.
At trial, the rules of evidence, statutes and rules governing the doctor-
patient privilege and privileged communications “or other similar statutes or
rules shall not apply.” RSA 135-E:10, I. The court may consider evidence of
the person’s prior conduct if such evidence is relevant to the issue of whether
the person is a sexually violent predator. RSA 135-E:10, II. The
multidisciplinary team’s report is inadmissible unless the court finds the
report’s probative value substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect. RSA 135-
E:10, III. Notwithstanding the general inapplicability of the rules of evidence,
hearsay evidence is not admissible “unless it falls within one of the recognized
exceptions to the hearsay rule or unless the court finds that the hearsay
evidence contains circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness and the
declarant is unavailable to testify.” RSA 135-E:10, IV. Hearsay evidence shall
not be used as the sole basis for committing a person. Id.
The State has the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence
that the person is a sexually violent predator. RSA 135-E:11, I. If the
determination is made by a jury, the verdict must be unanimous. Id. If the
court or jury determines that the person is a sexually violent predator, upon
the expiration of the incarcerative portion of all sentences, “the person shall be
committed to the custody of the department of corrections for control, care,
and treatment until such time as the person’s mental abnormality or
personality disorder has so changed that the person no longer poses a
potentially serious likelihood of danger to others.” RSA 135-E:11, II. An order
4
committing a person is valid for up to five years. Id. The determination that a
person is a sexually violent predator may be appealed. RSA 135-E:11, III. The
public defender must be appointed to represent the person on appeal if the
person is indigent. Id.
Before the end of the five-year commitment period, the county attorney
or attorney general may petition to recommit the person for another five-year
period. RSA 135-E:12, I. The trial court is required to hold a hearing and the
person “is entitled to the benefit of all procedural protections afforded the
person at the initial trial, except for the right to a jury.” RSA 135-E:12, II. At
the hearing, the State has the burden of proving by clear and convincing
evidence that the person remains a sexually violent predator. Id.
Either the committed person or the commissioner of the department of
corrections may file a petition for discharge at any time. RSA 135-E:13, :14. If
the commissioner files such a petition, the court must hold a hearing at which
the State bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence that the
person remains a sexually violent predator. RSA 135-E:13, I-II. If the
committed person files such a petition and the court determines that
appointment of counsel may assist in “an appropriate resolution” of the
petition, the court must appoint counsel to represent the person if he or she is
indigent. RSA 135-E:14. If the court determines that the petition is without
merit on its face, the court may deny the petition without a hearing. Id.
The New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services is
required to adopt rules relative to the designation of secure facilities for
sexually violent predators who are subject to involuntary commitment, the
components of basic treatment plans, procedures to be followed by the
multidisciplinary teams, and the protocol for informing a person that he or she
is being evaluated to determine whether he or she is a sexually violent
predator. RSA 135-E:22. Among the rules promulgated is New Hampshire
Administrative Rule He-C 702.04, establishing the requirements for treatment
plans for sexually violent predators. Pursuant to the rule, a person committed
as a sexually violent predator is provided a treatment team that is required to
develop an individual treatment plan for that person “based upon the
individual needs of the person as determined via the person’s assessment, and
established within 30 days of the person’s commitment to a secure facility.”
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 702.04(a). An individualized treatment plan shall:
(1) Be offender specific;
(2) Be tailored to the offender’s criminal history, cognitive
patterns, sexual arousal patterns, offense patterns, co-occurring
conditions, risk assessment, relapse profile, and current
circumstances;
5
(3) Address any medical conditions as identified by a
comprehensive medical examination;
(4) Contain measurable treatment goals, objectives, and treatment
interventions;
(5) Contain the timelines for goal attainment;
(6) Clearly define the expectations of the person;
(7) Specify clinical screening and progress assessment tools to be
administered, and expectations thereof . . . ;
(8) Indicate the treatment program staff responsible for treatment
and supervision;
(9) Integrate the collaborative efforts of all criminal justice and
treatment agencies responsible for treatment and supervision of
the person, including substance abuse providers, mental health
providers, and those responsible for the identification of
medication management strategies when indicated;
(10) Be reviewed quarterly . . . ; and
(11) Be signed and dated by all members of the treatment team.
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 702.04(b)(1)-(11).
The administrative rules also set forth specific requirements that the
individualized portion of the treatment plan shall address. The rules require
that each individualized treatment plan be reviewed quarterly by the treatment
team and set forth the specific required components of the review
documentation. See N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 702.04(c)-702.05(c). The fourth
quarterly review serves as the annual individualized treatment plan review, and
in addition to the components of a quarterly review, the components of the
annual review must include:
(1) Determination of whether the person is likely to commit acts of
sexual violence if discharged;
(2) Review of the person’s psychiatric and medical diagnosis(es);
(3) Reassessment of the person’s medications, if applicable;
(4) Assessment of the need for additional services and/or revisions
to the [individualized treatment plan];
(5) Need for other health care or social services;
(6) A list of the participants in this annual review process;
(7) A description of the level of the person’s participation, if any, in
the review; and
(8) The dated signatures of all the members of the treatment team.
N.H. Admin. Rules, He-C 702.05(d)-(e).
6
II. Due Process
The defendant first argues that the procedures set forth in RSA chapter
135-E “violate[ ] his rights under the due process clauses contained in the Fifth
and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, and Part I,
Article 15 of the New Hampshire Constitution.” We first address the
defendant’s claim under the State Constitution, citing federal opinions for
guidance only. See State v. Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 233 (1983).
The defendant grounds his challenge in procedural due process. Three
factors are considered in analyzing a procedural due process claim: (1) the
private interest that will be affected by the official action; (2) the risk of an
erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures used, and the
probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural safeguards; and
(3) the government’s interest. See In re Eduardo L., 136 N.H. 678, 686 (1993);
Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 332 (1976).
As to the first factor, we have recognized that “[t]he private interests at
stake in civil commitment proceedings, loss of liberty and social stigmatization,
are substantial and parallel those at risk in the criminal context.” In re
Richard A., 146 N.H. 295, 298 (2001); see Addington v. Texas, 441 U.S. 418
(1979) (civil commitment for any purpose constitutes a significant deprivation
of liberty that requires due process protection). Because the private interests
at stake in this case are substantial, we must weigh the second factor, risk of
an erroneous deprivation of those interests, against the third factor, the
government’s interest. Richard A., 146 N.H. at 298.
The defendant argues that in two specific respects the enacted
procedures inadequately protect his liberty interest against erroneous
deprivation. He argues that “[f]irst, RSA 135-E:10 violates due process in
abrogating the rules of evidence without enacting an adequate substitute.
Second, RSA 135-E:11 violates due process in failing to require the State to
prove the allegations of the petition beyond a reasonable doubt.”
A. Rules of Evidence
The defendant argues that “[o]ther than with regard to hearsay, RSA 135-
E:10 leaves the parties with no ready principles by which to determine the
admissibility of evidence” and that “[t]he absence of any rules . . . to govern the
admission of evidence deprives the court of a powerful tool for the prevention of
the prejudicial misuse of information.” The State argues that “a civil
commitment proceeding under RSA chapter 135-E should not be deemed
unreliable solely because the rules of evidence do not apply.” Given the
numerous safeguards in the statute to protect against the risk of erroneous
deprivation of the defendant’s liberty interest, the State contends that RSA
7
135-E:10 in fact “allows the trial court broader discretion to hear and consider
the evidence that it deems reliable and pertinent.”
The fact that the private interests at stake in civil commitment
proceedings parallel those at risk in the criminal context “does not compel
identical procedural safeguards under the State Constitution.” Richard A., 146
N.H. at 298. “Because the primary focus of an involuntary commitment
proceeding is the mental condition and dangerousness of the person sought to
be committed rather than determination of guilt or innocence, the full range of
protections afforded by the State and federal due process provisions does not
come into play.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). The individual’s liberty
interest “is not absolute” and the “individual’s constitutionally protected
interest in avoiding physical restraint may be overridden even in the civil
context,” provided that “the confinement takes place pursuant to proper
procedures and evidentiary standards.” Kansas v. Hendricks, 521 U.S. 346,
356-57 (1997).
In various other proceedings, the New Hampshire Rules of Evidence do
not apply. See N.H. R. Ev. 1101(d)(3). However, in such proceedings we have
nonetheless required some degree of trustworthiness in order for evidence to be
admissible. For example, in In re Eduardo L. we stated that “[i]t is settled that
due process applies to juvenile certification proceedings” and “requires that the
defendant be given notice, a hearing, the right to review records, and the
assistance of counsel,” and that evidence admitted at the hearing be
trustworthy. Eduardo L., 136 N.H. at 684-85. We discerned “no substantial
risk in relying upon the district court’s ability to consider the trustworthiness
of the evidence at issue.” Id. at 687; see also State v. Arnault, 114 N.H. 216,
219 (1974) (decided before adoption of the rules of evidence) (in a probable
cause hearing the trial court, “within its discretion, may admit evidence which
it finds relevant, not too remote, and given by a credible witness”).
“It is a basic principle of statutory construction that a legislative
enactment will be construed to avoid conflict with constitutional rights
wherever reasonably possible.” State v. Smagula, 117 N.H. 663, 666 (1977).
Given that the trial court is vested with the discretion to make initial
determinations of relevancy and reliability, we construe RSA 135-E:10 as
requiring the trial court to admit only evidence that satisfies these basic
requirements. See State v. Lee, 716 N.E.2d 751, 757 (Ohio Ct. App. 1998)
(relaxed standard for admissibility of evidence cannot be equated with
automatic admissibility of any and all materials); In re Civil Commitment of
Pittman, No. A09-1931, 2010 WL 1541453, at *3 (Minn. Ct. App. April 20,
2010) (although rules of evidence do not apply, simple notions of due process
must apply).
8
These basic requirements of relevance and reliability refute the
defendant’s assertion that in the absence of formal application of the rules of
evidence, the jury will be faced with “the unregulated presentation of
information.” Moreover, other requirements in RSA 135-E:10 support these
fundamental protections: the introduction of evidence of the individual’s prior
conduct is allowed only when such evidence “is relevant to the issue of whether
the person is a sexually violent predator”; the multidisciplinary team’s report is
inadmissible unless the court finds that the report’s “probative value
substantially outweighs its prejudicial effect”; and hearsay evidence is not
admissible unless it falls within a recognized exception or the court finds that it
“contains circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness and the declarant is
unavailable to testify.” RSA 135-E:10, II-IV. Under these circumstances, the
statute withstands the defendant’s argument that it “leaves the parties with no
ready principles by which to determine the admissibility of evidence.”
Accordingly, we conclude that the procedures under RSA 135-E:10 adequately
protect the defendant’s private interest against erroneous deprivation.
B. Burden of Proof
In addition, the defendant argues that RSA 135-E:11 violates the second
factor in a procedural due process analysis by failing to require the State to
prove the allegations in the petition for commitment as a sexually violent
predator beyond a reasonable doubt. In Addington v. Texas, the Supreme
Court addressed the standard of proof required by the Fourteenth Amendment
to the Federal Constitution in a civil proceeding brought under state law to
commit an individual involuntarily for an indefinite period to a state mental
hospital. Addington, 441 U.S. at 419. The Court recognized that
civil commitment for any purpose constitutes a significant
deprivation of liberty that requires due process protection.
Moreover, it is indisputable that involuntary commitment to a
mental hospital after a finding of probable dangerousness to self or
others can engender adverse social consequences to the individual.
Whether we label this phenomena “stigma” or choose to call it
something else is less important than that we recognize that it can
occur and that it can have a very significant impact on the
individual. The state has a legitimate interest under its parens
patriae powers in providing care to its citizens who are unable
because of emotional disorders to care for themselves; the state
also has authority under its police power to protect the community
from the dangerous tendencies of some who are mentally ill.
Id. at 425-26 (citations omitted).
9
However, the Court also recognized that
[t]here are significant reasons why different standards of proof are
called for in civil commitment proceedings as opposed to criminal
prosecutions. In a civil commitment state power is not exercised in
a punitive sense. . . . [A] civil commitment proceeding can in no
sense be equated to a criminal prosecution. In addition, the
“beyond a reasonable doubt” standard historically has been
reserved for criminal cases. This unique standard of proof, not
prescribed or defined in the Constitution, is regarded as a critical
part of the moral force of the criminal law, and we should hesitate
to apply it too broadly or casually in noncriminal cases.
Id. at 428 (citations and quotation omitted).
The Court stated that while “the preponderance standard falls short of
meeting the demands of due process . . . the reasonable-doubt standard is not
required.” Id. at 431. The Court found the reasonable doubt standard
“inappropriate in civil commitment proceedings because, given the
uncertainties of psychiatric diagnosis, it may impose a burden the state cannot
meet and thereby erect an unreasonable barrier to needed medical treatment.”
Id. at 432. Therefore, the Court concluded that the middle level burden of
proof, clear and convincing evidence, “strikes a fair balance between the rights
of the individual and the legitimate concerns of the state.” Id. at 431. The
Court explained that while some states have chosen to adopt the criminal law
standard for civil commitment proceedings, this more stringent standard of
proof is not required and is not adaptable to the needs of all states. See id. at
431-32. “The essence of federalism is that states must be free to develop a
variety of solutions to problems and not be forced into a common, uniform
mold. As the substantive standards for civil commitment may vary from state
to state, procedures must be allowed to vary so long as they meet the
constitutional minimum.” Id. at 431. Accordingly, the Court stated that
“determination of the precise burden equal to or greater than the ‘clear and
convincing’ standard which we hold is required to meet due process
guarantees” is a matter of state law. Id. at 433.
Despite the Supreme Court’s 1979 ruling in Addington, we declined in
1982 to reexamine the reasonable doubt requirement recognized in Proctor v.
Butler, 117 N.H. 927, 935 (1977), as applicable to civil commitment
proceedings under RSA chapter 135-C (civil commitment of mentally ill).
Rather, we advised the Senate that we were not persuaded that the clear and
convincing standard of Addington “adequately protects the liberty interests of
our citizens.” Opinion of the Justices, 122 N.H. 199, 204 (1982). Thereafter,
the Constitutional Convention of 1984 proposed, and the voters subsequently
adopted, an amendment to Part I, Article 15 that states: “In any proceeding to
10
commit a person acquitted of a criminal charge by reason of insanity, due
process shall require that clear and convincing evidence that the person is
potentially dangerous to himself or to others and that the person suffers from a
mental disorder must be established.” In re Sanborn, 130 N.H. 430, 444
(1988) (quotation omitted).
Four years later we addressed the effect of this constitutional
amendment on the standard of proof for commitment on civil petition under
RSA chapter 135-C. Id. at 431. As we noted, “[t]he terms of the amendment do
not, of course, deal with commitments under RSA 135-C:34, and the
respondent urges us to limit the amendment’s effect to criminal insanity cases,
which the application of its terms literally requires.” Id. at 444. We were,
however, “unanimous . . . in believing that we have no such option to confine
the effect of the 1984 amendment, for we perceive no intellectually realistic
basis for holding that due process can require a burden of proof under RSA
135-C:34 that is different from the State’s burden when it seeks commitment
after a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity to a criminal charge.” Id. We
concluded that “[t]here being no apparent justification for different standards,
the 1984 amendment to article 15 requires . . . [that] [h]enceforth the
petitioner’s burden of proof in commitment proceedings under RSA 135-C:34
shall be that of clear and convincing evidence,” thereby overruling Proctor v.
Butler insofar as it imposed a reasonable doubt burden of proof in civil
commitment cases. Id. at 446.
“The function of a standard of proof, as that concept is embodied in the
Due Process Clause and in the realm of factfinding, is to instruct the factfinder
concerning the degree of confidence our society thinks he should have in the
correctness of factual conclusions for a particular type of adjudication.”
Addington, 441 U.S. at 423 (quotation omitted). “The standard serves to
allocate the risk of error between the litigants and to indicate the relative
importance attached to the ultimate decision.” Id. As we have recognized,
“[w]hile the clear and convincing standard falls short of the proof required to
secure a criminal conviction, it nevertheless sends a strong message to the fact
finder about the degree of certainty required before a civil commitment can be
imposed.” Richard A., 146 N.H. at 298-99. Based upon Addington and
Sanborn, we hold that the clear and convincing standard of proof in RSA
chapter 135-E does not violate the state constitutional due process guarantee.
The defendant argues that the procedures contained in RSA chapter 135-
E carry the risk of erroneous deprivation of his liberty interest. However, the
statute affords a number of safeguards designed to protect against erroneous
commitment including: the right to counsel, which is provided at State
expense for indigent individuals; the right to retain mental health professionals
to perform an independent mental health assessment; the right to a probable
cause hearing; the right to an interview with the multidisciplinary team; the
11
right to retain experts at State expense for indigent individuals; the right to a
jury trial; the right to exclude hearsay evidence; the requirement that the State
prove its case by clear and convincing evidence; the right to a unanimous jury
verdict; the right to appeal; and the right to petition for discharge at any time.
We find these protections adequate.
Having concluded that neither the procedures nor the burden of proof set
forth in the statute carry undue risk of an erroneous deprivation of the
defendant’s private interests, we consider the third factor in analyzing the
defendant’s procedural due process claim – the government’s interest in the
purpose of the statute. Here the State has a strong interest in protecting the
public from, and providing care and treatment for, sexually violent predators.
See In re Christopher K., 155 N.H. 219, 225 (2007); In re Moulton, 96 N.H.
370, 374-75 (1950); Addington, 441 U.S. at 426. Accordingly, we weigh heavily
this factor and, on balance, conclude that the defendant’s rights to procedural
due process are not violated by the procedures set forth in RSA chapter 135-E.
It is also noteworthy that, despite seven days of trial, generating over one
thousand pages of trial transcripts, in addition to a three-day Daubert hearing,
the defendant does not argue that the statute as applied to him resulted in an
unconstitutional deprivation of rights. See Baker Valley Lumber v. Ingersoll-
Rand, 148 N.H. 609, 614 (2002) (adopting standard of reliability set forth in
Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993)).
Because the Federal Constitution does not provide any greater protection
than does the State Constitution with regard to the defendant’s procedural due
process claims, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution. See
State v. Veale, 158 N.H. 632, 645 (2009), cert. denied, 130 S. Ct. 748 (2009).
III. Separation of Powers
The defendant next argues that based upon our decision in Opinion of
the Justices (Prior Sexual Assault Evidence), 141 N.H. 562 (1997) (proposed
legislation modifying court rule of evidence would violate separation of powers),
we must hold that RSA 135-E:10 violates the principle of separation of powers
under Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution. He asserts that by
eliminating the application of the rules of evidence, “the legislature seeks to
control how a court regulates evidence in adjudicating sexually violent predator
civil commitment cases,” thereby usurping the judicial function of making
relevancy determinations in sexual predator cases without regard for the
particular facts or circumstances involved in such a case.
The State argues that Opinion of the Justices does not apply because
RSA 135-E:10 “does not modify an existing rule of evidence that this Court had
adopted,” “[n]or does it create . . . [a] partial abrogation or modification of the
rules of evidence.” Instead, the State argues, the statute simply creates an
12
exception for a particular type of proceeding from the general principle that the
rules of evidence apply, an action that the legislature is expressly allowed to
take under New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 1101(b). We agree.
Because Opinion of the Justices was an advisory opinion issued in
response to a request from the Senate, rather than a litigated case, the opinion
does not constitute binding precedent. See New Hampshire Health Care Assoc.
v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 392 (2011); Opinion of the Justices, 84 N.H. 559,
582-83 (1930). Nonetheless, the circumstances of this case are different and
the State does not ask us to reexamine Opinion of the Justices.
New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 1101, in effect when RSA chapter 135-
E was enacted, provided in part:
(a) Courts. – These rules apply to the proceedings in the district
courts, probate courts, superior court, and the supreme court.
(b) Proceedings Generally. – These rules apply generally to all civil
and criminal proceedings unless otherwise provided by the
constitution or statutes of the State of New Hampshire or these
rules.
Under the plain language of Rule 1101(b), the rules of evidence apply to civil
proceedings unless otherwise provided by statute. Here, the legislature has
expressly provided that the rules do not apply to proceedings under RSA
chapter 135-E. Unlike the proposed legislation addressed in Opinion of the
Justices, RSA 135-E:10 does not modify an existing rule of evidence adopted by
this court under its rulemaking authority. Because there is no conflict
between the statute and the rules of evidence, we hold that the statute does not
violate our state’s constitutional provision mandating the separation of powers.
IV. Equal Protection
Finally, the defendant argues that RSA chapter 135-E violates his right
to equal protection of the laws because it enacted lesser procedural protections
than New Hampshire law affords to persons facing civil commitment under RSA
chapter 135-C or RSA chapter 171-B. Specifically, the defendant points to the
statute’s express preclusion of the rules of evidence. The defendant relies upon
the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and Part I,
Articles 1, 12, and 14 of the New Hampshire Constitution. We first address the
defendant’s claim under the State Constitution, citing federal opinions for
guidance only. See Ball, 124 N.H. at 233.
13
The equal protection guarantee is “essentially a direction that all persons
similarly situated should be treated alike.” In re Sandra H., 150 N.H. 634, 637
(2004) (quotation omitted). “Holding that persons who are not similarly
situated need not be treated the same under the law is a shorthand way of
explaining the equal protection guarantee. Whether applying a strict scrutiny,
intermediate, or rational basis standard of review, we determine whether
differences between the classes justify disparate treatment under the law.” Id.
at 638.
When we review legislation under equal protection analysis, the level of
scrutiny applied depends upon the type of legislative classification at issue.
Classifications based upon suspect classes or affecting fundamental rights are
strictly scrutinized. See id. at 637. Intermediate scrutiny applies to
discriminatory classifications involving “important substantive rights.” Id. at
638 (quotation omitted). In all other cases, the court employs the rational
basis test. Id.
The defendant argues that strict scrutiny ought to apply. As the trial
court noted in its order denying the defendant’s motion to dismiss, of the
courts that have addressed this issue in other jurisdictions, most have applied
rational basis review. See, e.g., Martin v. Reinstein, 987 P.2d 779, 796 (Ariz.
Ct. App. 1999); In re Detention of Samuelson, 727 N.E.2d 228, 236 (Ill. 2000);
In re Detention of Williams, 628 N.W.2d 447, 453 (Iowa 2001); In re Treatment
and Care of Luckabaugh, 568 S.E.2d 338, 351 (S.C. 2002). Quoting Martin,
987 P.2d at 796, the trial court reasoned that
while [the defendant] assert[s] that RSA 135-E affects [his]
fundamental right to liberty, the classification itself only affects
[his] right to have applied to [him] the rules and procedures
applicable in the general civil commitment proceedings. But [he]
ha[s] not pointed the Court to, and the Court has not found, a
fundamental right to have particular procedures apply. The courts
that have analyzed equal protection challenges based upon the
application of differing sets of rules have applied the rational basis
test, even in cases such as this one, where liberty may ultimately
be at stake.
(Quotations and brackets omitted.)
We agree with the trial court that the rational basis standard applies
here. Under this standard the party challenging the statute bears the burden
of showing that the statutory classification does not bear a rational relationship
to a legitimate state interest. Verizon New England v. City of Rochester, 151
N.H. 263, 270 (2004). The defendant must show that “the classification is
arbitrary or without some reasonable justification.” Id. “Where a classification
14
realistically reflects the fact that the two groups are not similarly situated in
certain circumstances, and the legislation’s differing treatment of the groups is
sufficiently related to a government interest, it will survive an equal protection
challenge.” Sandra H., 150 N.H. at 638 (quotations, brackets and citation
omitted).
In enacting RSA chapter 135-E, the legislature explicitly found that
sexually violent predators have special treatment needs and present unique
risks to society. As the statute provides, “a small but extremely dangerous
number of sexually violent predators exist who have antisocial personality
features which are unamenable to existing mental illness treatment modalities,
and those features render them likely to engage in criminal, sexually violent
behavior.” RSA 135-E:1. The legislature also found that “[t]he existing
involuntary commitment procedures for the treatment and care of mentally ill
persons are inadequate to address the risk these sexually violent predators
pose to society.” Id. Therefore, the intent of the legislature is “to create a civil
commitment procedure for the long-term care and treatment of sexually violent
predators.” Id.
The legislature has thus declared that sexually violent predators are
different from other civilly committed persons with respect to treatment and
risk. Accordingly, the purpose of RSA chapter 135-E is to both provide care
and treatment to sexually violent predators and to protect society from such
dangerous persons. These are legitimate state interests. See Christopher K.,
155 N.H. at 225 (providing care to the mentally ill and protecting society from
dangerous persons are legitimate state interests); see also Conn. Dept. of Pub.
Safety v. Doe, 538 U.S. 1, 4 (2003) (sex offenders are a serious threat in this
nation and the public interest in protecting vulnerable members of the
community from sexual predators is a compelling one).
Although the defendant argues that “sex offender civil commitment and
New Hampshire’s other forms of civil commitment present similar challenges”
with regard to the application of the rules of evidence, he has failed to establish
that the classification is irrational or arbitrary. See Samuelson, 727 N.E.2d at
237 (persons subject to the Sexually Dangerous Persons Act possess
characteristics which set them apart from the greater class of persons who fall
within the Mental Health Code, and such persons present different societal
problems); Martin, 987 P.2d at 797 (given the difference between sexually
violent persons and other classes of mentally ill, it was not irrational or
unreasonable for the legislature to determine that the underlying mental
conditions of sexually violent persons render them unamenable to or
inappropriate candidates for existing involuntary commitment procedures);
Merryfield v. State, 241 P.3d 573, 578 (Kan. Ct. App. 2010) (defendant failed to
demonstrate that sexually violent predators are similarly situated to others
confined for mental illness).
15
In contrast to individuals facing civil commitment under RSA chapter
135-C (mental illness) or RSA chapter 171-B (persons with an “intellectual
disability” found not competent to stand trial), far different criteria must be met
to qualify as a sexually violent predator under RSA chapter 135-E. For
example, the individual must have been convicted of a sexually violent offense
and must suffer from a mental abnormality or personality disorder that makes
it likely that he or she will engage in acts of sexual violence in the future if not
confined in a secure facility for long-term control, care, and treatment. RSA
135-E:2, XII. Given the specific characteristics of individuals subject to civil
commitment under RSA chapter 135-E as identified by the legislature and the
unique nature of the proof required to meet the statutory requirements for civil
commitment as a sexually violent predator, the need for different procedures in
this context is rationally related to a legitimate governmental interest. Sandra
H., 150 N.H. at 638. “Where a classification realistically reflects the fact that
the two groups are not similarly situated in certain circumstances, and the
legislation’s differing treatment of the groups is sufficiently related to a
government interest, it will survive an equal protection challenge.” Id.
(quotations, brackets and citation omitted).
The defendant cites Grindle v. Miller, 119 N.H. 214 (1979), and argues
that following the logic in that case, we “must find RSA 135-E’s prohibition on
the rules of evidence to violate equal protection.” In Grindle, the defendant
challenged the constitutionality of RSA chapter 173-A, the Dangerous Sexual
Offenders Act, a prior version of the statute before us here. Id. at 215. The
plaintiff in Grindle contended that there was no rational basis for
distinguishing between a dangerous sexual offender and other individuals
involuntarily committed in order to justify differing release procedures under
the applicable statutes. Id. at 216. In upholding the statute we noted that
“permitting different procedures for the commitment and release of [dangerous
sexual offenders] from those provided for commitment of persons acquitted by
reason of insanity or civil commitments generally would violate equal protection
under [the State Constitution].” Id. at 217. However, the case was decided
based upon specific statutory construction and contains no analysis of the
constitutional issues alluded to. Furthermore, the former dangerous sexual
offender statute at issue in Grindle was substantively different from RSA
chapter 135-E. Accordingly, we decline to apply the case as controlling
precedent on the question before us. See Trustees v. Exeter, 90 N.H. 472, 479-
81 (1940).
We hold that, on its face, RSA chapter 135-E does not violate the
defendant’s right to equal protection under the New Hampshire Constitution.
16
Because the Federal Constitution does not offer greater protection than our
State Constitution, we reach the same conclusion under the Federal
Constitution. See Sandra H., 150 N.H. at 637.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
17