THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2011-151
PHANEUF FUNERAL HOME
v.
LITTLE GIANT PUMP COMPANY & a.
Argued: April 11, 2012
Opinion Issued: June 29, 2012
Sherman Law, PLLC, of Portsmouth (John P. Sherman on the brief), and
Cozen O’Connor, of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (Joseph F. Rich on the brief and
orally), for the plaintiff.
Law Offices of John B. Schulte, of Manchester (Nicholas J. Deleault on
the brief and orally), for defendant Little Giant Pump Company.
Mallory & Friedman, PLLC, of Concord (Christine Friedman on the brief
and orally), for defendant Boyer Interior Design.
Cornell & Gollub, of Boston, Massachusetts (Peter M. Durney on the
brief), and Littleton Joyce Ughetta Park & Kelly LLP, of Purchase, New York
(Jason P. Sultzer on the brief and orally), for defendant Leviton Manufacturing
Company.
Law Offices of Thomas M. Niarchos, of Boston, Massachusetts (David J.
Donovan on the brief and orally), for defendant The Elegant Earth, Inc. d/b/a
The Arbor.
LYNN, J. The plaintiff, Phaneuf Funeral Home (Phaneuf),1 appeals orders
of the Superior Court (Colburn, J.) granting motions for summary judgment in
favor of the defendants, Little Giant Pump Company (Little Giant), Boyer
Interior Design (Boyer), Leviton Manufacturing Company (Leviton), and The
Elegant Earth, Inc. (Elegant). We affirm the grant of summary judgment in
favor of Boyer, but otherwise reverse.
I
The record reflects the following facts. In 1998, Phaneuf hired Boyer to
do interior design and light renovation work in the basement and adjacent
hallway of the funeral home. In the hallway, Boyer installed a wall-mounted
water fountain that it purchased from Elegant, an Alabama-based household
goods retailer. Defendant Leviton supplied the fountain’s power cord to Little
Giant, which manufactured the fountain.
The water fountain was pre-assembled, and could be used simply by
hanging it from the wall and plugging it into an existing wall power outlet.
Phaneuf, however, wanted something more permanent that would blend with
the wall. To satisfy this preference, Boyer designed a back plate to be affixed to
the wall, attached the fountain to the back plate, and used a faux finish paint
application to blend the fountain and the back plate with the wall. Boyer
finished installing the water fountain in January 1999.
On March 17, 2007, a fire broke out at the funeral home. Alleging that
the water fountain’s defective pump and power cord caused the fire, Phaneuf
brought negligence and strict product liability claims against each defendant,
although it later withdrew its negligence claim against Boyer. Each defendant
1 Although nominally brought in the name of its insured, Phaneuf Funeral Home, the real plaintiff
in interest in this case is State Fire and Casualty Insurance Company, which, after paying
Phaneuf’s claim for damages arising out of the fire, brought this subrogation action against the
defendants.
2
moved for summary judgment, arguing that Phaneuf’s claims were time-barred
by RSA 508:4-b, I (2010), the statute of repose for “Damages From
Construction.” The superior court agreed, and granted each motion. This
appeal followed.
II
The statute of repose for damages from construction provides, in
pertinent part:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all actions to
recover damages . . . arising out of any deficiency in the
creation of an improvement to real property, including
without limitation the design, labor, materials,
engineering, planning, surveying, construction,
observation, supervision or inspection of that
improvement, shall be brought within 8 years from the
date of substantial completion of the improvement, and
not thereafter.
RSA 508:4-b, I.
Phaneuf concedes that its action was filed outside the eight-year time
period set forth in RSA 508:4-b, but argues: (1) that this statute is
inapplicable to product liability actions;2 (2) that the fountain did not
constitute an “improvement to real property” as the statute requires; and (3) in
the alternative, that the statute applies only to those who provide products and
services that are particularized to or “specifically designed” for the
improvement in which they are used or incorporated – thus excluding product
manufacturers and retail sellers.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Big League Entm’t v. Brox
Indus., 149 N.H. 480, 482 (2003). If our review of that evidence discloses no
genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving party is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id. We
review the trial court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
In matters of statutory construction, we are the final arbiters of the
legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the statute considered as a
2 The plaintiff asserts that if a statute of repose did apply to its claims, the applicable one would
be RSA 507-D:2 (2010), which established a twelve-year repose period for product liability actions,
and further notes that in Heath v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 123 N.H. 512 (1983), we held this
statute unconstitutional.
3
whole. New Hampshire Health Care Assoc. v. Governor, 161 N.H. 378, 385
(2011). When examining the language of a statute, we ascribe the plain and
ordinary meaning to the words used. Id. We read words and phrases not in
isolation, but in the context of the entire statute and statutory scheme. Id.
When the language of a statute is plain and unambiguous, we do not look
beyond it for further indications of legislative intent. Id.
A
Phaneuf first argues that, because the statute does not use the words
“product,” “products,” or “product liability,” it does not afford protection against
product liability claims, but rather is “limited to claims of negligence for design
or construction of an improvement.” RSA 508:4-b provides, however, that “all
actions to recover damages . . . arising out of any deficiency in the creation of
an improvement to real property” must be brought within eight years from the
date of substantial completion of the improvement. That language
unambiguously encompasses all types of claims, as long as they arise from a
deficiency in the creation of an improvement to real property. We therefore
decline Phaneuf’s invitation to adopt a categorical rule excluding product
liability actions from the statute’s coverage.
We also do not share Phanuef’s concern that by applying RSA 508:4-b to
product liability claims we will effectively “extinguish” them. While RSA 508:4-
b, I, applies to all types of claims regardless of the theory of liability, the
statute’s reach is limited to actions “arising out of any deficiency in the
creation of an improvement to real property.” Although the statute may result
in certain product manufacturers or sellers escaping liability in certain
circumstances, RSA 508:4-b, I, does not in any sense create a statute of repose
for all product liability claims.
B
Next, Phaneuf contends that there is a genuine question of material fact
as to whether the wall fountain constitutes an improvement to real property.
In interpreting RSA 508:4-b, we construe its words and phrases according to
their common and approved usage unless from the statute it appears that a
different meaning was intended. N.H. Resident Ltd. Partners of Lyme Timber
Co. v. N.H. Dep’t of Revenue Admin., 162 N.H. 98, 101 (2011). RSA 508:4-b
does not define the term “improvement”; nor have we had occasion, before
today, to adopt a definition. After carefully reviewing the common law from
other jurisdictions, we conclude that an improvement means an alteration to or
development of real property that either (1) enhances or is intended to enhance
its value or (2) improves or is intended to improve its use for a particular
purpose. See Plato Associates v. Envtl. Compliance Svcs., 9 A.3d 698, 706
(Conn. 2010); Brennaman v. R.M.I. Co., 639 N.E.2d 425, 429 (Ohio 1994)
4
(focusing on whether the item “increased value . . . to the realty when installed
for its intended purpose”); Barron v. Kerr-McGee Rocky Mountain Corp., 181
P.3d 348, 350-51 (Colo. App. 2007) (noting that an improvement is a
permanent addition to real property that “may, among other things, enhance
the real property’s capital value”); accord Black’s Law Dictionary 826 (2009)
(defining improvement as “[a]n addition to real property, whether permanent or
not; esp., one that increases its value or utility or that enhances its
appearance”); 41 Am. Jur. 2d Improvements § 1, at 336 (2005) (defining
improvement as “a permanent addition to or betterment of real property that
enhances its capital value and that involves the expenditure of labor and
money and is designed to make the property more useful or valuable as
distinguished from ordinary repairs”). See generally Annotation, What
Constitutes “Improvement to Real Property” for Purposes of Statute of Repose
or Statute of Limitations, 122 A.L.R.5th 1 (2004).
We need not set forth a comprehensive list of factors trial courts must
use in determining whether a particular item constitutes an improvement
under RSA 508:4-b as defined above. Even construing the facts in a light most
favorable to the plaintiff, the undisputed facts in the record establish that the
water fountain at issue was both custom-designed by Boyer to become a
permanent installation in the funeral home’s structure and constructed for the
particular purpose of improving the home’s aesthetics. See 41 Am. Jur. 2d
Improvements § 1, at 336 (“[A] fixture, by definition, is an improvement to real
property, but an improvement to real property need not be a fixture.”).
Additionally, removing the fountain would have damaged the wall. Aside from
the conclusory assertion in its brief that a question of fact exists as to whether
the installed fountain was an improvement, Phaneuf has identified no facts in
the summary judgment record to undercut the superior court’s conclusion
that, while the fountain may not have been an improvement when first
purchased and hung upon the wall, it became one when Boyer integrated it
into the building’s structure.
C
Phaneuf next contends that, to the extent that RSA 508:4-b affords any
protection to manufacturers and sellers of products that later become
improvements to real property, it bars claims only against those who provide
products particularized to the improvement at issue – i.e., those who
“participated in the enterprise” of improving real property. Whether product
manufacturers can claim the protection of the statute of repose based upon an
alleged defect in a product that later becomes part of an improvement to real
property is a question of first impression. Other jurisdictions are split on
whether to read similar statutes to protect such product manufacturers, see,
e.g., Krull v. Thermogas Co. of Northwood IA., 522 N.W.2d 607, 613 (Iowa
1994); Rose v. Fox Pool, 643 A.2d 906, 917 (Md. 1994), or to interpret them
5
more narrowly to protect only persons or entities who are involved, in some
way, in the particular improvement at issue, see, e.g., State Farm v. W.R. Grace
& Co.-Conn., 24 F.3d 955, 957 (7th Cir. 1994); Brown v. Overhead Door Corp.,
843 F. Supp. 482, 490 (W.D. Ark. 1994); Dighton v. Federal Pacific Elec. Co.,
506 N.E.2d 509, 515 (Mass. 1987); Winkel v. Windsor Windows and Doors, 983
So. 2d 1055, 1059 (Miss. 2008).
In Rose, the court held that a pool manufacturer could claim protection
under a Maryland statute providing a twenty-year limitation for “all actions
resulting from the defective and unsafe condition of an improvement to real
property.” Rose, 643 A.2d at 915. After a lengthy review of that statute’s
legislative history, the court distinguished the Maryland statute’s language
from out-of-state cases excluding product manufacturers from coverage under
a particular statute of repose. The court noted that the statutes in those cases
were all variants of a model statute covering particular types of defendants
performing particular types of activities – i.e., those “persons performing or
furnishing the design, planning, supervision or observation of construction, or
construction of such an improvement.” Id. at 916. In contrast, the Maryland
statute contained broad language covering all actions resulting from the
defective and unsafe condition of an improvement. Thus, manufacturers
whose products were incorporated into improvements could claim protection
under the statute.
Similarly, the court in Krull held that an action against a manufacturer
of an allegedly defective furnace control valve was time-barred under a statute
of repose with language similar to that in Rose. See Krull, 522 N.W.2d at 611
(barring actions “arising out of the unsafe or defective condition of an
improvement to real property”). Like Rose, Krull also distinguished those cases
interpreting similar statutes of repose more narrowly, noting that those
statutes “define specific classes for whom liability is cut off after a certain
number of years.” Id. at 612. Because the statute in Krull referred only to “the
defendant” as the covered party, it applied more broadly and could be applied
to bar suits against product manufacturers. Id.
Were RSA 508:4-b to bar all actions arising out of a deficiency “in an
improvement,” rather than “in the creation of an improvement,” this case might
be more analogous to Rose, Krull, and other decisions that extend protection
under the statute of repose to product manufacturers who are in no way
involved in the act of improving the value of real estate. But by covering
actions arising out of a deficiency in the creation of an improvement, the
legislature indicated its intent to protect only those who are involved in some
way in the transformation of a product into an enhancement to the value or
use of real estate, based upon their role in that transformation. See Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary 532 (unabridged ed. 2002) (defining
“creation” as “the act of creating; . . . the act or practice of making, inventing,
6
devising, fashioning, or producing”). This interpretation is confirmed by the list
of covered activities in the statute, all of which relate to the process of
improving real property: “design, labor, materials, engineering, planning,
surveying, construction, observation, supervision or inspection.” To the extent
that “materials” could be read to cover all manufacturers whose products are
incidentally incorporated into an improvement, such a reading is inconsistent
with the general rule that the action must arise out of a deficiency in the
creation of the improvement as well as the basic principle that words are
known by the company they keep. See United States v. Williams, 553 U.S.
285, 294 (2008) (“[A] word is given more precise content by the neighboring
words with which it is associated.”). The other words in the statute’s list
involve activities that relate to the creation of an improvement to real estate;
thus, “materials” cannot be read in isolation, but must be similarly construed
to have some connection to the process by which an improvement is created.
Additionally, construing “materials” more broadly to cover all actions
arising from defective products, irrespective of whether the allegedly wrongful
activity of the manufacturer was connected in some way with the creation of
the improvement itself, would protect every producer whose product
fortuitously happens to become incorporated into an improvement. This is not
what the legislature could have intended when it barred actions arising out of
deficiencies in the creation of an improvement. Cf. State Farm, 24 F.3d at 957.
The specific facts of this case do not require that we determine whether
and under what circumstances product manufacturers can claim the
protection of RSA 508:4-b.3 That is because the water fountain at issue is a
generic product that was neither manufactured to be an improvement nor
specifically designed to become one; indeed, it was designed at the outset to be
simply hung on a wall. Nothing in the record indicates that Elegant, Little
Giant, or Leviton were involved in any way in the process of improving the
value or use of real estate; indeed, the contractor had to create and follow a
customized plan to incorporate the fountain into the structure of the funeral
home. Moreover, Phaneuf’s claims against these three defendants would have
been the same whether or not the fountain was used to improve the real estate.
Thus, its action against them cannot be said to arise out of a deficiency in the
3 In particular, we need not decide whether some products are so inherently related to the
construction industry that their manufacturers could claim the protection of RSA 508:4-b. See,
e.g., Fine v. Huygens, DiMella, Shaffer & Associates, 783 N.E.2d 842, 847 (Mass. App. 2003)
(distinguishing, for purposes of statute of repose, between “mere suppliers of standardized
products," on the one hand, and those who perform "acts of ‘individual expertise’ akin to those
commonly thought to be performed by architects and contractors," on the other); Ball v.
Harnischfeger Corp., 877 P.2d 45, 50 (Okla. 1994) (manufacturer only protected by statute of
repose when acting as a designer, planner, construction supervisor, construction observer, or
constructor); Ferricks v. Ryan Homes, 578 A.2d 441, 443 (Pa. Super. 1990) (manufacturer not
protected by statute of repose because it did not construct or design an improvement but merely
furnished construction materials).
7
creation of an improvement. For this reason, the trial court erroneously
granted summary judgment to Elegant, Little Giant, and Leviton.
In contrast, Phaneuf’s action against Boyer does arise out of the creation
of an improvement. Phaneuf hired Boyer to redesign and renovate the funeral
home’s “monument room” and adjacent hallway; as part of that enterprise,
Boyer installed the fountain in the hallway of the funeral home by custom-
designing a back plate, permanently affixing the back plate to the wall,
attaching the fountain onto the back plate, and applying a faux finish paint to
blend the fountain and the plate with the wall. As noted above, the fountain
became an improvement when it was incorporated into the wall. Because
Boyer’s role was to install the fountain in a way that transformed it into an
improvement as defined above, he is entitled to rely upon the protection of RSA
508:4-b.
In so holding, we reject Phaneuf’s argument that its action arises not out
of Boyer’s role as the builder of an improvement, but as the seller of a defective
product. Although, as noted above, the statute’s inclusion of “materials” does
not operate to protect product suppliers unless they were involved, in some
way, in the creation of an improvement, the reference to materials does signify
the legislature’s intent, at the very least, to create a sphere of immunity for
those in the construction trade who, in the course of that trade, select and use
materials to create specific improvements to real property. Cf. Winnisquam
Reg. Sch. Dist. v. Levine, 152 N.H. 537, 540 (2005) (noting that the legislature,
by enacting RSA 508:4-b, intended to promote the public interest by
“protecting the building industry from infinite liability,” and that the statute
concerned “those involved in the construction trade” (emphases added)). Thus,
as a designer and builder who selected the fountain and installed it into the
funeral home, Boyer falls squarely within the protection of RSA 508:4-b, I. Cf.
Pendzsu v. Beazer East Inc., 557 N.W.2d 127, 132 (Mich. Ct. App. 1996)
(rejecting argument that entity that designed, manufactured, and installed coke
ovens was a supplier for purposes of statute of repose); Ball v. Harnischfeger
Corp., 877 P.2d 45, 50 (Okla. 1994) (“If the manufacturer was acting as a
designer, planner, construction supervisor or observer, or constructor, the
statute of repose will apply. It is the specialized expertise and rendition of
particularized design which separates those protected from mere
manufacturers and suppliers.”); Condit v. Lewis Refrigeration Co., 676 P.2d
466, 468-69 (Wash. 1984) (statute of repose “protects individuals who work on
structural aspects of the building but not manufacturers of heavy equipment or
nonintegral systems within the building”). To read RSA 508-4:b, I, as Phaneuf
urges would effectively eviscerate the protection it was intended to offer to the
construction industry, because virtually all persons involved in the creation of
an improvement are likely to furnish some kind of “product” as part of their
work.
8
III
For the reasons stated above, we affirm the trial court’s grant of
summary judgment as to Boyer, but reverse it as to the remaining defendants.
Affirmed in part; reversed in
part; and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9