THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Merrimack
No. 2011-626
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JONATHAN BALL
Argued: June 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: September 28, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Shaheen & Gordon, P.A., of Concord (James D. Rosenberg on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
DALIANIS, C.J. The defendant, Jonathan Ball, appeals his conviction,
following a bench trial upon stipulated facts, on one felony count of possessing
child sexual abuse images (child pornography). See RSA 649-A:3, I(a) (Supp.
2011). On appeal, he argues that the Superior Court (Smukler, J.) erred when
it denied his motion to suppress evidence derived from the search of his home
computer. We affirm.
I. Background
The following facts are derived primarily from the affidavit submitted to
support the warrant to search the defendant’s computer. On July 29, 2009,
the Concord police received a complaint that a man with a vehicle bearing New
Hampshire license plate “WOODFLR” had masturbated in front of the
complainant, showed the complainant numerous digital images of female
children engaged in sexual activity, and asked the complainant if he would like
to have sex with minor girls. The man also told the complainant that he had
been having sex with his fifteen-year-old step-daughter since she was ten years
old.
After running the license plate number through the New Hampshire
Division of Motor Vehicles’ computer system, the police discovered that the
plate was registered to Robert Johnston. On July 31, 2009, the police executed
a warrant to search his home. While there, the police interviewed his step-
daughter, who confirmed that Johnston had been sexually abusing her since
she was in sixth grade. The step-daughter told the police that “at some point,”
Johnston took nude photographs of her and sent them to others using his
cellular telephone; she said that some of these photographs were sexually
explicit.
The step-daughter also described engaging in sexual activity with
Johnston on July 28, 2009, in the presence of a man named “John.”
Specifically, she described performing oral sex on Johnston in his parked
vehicle while John stood outside the vehicle and masturbated. She stated that
then John inserted his hand in her vagina. She told the police that on that
same day, she and Johnston went to John’s house in Pembroke and had
sexual intercourse in John’s bedroom. The step-daughter said that John
joined her and Johnston on the bed and masturbated while he watched them
have sex.
The step-daughter told the police that John’s bedroom is located on the
second floor and that to access it one has to walk through a sitting room in
which there is a computer. The step-daughter told the police that on July 31,
2009, she observed John and Johnston “exchange[ ] messages by phone.” The
step-daughter said that John drove a yellow SUV with the license plate “AJ-
WINGS.”
On August 3, 2009, the police learned that a yellow SUV with the license
plate “AJ-WINGS” is registered to the defendant. The police also found the
defendant’s Pembroke address. Based upon all of this information, the police
submitted an application for a warrant to search the defendant’s home,
computer, and cell phone for evidence of child pornography. The Hooksett
District Court granted the application on August 4, 2009.
2
The search of the defendant’s computer revealed one computer file
containing four images and two videos of children engaging in sexual acts. The
search also revealed e-mails between the account on the defendant’s computer
and another online account describing sexual encounters involving a female of
unknown age and a man named “Bob” who drove a truck with the license
plate, “woodflr.”
II. Discussion
On appeal, the defendant argues that the trial court violated the Fourth
Amendment to the United States Constitution and Part I, Article 19 of the State
Constitution by denying his motion to suppress the evidence seized from his
home computer. He asserts that the affidavit in support of the warrant
application failed to set forth sufficient facts linking any child pornography to
his computer. We first address the defendant’s claim under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid in our analysis. See State v.
Ball, 124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
A. Standard of Review
Part I, Article 19 of the State Constitution requires that search warrants
be issued only upon a finding of probable cause. State v. Ward, 163 N.H. 156,
159 (2012). Probable cause exists if a person of ordinary caution would
justifiably believe that what is sought will be found through the search and will
aid in a particular apprehension or conviction. Id. “The police must
demonstrate in an application for a search warrant that there is a substantial
likelihood that the items sought will be found in the place to be searched.”
State v. Fish, 142 N.H. 524, 527-28 (1994). “However, they need not establish
with certainty, or even beyond a reasonable doubt, that the search will lead to
the desired result.” Id. at 528 (quotation omitted).
We apply a totality-of-the-circumstances test to review the sufficiency of
an affidavit submitted with a warrant application. Id. The task of the issuing
district court is to “make a practical, common-sense decision whether given all
the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before [it], including the ‘veracity’
and ‘basis of knowledge’ of persons supplying hearsay information, there is a
fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a
particular place.” Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 238 (1983); see Fish, 142
N.H. at 528.
“Our duty as the reviewing court is . . . to ensure that the [district court]
had a substantial basis for concluding that probable cause existed.” Ward,
163 N.H. at 162 (quotation omitted); see Gates, 462 U.S. at 238-39.
Nevertheless, under this standard we “may properly conclude that . . . [a]
3
warrant was invalid because the [district court’s] probable-cause determination
reflected an improper analysis of the totality of the circumstances.” United
States v. Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 915 (1984). “While an affidavit may establish
probable cause without the observance of contraband at the location to be
searched,” to meet constitutional muster, “affidavits must establish a sufficient
nexus between the illicit objects and the place to be searched.” Ward, 163 N.H.
at 160. As a reviewing court, we may consider only the information that the
police brought to the issuing court’s attention (here, the district court). See
United States v. Jacobson, 466 U.S. 109, 112 n.2 (1984).
We review the superior court’s order de novo except with respect to any
controlling factual findings. Ward, 163 N.H. at 159. In this case, we review the
superior court’s decision de novo as there were no controlling facts determined
by it in the first instance. See Fish, 142 N.H. at 528.
We afford much deference to the district court’s probable cause
determination and will not invalidate warrants by reading the supporting
affidavit in a hypertechnical sense. Ward, 163 N.H. at 159. “Rather, we review
the affidavit in a common-sense manner, and determine close cases by the
preference to be accorded to warrants.” Id. (quotation omitted).
B. Affidavit
The defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence linking the
contraband (child pornography) to the location to be searched (his computer).
See Ward, 163 N.H. at 160. However, his argument depends upon a
hypertechnical reading of the supporting affidavit. Reviewing the totality of the
circumstances, and in light of the deference accorded to the district court’s
finding of probable cause and the preference to be accorded to warrants, we
conclude that the district court had a substantial basis for believing that the
warrant was supported by probable cause. See id. at 159.
In arguing that the search warrant failed to establish a sufficient nexus
between child pornography and the defendant’s computer, the defendant relies
primarily upon State v. Silvestri, 136 N.H. 522, 526-28 (1992), and Ward, 163
N.H. at 160-61. Silvestri concerned a search of a defendant’s residence for
evidence of controlled drugs. Silvestri, 136 N.H. at 523-24. We observed that
the only fact alleged in the affidavit that referred to the defendant’s residence
was the telephone number the informant dialed to buy marijuana. Id. at 524,
526. The affidavit did not allege that the telephone number the informant
dialed was the number servicing the defendant’s residence, as opposed to his
office or cell phone numbers. Id. at 526. Notably, the informant never stated
that he or she saw drugs at the defendant’s residence or that the informant
believed that the defendant kept drugs there. Id. We concluded that even if
the magistrate had reasonably inferred that the telephone number was the
4
defendant’s home number, this, alone, was insufficient to establish the
required nexus between the defendant’s home and his drug-dealing activities.
Id. at 526-28. Accordingly, we held that the affidavit failed to establish
probable cause for the search. Id. at 526-28.
Ward concerned the search of a defendant’s home and computer for
evidence of child pornography. Ward, 163 N.H. at 157. We concluded that
Ward was distinguishable from Silvestri because, in Ward, there were several
alleged facts connecting the defendant’s home and computer to child
pornographic images. Id. at 160.
In Ward, although no child pornography was seen on the defendant’s
computer or in his residence, child pornography was found in his garage, and
there were facts linking this pornography to a computer and linking a
computer to the defendant’s residence. Id. at 160-61. Specifically, a neighbor
saw two pieces of paper in the defendant’s garage, which depicted sexually
explicit photographs of a nude girl, and which appeared to have been printed
out from a computer. Id. at 160-61. Moreover, the neighbor did not see any
computer equipment in the garage, but had observed the defendant using a
laptop computer in his home. Id. at 161. Considering the totality of these
circumstances, and viewing this information in a common-sense manner, we
concluded that the magistrate had a substantial basis for concluding that the
requisite probable cause existed. Id. at 159, 160-61.
Here, as in Ward, there was no child pornography observed on the
defendant’s computer; however, there are “other circumstances that would
support the inference” that child pornography was located there. Id. at 160
(quotation omitted). Specifically, the affidavit alleged that Johnston’s cell
phone contained sexually explicit images of children and that he used it to
transmit such images to others. The affidavit also alleged that Johnston and
the defendant exchanged messages. These facts are sufficient to support an
inference that Johnston used his cell phone to transmit at least one sexually
explicit image of a child to the defendant’s cell phone.
The affidavit also alleged that the defendant touched the minor victim
sexually and watched her and Johnston engage in sexual activity. This fact
supports an inference that the defendant is also interested in images of child
sexual activity.
Finally, the affidavit included the officer’s assertion based upon his
training and experience that those who “have demonstrated an interest or
preference in sexual activity with children . . . are likely to keep secreted, but
readily at hand, sexually explicit visual images depicting children,” which they
often “carry . . . upon their person in the form of USB drives or other media
storage devices,” and that persons receiving such images will copy them onto
5
their computers’ hard drives. Based upon the totality of these circumstances,
we conclude that the affidavit afforded the district court a substantial basis for
believing that the defendant’s computer contained child pornography. See id.
at 159, 160-61.
In arguing for a contrary result, the defendant relies upon cases from
other jurisdictions concluding that evidence of child molestation alone does not
establish probable cause for a search warrant for child pornography. See, e.g.,
United States v. Hodson, 543 F.3d 286, 292 (6th Cir. 2008). But see United
States v. Colbert, 605 F.3d 573, 578 (8th Cir. 2010), cert. denied, 131 S. Ct.
1469 (2011). The defendant’s reliance upon this case law is, however,
misplaced. In the instant case, there was evidence not only that the defendant
molested the minor victim, but also that he watched Johnston molest her while
he masturbated. In other words, there was evidence that the defendant was a
voyeur of child sexual activity.
The defendant also relies upon cases from other jurisdictions ruling that
an officer’s general conclusions based upon his training and expertise are
relevant to the probable cause determination only when they are supported by
particularized facts. See United States v. Zimmerman, 277 F.3d 426, 433 n.4
(3d Cir. 2002); see also United States v. Clark, 668 F.3d 934, 935-37, 939-40
(7th Cir. 2012). He contends that in this case, there were no particularized
facts to justify reliance upon the officer’s general conclusions. Assuming that
we were to follow the law from these jurisdictions, we disagree. In addition to
the officer’s conclusions, there was evidence that the defendant molested the
minor victim, watched her have sex with Johnston while he masturbated, and
exchanged messages with Johnston who used his cell phone to transmit
sexually explicit images of children to others.
As the Federal Constitution offers the defendant no greater protection
than the State Constitution does under these circumstances, see Ward, 163
N.H. at 163, we reach the same result under the Federal Constitution as we do
under the State Constitution.
Affirmed.
HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
6