THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Department of Safety
No. 2011-187
APPEAL OF ERICA BLIZZARD
(New Hampshire Department of Safety)
Argued: November 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: March 9, 2012
Moir & Rabinowitz, PLLC, of Concord (James H. Moir on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Kevin H. O’Neill, assistant attorney
general, on the memorandum of law and orally), for the New Hampshire
Department of Safety.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondent, Erica Blizzard, appeals a decision of the
New Hampshire Department of Safety (DOS) suspending her privilege to
operate a boat for three years. See RSA 270-E:17 (2010). We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the record. In the early hours of the
morning on June 15, 2008, the respondent, carrying two passengers, was
piloting a motorboat on Lake Winnipesaukee. There was almost no visibility
due to dark and inclement weather conditions. As the respondent later told
investigators, she was unable to see the bow of her boat. She was operating
the boat at eighteen to twenty miles per hour, unsure of her location and
checking her depth gauges, when the boat collided with an island. The
collision killed one passenger and seriously injured the respondent and the
second passenger. As a result of the collision, the respondent was charged
with boating while intoxicated and negligent homicide. A jury found her guilty
of negligent homicide, but not guilty of boating while intoxicated.
Thereafter, DOS sought to suspend the respondent’s privilege to operate
a boat pursuant to RSA 270-E:17, which authorizes DOS to revoke or suspend
operating privileges for any violation of RSA chapters 270, 270-A, 270-B or
270-E. A hearing was held, and the hearing examiner found that the
respondent had violated RSA 270:29-a (2010), which makes it a misdemeanor
to “operate a power boat upon any waters of the state in a careless and
negligent manner or so that the lives and safety of the public are endangered.”
As a result, the hearing examiner suspended the respondent’s privilege to
operate a boat for three years.
After DOS denied the respondent’s motion for rehearing, she appealed
pursuant to RSA 541:6 (2007). See RSA 21-P:13, II (2000) (“Unless otherwise
provided by law, all . . . appeals [from DOS hearings] shall be held in
accordance with RSA [chapter] 541.”). The respondent’s appeal raises the
following issues: (1) whether DOS lacks authority to suspend boat-operation
privileges because it has failed to promulgate associated regulations; (2)
whether RSA 270-E:17 delegates legislative authority in violation of Part I,
Article 37 of the State Constitution; and (3) whether the hearing notice
complied with Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
Our standard for reviewing agency decisions is set forth by statute: such
decisions “shall not be set aside or vacated except for errors of law, unless [we
are] satisfied, by a clear preponderance of the evidence before [us], that such
order is unjust or unreasonable.” RSA 541:13 (2007). We address the issues
raised by the respondent’s appeal in turn.
I. Failure to Adopt Regulations
The respondent argues that DOS was required to promulgate regulations
relative to the administration of RSA chapter 270-E and, because DOS failed to
do so, it lacked authority to suspend her operating privileges. See RSA 270-
E:12, XII (2010) (requiring DOS to adopt rules relative to “matters related to the
administration of [RSA chapter 270-E]”). Although DOS has procedural rules
governing revocation hearings, it has never adopted specific, substantive rules
governing the suspension and revocation of boat-operating privileges. See N.H.
Admin. Rules, Saf-C ch. 200. It argues that such rules are unnecessary for it
to exercise suspension and revocation authority pursuant to RSA 270-E:17.
2
We have consistently held that “promulgation of a rule pursuant to the
[Administrative Procedure Act] . . . is not necessary to carry out what a statute
demands on its face.” Nevins v. N.H. Dep’t of Resources and Economic Dev.,
147 N.H. 484, 487 (2002). Thus, although we have occasionally noted that an
agency “should . . . adopt rules,” Appeal of Behavior Science Institute, 121 N.H.
928, 935 (1981), or even that it “was required to promulgate rules,” Nevins, 147
N.H. at 487, it has been nearly a century since we last held that failure to
adopt rules, by itself, divested a regulatory body of its authority. See Hanover
Precinct v. Atkins, 78 N.H. 308, 310-11 (1916). Our modern cases focus upon
whether the result of the agency’s failure to adopt rules “was both unfair and
inconsistent with [the statute granting authority].” Appeal of Behavior Science
Institute, 121 N.H. at 935 (emphasis added). Therefore, when considering
whether an agency’s failure to adopt rules requires that its decision be
overturned, we must first examine whether the statute is “sufficiently detailed
to effectuate its purpose” without agency regulations. Nevins, 147 N.H. at 487.
If the statute lacks sufficient detail on its face, then an agency must adopt
rules supplying the necessary detail. See id. Next, we determine whether the
result was unfair by examining whether the complaining party “suffered harm
as a result of the lack of [required] rules.” Id. at 488.
In this case, we assume without deciding that RSA 270-E:17 lacks
sufficient detail to effectuate its purpose, but uphold the respondent’s
suspension because she does not argue that the lack of rules harmed her. The
respondent has facially attacked RSA 270-E:17 under multiple theories, but
has never argued that she suffered prejudice. She does not assert that she
lacked notice that her behavior could result in suspension of her operating
privilege. Nor does she argue that if DOS had promulgated regulations, it
would not have imposed the suspension. Without some argument that harm
resulted, the absence of regulations does not, in itself, require us to overturn
DOS’s suspension decision. See id.
The respondent also contends that, without additional rules, RSA 270-
E:17 violates her due process rights under Part I, Article 15 of the State
Constitution. To the extent the respondent claims the statute is
unconstitutionally vague on its face, we reject her argument. When a
vagueness claim does not involve a fundamental right, a facial attack on the
challenged statutory scheme is unwarranted, and the respondent does not
argue that the privilege to operate a boat is a fundamental right. State v.
MacElman, 154 N.H. 304, 307 (2006).
II. Delegation
We next address whether RSA 270-E:17 unconstitutionally delegates
legislative authority. The constitutionality of a statute is a question of law,
which we review de novo. N.H. Dep’t of Envtl. Servs. v. Marino, 155 N.H. 709,
3
714 (2007). In reviewing a statute, we presume it to be constitutional and we
will not declare it invalid except upon inescapable grounds. Id. Because the
respondent argues under the State Constitution only, we base our decision
upon it alone, and refer to federal law merely to aid in our analysis. See id. at
715. When interpreting a statute, “[w]e . . . examin[e] the plain language of the
statute using the ordinary meanings of the words to determine legislative
intent.” N.H. Dep’t of Resources and Economic Dev. v. Dow, 148 N.H. 60, 63
(2002). The relevant section of RSA 270-E:17 provides:
In addition to any other authority provided by law, the
commissioner is hereby authorized to revoke or suspend any
registration issued pursuant to this chapter or any privilege to
operate a boat, or both, upon a showing that:
I. The owner has violated any provision of this chapter, RSA
270, RSA 270-A, RSA 270-B, or any rules adopted under these
chapters, or has allowed another person to violate any of these
laws or rules.
The respondent first contends that RSA 270-E:17 violates Part I, Article
37 of the State Constitution because it impermissibly delegates legislative
authority to DOS. Under the separation of powers article of the New
Hampshire Constitution, the General Court may not create and delegate duties
to an administrative agency if its commands are in such broad terms as to
leave the agency with unguided and unrestricted discretion in the assigned
field of its activity. Id. Thus, we have ruled unconstitutional statutes that lack
either a declared policy or a prescribed standard. Id. To avoid the charge of
unlawfully delegated legislative power, a statute must lay down basic standards
and a reasonably definite policy for the administration of the law. Id.
For example, in Marino, a statute delegated authority to the New
Hampshire Department of Environmental Services to impose construction
conditions that, “in the opinion of the commissioner, more nearly meet the
intent of [RSA chapter 483-B, the Comprehensive Shoreland Protection Act],
while still accommodating [a property owner’s] rights.” RSA 483-B:10, I (2001)
(amended 2011). We held that the statute complied with the separation of
powers article because it impliedly incorporated the basic standards set forth
in RSA 483-B:9 and reasonably definite policies set forth in RSA 483-B:1 and
:2. Marino, 155 N.H. at 716.
In this case, mindful of our obligation to construe statutes to comport
with constitutional requirements when possible, see In re Guardianship of
Reena D., 163 N.H. ___, ___ (decided December 28, 2011), we construe RSA
270-E:17 to incorporate, by implication, the standards and policies in RSA
chapters 270, 270-A, 270-B and 270-E because the statute limits DOS’s
4
suspension power to individuals who violate a provision contained in those
chapters. Thus, to determine whether RSA 270-E:17 unlawfully delegates
legislative authority, we examine whether the policies and standards in the
incorporated chapters render the statute constitutional.
Turning first to the “reasonably definite policy” requirement, the
legislature has set forth, in detail, the policies underlying RSA chapter 270,
which include: (1) maintaining “public safety,” RSA 270:1, I (2010); (2)
“protection of property,” id.; (3) “maintaining the residential, recreational and
scenic values which New Hampshire public waters provide,” RSA 270:1, II
(2010); (4) “maintain[ing] . . . safe and mutual enjoyment of a variety of uses,”
id.; (5) “promotion of our tourist industry,” id.; (6) “protection of environment
and water quality,” id.; and (7) “nutur[ing] of . . . threatened and endangered
species,” id. We hold that these policies are reasonably definite, and, therefore,
satisfy the policy requirement for legislative delegations of authority.
As to “basic standards,” the impliedly incorporated chapters specifically
define dozens of distinct violations that potentially trigger suspension of
operating privileges. These standards are more than basic – they specifically
address most aspects of water recreation. In particular, the statute upon
which DOS relied when suspending the respondent’s operating privilege, RSA
270:29-a, lays down an adequate standard for “[c]areless and [n]egligent
[o]peration of [power] [b]oats,” which it defines as “operat[ing] a power boat
upon any waters of the state in a careless and negligent manner or so that the
lives and safety of the public are endangered.” These standards, when
combined with the reasonably definite policies in RSA 270:1, avoid an unlawful
delegation of legislative power.
The respondent contends, however, that the statute is an
unconstitutional delegation of authority because “it is glaringly lacking any
legislative statement as to the length of revocation authorized.” To support her
position, she relies upon Guillou v. State, 127 N.H. 579, 581 (1986), in which
we held that a statute permitting the director of DOS to suspend drivers’
licenses “for any cause which he may deem sufficient” was an unconstitutional
delegation of legislative authority. (Quotation omitted.)
Although Guillou, 127 N.H. at 581, mentioned the lack of statutory
guidance as to suspension length, this lack of guidance was not, by itself,
dispositive. Indeed, dicta in the case suggest that the lack of guidance as to
suspension duration was not even relevant to our decision. Guillou, 127 N.H.
at 582-83. After concluding that the statute under review unconstitutionally
delegated authority, we gave examples of three revocation statutes that are
apparently constitutional. Id. Like RSA 270-E:17, all of these statutes give
regulatory authorities the power to suspend or revoke licenses for specific
infractions, but no specific guidelines as to suspension lengths. See RSA
5
178:11 (1977) (amended 1987; recodified as RSA 179:57, see Laws 1990,
255:1); RSA 311-B:11 (1984) (amended 1987, 2010); RSA 361-A:3 (1984)
(amended 1995, 1997, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2009).
Guillou, 127 N.H. at 582-83, did not explain why these statutes
constitutionally delegated authority notwithstanding their lack of guidance as
to suspension duration, but cases addressing this issue in the context of the
Federal Constitution’s separation of powers doctrine are in accord. For
example, in Walberg v. United States, 763 F.2d 143, 147-48 (2d Cir. 1985), the
Second Circuit upheld a statute empowering courts to impose special parole
even though the controlling statute failed to specify the maximum period that
such parole could be imposed. The Second Circuit construed the statute to
allow courts to place defendants on special parole for life and held that “[s]ince
the explicit provision for punishment with a range of years up to the length of
the defendant’s life does not constitute an unconstitutional delegation of power,
we conclude that Congress’s implicit authorization of such a range for special
parole is not constitutionally infirm.” Id. at 149.
Moreover, legislation giving agencies suspension discretion, but lacking
specific provisions as to length, satisfy constitutional standards when
articulated factors limit agency discretion. Thus, in Arrow Distilleries v.
Alexander, 109 F.2d 397, 402 (7th Cir. 1940), the Seventh Circuit upheld
delegation of the power to suspend alcohol manufacturing permits if the permit
holder had “wilfully violated any of the conditions [of the permit].” (Quotation
omitted.) Although the statute lacked provisions as to suspension duration,
the court concluded that it complied with constitutional requirements, noting
the presence of three articulated factors: (1) “[t]he offense for which
suspension [could] be imposed [wa]s clearly designated and only the length . . .
of suspension [wa]s left to the discretion of the [agency]”; (2) “the section [had
to] be construed to require the . . . exercise [of] sound discretion”; and (3) there
was an avenue for judicial review of suspension lengths to ensure their
reasonableness. Arrow Distilleries, 109 F.2d at 402. Accordingly, the court
held that the delegation of authority did not violate the Federal Constitution’s
separation of powers doctrine. Id.
These cases are compatible with both Guillou’s dicta and the rule under
Part I, Article 37 of the State Constitution that delegations of authority require
only “reasonably definite policies” and “basic standards.” We, therefore, adopt
their reasoning and apply it here. Applying Walberg, 763 F.2d at 149, we
construe the lack of a maximum suspension length in RSA 270-E:17 to grant
DOS the discretion to suspend operating privileges for life when circumstances
indicate such is warranted. Legislative delegation of this discretion to DOS
satisfies constitutional standards because the factors discussed in Arrow
Distilleries limit DOS’s discretion. RSA 270-E:17 specifically defines the
conduct that triggers a revocation or suspension as violation of any provision of
6
RSA chapters 270, 270-A, 270-B or 270-E. Additionally, we construe the
statute to require that DOS exercise sound discretion in revoking or
suspending operating privileges by adhering to the incorporated policies
discussed above. Finally, DOS’s decisions as to revocation or suspension
length are subject to judicial review for unreasonableness pursuant to RSA 21-
P:13, II and RSA 541:6. As a result, RSA 270-E:17 constitutionally delegates
legislative authority notwithstanding its lack of specific provisions relating to
time limits.
We note, however, that the absence of rules makes our task on appeal
more difficult. In a case closer than this one, in which a party argues that a
DOS suspension was unjust or unreasonable, or contends that the absence of
rules caused harm or prejudice, the lack of rules might prove dispositive.
Adoption of rules could eliminate this risk. Therefore, to the extent practicable,
DOS should promptly adopt rules relative to the administration of RSA 270-
E:17. See RSA 270-E:12, XII.
In a final delegation of authority argument, the respondent contends
that, because DOS can suspend the privilege to operate a boat more easily than
it can suspend a license to drive an automobile, the boating privilege revocation
scheme is an unconstitutional delegation. We reject this argument because the
driver’s license suspension statutes are not implicated by the constitutional
standards for permissible legislative delegation, which, as we have explained,
RSA 270-E:17 satisfies.
III. Notice
The respondent argues that the notice of hearing she received was
inadequate under the State Constitution’s Due Process Clause. See N.H.
CONST. pt. I, art. 15. The notice provided in relevant part:
YOU ARE ORDERED TO APPEAR FOR A HEARING BASED
UPON A COMPLAINT . . . WHICH ALLEGES THAT YOU WERE THE
OPERATOR OF A BOAT OR VESSEL, [on June 15, 2008], ON LAKE
WINNIPESAUKEE, GILFORD, NEW HAMPSHIRE; AND, THAT YOU
DID OPERATE IN A RECKLESS DISREGARD FOR THE SAFETY OF
THE PUBLIC ON THE STATE’S WATERS. THEREFORE, THE
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE HAS JUST CAUSE TO REVOKE
YOUR SAFE BOATER EDUCATION CERTIFICATE. JUST CAUSE
FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE HEARING SHALL INCLUDE, BUT
NOT BE LIMITED TO
(1) CONVICTION OF BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED; OR
7
(2) CONVICTION OF ANY ACT THAT INDICATES A
RECKLESS DISREGARD FOR THE SAFETY OF THE
PUBLIC ON THE STATE’S WATERS.
FOR THE PURPOSES OF SAF-C 6107.03, (d), THE SCOPE OF THE
HEARING SHALL BE LIMITED TO:
(1) A REVIEW OF THE COURT ABSTRACT;
(2) WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL HAS BEEN BOATING TO
ENDANGER THE PUBLIC; AND
(3) WHETHER THE INDIVIDUAL IS THE NAMED PERSON
ON THE COURT ABSTRACT OR COMPLAINT
FOR THE PURPOSES OF RSA 270-E:17[ ], THE SCOPE OF THE
HEARING SHALL BE LIMITED TO:
[No limitation followed.]
For more than a century, the central meaning of procedural due process
has been clear: Parties whose rights may be affected are entitled to be heard,
and in order that they may enjoy that right, they must first be so notified.
Appeal of Sch. Admin. Unit #44, 162 N.H. 79, 87 (2011). The purpose of notice
under the Due Process Clause is to apprise the affected individual of, and
permit adequate preparation for, an impending hearing. Id. To satisfy due
process, the notice must be of such nature as reasonably to convey the
required information and must be more than a mere gesture. Id. Due process,
however, does not require perfect notice, but only notice reasonably calculated,
under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of
the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections. Id.
Thus, our inquiry focuses upon whether notice was fair and reasonable under
the particular facts and circumstances of the case. Id.
The respondent emphasizes the absence of specific scope-of-hearing
limitations in the portion of the notice addressing RSA 270-E:17. We conclude,
however, that read as a whole, the notice she received was fair and reasonable.
DOS’s notice informed the respondent of the specific date, location and nature
of the conduct that the hearing would address, i.e., reckless operation of a boat
in Gilford on June 15, 2008. Contrary to her argument, it informed her that
the legal authority for revoking her operating privilege was RSA 270-E:17. The
notice enabled the respondent to present objections both before and during the
hearing. Indeed, her arguments to the hearing examiner evinced a thorough
understanding of the facts and legal issues involved. Moreover, the hearing
addressed only that conduct to which the notice specifically referred.
8
Furthermore, although the notice failed to cite RSA 270:29-a, the
negligent boating statute upon which DOS ultimately relied to suspend the
respondent’s operating privilege, the notice adequately informed her of the facts
and legal standards involved. The notice alleged that the respondent operated
a boat “in a reckless disregard for the safety of the public.” (Capitalization
omitted.) This allegation combined with the notice’s citation of RSA 270-E:17
adequately apprised the respondent that DOS sought to revoke her boat-
operating privilege for violating a statute in RSA chapter 270, 270-A, 270-B or
270-E that related to reckless operation and risks to public safety. The only
provision in the listed chapters that fits this description is RSA 270:29-a,
which prohibits operating “a power boat . . . so that the lives and safety of the
public are endangered.” Because the hearing examiner relied exclusively upon
this provision when he suspended the respondent’s operating privilege, the
notice, read as a whole, adequately informed the respondent of the statutory
provision at issue. As a result, the notice was fair and reasonable under the
circumstances and complied with Part I, Article 15 of the State Constitution.
See id.
Finally, the respondent argues that the notice lacked certain elements
required by RSA 541-A:31 (2007). We do not address this argument, however,
because she has failed to demonstrate that she preserved it for our review. See
In the Matter of Sukerman & Sukerman, 159 N.H. 565, 566 (2009).
Affirmed.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
9