THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Derry Family Division
No. 2010-409
IN THE MATTER OF RICHARD LISTER AND MARIANNE LISTER
Submitted: April 7, 2011
Opinion Issued: May 12, 2011
Eugene F. Sullivan III, of Concord, by brief, for the petitioner.
Marianne Lister, pro se, filed no brief.
DUGGAN, J. The petitioner, Richard Lister, appeals the recommendation
of the Master (Luneau, M.) approved by the Derry Family Division (Moore, J.)
modifying his child support obligations and refusing to grant him credit for
monthly payments of $450.00 in Social Security disability benefits received by
his adult son. We affirm.
The record supports the following facts. The father, Richard Lister, and
the mother, Marianne Lister, have a disabled adult son, who lives with the
mother. According to the son’s neurologist, the son will always remain
dependent on others for care. As a disabled adult, the son is eligible for child
support so long as he remains dependent. See RSA 461-A:14, IV (Supp. 2009)
(amended 2010). Because of his disability, the son also receives approximately
$450 per month in Supplemental Security Income (SSI) from Social Security.
While the son is entitled to a maximum payment of $674 per month in SSI, the
amount has been reduced, either because of the child support paid by the
father or his government subsidized housing benefit. The son’s guardian ad
litem indicated that an increase in child support payments from the father
could further reduce, if not eliminate, the son’s SSI payments.
In 2010, the mother requested an increase in child support from the
father. The father, whose income is $4,250 per month, did not dispute that the
son is entitled to child support. However, relying upon our decisions in In the
Matter of State & Taylor, 153 N.H. 700 (2006), and In the Matter of Angley-
Cook & Cook, 151 N.H. 257 (2004), he argued that he should receive a dollar
for dollar credit for the son’s SSI benefits. The family division issued a
modification order on May 17, 2010, refusing to grant the father a dollar for
dollar credit for the son’s SSI benefits and increasing his child support
payments to $750 per month. The family division distinguished our prior case
law because in those cases the children’s benefits resulted from the obligor
parent’s status as either retired or disabled, while, in this case, the son
received SSI because of his own disability.
On appeal, the father argues that the family division erred in refusing to
grant him a dollar for dollar credit for the $450 monthly SSI benefit received by
the son. He asserts that this case is controlled by State & Taylor and Angley-
Cook & Cook, which require a credit to the obligor for Social Security benefits
received by the child, because all Social Security benefits, regardless of
whether they are based upon a parent’s past earnings, are “payable directly to
the child and must be retained solely for the benefit of the child.”
Trial courts have broad discretion in reviewing and modifying child
support orders. State & Taylor, 153 N.H. at 702. Because the trial court is in
the best position to determine the parties’ respective needs and their respective
abilities to meet them, we will not overturn modification orders absent an
unsustainable exercise of discretion. Id.
In Angley-Cook & Cook, we joined the majority of states that “allow the
obligor credit for his or her child support obligation as a per se rule.” Angley-
Cook & Cook, 151 N.H. at 259. However, in adopting this rule, we specifically
relied upon the rationale that Social Security retirement dependency benefits
and Social Security Disability Income (SSDI) dependency benefits are derived
from the contributing parent. Id. We explained that:
Unlike welfare and other forms of public assistance, social
security benefits represent contributions that a worker has made
throughout the course of employment.
Although the benefits are payable directly to the child rather
than through the contributing parent, the child’s entitlement to
2
payments derives from the parent, and the payments themselves
represent earnings from the parent’s past contributions.
Id. (quotation, brackets and ellipses omitted).
Unlike the SSDI dependency benefits at issue in State & Taylor and the
Social Security retirement dependency benefits at issue in Angley-Cook &
Cook, the son’s SSI benefits at issue here are not derived from the father. See
Martin v. Martin, 874 N.E.2d 1137, 1139 (Mass. App. Ct. 2007). In Martin, the
Massachusetts Appeals Court recognized the differing nature and purpose of
the SSDI and SSI programs and refused to provide a credit to the father for the
child’s SSI benefits. Id. at 1139-40.
Specifically, the court explained that SSDI is similar to an insurance
program, which pays benefits to the children of disabled workers because of
the workers’ contributions into the Social Security Trust Fund. Id. at 1139; see
also Bennett v. Com., Dept. of Social Services, 472 S.E.2d 668, 673 (Va. Ct.
App. 1996) (dependents’ benefits provided by SSDI “are not gratuities, but are
entitlements earned by the parent through his earlier employment” (quotation
and brackets omitted)). While the payment of SSDI benefits is linked to a
worker’s prior payment of Social Security taxes, general tax revenues fund SSI
and eligibility is unrelated to past earnings. Martin, 874 N.E.2d at 1139.
Instead the program “is designed to help qualifying disabled individuals meet
their basic needs. These benefits reflect a determination by Congress that the
government should assist certain persons with disabilities in meeting their
increased costs of living.” Id.; see also Lightel v. Myers, 791 So. 2d 955, 960
(Ala. Civ. App. 2000) (“SSI benefits are based on need; they reflect the amount
of additional income needed by a disabled person to maintain himself at the
federal minimum income level after all available income and resources are
considered.”).
Because the son’s SSI benefits have no connection with the father’s
previous earnings, we agree with the family division that the son’s benefits in
effect replace his own income rather than substitute for the father’s lost
income. Indeed, the son receives SSI benefits based upon his own disability
and independent of the father’s earning history. We note that child support
payments are considered in determining eligibility for SSI, see 42 U.S.C.
§ 1382a(b)(9) (2006), and that the son’s SSI payments may be reduced in the
future as a result of the increase in child support ordered by the trial court, see
42 U.S.C. § 1382(c)(1) (2006) (providing for periodic review of SSI eligibility).
Trial courts should be aware of these limitations in future cases. Given that an
individual receives SSI benefits based upon a determination that other
resources available to that individual are insufficient to meet a minimum
necessary for his subsistence, Lightel, 791 So. 2d at 959-60, we decline to
adopt a rule that has the potential to deduct from an SSI recipient’s already
3
limited resources. Additionally, although the legislature has not addressed the
precise issue of how SSI benefits payable to an adult disabled child should be
treated for purposes of calculating child support, we find further support for
our holding in RSA 458-C:2, IV, which provides that SSI benefits received by
either an obligor or obligee parent are not to be included in his or her gross
income when calculating child support pursuant to the Child Support
Guidelines. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in refusing to grant the
father a dollar for dollar credit for the SSI benefits received by the son.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4