THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2010-756
ESTATE OF JUNE M. DAY & a.
v.
HANOVER INSURANCE COMPANY
Argued: June 16, 2011
Opinion Issued: September 20, 2011
Richard J. Joyal, of Manchester, by brief and orally, for the petitioners.
Boyle, Shaughnessy & Campo, P.C., of Manchester (Mark W.
Shaughnessy and Andrew B. Ranks on the brief, and Mr. Ranks orally), for the
respondent.
LYNN, J. The petitioners, the Estate of June M. Day (Estate), Byron S.
Day and Stephanie L. Day, appeal the Superior Court’s (Tucker, J.) ruling that
respondent Hanover Insurance Company’s (Hanover) consent to settle a claim
by the petitioners with the insurer of a third party tortfeasor did not preclude
Hanover from contesting its liability to provide the Estate underinsured
motorist coverage under its insurance contract with the Estate’s decedent. We
affirm.
The summary judgment record reveals the following pertinent facts. On
September 18, 2007, June M. Day was fatally injured in a motor vehicle
accident. The collision occurred on Route I-93 in Hooksett, when a vehicle
operated by Lisa Follett that was traveling north crossed the median and
struck Day’s vehicle that was traveling south.
At the time of the accident, Day’s vehicle was insured under an
automobile liability policy and a personal umbrella policy issued by Hanover,
and both policies provided underinsured motorist coverage. Specifically,
Hanover was obligated to “pay compensatory damages which an ‘insured’ is
legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of . . . [a]n . . .
‘underinsured motor vehicle’ because of ‘bodily injury’ sustained by an
‘insured’ and caused by an accident.” Follett’s vehicle was insured by the
Commerce Insurance Company (Commerce) under a policy that provided a
bodily injury coverage limit of $100,000.
Following the accident, the petitioners made a claim against the
Commerce policy, and in November 2008 Commerce offered its policy limit. By
letter dated February 17, 2009, Hanover agreed that the petitioners could
accept the settlement offered by Commerce “while reserving [Hanover’s] right to
continue the investigation into liability in this matter,” and noting that Hanover
had “neither accepted nor denied liability.” The petitioners accepted payment
from Commerce and executed a release of Follett and Commerce from any
further liability arising out of the accident.
Thereafter, the petitioners took the position that, by consenting to the
settlement with Follett and Commerce, Hanover was precluded from contesting
that the petitioners were “legally entitled to recover” damages from Follett, and,
when Hanover disagreed with the petitioners’ position, the petitioners
instituted this declaratory judgment action in superior court. Ruling on the
parties’ cross-motions for summary judgment, the trial court rejected the
petitioners’ position and concluded that Hanover’s agreement to the settlement
did not preclude it from contesting its liability to provide underinsured motorist
coverage. The court therefore dismissed the action.
The petitioners filed an objection to the dismissal and a motion for
clarification and reconsideration. In the motion, the petitioners argued that
the court had “misunderstood the essence of the petition,” and that they did
not assert “that Hanover’s consent to settlement gives the Petitioners a legal
entitlement to uninsured motorist coverage.” Rather, the petitioners urged that
the question it had asked the court to rule upon was whether Hanover
participated in good faith in the settlement process. The trial court denied the
petitioners’ objection and motion, ruling that it had not misunderstood the
issue presented and that, even if the issue was as the petitioners reformulated
2
it, that issue was not the proper subject for a declaratory judgment action.
This appeal followed.
In reviewing the trial court’s grant of summary judgment, we consider
the affidavits and other evidence, and all inferences properly drawn from them,
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. N. Sec. Ins. Co. v.
Connors, 161 N.H. 645, 649 (2011); see RSA 491:8-a (2010). If our review of
that evidence discloses no genuine issue of material fact, and if the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, we will affirm the grant of
summary judgment. N. Sec. Ins. Co., 161 N.H. at 649. We review the trial
court’s application of the law to the facts de novo. Id.
The petitioners argue that the trial court erred as a matter of law in
ruling that Hanover’s consent to the settlement with Commerce does not
preclude Hanover from disputing its liability to provide the petitioners with
underinsured motorist coverage. The only authority they cite for this position
is the following statement contained in an insurance law treatise:
[W]hen the insurer providing uninsured (or underinsured) motorist
insurance coverage consented to or approved a settlement by an
insured with a tortfeasor or anyone else who may be legally
obligated, such a settlement does not provide an insurer with a
basis for denying a claim for uninsured motorist insurance benefits
on the ground that an insured is not legally entitled to recover for
damages caused by an uninsured motorist.
1 A.L. Widiss & J.E. Thomas, Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Insurance
§ 7.2, at 368-69 (3d ed. rev. 2005).
However, contrary to the petitioners’ argument, the above passage
provides no support for the view that Hanover’s consent to the settlement with
Follett and Commerce precludes Hanover from contesting its liability to provide
the petitioners with underinsured motorist coverage. Rather, the passage
merely indicates that an underinsured motorist carrier, such as Hanover,
cannot utilize its consent to a settlement with a third party tortfeasor or the
tortfeasor’s insurance carrier as a ground for denying underinsured motorist
coverage to its insured on the basis that the insured is not legally entitled to
recover damages caused by the underinsured motorist. Indeed, the quoted
language is found in a section of the treatise entitled “Fault,” which begins with
the statement: “The right of an insured to recover under the uninsured
motorist coverage is contingent on the insured being legally entitled to recovery
because the injuries were caused by the negligent operation of an uninsured
highway motor vehicle.” Id. at 363. The record here contains no indication
that Hanover has attempted to deny coverage on the basis of the petitioners’
settlement with Follett and Commerce.
3
The Hanover policy contains the following pertinent provisions:
PART C. Uninsured Motorists Coverage
INSURING AGREEMENT
A. We will pay compensatory damages which an “insured” is
legally entitled to recover from the owner or operator of:
1. An “uninsured motor vehicle” or “underinsured motor
vehicle” because of “bodily injury” sustained by an “insured”
and caused by an accident; . . . .
. . . With respect to damages an “insured” is legally entitled to
recover from the owner or operator of an “underinsured motor
vehicle,” we will pay under this coverage only if 1. or 2. below
applies:
1. The limits of liability under any bodily injury liability bonds
or policies applicable to the “underinsured motor vehicle”
have been exhausted by payment of judgments or
settlements; or
2. A tentative settlement has been made between an “insured”
and the insurer of the “underinsured motor vehicle” and we:
a. Have been given prompt written notice of such tentative
settlement; and
b. Advance payment to the “insured” in an amount equal to
the tentative settlement within 30 days after receipt of
notification.
Any judgment for damages arising out of a suit brought without
our written consent is not binding on us.
. . . .
ARBITRATION
A. If we and an “insured” do not agree:
1. Whether that “insured” is legally entitled to recover
damages; or
2. As to the amount of damages which are recoverable by
that “insured”;
From the owner or operator of an “uninsured motor vehicle” or
“underinsured motor vehicle”, then the matter may be
arbitrated. Either party may make a demand for arbitration.
. . . .
4
ADDITIONAL DUTY
With respect to damages an “insured” is legally entitled to
recover from the owner or operator of an “underinsured
motor vehicle”, a person seeking coverage must also
promptly notify us in writing of a tentative settlement
between the “insured” and the insurer of the “underinsured
motor vehicle” and allow us 30 days to advance payment to
that “insured” in an amount equal to the tentative settlement
to preserve our rights against the insurer, owner or operator
of such “underinsured motor vehicle”.
. . . .
PART F – GENERAL PROVISIONS
OUR RIGHT TO RECOVER PAYMENT
A. If we make a payment under this policy and the person to or
for whom payment was made has a right to recover damages
from another we shall be subrogated to that right . . .
. . . .
Our rights do not apply under Paragraph A with respect to
damages an “insured” is legally entitled to recover from the
owner or operator of an “underinsured motor vehicle” if we:
1. Have been given prompt written notice of a tentative
settlement between an “insured” and the insurer of an
“underinsured motor vehicle”; and
2. Fail to advance payment to the “insured” in an
amount equal to the tentative settlement within 30 days
after receipt of notification.
Under the above policy terms, which are clear and unambiguous, see
Matarese v. N.H. Mun. Assoc. Prop.– Liab. Ins. Trust, 147 N.H. 396, 403
(2002), Hanover’s consent to the settlement had the effect of waiving Hanover’s
right to pursue a subrogation claim against Follett or Commerce. But there is
nothing in these terms indicating that such consent bars Hanover from
contesting whether its insured is “legally entitled to recover” from Follett.
In Funai v. Metropolitan Property & Casualty Co., 145 N.H. 642 (2000),
we addressed the closely related question of whether an uninsured motorist
carrier’s consent to settlement with the tortfeasor’s insurer required the
uninsured motorist carrier to arbitrate the plaintiffs’ claims rather than
5
insisting on a trial in court.* The policy at issue provided for arbitration of
disputes between the uninsured motorist carrier and its insured upon the
written consent of both parties. See Funai, 145 N.H. at 645. In rejecting the
plaintiffs’ argument, we held:
There is no correlation between consent to settle and consent to
arbitrate.
Acceptance of the plaintiffs’ argument that consent to settle is
tantamount to consent to arbitrate would require us to find by
implication a waiver by Metropolitan of its right to submit the
dispute to trial. It is axiomatic that whenever a case involves
contested issues of material fact, the parties are entitled to a final
hearing or a trial at which they may produce evidence and submit
written arguments on the law. Furthermore, if the plaintiffs’
alleged additional damages exceed $1,500.00, such a holding
would imply waiver by Metropolitan of its constitutional right to
trial by jury.
We will not find waiver of such a right without a clear
expression by a party to do so. Because we find that Metropolitan
had no reason to anticipate implications regarding its right to
litigate its dispute with the plaintiffs when it consented to allow the
plaintiffs to settle with the underinsured motorist, we will not find
Metropolitan waived its right to trial.
Id. at 645-46 (brackets, quotations, and citations omitted).
Similarly, in this case we find “no correlation” between Hanover’s consent
to the settlement with Follett and Commerce and a consent to its liability to
provide underinsured motorist coverage. Our conclusion is consistent with
that reached by the Massachusetts Appeals Court in Furukawa v. Arbella
Mutual Insurance Co., 794 N.E.2d 1225 (Mass. App. Ct. 2003). In rejecting the
very argument asserted by the petitioners here, the court in Furukawa
explained:
There would be no sound reason to require the
insurer that provides underinsured coverage to
withhold its consent to a settlement with the alleged
tortfeasor as a condition of being able later to contest
the tortfeasor’s liability in relation to its coverage of
excess damages. There are many reasons why the
* Funai is not directly on point because in that case, unlike this one, it does not appear the
plaintiffs were asserting that Metropolitan was precluded from contesting its liability to provide
coverage in the arbitration proceeding plaintiffs demanded.
6
alleged tortfeasor’s liability insurer might choose not to
contest liability, particularly where the coverage limit
is small in relation to the likely cost of a successful
defense. Why should the victim’s own insurer of
uncovered damages be forced to oppose a settlement
beneficial to its own policyholder to preserve its right
to contest its own liability, with, as here, far larger
exposure limits?
Furukawa, 794 N.E.2d at 1228. We are in full agreement with this reasoning.
To hold, as the petitioners urge, that the underinsured carrier’s consent to
settlement with the tortfeasor precludes that carrier from contesting the
tortfeasor’s liability would be to foster an unsound public policy that would
discourage first party insurers such as Hanover from agreeing to settlements
that inure to the benefit of their policyholders. We refuse to countenance such
a result.
The petitioners also return to the theme they presented in their motion to
clarify and reconsider the trial court’s order, i.e., that the essence of their
complaint was not that Hanover was precluded from contesting its liability, but
that Hanover did not participate in good faith in the settlement process
because it delayed in either acknowledging or disputing its liability to provide
underinsured motorist coverage. The petitioners suggest that because this
issue remained alive even after the trial court ruled in Hanover’s favor on the
summary judgment motions, the court erred in dismissing the action. The
short answer to this argument is that, in ruling on the petitioners’ motion for
clarification or reconsideration, the trial court specifically found that the
parties had agreed the only issue to be decided in this case was whether
Hanover’s consent to the settlement had the legal effect of precluding Hanover
from contesting its liability to provide underinsured motorist coverage.
In support of this ruling, the trial court relied upon: (1) the petitioners’
objection to Hanover’s cross-motion for summary judgment, in which the
petitioners represented that “‘[t]he singular issue of law before the Court’ is
‘whether Hanover, after having consented to settlement by its insured with the
underlying tortfeasor, can ultimately deny a claim for uninsured motorist
coverage benefits on the ground that its insured is not legally entitled to
recover damages caused by the tortfeasor’”; (2) the petitioners’ motion to
remove the case from the jury trial list, wherein they stated that there were no
factual issues in dispute but only the single issue of law just recited; and (3)
the petitioners’ failure to dispute the order issued by the court following the
summary judgment hearing in which the court again described the aforesaid
legal issue as the only matter to be decided in the case. The petitioners have
not provided us with their pleadings related to items (1) and (2), and do not
challenge the court’s ruling on item (3). See Bean v. Red Oak Prop. Mgmt., 151
7
N.H. 248, 250 (2004) (appealing party has the burden of presenting this court
with a record sufficient to decide its issues on appeal). Accordingly, we must
assume that the record supports the trial court’s ruling regarding the litigation
strategy the petitioners pursued below. See id.; Atwood v. Owens, 142 N.H.
396, 399 (1997). In any event, insofar as the petitioners complain that
Hanover failed to exercise good faith in that it delayed investigating and
processing their claim, we note that the petitioners at all times had it within
their power under the terms of the policy to address this problem by
demanding arbitration of its underinsured motorist claim against Hanover, or,
alternatively, by filing a breach of contract action in court.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, CONBOY and HICKS, JJ., concurred.
8