THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-northern judicial district
No. 2011-819
KENNETH BOND & a.
v.
PAUL MARTINEAU & a.
Argued: June 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: September 28, 2012
New Hampshire Legal Assistance, of Manchester and Concord (Elliott
Berry and Dan Feltes on the brief, and Mr. Feltes orally), for the plaintiffs.
City Solicitor’s Office, of Manchester (Peter R. Chiesa on the brief and
orally), for defendant City of Manchester.
DALIANIS, C.J. The plaintiffs, Kenneth Bond and Deborah Thibault, on
behalf of themselves and a class of others similarly situated, appeal an order
of the Superior Court (Brown, J.) granting summary judgment to the
defendants, the City of Manchester and Paul Martineau in his official capacity
as Commissioner of the Manchester Welfare Department (collectively, the
City). We reverse and remand.
I. Background
The following facts are derived from the record. In January 2010, the
plaintiffs applied for general assistance from the City pursuant to RSA chapter
165. See RSA 165:1, I (2002). On February 24, 2010, the City approved
$140.00 per week in rental assistance. On March 18, 2010, the City
suspended this assistance for seven days because of the plaintiffs’ failure to
provide certain documentation, including that related to $30 the plaintiffs
used to buy gas for a vehicle. See RSA 165:1-b (2002). The City lifted this
suspension on March 25, 2010, noting, however, that the plaintiffs were
“unable to show compliance with the $30 purchase of vehicle gas that [they]
stated [they] had previously purchased through an alternate financial
resource.”
On April 1, 2010, the plaintiffs received rental assistance for one week.
The plaintiffs again received one week of rental assistance on April 8, 2010.
The April 8, 2010 notice of decision stated:
Today you have not asked for vehicle gas, just as you did not ask
for vehicle gas last week. In a March 15, email to this worker your
attorney clearly stated what he believed to be legitimate reasons
for gasoline assistance. On March 25th we assisted with five
gallons of car gas. Since that date we have not seen the vehicle
and have not been able to look at mileage or the amount of gas in
the car. Today you state you did not drive your car here. You
have stated that it broke down three or four days ago.
On April 9, 2010, the City revoked the April 8 voucher and denied the
plaintiffs all assistance for six months because they had misrepresented
information related to their vehicle. The April 9, 2010 notice of decision
asserted that even though the plaintiffs told the City that their vehicle had
broken down, a City security officer saw them exit their vehicle when they
arrived for their April 8, 2010 appointment and had seen the vehicle at prior
appointments. The April 9 notice of decision further averred that by
concealing the vehicle, the plaintiffs “prevented [the City] from being able to
check [the] fuel gauge [and] . . . odometer which would inform [the City] if [the
plaintiffs] had other financial resources to put gas in [the] vehicle ([for] which
[the plaintiffs] would then have had to provide receipts).” In the decision it
was observed that the plaintiffs stated on their March 25, April 1, and April 8
financial information update sheets that they had not received “any
income/money/resources since [their] prior appointment.” See RSA 165:1-b,
I(a). The April 9 decision referenced Section XII, subsection C(2) of the City’s
General Assistance Guidelines, which states: “Misrepresentation/omission of
information by a client is grounds for denial or termination of all City
assistance for up to six (6) months and may result in prosecution.”
2
The plaintiffs petitioned the superior court to enjoin the City from
suspending their assistance for six months. They brought the action on their
own behalf and as representatives of a class consisting of “all persons who are
currently or will in the future be disqualified from [the City’s] general
assistance program for six (6) months . . . on the grounds of misrepresentation
of information to the [City] Welfare Department.” See Super. Ct. R. 27-A.
The court certified the class, and the parties filed cross-motions for
summary judgment. The plaintiffs argued that RSA 165:1-b preempted the
Guidelines. The trial court disagreed and granted summary judgment in favor
of the City. This appeal followed.
II. Analysis
We review de novo the trial court’s application of the law to the facts in
its summary judgment ruling. Brown v. Concord Group Ins. Co., 163 N.H.
522, 524-25 (2012). We consider all of the evidence presented in the record,
and all inferences properly drawn therefrom, in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party. Id. If our review of that evidence discloses no genuine
issue of material fact and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, then we will affirm the grant of summary judgment. Id. A fact
is material if it affects the outcome of the litigation under the applicable
substantive law. Id.
At the outset, we observe that although the City suspended the
plaintiffs’ benefits pursuant to Section XII(C)(2) of the guidelines, the plaintiffs
sought to enjoin the City from enforcing Section VIII of the guidelines. Section
VIII states: “Misrepresentation of information by a client is grounds for denial
of all City assistance for up to six (6) months. Misrepresentation of
information by a client may result in prosecution.” Because Section XII(C)(2)
and Section VIII are nearly identical, we treat the plaintiffs’ arguments as
having been made under both sections and, for ease of reference, refer to them
as “the Guidelines.”
We first turn to the plaintiffs’ argument that RSA 165:1-b preempts the
Guidelines. Preemption may be express or implied. N. Country Envtl. Servs.
v. Town of Bethlehem, 150 N.H. 606, 611 (2004). Express preemption is not
claimed here. See id. Implied preemption may be found when the
comprehensiveness and detail of the State statutory scheme “preempts the
field,” which means that it evinces legislative intent to supersede local
regulation. See id. State law also impliedly preempts local law when there is
an actual conflict between State and local regulation. See id. A conflict exists
when a municipal ordinance or regulation permits that which a State statute
prohibits or vice versa. Id. Even when a local ordinance does not expressly
conflict with a State statute, it will be impliedly preempted when it frustrates
the statute’s purpose. See id.
3
Preemption, then, is essentially a matter of statutory interpretation and
construction. Blagbrough Family Realty Trust v. Town of Wilton, 153 N.H.
234, 236 (2006). Statutory interpretation is a question of law that we review
de novo. ATV Watch v. N.H. Dep’t of Transp., 161 N.H. 746, 752 (2011). We
are the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed in the words of
a statute considered as a whole. Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. 309, 317
(2010). In interpreting a statute, we first look to the language of the statute
itself, and, if possible, construe that language according to its plain and
ordinary meaning. Id. Unless we find that the statutory language is
ambiguous, we need not look to legislative intent. Id. Furthermore, we
interpret statutes in the context of the overall statutory scheme and not in
isolation. Id.
The plaintiffs argue that RSA 165:1-b preempts the Guidelines because
the statute and the Guidelines conflict. The Guidelines allow the City to deny
benefits to a person for a period of up to six months because of omission or
misrepresentation of information. In this case, the benefits of the plaintiffs
were suspended for six months because they allegedly omitted or
misrepresented information related to their financial resources. By contrast,
although RSA 165:1-b allows a municipality to suspend benefits for the failure
to disclose financial information, it does not authorize a blanket six-month
suspension. See RSA 165:1-b, I, V.
RSA 165:1-b, “Disqualification for Noncompliance With Guidelines,”
provides, in pertinent part:
I. Any person otherwise eligible for assistance under this chapter
shall become ineligible to receive such assistance if he willfully fails
to comply with written guidelines adopted by the governing body of
the town or city relating to:
(a) Disclosure of income, resources, or other material
financial data;
. . . .
II. No person shall be found ineligible for assistance or suspended
from assistance pursuant to paragraph I until he has been given:
(a) A written notice stating those specific actions he must
take in order to comply; and
(b) A 7-day period within which to comply after receiving
such notice.
4
III. If a person does not comply within the 7 days, the town or city
may issue to the person a written notice that the person is
ineligible for assistance or suspended from assistance. The written
notice shall include a list of the guidelines with which the person is
not in compliance, those actions necessary for compliance, and
written notice of the opportunity to request a hearing within 5
days.
. . . .
V. The period of ineligibility or suspension pursuant to this
section shall be 7 days; provided, however, that any such
suspension within 6 months after the end of any prior suspension
period shall be for 14 days; and provided further that if upon the
expiration of the 7-day or 14-day disqualification period the person
continues to fail to carry out the specific actions set forth in the
notice required in paragraph III, the disqualification shall continue
until the person complies.
VI. The overseers of public welfare shall not be required to accept
an application for general assistance from a person who is subject
to disqualification or suspension under this section; provided,
however, that in the event such disqualification or suspension
continues beyond the 7 or 14-day period due to continued
noncompliance . . . , and there is a dispute over a contention by
such person that he has satisfactorily complied with the
requirements set forth in the notice required by paragraph III, such
person shall be given an opportunity to request a hearing to
determine that issue . . . .
Thus, under RSA 165:1-b, I, a person otherwise eligible for General
Assistance becomes ineligible to receive such assistance for willfully failing to
comply with certain municipal guidelines, including those related to
“disclosure of income, resources, or other material financial data.” RSA 165:1-
b, I(a). The initial suspension period is for seven days. If the suspension
occurs “within 6 months after the end of [a] prior suspension period,” however,
then the suspension period is for fourteen days. RSA 165:1-b, V. “The period
of ineligibility or suspension” may be longer, “if upon the expiration of the 7-
day or 14-day disqualification period[,] [the person] continues to fail to carry
out the specific actions” required of him or her. Id. In that case, the period
“shall continue until the person complies.” Id.
Here, the plaintiffs were deemed ineligible for further receipt of benefits
because they allegedly misrepresented or omitted information about their
financial resources related to their vehicle. Because their April 9 suspension
occurred within six months of their March 18 suspension, RSA 165:1-b
5
allowed the City to suspend them from receiving further assistance for
fourteen days. If the plaintiffs failed to comply after fourteen days, RSA 165:1-
b allowed the City to suspend them until they did comply. Under no
circumstances, however, did RSA 165:1-b allow the City to impose a blanket
six-month suspension. The plaintiffs argue, therefore, that the Guidelines, as
applied to them and others similarly situated, conflict with, and are impliedly
preempted by, RSA 165:1-b. We agree with this analysis.
In arguing for a contrary result, the City contends that RSA 165:1-b
does not apply to this case because the Guidelines govern eligibility
determinations, while RSA 165:1-b governs only suspensions. The plain
meaning of RSA 165:1-b does not support this construction.
RSA 165:1-b, on its face, governs both eligibility determinations and
suspensions. RSA 165:1-b, II provides: “No person shall be found ineligible
for assistance or suspended from assistance pursuant to paragraph I” until he
or she has been given written notice and a seven-day period in which to
comply. RSA 165:1-b, III similarly provides that if the person does not comply
within seven days, the municipality “may issue . . . a written notice that the
person is ineligible for assistance or suspended from assistance.” RSA 165:1-
b, V specifically refers to “[t]he period of ineligibility or suspension.” Contrary
to the City’s assertions, RSA 165:1-b does not distinguish between periods of
ineligibility and suspension.
The City also argues that RSA 165:1-b does not apply to the plaintiffs
because they were not “otherwise eligible for assistance.” RSA 165:1-b, I. The
City reasons that the plaintiffs were not “otherwise eligible for assistance”
because they misrepresented information related to their financial resources
in violation of the Guidelines. Thus, the City contends, RSA 165:1-b, which
applies only to those who are “otherwise eligible for assistance,” does not apply
to the plaintiffs.
The City’s narrow focus upon the phrase “otherwise eligible for
assistance” is misplaced. RSA 165:1-b, I, specifically applies when a person
who is “otherwise eligible for assistance . . . become[s] ineligible” for such
assistance because of willful failure to comply with certain written guidelines.
(Emphasis added.) Here, the plaintiffs were “otherwise eligible for assistance”
until the City deemed them ineligible for further receipt of that assistance
because they misrepresented or omitted information about their financial
resources. Accordingly, RSA 165:1-b applies.
The City’s reliance upon RSA 165:1, II(b) (2002) is also misplaced. RSA
165:1, II(b) requires a municipality to adopt guidelines regarding the “criteria
for determining eligibility.” The City contends that the Guidelines merely set
forth “criteria for determining eligibility,” and, therefore, were consistent with
6
RSA 165:1, II(b). The Guidelines, as applied to the plaintiffs and others
similarly situated, do not support this construction.
The Guidelines provide for a six-month penalty for misrepresentation or
omission of information. They were applied to the plaintiffs specifically
because the plaintiffs allegedly failed to disclose “income, resources, or other
material financial data.” RSA 165:1-b, I(a). Accordingly, as applied in the
instant case, the Guidelines, like RSA 165:1-b, I(a), provide penalties for failing
to disclose financial information. However, whereas RSA 165:1-b provides
that the penalty shall be seven or fourteen days, or, if the person continues
not to comply, until the person does so, the Guidelines impose a blanket six-
month suspension. In this way, the Guidelines, as applied to the plaintiffs,
actually conflict with RSA 165:1-b, and are impliedly preempted by it. See N.
Country Envtl. Servs., 150 N.H. at 611.
The City also argues that the Guidelines are consistent with RSA
chapter 167, which concerns State assistance to the blind, aged, or disabled
persons, and to dependent children. This is immaterial as State assistance is
not at issue. RSA chapter 167 does not apply to this case.
Because we hold that RSA 165:1-b and the Guidelines actually conflict,
it is also immaterial that, according to the City, the Guidelines are consistent
with the humanitarian purpose of RSA chapter 165. Whether the Guidelines
conflict with the purpose of RSA chapter 165 would be relevant only if the
terms of the Guidelines and RSA 165:1-b did not conflict. See id. We have
reviewed the City’s remaining arguments and conclude that they do not
warrant extended consideration. See Vogel v. Vogel, 137 N.H. 321, 322 (1993).
For these reasons, we reverse the trial court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of the City and remand for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
Reversed and remanded.
HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
7