THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Strafford
No. 2011-307
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
JONATHAN CHAREST
Argued: September 12, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 16, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Elizabeth C. Woodcock, assistant
attorney general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Pamela E. Phelan, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief
and orally, for the defendant.
LYNN, J. The defendant, Jonathan Charest, appeals the sentence
imposed by the Superior Court (Brown, J.) pursuant to RSA 651:2, II-g (2007)
(amended 2011) following his conviction by a jury for being a felon in
possession of a firearm. See RSA 159:3, I (2002). We vacate and remand.
The record establishes the following facts. The defendant was convicted
of being a felon in possession of a firearm, contrary to RSA 159:3, which states:
I. A person is guilty of a class B felony if he:
(a) Owns or has in his possession or under his control, a
pistol, revolver, or other firearm, or slungshot, metallic
knuckles, billies, stiletto, switchblade knife, sword cane,
pistol cane, blackjack, dagger, dirk-knife, or other deadly
weapon as defined in RSA 625:11, V; and
(b) Has been convicted in either a state or federal court in
this or any other state . . . of:
(1) A felony against the person or property of another
. . . .
A deadly weapon is “any firearm, knife or other substance or thing which, in
the manner it is used, intended to be used, or threatened to be used, is known
to be capable of producing death or serious bodily injury.” RSA 625:11, V
(2007).
After the jury returned a verdict of guilty on the felon-in-possession
charge, the trial court asked the jury to issue a special verdict on whether it
unanimously found that the defendant possessed, rather than controlled or
owned, a firearm. The jury answered “yes.” The trial court sentenced the
defendant to three to six years’ imprisonment. The court imposed the
mandatory minimum sentence of three years under RSA 651:2, II-g, which
applies “[i]f a person is convicted of a felony, an element of which is the
possession . . . of a deadly weapon, and the deadly weapon is a firearm.” At
sentencing, the trial judge explained to the defendant, “You were just
sentenced to the minimum. . . . I don’t have any discretion . . . to do anything
other than to sentence you . . . to . . . those terms.”
The defendant does not appeal his conviction, but argues that the trial
court erred when it imposed the minimum mandatory sentence under RSA
651:2, II-g because: (1) the offense he was charged with, RSA 159:3, I, does
not have as an element the possession of a firearm in a manner that rendered
it a deadly weapon under RSA 625:11, V; and (2) the jury did not find that he
possessed a deadly weapon within the meaning of RSA 625:11, V. Because the
defendant did not make these arguments before the trial court, he invokes the
plain error rule, which allows us, under certain narrowly drawn circumstances,
to correct errors not raised before the trial court. See Sup. Ct. R. 16-A.
For us to find plain error: (1) there must be error; (2) the error must be
plain; and (3) the error must affect substantial rights. State v. Panarello, 157
2
N.H. 204, 207 (2008) (quotation and brackets omitted). If all three of these
conditions are met, we may then exercise our discretion to correct a forfeited
error only if the error meets a fourth criterion: the error must seriously
affect the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Id.
The rule is used sparingly, however, and is limited to those circumstances in
which a miscarriage of justice would otherwise result. Id. We find that all four
criteria are met in this case.
We first address whether the trial court erred when it sentenced the
defendant under RSA 651:2, II-g, which provides:
If a person is convicted of a felony, an element of which is the
possession, use or attempted use of a deadly weapon, and the
deadly weapon is a firearm, such person may be sentenced to a
maximum term of 20 years’ imprisonment in lieu of any other
sentence prescribed for the crime. The person shall be given a
minimum mandatory sentence of not less than 3 years’
imprisonment for the first offense . . . . Neither the whole nor any
part of the minimum sentence imposed under this paragraph shall
be suspended or reduced.
The language of RSA 651:2, II-g is clear and unambiguous. State v. Mohamed,
159 N.H. 559, 561 (2009); State v. Crie, 154 N.H. 403, 408 (2006). “The plain
language of RSA 651:2, II-g requires a three-year minimum sentence if three
conditions are met: (1) the defendant is convicted of a felony; (2) one of the
elements of the crime is possession, use or attempted use of a deadly weapon;
and (3) the deadly weapon is a firearm.” Mohamed, 159 N.H. at 561.
The defendant was indicted for and convicted of being a felon and
owning, possessing, or having a firearm under his control. As the special
verdict form demonstrates, the jury found that he possessed a firearm. “To
convict the defendant of being a felon in possession of a weapon [under RSA
159:3, I(a)], the State must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that: (1) the
defendant was a convicted felon; and (2) that he knowingly either owned, had
in his possession, or had under his control the weapons detailed in the
indictments.” State v. Hammell, 147 N.H. 313, 319 (2001). The elements of a
conviction for being a felon in possession of a firearm do not include a showing
that the firearm was a deadly weapon.
3
The State argues that firearms and other items which are specifically
enumerated in RSA 159:3, I(a) are deadly weapons per se and that,
consequently, no additional showing under RSA 625:11, V was necessary to
impose the mandatory minimum sentence under RSA 651:2, II-g. We disagree.
We have previously declined to equate a firearm with a deadly weapon,
including for the purposes of RSA 651:2, II-g. “A firearm . . . is not a deadly
weapon per se.” Mohamed, 159 N.H. at 561; see State v. Kousounadis, 159
N.H. 413, 427 (2009) (“Whether the specific manner in which the defendant
used the shotgun and the circumstances surrounding that use rendered the
shotgun a deadly weapon is a factual issue within the exclusive province of the
jury.”). Mohamed is directly on point. In that case, we concluded that the trial
court improperly sentenced the defendant under RSA 651:2, II-g because the
elements of the felony for which he was convicted, receiving a stolen handgun,
did not include the possession, use, or attempted use of a deadly weapon.
Mohamed, 159 N.H. at 562. By contrast, in State v. Bird, 161 N.H. 31, 37
(2010), we found that the trial court properly sentenced the defendant under
RSA 651:2, II-g where the underlying felony of which he was convicted, felony
criminal threatening, included the use of a deadly weapon and the jury found
that the defendant used the firearm as a deadly weapon.
The State argues that, based on Crie, RSA 651:2, II-g applies simply
because the defendant was convicted of being a felon and possessing a firearm.
Crie, 154 N.H. at 408-09 (“Where, as here, the indictment specifically alleged
that the defendant had firearms in his possession, the offense as alleged under
RSA 159:3 is within the scope of RSA 651:2, II-g.”). In Crie, however, we did
not have occasion to address the question of whether a firearm is per se a
deadly weapon. In our subsequent decisions in Kousounadis and Mohamed we
did address this question and clearly held that a firearm is not a deadly
weapon per se. Furthermore, in Mohamed, we specifically held that a firearm
is not a deadly weapon per se for the purposes of RSA 651:2, II-g.
Having concluded that the trial court erred, we next determine whether
the error was plain. “For the purposes of the plain error rule, an error is plain
if it was or should have been obvious in the sense that the governing law was
clearly settled to the contrary.” Panarello, 157 N.H. at 209 (quotation omitted).
In Mohamed, we settled the question of whether a defendant may be sentenced
under RSA 651:2, II-g when the felony offense of conviction, though it may
involve a firearm, does not include as an element the possession, use, or
 Under the State’s construction of the statute, only items aside from those specifically listed in
RSA 159:3, I(a) would have to satisfy the terms of RSA 625:11, V in order to be considered an
“other deadly weapon” captured by the last clause of the statute. While we disagree with the State
that the items specifically listed in RSA 159:3, I(a) are per se deadly weapons for purposes of RSA
625:11, V or 651:2, II-g, we do note that the specifically listed items, including firearms, are
subject to the prohibitions of RSA 159:3 regardless of whether they constitute deadly weapons.
4
attempted use of the firearm as a deadly weapon. Mohamed, 159 N.H. at 562
(“Because one of the elements of the offense for which the defendant was
convicted was not the possession, use or attempted use of a deadly weapon,
the trial court erred by imposing the mandatory minimum sentence of three
years pursuant to RSA 651:2, II-g.”). We therefore conclude that the error was
plain.
To meet the third prong of the plain error test, the error must affect
substantial rights. State v. Taylor, 152 N.H. 719, 720 (2005). Generally, to
satisfy the burden of demonstrating that an error affected substantial rights,
the defendant must demonstrate that the error was prejudicial, i.e., that it
affected the outcome of the proceeding. State v. Lopez, 156 N.H. 416, 425
(2007). We find that the error affected the outcome of the proceeding because
the transcript of the sentencing hearing makes plain that the trial court
erroneously believed it had no discretion to impose a sentence below the
minimum mandatory. Therefore, even though the sentence imposed did not
exceed the maximum available for the RSA 159:3 offense, a class B felony, the
defendant’s rights were substantially affected because the trial court did not
consider imposing a lesser sentence.
Having found that the trial court committed error, that the error was
plain, and that it affected the defendant’s substantial rights, we may exercise
our discretion to reverse if the error also seriously affects the fairness, integrity,
or public reputation of judicial proceedings. Panarello, 157 N.H. at 207. “Trial
judges are vested with broad discretionary powers with regard to sentencing.”
State v. Van Winkle, 160 N.H. 337, 340 (2010) (citation omitted). Here, the
trial court mistakenly imposed a mandatory minimum sentence which was six
months lower than the maximum of three-and-a-half to seven years applicable
to class B felonies, RSA 651:2, II(d) (2007), under circumstances where it might
have concluded that a lesser sentence would have been appropriate. Because
the trial court erroneously failed to exercise the discretion afforded to it at
sentencing, we find that the error affected the integrity and fairness of the
judicial proceedings.
We deem waived the remaining questions that the defendant raised in his
notice of appeal but did not brief. State v. Kelley, 159 N.H. 449, 455 (2009).
Sentence vacated; remanded
for resentencing.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
5