THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Plymouth Family Division
No. 2011-483
IN THE MATTER OF NANCY E. WOOLSEY AND GRANT E. WOOLSEY
Argued: June 7, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 30, 2012
Martin, Lord & Osman, P.A., of Laconia (Judith L. Homan on the brief
and orally), for the petitioner.
Seufert, Davis & Hunt, PLLC, of Franklin (Lexie Rojas on the brief and
orally), for the respondent.
HICKS, J. The respondent, Grant E. Woolsey, appeals an order of the
Plymouth Family Division (Rappa, J.) modifying his child support obligation to
the petitioner, Nancy E. Woolsey. We reverse and remand.
The trial court found, or the record supports, the following relevant facts.
The parties have two daughters who, at the time of the order, were seventeen and
fourteen. The respondent is a self-employed truck driver, doing business under
the name Fox Ridge Reliance (the business). He transports construction
materials from April to December and plows snow in the winter and spring.
Before working as a truck driver, the respondent had been employed selling
recreational vehicles at a salary of $50,000 per year.
According to his business’s 2008 profit and loss statement, the business
had gross income of $70,451.48; the net, after business expenses of $42,947.79
were deducted, was $27,947.79. The respondent took that amount as his
personal income. The 2009 profit and loss statement showed gross income of
$50,601.08; after expenses of $25,556.85 were deducted, the net was
$25,044.23, which the respondent again took as personal income. For 2010, the
profit and loss statement showed $49,624.86 in gross income, and $24,652.97 in
expenses, leaving $24,971.89 for the respondent’s income.
On December 8, 2010, the respondent moved to modify a child support
order issued on January 28, 2008. He alleged a substantial change in
circumstances due to the economic downturn. For instance, he testified that
although he had regularly received work from Ambrose Brothers in the past, he
did no hauling for that company in 2010 “because the economy had gotten so
horrible.” In addition, he testified that his fuel expense had gone up because of
the economy.
The petitioner questioned the respondent’s business expenses, argued that
he is underemployed, and alleged that he had additional income he was not
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service or to the court. She argued that the
respondent did not show signs of financial hardship, and asked the court to find
that he is financially capable of paying his original support obligation.
Under the 2008 order, the respondent was obligated to pay $189.00 per
week in child support. At the time of the hearing, he was $12,907.00 in arrears
and had not been current since 2004.
The trial court found that the respondent had failed to show a substantial
change in circumstances because he continued to operate the same business
and “[h]is gross income from that business was $49,624.86 in 2010, which is
virtually the same as the income that was considered by the Court in 2008.” See
RSA 458-C:7, I(a) (Supp. 2012) (party not prohibited from applying “at any time
for a modification [of child support order] based on substantial change of
circumstances”). Nevertheless, because the hearing took place three years after
entry of the support order under review, the court acknowledged that the
petitioner was entitled to review without a showing of a substantial change of
circumstances. See id. (party may apply for modification three years after entry
of order “without the need to show a substantial change of circumstances”).
The court found “that the [r]espondent’s claims of financial hardship [were]
not credible.” It specifically found that his checking account balance was over
$6,000.00 at the end of 2010 and that “[t]here were many months that the
[r]espondent did not pay his child support in spite of having a significant positive
balance in his checking account.” The court acknowledged, but presumably
discounted, the respondent’s claim that his business needs a “cash cushion” to
2
start “at the beginning of the spring and to deal with unexpected repairs and
other expenses.”
The trial court found that the respondent’s 2010 gross income was
$49,624.86 – that is, $4,135.40 per month. It found that he paid $436.00 in
self-employment taxes per month, entitling him to a $218.00 per month
deduction under RSA 458-C:2, I (Supp. 2012), resulting in an adjusted gross
income of $3,917.40 per month. Applying the child support guidelines, the court
calculated the respondent’s support obligation to be $233.00 per week.
On appeal, the respondent argues that: (1) the trial court erred by finding
that his gross income for purposes of calculating his child support obligation was
the same as the business’s gross income; (2) the trial court incorrectly applied
RSA 458-C:2, I, in finding that the only expense it could deduct was fifty percent
of the respondent’s self-employment tax; (3) the trial court misinterpreted RSA
458-C:2, IV (2004) so as to impose a confiscatory order; (4) the trial court’s
finding as to the credibility of the respondent could not be used to support an
upward adjustment to the guideline support obligation; and (5) the trial court’s
order constituted an “inequitable application of the law in violation of [the New
Hampshire] [C]onstitution.”
We first address the respondent’s claim that the trial court erred in
equating the gross income of his business with his gross income for purposes of
calculating his child support obligation. “Resolution of this issue requires that
we interpret RSA 458-C:2, IV, which defines gross income for child support
purposes. We review the trial court’s statutory interpretation de novo. We are
the final arbiters of the legislature’s intent as expressed in the words of the
statute considered as a whole.” In the Matter of Fulton & Fulton, 154 N.H. 264,
266 (2006) (quotations and citation omitted).
When examining the language of the statute, we will ascribe the
plain and ordinary meaning to the words used. We interpret
legislative intent from the statute as written and will not consider
what the legislature might have said or add language the legislature
did not see fit to include. As we examine the language, we do not
merely look at isolated words or phrases, but instead we consider
the statute as a whole. In so doing, we are better able to discern the
legislature’s intent, and therefore better able to understand the
statutory language in light of the policy sought to be advanced by
the entire statutory scheme.
Appeal of Kat Paw Acres Trust, 156 N.H. 536, 537-38 (2007) (quotations and
citations omitted).
3
The statute defines “gross income” to mean, in pertinent part, “all income
from any source, whether earned or unearned, including, but not limited to,
wages, salary, commissions, tips, annuities, social security benefits, trust
income, lottery or gambling winnings, interest, dividends, investment income, net
rental income, self-employment income, alimony, business profits, pensions,
bonuses, and payments from [certain] other government programs.” RSA 458-
C:2, IV.
The respondent argues that the “business profits” includable under the
statute must be net of expenses because “the very definition of the word ‘profit’
necessitates that in order to calculate profits one must remove the expenses from
the gross business income.” We agree. Profit is defined as “the excess of returns
over expenditure in a transaction or series of transactions” or “net income (as in
a business) usu[ally] for a given period of time.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 1811 (unabridged ed. 2002). Net income, in turn, is
defined as “the balance of gross income remaining after deducting related costs
and expenses usu[ally] for a given period and losses allocable to the period.” Id.
at 1520. In using the term “profits,” the legislature contemplated the deduction
of business expenses from business income.
The statute also includes as gross income “self-employment income,” RSA
458-C:2, IV, but does not define that term. Other courts, however, at least for
the purpose of interpreting separation agreements, have noted that “[i]n the
context of alimony and child support, ‘income’ is ordinarily construed to mean
gross receipts less business expenses related thereto, because it is the [obligor’s]
net income that must be referred to in determining his ability to pay.” Dobbins v.
Dobbins, 397 N.Y.S.2d 412, 414 (App. Div. 1977) (citation omitted); see Cannan
v. Cannan, 436 N.Y.S.2d 133, 134 (App. Div. 1981). The Dobbins court reasoned
that “[i]t is improbable that the parties would agree upon a measure of income,
such as gross income or receipts, which had no relation to the [obligor’s] actual
ability to pay support.” Dobbins, 397 N.Y.S.2d at 414.
We conclude that it is similarly improbable that the legislature intended
the term “self-employment income” in RSA 458-C:2, IV to mean the gross receipts
of a sole proprietorship when a portion of that money is payable to others as
legitimate business expenses, and is therefore unavailable for the payment of
child support. See In the Matter of Rupa & Rupa, 161 N.H. 311, 319 (2010)
(noting that “[w]e interpret a statute to lead to a reasonable result” (quotation
omitted)). Our prior cases recognize the importance of the availability of income
to the obligor for child support. Thus, in In the Matter of Albert & McRae, 155
N.H. 259 (2007), we noted that the definition of income for federal income tax
purposes is “of little relevance” to determining what is includable as gross income
under our child support guidelines. Albert, 155 N.H. at 263 (quotation omitted).
We explained that, as the facts of that case demonstrated, “income tax returns
4
are an unreliable guide to the income available for child support purposes.” Id.
at 264 (emphasis added).
Courts in other jurisdictions have also relied upon the interpretation of
language denoting self-employment income in separation agreements to construe
the statutory meaning of the term. In Barber v. Cahill, 658 N.Y.S.2d 738 (App.
Div. 1997), the court cited a case construing the term “earnings” in a divorce
settlement to mean “gross income less allowable business expenses.” Barber,
658 N.Y.S.2d at 739 (quotation omitted); see Bottitta v. Bottitta, 598 N.Y.S.2d
304, 306 (App. Div. 1993). Relying upon that precedent, the court held that
although the child support “statute itself contain[ed] no explicit authorization to
deduct the business expenses of a self-employed individual from income . . . [the]
Family Court erred in not allowing [such] business expenses.” Barber, 658
N.Y.S.2d at 739 (citation omitted).
Similarly, in Whelan v. Whelan, 908 N.E.2d 858 (Mass. App. Ct. 2009), the
court interpreted child support guidelines that did “not specifically provide for
deduction of business-related expenses from self-employment income” to
nevertheless allow such a deduction. Whelan, 908 N.E.2d at 866. The guidelines
contained a broadly-worded definition of income roughly comparable to RSA 458-
C:2, IV’s definition of gross income. Id. at 865 n.16. “Indeed, these guidelines
list[ed] in the definition of income from whatever source both ‘income from self-
employment’ as well as, by way of comparison, ‘net rental income.’” Id. at 866.
Notwithstanding the lack of explicit authorization to deduct business expenses
from self-employment income, the court found it “implicit that such expenses
may be deducted where they are reasonable and necessary for the production of
income.” Id. We find it similarly implicit in RSA 458-C:2, IV that the term “self-
employment income” means self-employment income net of legitimate business
expenses incurred for the purpose of earning that income. Accordingly, we
reverse the trial court’s decision to use gross business receipts as the
respondent’s self-employment income.
The petitioner argues that the respondent “exercised total individual
control over the distributions made to himself, his creditors, and to [her] for child
support.” The argument implicitly rests upon the ground that because the
respondent operates a sole proprietorship, payments to the business are
payments to him. The trial court appears to have used the same reasoning,
noting that “the [r]espondent is a sole proprietor of his business. The trucking
business is a d/b/a/, not a corporation.” The respondent disputes the amount
of actual control he has over paying his business expenses, arguing, “[f]or
instance, [that] he cannot choose between fueling his dump truck or receiving a
salary. If he fails to put fuel in his truck, he does not earn a salary.”
We agree with the respondent. His theoretical ability to pay himself rather
than his business creditors, and, likewise, the form of his business entity as a
5
“d/b/a” (doing business as) rather than a corporation, are irrelevant in this
context. We believe that calculating a parent’s ability to pay child support
necessitates determining an actual ability to pay, and, therefore, as indicated
above, it presupposes the deduction of legitimate business expenses. As the
Colorado Court of Appeals stated:
To embrace . . . a rule [that a child support obligation takes
precedence over the self-employed obligor’s business expenses] . . .
could create the untenable situation that the expenses associated
with the production of income be held in abeyance until the child
support is paid. The inevitable result of such a disposition of
resources, in circumstances such as are present here, would be the
eventual loss of all income when the business reached the point
where it was no longer a viable, going concern.
In re Marriage of Crowley, 663 P.2d 267, 269 (Colo. Ct. App. 1983).
These concepts also inform what constitute legitimate business expenses.
We have noted that “[u]nlike personal living expenditures, business . . . expenses
are costs incurred by the taxpayer in earning gross income.” Thayer v. Thayer,
119 N.H. 871, 873 (1979) (decided before adoption of child support guidelines),
superseded by statute as stated in In the Matter of Clark & Clark, 154 N.H. 420,
425 (2006). Other courts similarly focus upon the income-producing role of
business expenses in determining whether they are deductible for purposes of
calculating self-employment income for child support purposes. Thus, the
Whelan court found it implicit in the child support guidelines that business-
related expenses “may be deducted where they are reasonable and necessary for
the production of income.” Whelan, 908 N.E.2d at 866. In Dobbins, the court
ruled that the obligor’s support obligation under his separation agreement
“should be measured by taking into account all of his income, from whatever
source derived, and by deducting therefrom all losses and expenses actually
incurred and paid which were directly related to the production of that income.”
Dobbins, 397 N.Y.S.2d at 414. We similarly hold that to be deductible for
purposes of determining “self-employment income” under RSA 458-C:2, IV,
business expenses must be “actually incurred and paid,” Dobbins, 397 N.Y.S.2d
at 414, and “reasonable and necessary” for producing income, Whelan, 908
N.E.2d at 866. It is for the trial judge to determine whether claimed expenses
meet those criteria. See, e.g., Whelan, 908 N.E.2d at 867. Accordingly, we
remand to the trial court to make that determination in this case. In light of our
decision, we need not address the respondent’s remaining arguments.
Reversed and remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
6