THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Hillsborough-southern judicial district
No. 2011-341
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
PETER E. GIBBS, JR.
Argued: September 13, 2012
Opinion Issued: December 21, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
Stephanie Hausman, senior assistant appellate defender, and Lisa L.
Wolford, assistant appellate defender, of Concord, on the brief, and Ms.
Hausman orally, for the defendant.
HICKS, J. The defendant, Peter E. Gibbs, Jr., appeals his convictions
following a jury trial in Superior Court (Nicolosi, J.) of two counts of criminal
restraint, see RSA 633:2 (2007), and one count of being an armed career
criminal, see RSA 159:3-a (2002). On appeal, the defendant argues that: (1)
his right against double jeopardy was violated when he was twice convicted of
a single criminal restraint; (2) his right to effective assistance of counsel was
violated; and (3) there was insufficient evidence to find him guilty beyond a
reasonable doubt of the crime of being an armed career criminal. We affirm in
part, vacate in part, and remand.
I
The jury could have found the following facts. In the early morning of
March 16, 2008, the victim awoke in his bedroom to find a man pointing a
gun at him and claiming to be a police officer. Another man stood in the
hallway. Both men’s faces were covered by scarves. The man with the gun
tied the victim’s hands and proceeded to ransack the bedroom. Subsequently,
that man took the victim downstairs to the kitchen where he was placed in a
chair. Shortly thereafter, he was moved to the basement and tied to a column.
The man with the gun stayed in the basement with him while the other man
carried some of the victim’s belongings upstairs. Fifteen to twenty minutes
later, the man with the gun brought the victim upstairs to the living room
where he was tied to a chair. Both men then left the house. After struggling
for fifteen to twenty minutes, the victim freed himself and called the police.
The defendant was charged with the crimes of being an armed career
criminal, armed robbery, burglary, and three counts of criminal restraint. The
criminal restraint charges were based on the defendant allegedly displaying a
handgun and: (1) tying the victim’s hands in his bedroom; (2) tying him to a
column in his basement; and (3) tying him to a chair in the living room. The
defendant waived his right to a jury trial on the armed career criminal charge.
At trial, the jury acquitted the defendant of the charge of tying the
victim’s hands in his bedroom. The jury found him guilty of the other two
criminal restraint charges, armed robbery, and burglary. The trial court found
him guilty of the armed career criminal charge. The defendant received two
sentences to be served concurrently for the criminal restraint convictions.
II
The defendant first argues that his right against double jeopardy under
the State and Federal Constitutions has been violated because the two
criminal restraint convictions arose from one continuous period of
confinement, and, therefore, constitute one offense for double jeopardy
purposes. We first address the defendant’s argument under the State
Constitution and rely upon federal law only to aid our analysis. State v. Ball,
124 N.H. 226, 231-33 (1983).
Part I, Article 16 of the New Hampshire Constitution provides that “[n]o
subject shall be liable to be tried, after an acquittal, for the same crime or
offense.” N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 16. In addition to protecting against
successive prosecutions for the same offense after acquittal or conviction, the
2
provision has also been construed to protect against multiple punishments for
the same offense. State v. Glenn, 160 N.H. 480, 486 (2010).
RSA 633:2, I, states that “[a] person is guilty of a class B felony if he
knowingly confines another unlawfully in circumstances exposing him to risk
of serious bodily injury.” The phrase “confines another unlawfully,” as used in
this section, “includes but is not limited to confinement accomplished by force,
threat or deception.” RSA 633:2, II. To “confine” means “to hold within
bounds,” or “restrain from exceeding boundaries.” Webster’s Third New
International Dictionary 476 (unabridged ed. 2002).
The defendant argues that the two criminal restraint convictions violate
his right against double jeopardy because they constitute the same course of
unlawful conduct and, therefore, a single offense. The State responds that
there was no double jeopardy violation because the two criminal restraint
convictions involved different circumstances of confinement and different
risks. The State argues in the alternative that even if the defendant subjected
the victim to only one period of confinement, he was still subjected to “two
episodes of illegal restraint.”
We have had no occasion to address whether, and under what
circumstances, a defendant may face multiple indictments for criminal
restraint based upon a continuing course of criminal conduct. Our review of
other authorities, however, supports the generally accepted principle that a
defendant may not be charged multiple times for a crime of interfering with
another person’s freedom – such as kidnapping or criminal confinement –
unless the victim has been freed and subsequently restrained again. See, e.g.,
People v. Palacios, 161 P.3d 519, 522 (Cal. 2007); State v. Stouffer, 721 A.2d
207, 215 (Md. 1998); People v. La Marca, 144 N.E.2d 420, 424-25 (N.Y. 1957);
cf. United States v. Rodriguez-Moreno, 526 U.S. 275, 281 (1999) (agreeing with
several jurisdictions that kidnapping is a “unitary crime” that “does not end
until the victim is free”). We adopt this approach and conclude that the
unlawful confinement element of RSA 633:2 begins when the confinement is
initiated and ends only “when the victim both feels and is, in fact, free” from
the confinement. Idle v. State, 587 N.E.2d 712, 717 (Ind. Ct. App. 1992); see
also Bunch v. State, 937 N.E.2d 839, 848-49 (Ind. Ct. App. 2010) (holding that
three counts of criminal confinement violated double jeopardy where victim
was moved at gunpoint throughout home during burglary), transfer denied,
950 N.E.2d 1196 (Ind. 2011); State v. Jones, 916 P.2d 1119, 1123 (Ariz. Ct.
App. 1995); State v. Freeney, 637 A.2d 1088, 1091 (Conn. 1994). This
interpretation comports with the plain meaning of the statute because
confining an individual necessarily involves a period of time in which the
individual is deprived of his freedom.
3
Our review of the record reveals that the defendant engaged in only one
episode of criminal restraint. For the purposes of our analysis, we need review
only the acts for which the defendant was convicted, which include tying the
victim in the basement and then in the living room, during which, both times,
the defendant was displaying a gun. The defendant’s confinement of the
victim was continuous because the victim at no point felt free to leave. See,
e.g., Bunch, 937 N.E.2d at 848-49; Jones, 916 P.2d at 1123; Idle, 587 N.E.2d
at 717. The confinement, which occurred over the course of thirty to forty
minutes, began when the victim was tied to a column in the basement,
continued as he was brought upstairs and tied to the living room chair, and
ended only when he was able to free himself after the defendant and his
accomplice departed. Furthermore, the defendant restrained the victim with
only one intent − to prevent him from interfering with the burglary. See
Freeney, 637 A.2d at 1091. Further, there is no evidence that the victim felt
free during his movement between these areas because his movement was
always controlled by the burglars and he was continually aware of the threat
of the gun. See Bunch, 937 N.E.2d at 848-49. The facts demonstrate that the
victim was continuously confined from the time he was tied in the basement
until the point at which he was able to free himself and, therefore, the
defendant engaged in only one episode of criminal restraint.
We also reject the State’s argument that the different risks involved in
restraining the victim in the basement and the living room created “two
episodes of illegal restraint.” The State asserts that the risk involved in the
two convictions was different because initially the gun was the only source of
risk, whereas after the defendant’s departure, the victim was at risk of not
being freed. RSA 633:2, I, however, requires only a “risk of serious bodily
injury” and does not establish separate crimes based upon the level or type of
risk. Cf. State v. Burke, 162 N.H. 459, 462 (2011) (rejecting the defendant’s
argument that the State must present “an actual, identifiable risk”). Our
reading of the record reveals that the defendant exposed the victim to such
risk throughout the period upon which his two convictions were based.
Accordingly, we conclude that, as with the confinement element, the “risk”
element of the statute was established continuously during the period in
question.
Based on the foregoing discussion, we conclude that the defendant’s
conduct constituted only a single confinement exposing the victim to risk of
serious bodily injury, and, therefore, his two convictions of criminal restraint
violate the Double Jeopardy Clause of the New Hampshire Constitution. As
the United States Supreme Court noted in Brown v. Ohio, 432 U.S. 161, 169
(1977), “[t]he Double Jeopardy Clause is not such a fragile guarantee that
prosecutors can avoid its limitations by the simple expedient of dividing a
single crime into a series of temporal or spatial units.” Accordingly, one of the
two criminal restraint convictions and sentences must be vacated.
4
Because the defendant prevails under our State Constitution, we need
not reach the federal issue. See Ball, 124 N.H. at 232.
III
The defendant next argues that his right to effective assistance of
counsel was violated. Assuming, without deciding, that the defendant
properly raised this argument, we nevertheless decline to address it pursuant
to State v. Thompson, 161 N.H. 507 (2011).
In Thompson, we held that the only type of ineffectiveness of counsel
claim permissible for direct appellate review is “the extraordinary case where
the factual basis of the claim appears indisputably on the trial record.”
Thompson, 161 N.H. at 527 (quotation omitted). We stated that although trial
counsel’s reasoning may seem apparent from the record, “it is usually
necessary to develop an additional record to show the reason for the act or
omission that appears in the trial record.” Id.
Here, the defendant claims that trial counsel’s performance fell outside
the range of reasonable professional judgment because “he failed to object to,
and indeed elicited, testimony” from a witness that established the defendant
as a violent criminal. The State argues that the testimony in question was
neither directly inculpatory nor clearly inadmissible. The State further
contends that defense counsel’s actions were part of a reasonable trial strategy
in which he attempted, however unsuccessfully, to impeach the witness in
question.
The defendant’s claims cannot be decided on the face of the trial record.
Because, in the absence of a record of additional evidence, we cannot
determine whether the actions of the defendant’s trial counsel were part of an
acceptable trial strategy, we decline to address this argument. Our ruling is
without prejudice to any proper ancillary proceeding.
IV
Finally, the defendant argues that there was insufficient evidence that
he possessed a handgun to support his conviction of being an armed career
criminal. He contends that if there was evidence that he was the man with the
gun during the home invasion or that he possessed a gun while in New
Hampshire, such evidence is solely circumstantial and not sufficient to
support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The State counters that
the victim’s testimony describing the men who burglarized his home, and the
testimony of the other witnesses describing the defendant’s actions, were
5
sufficient to establish that the defendant possessed a handgun while in New
Hampshire.
Our standard for review in this area is well established:
To prevail upon his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, the defendant must prove that no rational trier of
fact, viewing all of the evidence and all reasonable inferences
from it in the light most favorable to the State, could have
found guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. When the evidence
is solely circumstantial, it must exclude all rational
conclusions except guilt. Under this standard, however, we
still consider the evidence in the light most favorable to the
State and examine each evidentiary item in context, not in
isolation.
State v. Ruggiero, 163 N.H. 129, 138 (2011) (quotation omitted).
To prove that the defendant is guilty of the armed career criminal
charge, the State was required to establish that the defendant was convicted of
three or more of the statutorily enumerated felonies and that he owned or had
“in his possession or under his control, a pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, or any
other firearm.” RSA 159:3-a, I. Because the defendant does not contest that
he has been previously convicted of three or more qualifying felonies, the only
element the State had to prove at trial was that the defendant owned or
possessed a handgun.
We conclude that there was sufficient evidence for a rational trier of fact
to find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant owned or possessed a
handgun, and, therefore, was guilty of the crime of being an armed career
criminal. To the extent that the defendant argues that the evidence was solely
circumstantial, we disagree. The defendant told Michael Bailey, a man he met
while incarcerated, that he and his accomplice “had guns” at the time of the
home invasion. This constitutes direct evidence of the defendant’s guilt,
obviating the rule that if there is solely circumstantial evidence, the trier of
fact must exclude all rational conclusions other than guilt. See Ruggiero, 163
N.H. at 138; see also State v. Newcomb, 140 N.H. 72 (1995) (stating that
defendant’s admission to witnesses was direct evidence).
In addition, the victim testified that one of the two men involved in the
home invasion had a gun, and that the other person was “a little taller” than
the defendant. Shortly after the crime, the police stopped a van in which the
defendant was a passenger, and a gun holster was found in the vehicle.
Furthermore, not only did Bailey testify that the defendant said that his gun
had been sold for drugs in Massachusetts shortly after the invasion, but
6
another witness also testified that he overheard the defendant express anger
that his gun had been sold for drugs.
Upon consideration of all of the evidence, we conclude that there was
sufficient evidence for a rational trier of fact to find that the defendant
possessed a gun, and, therefore, to find the defendant guilty of the crime of
being an armed career criminal beyond a reasonable doubt.
V
In light of the foregoing, we remand to the trial court with instructions
to vacate one of the two criminal restraint convictions and resulting sentence,
but in all other respects we affirm.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; and remanded.
CONBOY, LYNN and BASSETT, JJ., concurred.
7