THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Board of Education
No. 2010-225
APPEAL OF KEELIN B.
(New Hampshire State Board of Education)
Argued: March 10, 2011
Opinion Issued: May 12, 2011
Daniel B. and Lisa B., petitioners, by brief, and Mr. B., orally, pro se.
Soule, Leslie, Kidder, Sayward & Loughman, P.L.L.C., of Salem (Barbara
F. Loughman and Maureen L. Pomeroy on the brief, and Ms. Loughman orally),
for respondent Sunapee School District.
LYNN, J. The petitioners, Daniel B. and Lisa B., appeal the decision of
the New Hampshire State Board of Education upholding a thirty-four day
school suspension imposed on their daughter, Keelin B., by respondent
Sunapee School District. We affirm in part, vacate in part and remand.
The following facts are drawn from the record. Principal Sean Moynihan
received an email at his Sunapee School District email account, purportedly
authored by a particular student, which contained a sexually suggestive
message. The principal replied, informing the sender that he intended to notify
the police and discover the identity of the sender, and encouraging the sender
to come forward voluntarily. A Sunapee school teacher also received an email
at her school district email account, purportedly authored by the same
student, which contained vulgar and sexually explicit language. The teacher
forwarded the message to the principal, asking whether the sender could be
identified. Both recipients opened their respective email messages on their
home computers. Because Principal Moynihan could not identify who sent the
emails, he contacted the Sunapee Police Department, and after an
investigation, the police determined that the emails originated from a computer
in Keelin B.’s home. In November 2008, Keelin B. provided a statement to the
police acknowledging that she had “logged on to my dad’s black computer at
my house,” and stating “I made up a Gmail account under the name of
[another student]. This only happened one day, and only two emails were sent;
one to Mr. Moynihan, and one to [the teacher].” The superintendent for the
Sunapee School District, Brendan Minnihan, met with Keelin B. and her
parents, and determined that Keelin B. had sent both emails under the name
of a different student. He imposed a ten-day school suspension, from
November 19 through December 5, and informed her parents that he would
recommend to the Sunapee School Board that it impose a long-term
suspension under RSA 193:13, II (2008). By email dated November 19, Keelin
B. apologized to the teacher for the “rude and inap[p]ropriate” email, stating
that she now realized “how horrible that was to do to you and everyone else.”
Her parents appealed the superintendent’s suspension decision to the school
board and requested that it dismiss the request for a long-term suspension.
The school board conducted a hearing and voted to continue Keelin B.’s
suspension through January 23, 2009, pursuant to RSA 193:13 (2008),
bringing the total suspension period to thirty-four school days. It identified
several rules in the student handbook that were violated by the student’s
misconduct, including the “Unacceptable Use” policy relating to use of the
school district’s computer information system, several sections of the “Behavior
and Discipline Code,” and the “Harassment (Anti-Harassment) Policy.”
Ultimately, the school board decided:
Keelin created an email account under the name of another
student and using that account participated in sending two emails,
one to the principal and one to a teacher, . . . at their school email
addresses. The emails were offensive, abusive, harassing, vulgar
and profane, causing embarrassment and distress to the student,
in whose name they were sent, and the recipients.
These facts show that Keelin neglected or refused to conform to
the reasonable rules of the school, for which the School Board may
impose a long term suspension under RSA 193:13. Keelin’s
conduct violated the District’s Acceptable (Computer) Use Policy,
Behavior Code and Harassment (Anti-Harassment) Policy.
2
In addition to continuing the suspension, the school board required Keelin B.
to perform community service, and also made provisions for her to keep up
with her course work. The school board informed the petitioners of their right
to appeal to the state board of education “[p]ursuant to RSA 193:13 and New
Hampshire Department of Education Regulations, ED 317.04 (e) and (f).”
The petitioners appealed to the state board of education, and a hearing
officer conducted a hearing. The officer determined that Keelin B.’s conduct
violated the “Acceptable Use Policy” regarding computers and other student
conduct and discipline policies in the student handbook, stating: “The
infractions here go well beyond the misuse of a computer.” She concluded that
the misconduct qualified as “an act of neglect or refusal to conform to the
reasonable rules of the school,” and that the school district’s policies “are
substantially in harmony with NH RSA 193:13 and Rule ED 317:04.”
Ultimately, she determined, “Though I may find the actions of the
Superintendent and the Sunapee School Board harsh considering the future of
the young Student, careful examination yields no basis to overturn the decision
of the local school board.” The state board of education adopted the hearing
officer’s recommendation, and after granting the petitioners a rehearing, the
board upheld its decision. This appeal followed.
The petitioners first argue that the state board of education erred in
upholding the school board’s decision because the school board acted in excess
of statutory authority and in violation of Rule 317.04 by imposing a suspension
in excess of ten days for neglect or refusal to conform to reasonable rules of the
school and school policies. We disagree.
Resolution of this appeal requires us to construe statutes and
regulations relating to school discipline, and we apply the same principles of
construction in interpreting both. See Vector Mktg. Corp. v. N.H. Dep’t of
Revenue Admin., 156 N.H. 781, 783 (2008). When construing statutes and
administrative regulations, we first examine the language used, and, where
possible, we ascribe the plain and ordinary meanings to words used. See
Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. 309, 317 (2010); Vector Mktg., 156 N.H. at
783. Courts can neither ignore the plain language of the legislation nor add
words which the lawmakers did not see fit to include. Appeal of Garrison Place
Real Estate Inv. Trust, 159 N.H. 539, 542 (2009). Further, “administrative
officials do not possess the power to contravene a statute.” Appeal of
Anderson, 147 N.H. 181, 183 (2001) (quotation omitted). Therefore, when
interpreting administrative rules, we are mindful that such rules may only “fill
in the details to effectuate the purpose of the [enabling] statute,” and “may not
add to, detract from, or modify the statute which they are intended to
implement.” Id. (quotation omitted).
3
This court is the final arbiter of the intent of the legislature as expressed
in the words of a statute considered as a whole. Appeal of Union Tel. Co., 160
N.H. at 317. We review the interpretation of both statutes and administrative
rules de novo. See Appeal of Gamas, 158 N.H. 646, 648 (2009) (interpreting
statute); Appeal of Murdock, 156 N.H. 732, 735 (2008) (interpreting
administrative rule). With this framework in mind, we turn to the statutes and
regulations relevant to this appeal.
Under RSA chapter 193 governing “Pupils,” the legislature authorized
local school authorities to suspend and expel students. See RSA 193:13.
Specifically, RSA 193:13 authorizes: (1) the superintendent or chief
administering officer, or a representative “to suspend pupils from school for a
period not to exceed 10 school days for gross misconduct or for neglect or
refusal to conform to the reasonable rules of the school”; (2) the school board
or a designated representative “to continue the suspension of a pupil for a
period in excess of 10 school days” following a hearing; and (3) the school
board to expel any pupil “for gross misconduct, or for neglect or refusal to
conform to the reasonable rules of the school, or for an act of theft,
destruction, or violence as defined in RSA 193-D:1, or for possession of a pellet
or BB gun, rifle, or paint ball gun.” RSA 193:13, I, II; see also RSA 193:13, III
(requiring the expulsion for a period of not less than 12 months of “[a]ny pupil
who brings or possesses a firearm . . . in a safe school zone as defined in RSA
193-D:1 without written authorization from the superintendent or designee”).
The state board of education and local school authorities have statutory
authority to create rules and policies, respectively, regarding student conduct
and discipline. See, e.g., RSA 21-N:9, II(x) (2000); RSA 193:13, IV; RSA 193-
D:2 (2008); RSA 194:3-d (2008).
RSA chapter 193-D specifically relates to acts of theft, destruction, or
violence committed in a safe school zone. See RSA 193-D:1, II (2008) (defining
“[s]afe school zone” as “an area inclusive of any school property or school
buses”); RSA 193-D:1, I (2008) (defining acts of “theft, destruction, or violence”
to include homicide, assault, sexual assault, criminal mischief). It compels
public or private school employees who have witnessed or have information
“from the victim of an act of theft, destruction, or violence in a safe school zone
[to] report such act in writing immediately to a supervisor,” and requires the
information to be provided to the local law enforcement authority. See RSA
193-D:4, I(a) (2008); see also RSA 193-D:6 (2008) (setting forth a penalty for
persons who knowingly fail to comply with reporting requirement for acts of
theft, destruction, or violence). The state board of education is required to
adopt rules relative to safe school zones under RSA chapter 541-A for, among
other things, disciplinary proceedings and standards and procedures for
suspension and expulsion of pupils, both of which must include “procedures
assuring due process,” RSA 193-D:2, I(a), (b). The Safe School Zone legislation
specifically states, however: “Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit local school
4
boards from adopting and implementing policies relative to pupil conduct and
disciplinary procedures.” RSA 193-D:2, II; see also RSA 194:3-d (requiring
“[e]very school district which has computer systems or networks [to] adopt a
policy which outlines the intended appropriate and acceptable use, as well as
the inappropriate and illegal use, of the school district computer systems and
networks including, but not limited to, the Internet”).
The state board of education promulgated rules governing “Standards
and Procedures for Suspension and Expulsion of Pupils including Procedures
Assuring Due Process.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Part Ed 317. The purpose of Part
317 includes “provid[ing] the minimum requirements to assure due process
and statewide uniformity in the enforcement of RSA 193:13 and 193-D relative
to disciplinary action of a pupil in a safe school zone” and providing a
“standard that local school boards shall use in adopting and implementing a
policy relative to pupil conduct and disciplinary procedures under RSA 193-
D:2, II.” N.H. Admin. Rules, Ed 317.01. The specific regulation at issue in this
case, Rule 317.04, sets forth “Disciplinary Procedures” and provides in part:
(a) There shall be the following levels of discipline available to
school officials enforcing RSA 193:13 relative to the suspension
and expulsion of pupils in a safe school zone:
(1) A suspension for gross misconduct or for neglect or refusal to
conform to the reasonable rules of the school under RSA 193:13, I
shall be considered a short-term suspension and shall be
administered by a superintendent or designee for a period not to
exceed 10 school days;
(2) A suspension for an act of theft, destruction, or violence as
defined in RSA 193-D, or for possession of a pellet paint ball gun
or BB gun or rifle under RSA 193:13, II shall be considered a long-
term suspension and shall be administered by the school board or
designee in order to continue the short term suspension for a
period in excess of 10 school days, provided the designee is not the
person who suspended the pupil for 10 school days under (1)
above, and that designee provides a due process hearing under
(d)(2) below;
(3) An expulsion by the local school board for a period determined
in writing by the board under RSA 193:13, II; and
(4) An expulsion by the local school board for a period of not less
than 12 months under RSA 193:13, III.
5
The above rule appears to permit long-term suspension only for conduct
that involves “an act of theft, destruction, or violence as defined in RSA
[chapter] 193-D, or for possession of a pellet paint ball gun or BB gun or rifle
under RSA 193:13, II.” However, this rule is not consistent with the governing
statutes. For instance, Rule 317.04(a)(1), regarding short-term suspensions,
references RSA 193:13, I, and this statutory provision expressly authorizes
local school boards to impose long-term suspensions. Specifically, the statute
authorizes the school board, following a hearing, to “continue” a short-term
suspension imposed for “gross misconduct or for neglect or refusal to conform
to the reasonable rules of the school,” to a long-term suspension “in excess of
10 school days.” RSA 193:13, I(a), (b). Moreover, the legislature authorized
local school boards to expel students, not only for acts of theft, destruction or
violence as defined in RSA 193-D:1 or possession of, for example, a pellet gun,
but also for “gross misconduct, or for neglect or refusal to conform to the
reasonable rules of the school.” RSA 193:13, II. Further, when requiring the
state board of education to promulgate rules relative to safe school zones, the
legislature preserved the authority granted to local school boards to adopt and
implement policies relative to pupil conduct and discipline procedures. See
RSA 193-D:2, II.
Insofar as Rule 317.04(a) purports to preclude local school boards from
imposing long-term suspensions in excess of ten days for misconduct that does
not involve “an act of theft, destruction, or violence as defined in RSA 193-D, or
for possession of a pellet paint ball gun or BB gun or rifle under RSA 193:13,
II,” it directly conflicts with RSA 193:13, which expressly authorizes school
boards to impose suspensions in excess of ten days, or even expulsion, for
gross misconduct or for neglect or refusal to conform to the reasonable rules of
the school. We recognize that Part 317 may well have been intended to provide
regulatory direction for local school authorities to develop discipline policies
and procedures, rather than to establish absolute standards. See N.H. Admin.
Rules, Ed 317.01; see also RSA 21-N:1, II(a) (2000), :9, II(b) (2000); RSA 193-
D:2; RSA 21-N:9, II(x). However, to the extent Rule 317.04(a) limits the
statutorily prescribed authority granted to local school boards in the manner
set forth above, we conclude that the regulation is invalid. See Appeal of
Anderson, 147 N.H. at 183 (administrative rules may not “add to, detract from,
or modify the statute which they are intended to implement”). Accordingly, we
reject the petitioners’ argument that the school board acted in excess of
statutory authority and in violation of Rule 317.04 when it imposed a
suspension in excess of ten school days for neglect or refusal to conform to
reasonable rules of the school.
The petitioners next argue that Keelin B.’s suspension was improper
because the Sunapee School Board failed to comply with its own policy that
limits long-term suspensions to twenty school days. Cf. Appeal of Union Tel.
Co., 160 N.H. at 317 (“an administrative agency must follow its own rules and
6
regulations, and . . . an agency’s interpretation of its own regulations is
erroneous as a matter of law when it fails to embrace the plain meaning of its
regulations”). We agree.
The Sunapee School District established “rules relative to student
conduct, discipline and due process” (district rules), purportedly adapted from
Part 317. The stated purpose of the rules includes providing “due process and
statewide uniformity in the enforcement of RSA [chapter] 193-D relative to . . .
school safe zone[s] . . . and RSA 193:13 relative to suspension and expulsion,”
and implementing the authority of school boards reserved under RSA 193-D:2,
II to “adopt policies relative to pupil conduct and disciplinary procedures.”
The district rules provide “levels of discipline available to school officials
enforcing RSA 193:13 and/or RSA 193-D relative to the suspension and
expulsion of pupils,” including short-term suspension “not to exceed 10 days,”
long-term suspension “between 11 and 20 days,” and expulsion. They also
specify procedural protections afforded to students for the different levels of
discipline, and prescribe to some degree the nature of student misconduct that
is subject to the varying levels of discipline. For example, the district rules
define “suspension” to mean “the temporary denial of a student’s attendance at
school for a specific period of time for gross misconduct or for neglect or refusal
to conform to announced, posted, or printed school rules,” and also contain
definitions for “gross misconduct,” “neglect,” and “refusal.”
Respondent school district argues that its rules afford students the same
disciplinary procedures as provided under Rule 317.04. Even assuming some
procedures in the district rules and the regulations are the same, the former
limit long-term suspensions to twenty days by their plain terms. Therefore, the
school board exceeded the district rules when it imposed a suspension of
thirty-four school days.
The school district contends, however, that interpreting the district rules
to prohibit a long-term suspension in excess of twenty school days would be
contrary to its statutory authority under RSA 193:13 and RSA 193-D:2, II, and
would lead to absurd and unlawful results. We disagree. Unlike Rule
317.04(a), which can be viewed as an attempt by the state board of education
to impose limits on local school boards’ disciplinary authority in a manner that
conflicts with RSA 193:13, nothing in that statute prohibits a local school
board from circumscribing its own disciplinary authority more narrowly than
the law allows. In other words, RSA 193:13 does not require a local school
board to exercise the full measure of disciplinary authority granted to it by the
legislature. Consequently, although the Sunapee School Board may well have
the authority to create a policy or rule permitting long-term suspensions in
excess of twenty days pursuant to RSA 193:13, I(b), it is bound by the terms of
the rules in effect when the suspension at issue was imposed. Cf. Appeal of
7
Union Tel. Co., 160 N.H. at 317 (administrative agency must follow its own
rules and regulations); Doe v. N.H. Dep’t of Safety, 160 N.H. 474, 477 (2010)
(“we will not permit an agency to add or delete requirements . . . through the
mere expedient of interpreting a rule that is clear and unambiguous on its face”
(brackets omitted)).
The school district also argues that the student handbook and other
district policies provided notice to Keelin B. and her parents that the conduct
at issue was prohibited and that possible sanctions included suspension and
expulsion. It contends that school rules need not be as detailed as a criminal
code, and that notice of possible expulsion necessarily includes notice of long-
term suspension in excess of twenty school days. We are not persuaded.
Although the district policies and the student handbook alerted Keelin B.
and her parents that the conduct at issue was subject to discipline, and even
may have given notice that expulsion was a possibility, the school board did
not pursue the more severe discipline of expulsion and provide Keelin B. with
the associated procedural safeguards. See, e.g., N.H. Admin. Rules, Ed 317.03.
That the school board might have sought expulsion does not authorize it to
exceed the twenty-day limitation for long-term suspensions established under
the district policy. Furthermore, we do not find applicable the cases cited by
the school district upholding challenged student discipline when the governing
school policy gave notice that the conduct was prohibited. See Bethel School
Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 678, 686 (1986) (holding that school
disciplinary rule proscribing conduct, as well as admonition by teacher,
provided adequate notice to student that such conduct would subject him to
sanctions, notwithstanding lack of specific penalty enunciated in school
handbook); Palmer v. Merluzzi, 689 F. Supp. 400, 410-12 (D.N.J. 1988)
(upholding additional school discipline of suspending student from
extracurricular activities even though such sanction was not expressly set forth
in student handbook), aff’d, 868 F.2d 90 (3d Cir. 1989). In neither case did the
school district impose a suspension that exceeded a cap expressly enunciated
in the school district policy. Accordingly, while we reject the petitioners’
argument that Keelin B.’s suspension in excess of ten days was not authorized
by law, we hold that the school board erred as a matter of law when it imposed
a suspension of thirty-four school days. The suspension must be reduced to
twenty school days in accordance with the district rules.
Next, the petitioners argue that suspension was not a permitted sanction
in this case because the maximum punishment available under the “Acceptable
Use Policy” in the student handbook is suspension from the school district’s
computer system for ninety days. We disagree.
The state board of education upheld the school board’s finding that
Keelin B. violated not only the Acceptable Use Policy, but also numerous other
8
provisions in the student handbook, including prohibitions on harassment,
bullying, and use of vulgar, profane, obscene or defamatory language. The
student handbook gives notice that suspension is a possible sanction for such
misconduct. Furthermore, under the handbook’s “Behavior and Discipline”
section, suspension is identified as a possible sanction for “[f]ailure to follow
guidelines for computer use,” which the school board also identified as an
infraction in this case.
Finally, the petitioners argue that the Sunapee School District acted in
excess of its statutory authority by imposing a suspension for electronic
communications that were transmitted and received off school campus and not
in a safe school zone. The school board found, however, that Keelin B.
participated in sending the emails to the principal and the teacher at their
school email addresses. The petitioners do not dispute this finding, and
acknowledge that the emails were transmitted using the school district email
system. Their claim that their daughter’s conduct was beyond the reach of
school authorities since her home computer was used to send the emails and
the recipients used their home computers to access their school email accounts
lacks merit. Whether or not Keelin B.’s improper use of the school email
system, accessed remotely from home computers, falls within the ambit of a
“safe school zone” under RSA 193-D:1, II, we have no doubt that this conduct
falls squarely within the purview of RSA 193:13. See also RSA 194:3-d (a
school district with computer systems or networks shall adopt a policy which
outlines the appropriate and acceptable, and inappropriate and illegal use, of
those systems and networks).
The remainder of the petitioners’ arguments in their brief were not
included in the notice of appeal. Therefore, they are deemed waived and we do
not address them. See Forsberg v. Kearsarge Reg’l Sch. Dist., 160 N.H. 264,
269 (2010); Sup. Ct. R. 16(3)(b).
In sum, we affirm the state board of education’s decision upholding the
suspension of Keelin B., vacate that decision only insofar as the suspension
exceeded twenty school days, and remand.
Affirmed in part; vacated in
part; remanded.
DALIANIS, C.J., and DUGGAN, HICKS and CONBOY, JJ., concurred.
9