THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
SUPREME COURT
In Case No. 2011-0595, State of New Hampshire v. Patrick
Eschenbrenner, the court on March 12, 2013, issued the
following order:
Upon consideration of the defendant’s motion for reconsideration, the
court hereby modifies as follows the slip opinion issued on February 8, 2013:
1. The following footnote 1 is inserted at the end of the fourth sentence
of the fourth paragraph on page 8 of the original slip opinion (i.e., footnote 1
shall be inserted at the end of the following sentence: “It is important to
emphasize that the defendant makes no claim that his trial counsel were
ineffective in choosing to pursue the aforesaid line of cross-examination.”):
1. The defendant did argue in the trial court that his
counsel should have objected to Stowell being allowed to testify at
all, but he conceded that this alleged error did not amount to
ineffective assistance of counsel. However, the defendant never
asserted below that, given the fact Stowell did testify as a witness
for the State, the cross-examination of Stowell conducted by his
trial counsel constituted ineffective representation.
2. Footnote 1 in the original opinion is renumbered as footnote 2.
3. The following footnote 3 is inserted at the end of the parenthetical
following the citation of State v. Perron, 122 N.H. 941 (1982), in the first full
paragraph on page 10 of the original opinion (i.e., footnote 3 shall be inserted
at the end of the following parenthetical: “(not ineffective assistance to open the
door to bad character evidence of the defendant).”):
3. The defendant argues that the trial court made factual
findings: (1) that the “trial strategy” explanation offered by
defendant’s lead trial counsel as the reason for not objecting to
Stowell’s redirect testimony was not credible; and (2) that the
“failure to object . . . most likely came from insufficient
preparation.” He contends that we are bound by these findings.
The problem with this argument is that these findings were
premised entirely on the trial court’s legal conclusion that the
defendant’s trial counsel could have successfully objected to
Stowell’s redirect testimony. As explained in the text, that
conclusion was erroneous, and the court’s reliance on it completely
undercut the basis of its factual findings on the above points.
Moreover, while we readily agree with the defendant that
credibility determinations fall within the province of the trial court,
see State v. Ayer, 150 N.H. 500, 519 (2006), the fact remains that
it was the defendant’s burden to establish that his trial counsel’s
performance was constitutionally deficient. The trial court did not
find that trial counsel were ineffective because of the nature of
their cross-examination of Stowell; the court faulted counsel only
for failing to object to Stowell’s redirect examination. Even if we
entirely discount trial counsel’s testimony as to his trial strategy
explanation, the record is devoid of evidence showing how any
amount of further preparation by trial counsel would have
permitted the defendant to successfully exclude Stowell’s redirect
testimony given the theory of defense presented at trial and the
cross-examination of Stowell pursued in support of that theory.
4. Footnote 2 in the original opinion is renumbered as footnote 4.
In all other respects, the defendant’s motion for reconsideration is
denied.
Slip opinion modified;
reconsideration otherwise
denied.
Dalianis, C.J., and Hicks, Conboy, Lynn and Bassett, JJ, concurred.
Eileen Fox,
Clerk