THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Belknap
No. 2011-785
STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
v.
CALVIN DUNN, III
Argued: June 14, 2012
Resubmitted: July 20, 2012
Opinion Issued: October 16, 2012
Michael A. Delaney, attorney general (Nicholas Cort, assistant attorney
general, on the brief and orally), for the State.
M.D. Hulser & Associates, PC, of Acworth (Michael D. Hulser on the brief
and orally), for the defendant.
BASSETT, J. The defendant, Calvin Dunn, III, appeals an order of the
Superior Court (O’Neill, J.) denying his motion to vacate the imposition of a
suspended sentence. We affirm.
The following facts are drawn from the trial court’s order and the record,
or are otherwise undisputed. In 2006, the defendant pleaded guilty to one
count of accomplice to burglary, see RSA 626:8 (2007); RSA 635:1 (2007), and
one count of tampering with witnesses, see RSA 641:5 (2007). Under the plea
agreement, the defendant was sentenced to two concurrent prison terms of
three and one-half to seven years, suspended for five years on the condition of
his good behavior.
On May 11, 2010, the Laconia District Court found the defendant guilty
of two counts of simple assault and one count of criminal threatening in
connection with a physical altercation that occurred in 2009. The defendant
appealed to the superior court for a jury trial. Later in May, the State filed a
motion to impose the 2006 suspended sentence, alleging that the physical
altercation constituted a violation of the good behavior requirement. The
defendant requested that the hearing on the motion to impose be deferred until
final disposition of the pending criminal trial. The State objected, and the
court denied the defendant’s request.
On December 14, 2010, the superior court held a hearing on the motion
to impose at which testimony and evidence were received. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the court found “that the State ha[d] submitted sufficient evidence
to show that indeed [the defendant had] failed to remain of good behavior and,
in fact, the crime of simple assault did occur.” As a result, the court granted
the motion and imposed the original 2006 sentence. The defendant did not
appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 3, 7.
On July 6, 2011, the defendant was tried by a jury on the charges
stemming from the 2009 altercation. At trial, he argued that his actions were
justified by self-defense. The jury acquitted him of all the charges.
On July 21, the defendant filed a motion to vacate the imposition of his
sentence for the 2006 convictions. He argued that his actions in the 2009
altercation were justified by self-defense, as evidenced by the jury’s acquittal on
those charges, and, thus, he did not violate the good behavior requirement of
his 2006 suspended sentence. Accordingly, he requested that the court vacate
his sentence or, in the alternative, reevaluate the sentence “in order to consider
the complete exposition of evidence and the jury’s” verdict.
After a hearing, the court denied the defendant’s motion. The court
noted that “a jury acquittal of criminal charges is not dispositive as to whether
a suspended sentence should be imposed,” and found that the sentence was
properly imposed. It further disagreed with the defendant’s argument that he
did not violate the good behavior requirement because the jury found that his
actions were justified and in conformity with the law. It explained: “The jury
only found that the defendant was not guilty of simple assault and criminal
threatening beyond a reasonable doubt. The jury did not specifically find that
the defendant acted in self defense or that his actions were otherwise justified.”
Finally, the court declined to address the defendant’s alternative argument that
it should reevaluate his sentence in light of his acquittal as he “failed to provide
2
any legal support for [his] request.” The defendant’s motion for reconsideration
was denied, and this appeal followed.
The defendant’s main argument on appeal is that the trial court’s denial
of his motion to vacate his suspended sentence was based upon its
misinterpretation of the jury’s verdict. He contends that the jury acquitted him
because it credited his assertion that he acted in self-defense and, as a result,
the trial court’s ruling that “[t]he jury did not specifically find that the
defendant acted in self defense or that his actions were otherwise justified” was
an “erroneous misinterpretation of the jury’s verdict.” Consequently, he
maintains that the court unsustainably exercised its discretion in denying his
motion to vacate. We review a trial court’s decision to impose or vacate a
suspended sentence for an unsustainable exercise of discretion. See State v.
Gibbs, 157 N.H. 538, 540 (2008).
When a defendant raises self-defense, “conduct negating the defense
becomes an element of the charged offense, which the State must prove beyond
a reasonable doubt.” State v. Etienne, 163 N.H. 57, 80-81 (2011) (quotation
and citation omitted). The State’s failure to do so, however, is not equivalent to
an affirmative finding by the jury that the defendant, in fact, acted in self-
defense. Rather, it merely means that the State failed to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt one or more elements of the charged crime. See State v.
White, 145 N.H. 544, 548 (2000), vacated on other grounds by White v. Coplan,
399 F.3d 18 (1st Cir. 2005). Such failure can result from a variety of factors.
Id. Thus, the trial court did not err in ruling that “[t]he jury did not specifically
find that the defendant acted in self-defense or that his actions were otherwise
justified.”
Moreover, a suspended sentence may be imposed upon proof by a
preponderance of evidence of a violation of the condition upon which the
sentence was imposed. See State v. Weeks, 141 N.H. 248, 251 (1996). “When,
as here, the condition was to be of good behavior, the State’s burden of proof is
satisfied either by establishing the fact of a criminal conviction for the acts
which constitute the violation or by proof of the commission of the underlying
acts.” Gibbs, 157 N.H. at 540 (quotation omitted). “[A] jury acquittal of
criminal charges is not dispositive as to whether a suspended sentence should
be imposed.” Cf. id. (concluding “that the trial court’s consideration of the
evidence presented at trial regarding the acquitted conduct was proper for
purposes of imposing [the defendant’s] suspended sentence”); State v.
Benjamin, 9 A.3d 338, 346 (Conn. 2010) (“[A] trial court’s finding of a violation
of probation is not clearly erroneous solely because of an acquittal at the
criminal trial on the basis of the same alleged unlawful conduct.”); Douglas v.
State, 43 So. 3d 196, 198 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 2010) (“The law is well-settled
that, because different standards of proof apply, a violation of probation can be
based on criminal conduct for which a defendant is subsequently acquitted by
3
a jury.”). Here, the court “independently determined that a violation of the
suspension condition occurred” and found that the defendant had “not pointed
to any law or fact which the Court misapprehended when” deciding to impose
the suspended sentence. We find this was a sustainable exercise of the court’s
discretion.
The defendant next argues that, even prior to his acquittal, there was
insufficient evidence to support the court’s decision to impose the suspended
sentence. The defendant, however, has waived this argument because he did
not appeal the trial court’s original decision to impose the suspended sentence.
The trial court imposed the 2006 suspended sentence on December 14, 2010.
The defendant did not appeal this ruling. The imposition of a suspended
sentence is a decision on the merits that a defendant may appeal to this court.
See Sup. Ct. R. 3, 7. A defendant has thirty days from its imposition to file an
appeal. See Sup. Ct. R. 7. Failure to appeal within the permitted time will
result in the entry of judgment. See Super. Ct. R. 74; State v. Ryan, 142 N.H.
486, 487 (1997). Because the defendant failed to directly appeal the imposition
of his suspended sentence, we do not reach the merits of his sufficiency claim.
See Ryan, 142 N.H. at 487.
Finally, the defendant argues, in essence, that we should reverse State v.
Flood, 159 N.H. 353 (2009), and hold that the imposition hearing should have
been stayed pending the conclusion of his criminal trial. As previously noted,
the defendant did not appeal the decision imposing his suspended sentence;
thus, he failed to timely appeal the court’s earlier ruling denying his request for
a stay. Accordingly, we decline to address this argument.
Affirmed.
DALIANIS, C.J., and HICKS, CONBOY and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
4