THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW HAMPSHIRE
___________________________
Rockingham
No. 2010-323
HAMPTON POLICE ASSOCIATION, INC.
v.
TOWN OF HAMPTON
Argued: March 17, 2011
Opinion Issued: April 28, 2011
McKittrick Law Offices, of North Hampton (J. Joseph McKittrick on the
brief and orally), for the petitioner.
Mark S. Gearreald, of Hampton, by brief and orally, for the respondent.
Paul G. Sanderson, of Concord, by brief, for The Local Government
Center, as amicus curiae.
DALIANIS, C.J. The respondent, Town of Hampton (Town), appeals the
orders of the Superior Court (McHugh, J.) granting the request for injunctive
relief filed by the petitioner, Hampton Police Association, Inc. (Association), and
ordering the Town to provide the Association with copies of certain invoices
from the Town’s outside counsel. The Town contends that the trial court
erroneously: (1) ordered the Town’s outside counsel, as its agent, to prepare a
revised invoice listing entries devoted only to a particular matter; and (2) failed
to rule that the narrative descriptions contained in the original and revised
invoices were “confidential” under the Right-to-Know Law because they were
subject to the attorney-client privilege. See RSA ch. 91-A (2001 & Supp. 2010).
We affirm in part and reverse in part.
I. Background
The record reveals the following facts. On September 2, 2009, counsel
for the Association wrote to Frederick Welch, the Town’s manager, requesting,
pursuant to the Right-to-Know Law, “copies of each and every invoice from any
and all Attorneys who have represented the Town or given advice regarding the
so-called Probationary Employees’ grievance and subsequent Arbitration” as
well as “the same information with regard to the Petition to Enforce the
Arbitrator’s Award.” In his September 10, 2009 response, Welch advised the
Association’s attorney “that the invoices from [the Town’s outside] attorneys . . .
contain confidential detailed billing narratives which are protected by the
attorney-client privilege,” and, thus, “are excepted from the requirements of the
Right to Know Law.” Welch further explained that only the August 20, 2008
bill from outside counsel contained time entries that related solely to the
probationary employees’ grievance, arbitration and subsequent petition to
enforce the arbitration award; the remaining invoices addressed “a variety of
other legal matters” and were not limited to the dispute in question. Thus,
Welch enclosed only the last two pages of outside counsel’s August 20, 2008
invoice.
On September 15, 2009, the Association’s counsel sent the Town’s
attorney a letter explaining that his “request was for the time and monies spent
by the Town on the Arbitration and subsequent Superior Court Appeal,” and
that he was “not requesting any other information, including possible
privileged” information. The Association’s counsel suggested that the Town
“redact any information that it believes is privileged,” and observed that “[t]he
amount of money spent by the Town is not privileged and is the proper subject
of [his] request.” In a September 22, 2009 letter, counsel for the Town replied
that the Town did not “have any documents beyond those that have already
been provided [to the Association’s attorney] that segregate out the time and
charges on [the grievance, arbitration and petition to enforce arbitration award
at issue].” On September 30, 2009, the Association brought the instant
petition for injunctive relief, asking the trial court to, among other things, order
the Town to produce the requested information.
The trial court held a hearing on the matter on January 14, 2010, at
which Town counsel reiterated that outside counsel’s invoices generally did not
identify the work performed by case. Town counsel provided the court with
2
outside counsel’s invoices for the relevant time period for in camera review,
explaining that thirty-four of the sixty-nine entries concerned only the matter
for which the Association sought information, but that the remaining thirty-five
entries concerned multiple matters. The Town argued that all of the descriptive
narratives in the invoices were privileged from disclosure by the attorney-client
privilege.
Following its in camera review of the invoices, the trial court ruled that
the Association was “entitled to receive copies of bills which reflect simply the
work done on the matters at issue, for example telephone conversation with
Town manager, without the specifics of their discussion, along with an
accompanying dollar amount for the services rendered.” The court ordered the
Town to photocopy the thirty-four entries that were devoted to the matter for
which the Association sought information. For the remaining entries, the court
ordered the Town’s outside counsel, as the Town’s agent, to “approximate how
many of the entries were devoted to the subject matter at issue and forward a
revised bill to [the Association’s] counsel listing the general subject matter and
amount approximated for the service.” Because complying with its mandates
would entail “extra work” by the Town and its outside counsel, the court
“elect[ed] not to require the Town to be responsible for any portion of the
[Association’s] attorney[’s] fees in having to file the within petition.” See RSA
91-A:8, I (2001).
Although the trial court’s order obliged the Town’s outside counsel only
to list the general subject matter and amount approximated for each service,
outside counsel’s revised invoice contained detailed narratives about the work
performed for the Town. Arguing that the detailed narratives were subject to
the attorney-client privilege and, therefore, not subject to disclosure, the Town
asked the court to be relieved of its obligation to forward the revised invoice to
the Association. The trial court denied the Town’s request for relief and sent
the revised invoice to the Association itself. This appeal followed.
II. Discussion
Resolving the issues on appeal requires that we interpret the Right-to-
Know Law. “The interpretation of a statute, including the Right-to-Know Law,
is to be decided ultimately by this court.” N.H. Challenge v. Commissioner,
N.H. Dep’t of Educ., 142 N.H. 246, 249 (1997) (quotation omitted). “The
purpose of the Right-to-Know Law is to ensure both the greatest possible
public access to the actions, discussions and records of all public bodies, and
their accountability to the people.” N.H. Civil Liberties Union v. City of
Manchester, 149 N.H. 437, 438 (2003) (quotation omitted). Thus, the Right-to-
Know Law helps further our state constitutional requirement that the public’s
right of access to governmental proceedings and records shall not be
unreasonably restricted. Id.; see N.H. CONST. pt. I, art. 8. While the statute
3
does not provide for unrestricted access to public records, we resolve questions
regarding the Right-to-Know Law with a view to providing the utmost
information in order to best effectuate the statutory and constitutional
objective of facilitating access to all public documents. Lambert v. Belknap
County Convention, 157 N.H. 375, 379 (2008). Therefore, we construe
provisions favoring disclosure broadly, while construing exemptions narrowly.
Id. “We also look to the decisions of other jurisdictions, since other similar
acts, because they are in pari materia, are interpretively helpful, especially in
understanding the necessary accommodation of the competing interests
involved.” Id. (quotation omitted). “When a public entity seeks to avoid
disclosure of material under the Right-to-Know Law, that entity bears a heavy
burden to shift the balance toward nondisclosure.” Id. (quotation and brackets
omitted).
A. Revised Invoice
The Town first argues that the trial court erred when it required its
outside counsel, as its agent, to create a revised invoice for submission to the
Association. The Town asserts that by requiring outside counsel to prepare a
revised invoice, the trial court violated RSA 91-A:4, VII (Supp. 2010), which
states that the Right-to-Know Law should not be construed “to require a public
body or agency to compile, cross-reference, or assemble information into a form
in which it is not already kept or reported by that body or agency.” The
Association counters that the trial court’s order merely required the Town
(through outside counsel acting as the Town’s agent) to “create a subset of
already existing information.” The Association asserts, “All of the information
was in one set of documents. The Town had only to redact the non[-]requested
information.” Thus, the Association contends, contrary to the Town’s
assertions, the court order did not require the Town to compile data into a
format that the Association specifically requested. See Hawkins v. N.H. Dep’t
of Health and Human Services, 147 N.H. 376, 379 (2001).
While the Right-to-Know Law guarantees “[e]very citizen . . . the right to
inspect . . . and to copy” all public records “except as otherwise prohibited by
statute,” RSA 91-A:4, I (Supp. 2010), it specifically does not “require a public
body or agency to compile, cross-reference, or assemble information into a form
in which it is not already kept or reported by that body or agency,” RSA 91-A:4,
VII. In Brent v. Paquette, 132 N.H. 415, 426 (1989), for instance, we held that
the Right-to-Know Law “does not require public officials to retrieve and compile
into a list random information gathered from numerous documents, if a list of
this information does not already exist.” The plaintiff in Brent had requested a
school superintendent to create a list containing the names of children in the
school district, their parent’s names, and their addresses. Brent, 132 N.H. at
426. “[A]lthough the children’s names, their addresses, and the names of their
parents, appear[ed] on registration cards and attendance records, the
4
requested information ha[d] never been compiled into a single list.” Id. We
held that because a list of the requested information did not already exist, the
school superintendent was not required by the Right-to-Know Law to create
one. Id.
In Hawkins, 147 N.H. at 379, we similarly held that the Right-to-Know
Law did not require the New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) to create a new document that contained only the information
sought by the plaintiff. The plaintiff sought records of dental services provided
to New Hampshire Medicaid recipients under the age of twenty-one and of
Medicaid reimbursement payments made to their dental healthcare providers
from 1993 to 1998. Hawkins, 147 N.H. at 377. We held that HHS could
comply with this request by providing the plaintiff with copies of individual
Medicaid claims in their original form, which would not entail creating new
documents. Id. at 379.
In New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 439-40, we
distinguished Brent and its progeny. In that case, the New Hampshire Civil
Liberties Union (NHCLU) sought access to consensual photographs that the
Manchester Police Department had taken of people who were stopped by
officers, but not arrested. N.H. Civil Liberties Union, 149 N.H. at 438. We held
that requiring the police department to provide the NHCLU with some, but not
all, of the photographs, as requested, did not entail compiling records into a
new format contrary to Brent. Id. at 439-40. We explained, “While the Brent
rule shields agencies from having to create a new document in response to a
Right-to-Know request, it does not shelter them from having to assemble
existing documents in their original form.” Id. at 439-40. Thus, we concluded,
requiring the police to provide the NHCLU with “a subset of existing public
records” was unlike requiring the police to create “a new document that does
not already exist.” Id. at 440.
The instant case is on all fours with Brent and is distinguishable from
New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union. The record reveals that, as the trial
court aptly found, thirty-five of the entries in outside counsel’s original invoices
“suggest[ed] that the billing was for a myriad of subjects.” These thirty-five
entries represented time expended on multiple cases, not only those for which
the Association sought information. When submitting them to the trial court,
the Town highlighted the work by outside counsel on the grievance and
arbitration matter at issue, but put a question mark next to the time entry
because the Town could not discern how much of the time entry was dedicated
to the highlighted work. Accordingly, the original invoices did not enable the
Town to provide the Association with figures representing the amount of time
outside counsel spent on specific tasks for the grievance and arbitration at
issue. Nor could the Town, using the original invoices, provide the Association
with figures representing the amount of money the Town spent on each task
5
related to the grievance and arbitration issue. In short, with regard to the
thirty-five entries containing information about multiple matters, no document
already existed that would provide the Association with the information it
sought.
Based upon this record, we conclude that the trial court erred when it
required the Town, through outside counsel, to create an entirely new
document that would provide the Association with the requested information.
While the Association contends that no new document need have been created,
creation of a new document was exactly what the trial court order required.
The court specifically ordered outside counsel “to the best of her ability” to
“approximate how many of the [thirty-five] entries were devoted to the subject
matter at issue and forward a revised bill” to the Association. The revised bill
was an entirely new document that the court ordered outside counsel to create.
For all of the above reasons, therefore, we hold that the trial court erred when
it ordered the Town’s outside counsel to create a revised invoice.
B. Original Invoices
The Town next asserts that the trial court erred when it ordered the
Town to photocopy the thirty-four entries in outside counsel’s original invoices,
which pertained only to the matter for which the Association sought
information. The Town contends that the narrative descriptions of the work
outside counsel performed were “confidential” within the meaning of RSA 91-
A:5, IV (2001), and, therefore, exempt from disclosure, because they were
subject to the attorney-client evidentiary privilege.
The Right-to-Know Law specifically exempts from disclosure “[r]ecords
pertaining to . . . confidential . . . information.” RSA 91-A:5, IV. The
determination of whether information is confidential for purposes of our Right-
to-Know Law is assessed objectively, not based upon the subjective
expectations of the party generating that information. Goode v. N.H. Legislative
Budget Assistant, 148 N.H. 551, 554 (2002). Even if records are deemed
confidential, however, they are not per se exempt from disclosure. Id. “Rather,
to determine whether records are exempt as confidential, the benefits of
disclosure to the public must be weighed against the benefits of non-disclosure
to the government.” Id. (quotation and brackets omitted). To show that
information is sufficiently confidential to justify nondisclosure, the party
resisting disclosure must prove that disclosure is likely to: (1) impair the
information holder’s ability to obtain necessary information in the future; or (2)
cause substantial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom
the information was obtained. Id. This test emphasizes the potential harm
that will result from disclosure, rather than simply promises of confidentiality,
or whether the information has customarily been regarded as confidential. Id.
6
at 554-55. The burden of proving whether information is confidential rests
with the party seeking nondisclosure. Id. at 555.
In this case, the trial court did not engage in the balancing test described
above because it concluded that the Town failed to meet its burden of proving
that the narrative descriptions were subject to the attorney-client privilege. We
hold that the trial court did not err in this regard.
“The common law rule that confidential communications between a client
and an attorney are privileged and protected from inquiry is recognized and
enforced in this jurisdiction.” Riddle Spring Realty Co. v. State, 107 N.H. 271,
273 (1966) (quotation omitted). The classic explication of the privilege is:
“Where legal advice . . . is sought from a professional legal adviser in his
capacity as such, the communications relating to that purpose, made in
confidence by the client, are at his instance permanently protected from
disclosure . . . unless the protection is waived by the client or his legal
representatives.” Id.; see City Pages v. State, 655 N.W.2d 839, 844 n.5 (Minn.
Ct. App. 2003). New Hampshire Rule of Evidence 502 essentially codifies the
common law attorney-client privilege.
The Town argues that detailed descriptive billing entries are per se
privileged from disclosure under the attorney-client privilege. Although this is
an issue of first impression in New Hampshire, courts in many other
jurisdictions have rejected such a per se rule. See, e.g., Cypress Media v. City
of Overland, 997 P.2d 681, 693 (Kan. 2000) (affirming trial court’s ruling that
all narrative statements in attorney fee statements are not per se privileged);
City Pages, 655 N.W.2d at 845 (holding that billing records “are not protected
in their entirety” by the attorney-client privilege); State v. Cherry, 541 S.E.2d
205, 208 (N.C. Ct. App. 2000) (“Billing records do not automatically fall under
the attorney-client privilege . . . .”). As other courts have explained, “[t]ypically,
the attorney-client privilege does not extend to billing records,” Chaudhry v.
Gallerizzo, 174 F.3d 394, 402 (4th Cir. 1999), because such records “ordinarily
reveal[ ] no confidential professional communications between attorney and
client,” Maxima v. 6933 Arlington Dev., 641 A.2d 977, 984 (Md. Ct. Spec. App.
1994) (quotation omitted).
Courts generally agree that billing statements that provide only general
descriptions of the nature of the services performed and do not reveal the
subject of confidential communications with any specificity are not privileged.
Cypress Media, Inc., 997 P.2d at 691; see also Clarke v. American Commerce
Nat. Bank, 974 F.2d 127, 129 (9th Cir. 1992) (“[T]he identity of the client, the
amount of the fee, the identification of payment by case file name, and the
general purpose of the work performed are usually not protected from
disclosure by the attorney-client privilege.”); Colonial Gas Co. v. Aetna Cas. &
Sur. Co., 144 F.R.D. 600, 607 (D. Mass. 1992) (“Documents regarding the
7
payment of fees, billing and time expended are generally subject to discovery.”);
Tipton v. Barton, 747 S.W.2d 325, 332 (Mo. Ct. App. 1988) (billing statements
that merely identified attorney’s preparation of pleadings, phone calls, meetings
and discussions without detailed entries that advised, analyzed or discussed
privileged communications were not privileged). Based upon the above
authority, we decline the Town’s invitation to adopt a per se rule that all
descriptive narratives in attorney invoices to clients are subject to the attorney-
client privilege.
We hold, however, that the attorney-client privilege may apply to
information in a billing record that reveals “the motive of the client in seeking
representation, litigation strategy, or the specific nature of the services
provided, such as researching particular areas of law.” Clarke, 974 F.2d at
129; see Chaudhry, 174 F.3d at 402; In re Gibco, Inc., 185 F.R.D. 296, 299 (D.
Colo. 1997); Maxima, 641 A.2d at 984; Hewes v. Langston, 853 So. 2d 1237,
1248-49 (Miss. 2003) (billing statements that provided “an hour-by-hour
rendition of the work performed for a client,” including identifying, by name,
the people with whom the attorney talked, the topics they discussed, the
subjects the attorney researched and the papers he reviewed “necessarily
reveal[ed] strategies, confidential communications, and the thought processes
behind the representation” and were privileged from disclosure).
In the context of the Right-to-Know Law, the party seeking nondisclosure
of attorney billing statements because of the attorney-client privilege bears the
burden of proof. See Goode, 148 N.H. at 555. “A blanket assertion is generally
extremely disfavored, and ordinarily the privilege must be raised as to each
record so that the court can rule with specificity.” Maxima, 641 A.2d at 984
(quotation omitted); see Cypress Media, 997 P.2d at 693 (parties claiming that
narrative statements in attorney fee statements are privileged must show
application of privilege to particular narrative statements). In this case, the
Town did not specifically identify to the trial court the narratives it claimed
were privileged, but rather urged the court to find that all of the narratives
were privileged. In light of our ruling, we hold that the trial court did not err by
rejecting this request.
Affirmed in part; and reversed
in part.
DUGGAN, HICKS and LYNN, JJ., concurred.
8